

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

  KA and Others (domestic violence - risk on return) Pakistan CG [2010] UKUT
                                                                   216 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |                             |
|On 21 and 22 April 2010                       |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                             MR JUSTICE STADLEN
                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE STOREY
                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE KEKI?



                                   Between

                                     Ka
                                     aa
                                     ik

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants: Mr E Fripp, Counsel instructed by Paragon Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr C Bourne, Counsel instructed by the Treasury
Solicitor


   i. In general persons who on return  face  prosecution  in  the  Pakistan
      courts will not be at real risk of a flagrant denial of their right to
      a fair trial, although it will always be  necessary  to  consider  the
      particular circumstances of the individual case.

  ii. Although conditions in prisons in Pakistan remain extremely poor,  the
      evidence does not demonstrate that  in  general  such  conditions  are
      persecutory or amount to serious harm  or  ill-treatment  contrary  to
      Article 3 ECHR.

 iii. The Protection of Women (Criminal Laws Amendment)  Act  2006  ("PWA"),
      one of a number of legislative  measures  undertaken  to  improve  the
      situation of  women  in  Pakistan  in  the  past  decade,  has  had  a
      significant effect on the operation of the Pakistan criminal law as it
      affects women accused of adultery. It led  to  the  release  of  2,500
      imprisoned women. Most sexual offences now have to be dealt with under
      the Pakistan Penal Code (PPC) rather  than  under  the  more  punitive
      Offence of Zina (Enforcement of Hudood) Ordinance  1979.  Husbands  no
      longer have power to register a First Information  Report  (FIR)  with
      the police alleging adultery; since 1 December 2006 any such complaint
      must be presented to a court which will require sufficient grounds  to
      be shown for any charges to proceed. A senior police  officer  has  to
      conduct the investigation. Offences of adultery (both zina  liable  to
      hadd and zina liable to  tazir)  have  been  made  bailable.  However,
      Pakistan remains a heavily patriarchal society and levels of  domestic
      violence continue to be high.

  iv. Whether a woman on return faces a real risk of an honour killing  will
      depend on the particular circumstances; however,  in  general  such  a
      risk is likely to be confined to tribal areas such as the  North  West
      Frontier Province (NWFP) and is unlikely to impact on married women.

   v. Pakistan law still favours the father in  disputes  over  custody  but
      there are signs that the courts are taking a more  pragmatic  approach
      based on the best interests of the child.

  vi. The guidance given in SN and HM (Divorced  women  -  risk  on  return)
      Pakistan CG [2004] UKIAT 00283 and FS (Domestic violence - SN and HM -
      OGN) Pakistan CG [2006] 000283 remains valid.  The network of  women's
      shelters (comprising government-run shelters (Darul Amans) and private
      and Islamic women's  crisis  centres)  in  general  affords  effective
      protection for women victims of domestic violence, although there  are
      significant shortcomings in the level of  services  and  treatment  of
      inmates in some such centres. Women with boys over 5  face  separation
      from their sons.

 vii. In assessing whether women victims of domestic violence have a  viable
      internal relocation alternative, regard must be had not  only  to  the
      availability of such shelters/centres but also to the situation  women
      will face after they leave such centres.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


    1.   Our decision on these appeals is one on which  we  all  agree  and
       also  one  to  which  each  member  of  the  panel  has  contributed
       substantially. The first appellant (hereafter "the appellant") is  a
       national of Pakistan born on 10 April 1981.  The  second  and  third
       appellants are her daughters. They are also nationals  of  Pakistan,
       born on 7 May 2003 and 24 January 2007 respectively.  On  20  August
       2006 the appellant arrived in the UK,  illegally  it  would  appear,
       accompanied by the second appellant. She claimed asylum on 29 August
       2006 avowing that she had a well  founded  fear  of  persecution  if
       returned to Pakistan on the basis that she would be pursued  by  her
       abusive husband, that she would be  detained  and  prosecuted  as  a
       result of false adultery and attempted murder charges he  had  filed
       against her and that she would be ill treated in  prison.  She  also
       argued that she would lose custody rights to her child. On the  same
       basis she argued that her removal would breach her human rights.

    2. On 16 January 2008 the respondent refused the application and made a
       decision to remove her and her daughters as illegal entrants. On  28
       January 2008 the appellants gave Notice of Appeal and their  appeals
       were heard by Immigration Judge (IJ) Buchanan at  Birmingham  on  28
       February 2008. The  IJ  found  that  the  appellant's  evidence,  as
       outlined in her asylum interview and further expanded  upon  in  her
       witness statement, was true. He found the First  Information  Report
       (FIR) she had produced to be a genuine document.  That  report  said
       that the appellant had been accused of adultery with a man called YK
       and also attempted murder of her husband's servant who was  said  to
       have seen them commit adultery.  He accepted that at  the  time  the
       appellant left Pakistan she had a well founded fear  of  persecution
       on account of being a member of a particular social group, namely  a
       woman charged with committing adultery, and that she would have been
       at real risk of imprisonment under the Hudood  Ordinances.  He  also
       found that  at  that  time,  if  re-arrested,  she  would  have  had
       difficulty in obtaining further  bail.  He  concluded  however  that
       there was no risk  at  the  time  of  the  hearing  because  of  the
       introduction  of  the  The  Protection  of  Women   (Criminal   Laws
       Amendment) Act, 2006 (hereafter "PWA"; some texts  refer  to  it  as
       "WPA")) which repealed those parts of  the  Hudood  Ordinances  that
       related to charges of sexual misconduct, in particular  the  Offence
       of Zina (Enforcement of Hudood) Ordinance 1979 (hereafter the  "Zina
       Ordinance"; zina is a generic term covering adultery and non-marital
       consensual sex including   consensual  sex  between  a  married  and
       unmarried person). He found that the appellant would have  effective
       protection against her husband and that she would not be at risk  of
       an honour killing as the evidence suggested that  they  occurred  in
       rural parts of the country whereas the appellant lived in Lahore and
       came from a relatively wealthy background. He found that  she  could
       also obtain shelter in a state run Darul Aman (house of peace).  His
       determination dismissing the appeals  was  promulgated  on  5  March
       2008.

    3. On 13 March 2008 an application for reconsideration was filed by the
       appellants' representatives; issue was taken with the IJ's  findings
       on the effect of the PWA. On 27 March 2008 Senior Immigration  Judge
       (SIJ) Latter ordered reconsideration.

    4. A Case Management Review (CMR) hearing took place  on  25  September
       2008 before SIJ Gleeson when it was agreed by the parties  that  the
       appeal would be suitable for possible country guidance on the effect
       of the PWA and related issues. The matter was then listed  before  a
       panel on 8 January 2009. Following that hearing, it was  decided  by
       SIJs Southern and Ward and  Mrs  Harris  that  the  IJ  had  made  a
       material error of law.  A  full  transcript  of  their  decision  is
       annexed to this determination but in summary the  panel  found  that
       the judge's findings as to the effect of the Act were  fundamentally
       flawed and inaccurate.  He  appeared  to  have  concluded  that  the
       prospect of an adultery charge had fallen  away  altogether  whereas
       the  evidence  before  him  suggested  only  that  the  process   of
       prosecution may have changed. He found there was no  remaining  risk
       of  imprisonment  without  dealing  with  the  evidence  before  him
       pointing to there remaining a risk  of  imprisonment  on  conviction
       even before a secular court. It was  considered  that  the  IJ  also
       appeared to have overlooked the fact that, even if he  were  correct
       to find that the adultery allegations had fallen away, the appellant
       still potentially faced arrest because the other allegations in  the
       FIR remained outstanding.  As,  on  the  findings  of  the  IJ,  the
       appellant had absconded from bail, the prospects of being readmitted
       to bail should she be arrested  on  return  should  also  have  been
       considered.

    5. The Tribunal found that the appellant should not be deprived of  the
       acceptance of her factual account and therefore, with the  agreement
       of the parties,  it  was  held  that  the  starting  point  for  the
       reconsideration hearing would be the following findings:

               . that the appellant's account, as  outlined  in  her  asylum
                 interview  and  further  expanded  upon  in   her   witness
                 statement, is true (this evidence is summarised below);
               . the FIR is a genuine document;
               . the medical report relating to the  appellant's  father  is
                 also genuine; he  suffers  from  a  heart  condition  which
                 existed since 1993. However, it was noted that the document
                 did not support the appellant's claim  that  his  condition
                 had deteriorated markedly since the time of her arrest.


    6. A further CMR Hearing took place on 8 April 2010 before SIJ Storey.

    7. At the conclusion of the two-day hearing before us the parties  were
       given extra time to submit further comments from two of the  experts
       instructed in these appeals, Dr Lau and Dr Shah, addressing  several
       questions raised by the  Tribunal  that  had  been  referred  to  in
       earlier submissions and  to make further submissions.





   APPELLANT'S CASE

    8. The appellant's case is set  out  in  her  asylum  interview  of  19
       January 2007, in three witness statements dated 25 February 2008, 28
       April 2009 and 22 April 2010 and  in  the  oral  evidence  she  gave
       before the IJ and before us.

    9. The appellant's screening interview which took place  on  29  August
       2006 was concerned mainly  with  her  method  of  entry  and  travel
       arrangements; however the appellant did state that false allegations
       had been made against her and she had spent two days in prison.

   10. Her asylum interview took place on 19 January 2007. She said she had
       claimed asylum because her husband had filed a false  adultery  case
       against her on 21 July 2006. She stated that she had  been  arrested
       on that date by the police. Her husband made allegations that he may
       not have fathered the appellant's unborn child.

   11. The appellant claimed that her father  was  a  retired  employee  of
       State  Life  Insurance.  She  stated   that   he   was   financially
       comfortable, if not well off. Her husband was a student. His  father
       was a lawyer. Their marriage had been arranged. She stated that they
       argued a lot and he was not happy that their first child had been  a
       female. She stated that her husband had slapped her  once  when  she
       asked him not to smoke near  their  child  and  had  beaten  her  on
       another occasion when she had joked with a charity worker collecting
       funds for Imran Khan's Hospital.

   12. The  appellant  maintained  that  she  had  been  arrested  by  four
       policemen at her parent's house where she had taken refuge after  an
       argument with her husband. She was detained for two days. Her father
       paid a lawyer Rs.50,000 to handle her case. She  also  claimed  that
       her father paid money to the police. She was released  on  bail  and
       told "to stay here". She left the country on  20  August  2006.  She
       claimed that her husband would kill her and marry again or make  her
       his servant if she returned.

   13. The appellant maintained that her husband had threatened her  father
       and brother, warning them not to interfere. The police had  been  to
       her father's house on two occasions but he had  informed  them  that
       she had left the country. Her father sold some of her gold and  some
       of his land to raise the six lakh rupees required for  her  journey.
       She had taken her gold with her to her father's house when she  left
       the marital home. She had no problems leaving the country. She  used
       a passport to  which  she  was  not  entitled.  An  agent  made  the
       necessary arrangements.

   14. The appellant's first witness statement,  prepared  on  25  February
       2008, was a response to the Secretary of State's refusal letter.  In
       it the appellant maintained that she was married on 15  March  2001.
       Her parents arranged the marriage and it was held  at  their  house.
       Her husband turned out to be a cruel man and she left his  house  on
       21 July 2006, having decided not  to  return  to  him.  Her  husband
       registered false allegations of adultery against her  out  of  anger
       and because he considered that she had brought  shame  upon  him  by
       leaving. She maintained that she was arrested by the police  on  the
       same date and was interrogated and harassed at the  police  station.
       She described the conditions  as  "very  dreadful"  and  the  police
       officers as "mean and humiliating". On 23 July 2006 she was released
       on bail. She  maintained  that  this  was  because  her  father  had
       instructed a lawyer and also because the charges brought against her
       were still under investigation. Her father acted  as  a  surety  and
       money was paid. She was granted police bail.  It  was  her  lawyer's
       advice that once she was charged under  Hudood  law,  she  would  be
       unable to get bail and he would  be  unable  to  help  her.  In  the
       meantime, he warned that she would be re-arrested and  would  remain
       in custody pending a  decision  in  her  case.  The  punishment  for
       adultery was a lengthy period of imprisonment  or  death.  Following
       investigation, she stated that the case was sent to  the  divisional
       police officer and charges were brought against her under Hudood law
       on 31 July 2006. She maintains that she was charged with the offence
       of adultery and her case was sent to court on 31 August 2006.

   15. The  appellant  maintained  that  she  would  be  unable  to  obtain
       protection in a woman's refuge. Her father had visited a Darul  Aman
       and had been told that she would not  be  admitted  because  of  the
       pending FIR. She stated that after she obtained  bail  she  went  to
       stay at her father's friend's house and  remained  there  in  hiding
       until her departure.

   16. The appellant stated that her father's health had deteriorated.  She
       said her husband continued to visit  her  parents'  home  since  her
       departure. Her mother,  at  the  appellant's  request,  visited  the
       police station to obtain a copy of the FIR.

   17. The appellant's statement of 2009  provided  information  of  recent
       events. In it she maintained that her father is very  ill,  that  he
       has a heart condition and suffered a stroke in 2007  after  the  FIR
       was registered. In December 2008 he suffered a heart attack and  now
       requires surgery but is having difficulty in raising  the  necessary
       funds.  She maintained that he is no longer  able  to  work.  He  is
       cared for by her mother. Her brother had ceased his further  studies
       as they cannot afford the  fees.  He,  too,  was  without  work  and
       financially dependent upon their parents.

   18. The appellant maintained that she would be arrested upon  return  to
       Pakistan and that even if she were not, she would still be  at  risk
       from her husband. She would find it difficult to live away from  her
       parents. She had no experience of working or  living  independently.
       The family friend who had previously assisted her was now  reluctant
       to help because of a fear of the police. The appellant had  remained
       in touch with her family and had heard that  shortly  prior  to  her
       father's heart attack, the police came to  the  family  home  making
       enquiries of her whereabouts. They were told  that  the  appellant's
       whereabouts were unknown. The appellant maintained that her  parents
       may not have disclosed other possible incidents to her so as not  to
       worry her. Nevertheless they had told her  that  her  husband  often
       telephoned and threatened them. He also drove by their house blowing
       his horn and gathered with friends outside in  order  to  intimidate
       them. The appellant believed that if  she  returned  he  would  seek
       revenge for the damage to  his  honour  and  would  seek  to  obtain
       custody of their children. She maintained that the Pakistani  courts
       are biased against women and  that  her  situation  with  regard  to
       custody would be made more  difficult  if  she  were  imprisoned  or
       forced to seek refuge in a shelter. If  they  were  imprisoned  with
       her, it would be damaging to her children's welfare.

   19. The appellant stated that it is easy to bribe the police in Pakistan
       and that they are unwilling to become involved in family disputes.

   20. In a statement prepared during the hearing the appellant  sought  to
       clarify matters raised during the  course  of  the  hearing  by  the
       Tribunal. She confirmed she has never worked either in  Pakistan  or
       in the UK. She  maintained  that  she  did  not  complete  secondary
       schooling but would like to study in the UK so as to be able to work
       and support herself and  her  daughters.  She  maintained  that  her
       brother worked part time giving  lessons  to  students  but  was  no
       longer doing so. He spent little time at home. She had two  paternal
       aunts who lived with their husbands in Sialkot  but  they  were  not
       close to the family. A maternal aunt lived in Lahore  but  would  be
       unable to provide shelter as the appellant's husband  was  aware  of
       her place of residence.

   21. The appellant's father has no funds to instruct a lawyer and in  any
       event his health would not allow him to do so. Her parents  live  on
       her father's pension. The police have been to the family home  about
       twice in the year up to March 2010. The  appellant's  husband  still
       harasses her parents although this is less frequent.

   22. In her subsequent oral  evidence  to  this  Tribunal  the  appellant
       adopted her most recent witness statement  and  confirmed  that  the
       contents were true and accurate. She stated that she  did  not  know
       anybody called YK (the man named in the FIR as her co-adulterer) and
       was  not  aware  of  anyone  being  punished  as  a  result  of  the
       allegations her husband had made.

   23. In cross-examination she was asked to explain what she meant by  her
       claim that her brother spent "little time at home". She replied  "he
       is out with his friends". She did not know  whether  he  lived  with
       them but said he did not come home every day. She stated he  had  no
       permanent work. He had been giving tuition but no longer did so. She
       was unable to comment on how he supported himself financially.

   24. The appellant stated that her father had two sisters who  were  both
       married and lived with their husbands. When she was in Pakistan  she
       had been aware that they had enough to feed their family. Both their
       husbands were employed but she did not know their  occupations.  She
       stated that her maternal aunt was also married; this woman's husband
       worked sometimes but she did not know their situation at the present
       time.

   25. In response to questions from the Tribunal the appellant stated that
       between December 2008 and the present day, the  police  had  visited
       her family home  3 times. She stated that  her  father  had  retired
       when she married and had been on a pension ever since. She  did  not
       think he owned any property either now or at the time she  left  the
       country. She was reminded that she had stated at interview  that  he
       had sold "some" of his land to fund her journey and  she  was  asked
       what had happened to the rest of it. She stated she  did  not  know.
       Although recorded as having said at interview that  her  father  had
       paid a lawyer to cover all the proceedings, she stated she  did  not
       know whether this was so. She was also unaware of what had  happened
       to the family gold, some of which had  been  sold  to  pay  for  her
       journey. She assumed it had been sold.

   The expert evidence

   26.  The  Tribunal  had  the  benefit  of  expert  evidence  from  three
       individuals, Drs Lau and Balzani being instructed by the appellants'
       representatives. Dr Shah being instructed by the respondent.


   Dr Lau: written report


   27. A Barrister and Reader in Law at the School of Law of the School  of
       Oriental and African Studies, Dr Lau's areas  of  expertise  include
       Islamic law. He is chief examiner for Islamic Law  of  the  external
       LLB of the University of London and his  current  position  involves
       intensive research on modern Pakistani law. He prepared two  reports
       for these appeals. In his  main  report  of  5  April  2010  Dr  Lau
       explains that although in  Pakistan  any  zina  (sexual  intercourse
       outside marriage) is a crime,  the  matter  is  complicated  because
       Islamic criminal law provides  for  different  punishments  for  the
       offence.  This is because there is a  distinction  between  offences
       against God (hadd), for which  punishments  are  prescribed  in  the
       Koran and offences against the public good which are defined by  the
       state  (tazir)  and  for  which  the   state   prescribes   suitable
       punishment.  The  punishments  depended  on  the  kind  of  evidence
       available to prove the offence.

   28. Dr Lau further explains in his main report that following the coming
       into force of the PWA (on 1 December 2006) the release of all  women
       in prison under accusations of zina was ordered. He reports that  by
       and large there has been compliance and that only very few women, if
       any, remain detained under the Zina Ordinance. He noted  that  prior
       to the PWA, the majority of zina cases ended with the  acquittal  of
       the accused woman. To  his  knowledge,  there  were  no  zina  cases
       pending before any court in Pakistan.

   29. He notes, however, that the  amendment  of  the  Zina  Ordinance  is
       controversial with some arguing that it would  cause  moral  decline
       and others complaining it had not gone far enough. (Dr Lau's  report
       also stated that the appellant could not be prosecuted under s.10 of
       the Ordinance because it no longer existed;  however,  he  retracted
       that statement in his second report and in his oral  evidence).   He
       confirms that the appellant could not be prosecuted under  the  hadd
       laws because the FIR mentions only one  eyewitness  to  the  alleged
       adultery and not the required  four.  In  his  view  the  charge  of
       adultery cannot be re- formulated as a charge of fornication and  so
       the appellant could not be prosecuted on that latter basis.  If  the
       appellant's husband sought to file another  FIR  alleging  that  the
       lesser offence of fornication had been committed, Dr Lau's  view  is
       that the appellant could successfully apply to  the  High  Court  to
       have it struck down since  the  alleged  offence  has  already  been
       recorded in an existing FIR.

   30. With regard to the attempted murder allegation, Dr  Lau  notes  that
       this was brought under s. 324 of the Pakistan Penal Code  (PPC)  and
       carries a maximum of 10 years of  imprisonment.  He  considers  that
       there is nothing to suggest that the appellant  would  not  have  to
       face these charges if returned to Pakistan.

   31. Dr Lau notes that the appellant was granted bail  but  violated  her
       bail conditions by removing herself from  the  jurisdiction  of  the
       Pakistani courts.  In his opinion, she is very likely, therefore, to
       be arrested and detained on  remand  if  returned  to  Pakistan.  He
       considers that if refused bail, there is a risk she could be held in
       custody for several years especially if  she  is  convicted  by  the
       trial court and had to appeal her conviction to the High Court.

   32. On the issue of whether the appellant would be likely to  receive  a
       fair trial, Dr Lau notes that whilst trials in the higher courts are
       generally considered fair, no such assurances are available for  the
       lower courts, often criticised for being vulnerable to corruption.

   33. Dr Lau expresses the opinion that on the whole Pakistani police  are
       considered corrupt, brutal and abusive, especially towards women. He
       considers that despite the official pronouncements and  promises  of
       reform, there have been hardly any improvements. He  relies  on  the
       Country of Origin Report (COIR) of February 2010 which records human
       rights abuses being committed by the police and the frequent failure
       to punish such abuses creating  a  climate  of  impunity.  He  cites
       reports of police torture and mistreatment, extrajudicial  killings,
       arbitrary detention, the acceptance of bribes to  file  or  withdraw
       charges  and  the  extortion  of  money  from  prisoners  and  their
       families.  There were reports of many women and girls being held  at
       police stations without any cases being registered against them  and
       of many domestic servants being beaten up and humiliated  by  police
       officers to extort confessions of theft and  other  crimes.  Several
       women reported being raped in police custody; some were held so that
       medico-legal checkups were delayed and incriminating evidence of any
       sexual assault was  lost.   Dr  Lau  considers  that  there  are  no
       effective mechanisms to prevent police  misconduct.  He  finds  that
       although a few cities have introduced measures such as  female  only
       police stations, these are piecemeal in nature and would not  assist
       the appellant.

   34. Dr Lau considers that there is a risk of the  appellant  becoming  a
       victim of an honour crime committed by her husband  or  one  of  his
       relatives to restore  the  honour  of  the  family  damaged  by  the
       appellant's alleged adultery. He notes  the  patriarchal  system  in
       operation in Pakistan and the endorsement  of  Jirga  systems  which
       provide a licence to men to inflict violence  and  murder  on  their
       female relatives in the name of honour.

   35. He reports that prison and pre-trial detention conditions  are  very
       poor.

   36. He states that he is unable to provide an opinion on the position of
       the appellant's children  whilst  she  is  awaiting  prosecution  or
       during prosecution, although on  the  issue  of  child  custody,  he
       considered that the courts adopt a pragmatic and tend to  be  guided
       by what they regard to be in the best interests of  the  child.   In
       his experience Pakistani  courts  generally  award  custody  to  the
       mother in spite of the fact that Islamic law favours the father.  He
       considers, however, that if the appellant was convicted of attempted
       murder, it would be very likely that she would lose custody  of  the
       children, whereas if acquitted she would be  likely  to  be  awarded
       custody. He considers it possible that the appellant's husband might
       be able to bribe police officers and/or judiciary to take  his  side
       on the issue of custody but he points out that  an  individual  need
       not be influential to bribe the authorities in  this  way;  he  just
       needs money.  He states that it would be unlikely that a court would
       forbid the appellant from having any contact with her children.

   37. On the issue of internal relocation,  Dr  Lau  considers  that  this
       would not be possible for the appellant as she stands accused  of  a
       serious criminal offence and would be a wanted woman in Pakistan. He
       considers that it would be very unlikely that the appellant would be
       able to avoid detection and arrest for very long and points out that
       she would come to the notice of the authorities simply  by  entering
       the country (as we shall see, his oral evidence  resiled  from  this
       last assertion).

   38. Dr Lau reports that prior to 2006 the majority of zina  cases  ended
       with the acquittal of the accused woman albeit that she  would  have
       spent many years in jail awaiting the outcome of her appeal.

   39. A second report by Dr Lau, prepared on 14  April  2010,  focuses  on
       giving a response to Dr Shah's report of February 2010 (to which  we
       shall come in a moment). In it he states that he now agrees with  Dr
       Shah that s.10 of the Zina  Ordinance  continues  to  apply  to  the
       appellant because the FIR was filed before  the  amendments  to  the
       Ordinance became effective. He disagrees with Dr Shah,  however,  on
       the risk of return noting that despite  the  changes  governing  the
       procedure surrounding allegations of adultery, the  availability  of
       bail and the requirement that an arrest could only be  made  on  the
       basis of a court order, the appellant was  arrested  by  the  police
       without any court order suggesting that the procedures introduced in
       2004 are not always followed. He also takes  issue  with  Dr  Shah's
       assessment of the situation in Lahore and points out that  at  least
       50% of the population of that city live in squatter  camps.  In  his
       view the fact that the appellant's husband was able to file  an  FIR
       against  his  wife  on  false  allegations,  indicates  that  he  is
       influential and determined  to  harm  her.  He  disagrees  that  the
       presence of NGOs in Lahore would offer protection to  the  appellant
       and he also rejects Dr Shah's suggestion that a single  woman  would
       be able to obtain accommodation and employment in one of  the  large
       cities. In his experience, there were very few women living on their
       own and it was usual for divorced women to return to  their  parents
       or live with other members of their extended families.

   Dr Lau: oral evidence

   40. Dr Lau said that an FIR was the first step in a criminal case.  Once
       a complaint is recorded in such a report and registered at a  police
       station, it cannot be extinguished unless the matter goes  to  court
       and it is found there is no case to answer or  (on  an  application)
       the High Court makes an order quashing it.  However, an  FIR  is  an
       accusation not a charge document.  Its registration imposes  on  the
       police only a duty to investigate and where the investigation merits
       it, to bring the matter to a court.   In  practice  there  are  many
       stale or stagnant FIRs.  When considering whether to take the FIR to
       a court the police consult lawyers (assistant advocates),  but  they
       are part of the police service, they are not independent prosecutors
       able to apply an independent filter.  They draw up  a  draft  charge
       sheet based on the FIR, which is presented in court.

   41. Criminal cases in most of Pakistan (including Lahore) are  heard  in
       the trial or Session Courts with appeals lying onwards to a Court of
       Appeal, the High Court  and  the  Supreme  Court.   In  relation  to
       certain matters governed by Islamic law, including zina, appeal lies
       to the Federal Sharia Court.  The latter is a very  powerful  court.
       It is currently quite liberal, but  there  is  no  guarantee,  under
       mounting pressure from Islamists, that this will continue.

   42. On the basis of an FIR and their duty  to  investigate,  the  police
       have powers of arrest and bail.  The police can release on bail  and
       it is even possible to apply for pre-arrest bail, so no arrest takes
       place at all.  The  PPC  distinguishes  between  bailable  and  non-
       bailable offences, the latter only allowing for bail to  be  granted
       at the discretion of the court.

   43. So far as women are concerned an amendment made in 2006  to  s.  347
       of  the  Code  of  Criminal  Procedure  (CCP)  by  Ordinance   XXXVI
       (otherwise known as the Law Reforms Ordinance,  see  COIR,  February
       2010, 11.48) accorded them a right to bail except in three  sets  of
       circumstances  "relating  to  terrorism,  financial  corruption  and
       murder". In his view the murder exception includes attempted  murder
       under s.324 of the PPC.  If any of the exceptions applies bail might
       still be granted but only at the  discretion  of  the  judge.   When
       applying for bail there is state provision for help from government-
       appointed lawyers, but good legal help costs money.  If appeals have
       to be made to the High Court even a middle-class family might not be
       able to afford to find lawyers qualified to appear  there  (although
       some public-minded elite lawyers do some of this type  of  work  pro
       bono).

   44. Dr Lau opined that even if only detained for  one  night  in  police
       detention, that will tarnish a woman's reputation. If a  woman  with
       children is detained for any period either her children will have to
       be looked after by members  of  her  family  or  guardians  will  be
       appointed.

   45. The PWA 2006 was passed in order to address the widespread abuse and
       misuse by men of adultery charges against women (failed rape charges
       brought by women could be converted by their husbands into  adultery
       allegations which had led  to  many  women  being  incarcerated  and
       convicted by lower courts on very  flimsy  evidence  -  only  to  be
       eventually acquitted by the Federal Sharia Court).  The PWA had  led
       to a number of changes: many women had been released from prison and
       men who press new  charges  of  adultery  that  fail  can  now  find
       themselves prosecuted for making false  accusations.   He  believed,
       however, there was a real risk in the coming years that the  Federal
       Sharia Court might strike down all or some parts of the PWA.

   46. Dr Lau said that he now agreed with Dr Shah that an accusation in an
       FIR of an offence of zina under s.10  of  the  1979  Zina  Ordinance
       would still be prosecutable in the Pakistani courts, notwithstanding
       that the 2006 Act had now abolished it.   However,  the  appellant's
       eligibility for bail would be  decided  according  to  the  reformed
       legislation.

   47. Dr Lau said that he did not think that being a woman  would  prevent
       someone getting a fair trial, but it was only at the  level  of  the
       higher courts that judicial standards were adequate and much, in any
       event, depended  on  the  social  standing  and  reputation  of  the
       accused.

   48. In Pakistan there was a vibrant NGO  culture,  but  their  resources
       were small in comparison with the level of unmet legal needs.

   49. He did not consider he had any expertise on women's shelters, but he
       had visited the Panaj Centre in Karachi in early 2010.  It had  been
       a government-run centre (Darul Aman) but  had  latterly  been  taken
       over by a local NGO.  It was well-run but his understanding was that
       most were badly run and not much better than prisons.  He considered
       that it was doubtful such a shelter would accept a  woman  facing  a
       charge of attempted murder.

   50. Whilst honour killings were now criminalised and courts could impose
       punishments irrespective of any agreement between  the  accused  and
       the victim's family, honour killings could  often  still  be  hidden
       away or presented as a domestic accident.

   51. In cross-examination Dr Lau reiterated that FIRs can be a source  of
       harassment.  It is easy to bribe the police to file an  FIR.  Whilst
       many FIRs lie on the file and nothing happens, it would be easy  for
       the appellant's husband to reactivate his, if she was to return. If,
       however, she were to return to another part of Pakistan, he did  not
       think the police would be likely to know, as  there  is  no  central
       register of FIRs.  If  her  husband  were  to  learn  that  she  had
       returned to another part of Pakistan, the  police  in  Lahore  could
       take steps to have her arrested and returned to Lahore.

   52. In answer to questions from the Tribunal about the criteria used  by
       the courts to decide whether to exercise their discretion  to  grant
       bail, Dr Lau  said  the  three  main  considerations  were  (1)  the
       seriousness of the offence; (2) danger to the public;  and  (3)  the
       risk the accused would  interfere  with  the  criminal  trial.   But
       someone in breach of bail conditions would find it difficult to  get
       bail, albeit being a mother with two children would be a factor in a
       woman's favour.

   53. He was not confident that the proviso introduced by Ordinance  XXXVI
       stating that (subject to three exceptions)  a  woman  could  not  be
       imprisoned for more than six months  was  absolute,  as  there  were
       cases of women held on remand for several years.

   54. He reiterated his disagreement with the view  stated  in  Dr  Shah's
       report that women would go to the police for help.  Nor did he agree
       with Dr Shah's opinion that in Lahore all cases in which the  police
       were accused of persecutory conduct were taken  seriously.   The  UK
       Parliamentary Fact Finding Mission in which  he  had  been  involved
       early in 2010  had  found  some  cases  where  government  officials
       (including in Lahore) had acted wrongfully.

   55. Dr Lau agreed that for a court deciding whether to  grant  bail  one
       factor was the strength of the case.  If  in  the  appellant's  case
       there was, for example, a witness statement from the  servant,  that
       might make it strong enough.  He did not think that at the level  of
       trial courts there was a risk of an unfair  trial,  although  judges
       could be influenced by bribes and threats.  He had limited knowledge
       of prison conditions although  as  part  of  the  new  human  rights
       culture the courts have tried to highlight poor prison conditions.

   56. Dr Lau agreed that government-run women's shelters dealt with  women
       transferred to them by a court order and so would accommodate  women
       facing criminal charges, but he still thought that the fact that the
       appellant faced a serious charge of  attempted  murder  would  count
       against her being sheltered.  For women who have been put on  trial,
       even if later acquitted, their reputations were compromised  in  the
       eyes of society.  If their families rejected  them,  they  could  be
       forced to try and survive on their own in  large  cities  or  towns,
       some ending up in prostitution.

   57. On the second day of  the  hearing  Dr  Lau  gave  further  evidence
       regarding a "Note" he had prepared after discussions overnight  with
       Dr Shah designed to clarify  the  one  real  point  of  disagreement
       between them on points of Pakistani law: In the light of  a  further
       case shown to him by  Dr Shah  since  he  prepared  his  "Note"  he
       accepted that an FIR pre-dating the 2006 WPA would proceed under the
       "old" s.10 zina.

   58. In further evidence given on the second day of the hearing, the only
       continuing area of disagreement between Dr Lau and Dr Shah concerned
       the amendment of s. 497 of the CCP  by  Ordinance  XXXVI.    Dr  Lau
       considered that the reference to 10 years imprisonment meant "up  to
       10 years", not "10 years  or  more"  (as  Dr  Shah  contended).  In
       relation to the  Tribunal's  query  as  to  whether  this  provision
       imposed an absolute prohibition on a woman being detained beyond six
       months, he considered that terrorist cases would be dealt with under
       separate anti-terrorist laws.  He suspected that in any  case  lower
       court judges would not necessarily apply this safeguard  and  so  it
       would be left to applicants to appeal higher to get their continuing
       detention quashed.  He confirmed that it was his view  that  if  the
       FIR against the appellant was accompanied  by  a  witness  statement
       from the servant, that would  constitute  "reasonable  grounds"  for
       both possible arrest by the police and probable denial  of  bail  by
       the courts. Risk of absconding would  also  be  a  relevant  factor.
       However, he did not think there were any centralised records kept of
       people who had absconded.

   59. In further cross-examination Dr Lau agreed that one  possible  court
       reaction to a previous record of having absconded would be to impose
       more stringent bail conditions and not necessarily to refuse bail.

   60. In response  to  further  questions  posed  by  the  Tribunal  in  a
       memorandum sent to the parties shortly  after  the  hearing  Dr  Lau
       prepared a  short  supplementary  report  commenting  on  Dr  Shah's
       answers to the same.

   Dr Balzani: written report

   61. Dr  Balzani  is  a  Reader  in  Social  Anthropology  at  Roehampton
       University, an Associate  Lecturer  with  the  Open  University  and
       currently chief  examiner  for  the  Anthropology  A-level.  Her  CV
       emphasised that she was not a lawyer  by  training  but  during  the
       course of her career she has taken a specialist  interest  in  South
       Asia where she has conducted extensive  ethnographic  fieldwork,  as
       well as amongst the settlers who have established themselves in  the
       UK. She had written two reports for this case, one in October  2008,
       and the other on 20 March 2010. Both  make  frequent  references  to
       recent major country reports on Pakistan. The second was, she wrote,
       partially collated from responses she had received from two contacts
       in Pakistan, Mr Jamal Asad, Advocate in the High Court in Lahore and
       Hina Jalani, the Special Representative of the UN  Secretary-General
       on the situation of human rights  defenders,  and  Advocate  of  the
       Supreme Court of Pakistan.   In her written reports Dr Balzani makes
       clear that in her opinion the appellant would be at risk  of  arrest
       and imprisonment as a result of the FIR registered against  her  and
       she may find that her children are given in custody to their  father
       or taken into care while she awaits  trial  and  possibly  serves  a
       prison sentence. She would  continue  to  be  at  risk  of  physical
       violence from her  husband  and  his  family.  If  her  husband  was
       determined enough and had sufficient resources he  could  track  her
       down in Pakistan. Even if one of Pakistan's  women's  shelters  took
       her in, they are dysfunctional and themselves constitute a  risk  of
       harm, as was made clear by a 2008 report by the South Manchester Law
       Centre, Safe to Return?:  Pakistani  women,  domestic  violence  and
       access to refugee protection - a report of a transnational  research
       project conducted in the UK and Pakistan. Once her father  died  her
       brother may well decide not to help her and it was he who  was  most
       likely to inherit any property, land or  money  belonging  to  their
       father.  She would find it extremely difficult to live alone for any
       length of time in Pakistan; only those who are  economically  secure
       and have a good network of family and friends for support can manage
       this.  As a lone woman who needed to work to feed  herself  and  her
       children the appellant would be more vulnerable  to  harassment  and
       sexual abuse. The social consequences of an accusation  of  adultery
       for a woman were serious; many of the  women  who  were  accused  of
       moral crimes pre-2006 had their lives blighted by these  accusations
       and even if exonerated by the courts were  unable  to  return  home.
       The children of such women were also harmed by the  stigma  attached
       to the mother.


   62.  In addition to  various  observations  on  the  legal  position  in
       Pakistan in relation to adultery, Dr Balzani's report chronicles the
       high incidence in Pakistan of violence against women.  She  believes
       that the appellant is at real risk of an honour crime  committed  or
       arranged by her husband or family. She is likely to face a period in
       detention and in  both  pre-trial  and  custodial  detention  prison
       conditions are extremely poor. Levels of corruption in the  Pakistan
       judiciary are high particularly in the lower courts  and  women  and
       children are especially  vulnerable  to  exploitation.  Dr  Ballzani
       observes although there had not been any systematic study  available
       to assess whether the number of cases involving women  charged  with
       the crime of adultery had decreased,  the  anecdotal  evidence  (she
       referred to her e-mail correspondence with her two  Pakistan  lawyer
       contacts) suggests that there has been a dramatic  decrease  in  the
       registration of cases of adultery against  women  under  the  Hudood
       Ordinances. This appears to be based on unofficial figures collected
       by women's rights and  human  rights  organisations  from  different
       police stations.  Her contact, Asad Jamal, confirmed that the police
       and judiciary were aware of the changes and that the new  procedures
       had been adopted across the country.


   63. Dr Balzani quotes Anjali Gandhi of  the  European  Union  of  Public
       Relations as stating in August 2004 that 88% of women in  prison  in
       Pakistan were there as a result of the Zina Ordinance In the wake of
       the introduction of bail for zina offences, Dr Balzani  observes  in
       her October 2008 report that the Minister  for  Women's  Development
       and Youth Affairs  (Sumaira  Malik)  announced  that  following  the
       release of female prisoners, they would be provided with legal  aid,
       personal and financial surety for their bail and  accommodation  for
       those who were homeless.

   64. Dr Balzani opines that as the appellant does not have employment  or
       accommodation for herself and her children, her  economic  situation
       would weigh heavily against her in court should her husband seek  to
       gain custody of the children. Further, the children would  be  given
       in custody to their father or taken  into  care  while  she  awaited
       trial. She acknowledged that in some  cases  children  serve  prison
       sentences with their mothers but considered that they may have  been
       confined to children born there. She reflected that it was  possible
       that the appellant's husband would seek custody not because  of  any
       fatherly affection but as one more way of causing  distress  to  his
       wife and, in such circumstances, might not  care  for  the  children
       very well. She also suggests that the children might be at risk from
       their father who may well decide to kill them.

   65. Dr Balzani refers to the  website  of  the  Sustainable  Development
       Policy Unit with regard to custody  of  children  in  Pakistan.  She
       lists several factors which it is said are considered by the  courts
       when granting custody. These are:

      . the welfare of the minor
      . the age, sex and religion of the  minor;  the  welfare  of  younger
        children is generally regarded as being in the mother's custody
      . the character and capacity of the proposed guardian; courts usually
        reject baseless allegations against mothers
      . any existing or previous relations of the  proposed  guardian  with
        the minor's property
      . the minor's preference (usually accepted at  about  nine  years  of
        age)
      . whether siblings would be divided; courts prefer to  keep  children
        united
      . whether either or both parents have remarried
      . whether the parents live far apart
      . the child's comfort,  health,  material,  intellectual,  moral  and
        spiritual welfare; the mere fact that the  mother  is  economically
        less secure than the father is not usually reason  enough  to  deny
        her custody because  maintenance  is  the  father's  responsibility
        irrespective of who has custody
      . the mental and psychological development of the minor, which should
        not be upset by a reversal of the existing status quo.



   Dr Balzani: oral evidence

   66. In her oral evidence Dr Balzani re-emphasised that  she  was  not  a
       legal expert.  Having had the benefit  of  reading  Dr  Lau  and  Dr
       Shah's reports, she said she would need to rethink her opinion  that
       in Pakistan marital rape was not a crime.  She  continued,  however,
       to take a different view from Dr Shah about  the  extent  to  which
       liberalising  legal  reforms   had   altered   entrenched   societal
       attitudes.  Family structures were deeply patriarchal and women were
       blamed for the breakdown of a marriage. Police and other  government
       officials had the same values as the wider society.  Whilst she  did
       not think the appellant would be  persecuted  by  the  police,  they
       would not be willing to protect her.  The  level  of  accountability
       for official abuses was limited. The NGO sector was actively helping
       women  affected  by  domestic  violence  but  their  resources  were
       limited.  Honour killings were still a serious problem.   In  Lahore
       the majority  of  the  population  lived  in  poverty  or  difficult
       conditions and the middle classes  covered  a  broad  spectrum.   In
       Pakistan as a whole the criminal justice system existed side by side
       with the traditional Jirga courts, who were groups of  senior  males
       who could  act,  at  least  in  rural  areas,  as  judge,  jury  and
       executioner.

   67. As regards women's shelters, Dr Balzani said  their  standards  were
       very variable, the South  Manchester  Law  Centre  report,  Safe  to
       Return? had identified serious shortcomings.  For  single  women  it
       would not be easy to relocate; having children would  make  it  even
       more difficult.  Even assuming a shelter would assist the  appellant
       on return, the time women were allowed to stay in them  was  limited
       and  finding  work  and  accommodation  thereafter  would  be   very
       difficult.

   68.  In  cross-examination  Dr  Balzani  agreed  she  had  no  fieldwork
       experience in Pakistan, although she considered  that  her  research
       work in the UK, which included  interviews  of  women  and  men  who
       originated from Pakistan, added to her insight.   She  had  a  paper
       soon to be  published  on  the  problems  of  domestic  violence  in
       Pakistan.  She defended her statement that the appellant's father-in-
       law, being a lawyer, would know ways and methods, legal and illegal,
       to advance his son's attempts to have the appellant prosecuted.  She
       thought that the appellant's family might be able to ensure she  got
       help from a lawyer  up  to  a  point,  but  whether  that  would  be
       sufficient was difficult to say.  If the appellant tried to relocate
       she would face difficulties at every stage.   The  Safe  to  Return?
       report had noted that sometimes educated women found  it  harder  to
       cope with relocation.

   69. Asked to clarify, her comment that the retention of hadd punishments
       was "worrying", Dr Balzani said that she meant it created  concerns
       about future changes given the general societal attitudes to  women.
       She agreed that the FIR particulars in this case would not sustain a
       charge of adultery under hadd, but thought the details of  witnesses
       it gave were designed to scare and worry the appellant.  Whether  it
       reflected a genuine belief or was purely malicious,  she  could  not
       say.

   70. In reply to questions from the Tribunal, Dr Balzani said she thought
       that the Safe to Return? report had  been  careful  to  explain  its
       methodology and to produce qualitative research  supported  by  some
       statistical data, but she agreed it was not a  comprehensive  survey
       of women's shelters in Pakistan.  She  agreed  her  report  did  not
       always identify her sources.  She agreed her comments on inheritance
       law and practice  needed  modification,  as  daughters  do  inherit,
       although their shares were less than brothers.

   Dr Shah: written report

   71. Dr Shah is a Lecturer in Law at  the  University  of  Hull.  He  had
       practised law as an advocate in the district  courts  in  Islamabad.
       His main interest was in Pakistan  criminal  law;  His  publications
       included a monograph,  Women,  the  Koran  and  International  Human
       Rights Law: The  Experience  of  Pakistan  (2006)  Leiden:  Martinus
       Nijhoff Publishers.  Dr Shah's report of 23 February 2010  sets  out
       the legal position of the pre-PWA Zina Ordinance on  adultery,  non-
       marital consensual sex and the  evidential  requirements  for  these
       offences. He explains that in 1979 General  Zia  Ul-Haq  promulgated
       five ordinances one of which was the Zina Ordinance. The PWA has had
       a significant impact on the Ordinance.  In  addition,  the  PWA  has
       amended several  provisions  of  the  PPC,  the  CCP  and  the  1939
       Dissolution of Muslim Marriages Act.

   72. There are two sets of laws dealing with sexual offences in Pakistan:
       the Zina Ordinance  (dealing  with  hadd  punishment)  and  the  PPC
       (dealing with tazir punishment). The  former  distinguishes  between
       sexual acts committed by  married  and  unmarried  persons  but  the
       latter makes no such  distinction  (s.496B).   The  result  is  that
       sexual intercourse is illegal in Pakistan except between  a  husband
       and wife. Adultery was treated as a separate offence under s. 497 of
       the PPC but it was repealed by the Zina Ordinance in  1979  (s.  19)
       and the PWA did not restore it. An individual cannot  be  tried  for
       both adultery and non marital consensual sex.

   73. The Zina Ordinance (s. 5) describes  zina  as  a  man  and  a  woman
       wilfully having sexual intercourse without  being  married  to  each
       other. Section 2 of the Ordinance provides two types  of  punishment
       for zina: hadd, a fixed Islamic punishment and tazir,  a  punishment
       where the  court  can  exercise  discretion.  For  the  purposes  of
       punishment, the determining factors are set to  be  marital  status,
       age, whether the parties to zina are sane and the number and  gender
       of witnesses. If zina is committed by  a  married,  sane  and  adult
       person (18 years for a male and 16 years for a female),  he  or  she
       would be stoned to death in public as a hadd punishment. If a person
       is unmarried than the punishment is 100 lashes. A minor is liable to
       imprisonment for up to 5 years with or without  a  fine.  The  tazir
       punishment for married and unmarried persons is imprisonment of  not
       less than four years and not more than 10 years.  A fine could  also
       be imposed. The addition of 30 lashes has been abolished  by  virtue
       of the Abolition of the Punishment of  Whipping  Act  1996.  A  case
       falls into  the  tazir  rather  than  the  hadd  category  when  the
       evidential requirement of four adult male Muslims'  testimony  or  a
       confession is not met. Dr Shah reports that no  one  has  ever  been
       stoned to death under the Zina Ordinance in Pakistan to date.


   74. Dr Shah reports that the main criticism regarding the Zina Ordinance
       was the power of the police to register a case of zina. Police often
       abused  their  power  by  registering  such   cases   on   unfounded
       allegations, leading to the arrest and lengthy detention of men  and
       women. Prior to the implementation of the PWA, a case  of  zina  was
       registered in a police station and any police officer above the rank
       of Assistant sub Inspector could investigate the  matter.  Following
       registration of a case, the usual procedure was for  the  police  to
       arrest the accused, have them medically examined  and  record  their
       statements. Evidence from the scene of the alleged  crime  was  also
       collected and statements of available witnesses  were  recorded.  If
       the investigation was not completed within 24 hours, the accused had
       to be produced in court. If  the  investigating  officer  considered
       that there was insufficient evidence, the  accused  was  discharged;
       however if he was satisfied that sufficient evidence to support  the
       complaint did exist, he was required to submit a charge sheet within
       14 days after the registration of the case  to  a  competent  court.
       Under  the  Criminal  Law  Amendment  Act   2004,   the   power   of
       investigation in such cases now  lies  with  the  superintendent  of
       police, a police officer of higher rank who  is  in  charge  of  the
       district police force. The aim of the change was to show that  cases
       of zina would be taken seriously and investigated by a senior police
       officer. The most important change is described as  the  prohibition
       of arrest by police without the permission of the court. As of  2004
       it has been a requirement that the police have  to  establish  in  a
       court that an offence has actually been committed  rather  than  the
       fact that a mere complaint has been made.

   75. The effect of the PWA on the Ordinance has been to delete  all  zina
       offences other than those liable to hadd punishment, and  to  insert
       them within the PPC.  Zina liable  to  tazir  has  been  renamed  as
       fornication and been inserted in the PPC and s.496B.   This  offence
       covers  married  and  unmarried  persons  and  is  punishable   with
       imprisonment for up to 5 years and a fine up to 10,000 rupees (hence
       a reduction in  the  sentence  by  half).  The  same  punishment  is
       accorded to the crime of making a false accusation of fornication  -
       qazf under the Qazf Ordinance - although a court has the  discretion
       not to pass any judgment in this regard.

   76. Dr Shah explains how the PWA has changed the procedure of  complaint
       in zina cases. The power of registering a case is  taken  away  from
       the police and given to a Session judge. The court must  examine  on
       oath at least four  adult  male  Muslim  witnesses  to  the  act  of
       penetration necessary for constituting  the  zina  offence.  If  the
       judge considers that there are sufficient  grounds  for  proceeding,
       then a summons will be issued for the accused to attend but if there
       are insufficient  grounds,  the  complaint  can  be  dismissed.  The
       Session court is equivalent to the Crown Court in the UK. Dr Shah is
       of the view that the era of revenge for complaints of  zina  against
       women and young couples who want to marry  each  other  against  the
       wishes of their families has  ended.  He  also  maintains  that  the
       practice of sending women  to  prison  for  lengthy  periods  whilst
       awaiting investigation and/or trial has  ended.  The  procedure  for
       lodging complaints in fornication cases has  also  been  amended  in
       that complaints must now be filed at a magistrate's court.

   77. A further significant change is  that  the  offence  of  fornication
       under s. 496B has been made a bailable offence as has zina liable to
       hadd. It is not possible for a crime to be punishable both under the
       Zina Ordinance and the PPC. The criminal procedure  code  determines
       which court has the power to try a particular case unless  specified
       by law. According  to  the  Zina  Ordinance  a  Session  court  will
       prosecute cases of zina liable to  hadd  and  cases  of  fornication
       under the PPC are decided by a first-class magistrate.

   78.  The  PWA  has  also  added  further  grounds  for  divorce  to  the
       Dissolution of Marriages Act.  Where a woman alleges  that  she  has
       been falsely accused of a zina offence, she can approach a court for
       a divorce. Ill-treatment by a husband, even where such conduct  does
       not amount to physical cruelty, can also  be  grounds  for  divorce.
       Cases are to be decided within six months.

   79. Dr Shah reports that his  search  for  registration  of  zina  cases
       undertaken in June 2009 in three districts of Pakistan  revealed  no
       new cases under the new law by the Session courts. Enquiries made of
       the District Prosecutor of  Rawalpindi,  the  District  Attorney  of
       Islamabad and a Session Judge also  disclosed  none.   He  concludes
       that the PWA has blocked the way for registering false cases of zina
       and fornication.

   80. However he points out that the PWA has no retrospective  application
       and therefore the appellant would still be tried under s. 10 of  the
       original Zina Ordinance.

   81. Having noted  that  the  appellant  claimed  that  her  husband  had
       admonished her several times not to continue her 'affair',  Dr  Shah
       expresses the view that her husband  had the opportunity to kill his
       wife if he had wanted to; however he chose not to take the law  into
       his own hands.

   82. In his February 2010 report, Dr Shah addresses the issue of custody.
       He notes that the law recognises dual control of father and  mother.
       He confirms that male children remain with their  mother  until  the
       age of seven whereas female  children  remain  until  they  attained
       puberty. He reports that children are not sent to prison with  their
       mother where a conviction takes place  but  that  mothers  of  young
       children tend to receive lenient sentences and having young children
       is a compelling basis for obtaining bail. If  a  woman  is  sent  to
       prison, the courts can appoint a  guardian  for  her  children.  The
       welfare and consent of children are key factors in the choice  of  a
       guardian. The father is normally considered to be the  most  natural
       guardian after a mother but maternal grandparents are also a popular
       choice.

   Dr Shah: oral evidence

   83. In oral evidence Dr Shah said  that  lawyers  he  had  contacted  in
       Pakistan had confirmed his view of s.497 of  the  CCP.   If  he  was
       wrong about that provision - and so  bail  on  an  attempted  murder
       charge against a woman was not automatic - then he  thought  it  was
       significant that an  existing  case  authority  said  that  previous
       absconding could not  be  the  sole  basis  for  denying  bail.  The
       approach of the courts to deciding  whether  there  were  reasonable
       grounds for granting bail or for proceeding with a charge  would  be
       to look at whether there was  independent  evidence,  e.g.  medical,
       forensic. The FIR itself was not treated as evidence.  If  the  case
       involved a woman with young children the court would be  more  ready
       to grant bail.  By his statement that in Lahore all  cases  alleging
       persecution by the police or other state officials  would  be  taken
       seriously, he had meant to describe legal processes, not necessarily
       legal practices.  He agreed that in  Lahore  there  were  many  poor
       people, but it was Pakistan's second largest city and very expensive
       to live in. It had a better educational  ratio  and  literacy  rate.
       The quality of its lawyers and judges was better.  He could not rule
       out that trial judges who dealt with the appellant's case  might  be
       corrupt, but there was no good reason to think they would be.

   84. In cross-examination Dr Shah said his expertise was primarily in the
       law of Pakistan but he believed that his 32 years spent in  Pakistan
       gave him a better understanding of practices in the courts.  He  had
       also published academic work dealing with mixed issues  of  law  and
       society, including work on honour killings.  In  his  view  the  PWA
       would not prevent an FIR relying on s.10 of the old  zina  law  from
       proceeding.   Although  the  legal  advisers   within   the   police
       department  had  no  formal  power  to  decide  whether   a   police
       prosecution  (having  investigated  the  FIR)  should  proceed,   in
       practice their comments played an important role; but  even  if  the
       police decided not to prosecute, he  agreed  that  the  FIR  is  not
       extinguished.

   85. Regarding s.347 of the CCP as amended by Ordinance XXXVI,  he  stood
       by his view that the reference to "imprisonment for 10 years"  meant
       "10 years and above".  Lawyers  he  had  been  in  contact  with  in
       Pakistan told him this interpretation was the  most  likely,  albeit
       also confirming there was no decided cases on the  issues.   He  did
       not share Dr Lau's belief that lower-level (trial) courts would  not
       apply this liberalising provision.  All judicial personnel operating
       in the courts, except perhaps in rural areas, would know them.  If a
       person was already in prison, then bail would not  be  automatically
       given and there would need to be an application to the court.

   86. He accepted that when in his main report he stated that women facing
       adultery charges would be protected by the state, he  was  referring
       to legal form; in practice  bias,  administrative  inefficiency  and
       such factors could play a role, mainly at the lower court level.

   87. Dr Shah said he doubted that in order for a court  to  be  satisfied
       there were "reasonable grounds"  for  a  prosecution  proceeding,  a
       statement from a witness  would  be  enough.  Corroborative  medical
       evidence might not be considered necessary but in general the courts
       would want to see  physical  evidence  of  assault  or  injury.   He
       agreed, however, that unscrupulous  complainants  or  lawyers  could
       obtain false medical evidence.

   88. In answer to questions from the Tribunal, Dr Shah said  he  was  not
       sure whether the police could detain a person who  had  jumped  bail
       without the permission of a court.  There was no case law on  powers
       of arrest for breach of bail, although he knew that guarantors could
       be summoned to court. He thought Dr Lau was right in saying that  in
       terrorism  cases   special   law   (deriving   from   anti-terrorism
       legislation) would prevail  over  the  Ordinance.   Although  trials
       could sometimes continue in  absentia,  in  ordinary  cases  it  was
       likely that in such cases the charges would just lie on the file.

   89. In a written answer to  further  questions  posed  by  the  Tribunal
       shortly after the hearing Dr Shah reiterated certain aspects of  his
       earlier evidence.

   BACKGROUND EVIDENCE

   Criminal justice system

   Police practices

   90. The USSD Report, March 2010 states that during 2009 the Society  for
       Human Rights and Prisoners' Aid  (SHARP)  reported  2,300  cases  of
       torture  by  police.  Corruption  within  the  police  was  rampant,
       particularly amongst low-level  officials,  low  salaries  and  poor
       working conditions being key factors. Police were  known  to  charge
       fees  to  register  genuine  complaints  and  accepted   money   for
       registering  false  complaints.  Bribes  to   avoid   charges   were
       commonplace. Individuals paid police to  humiliate  their  opponents
       and to  avenge  personal  grievances.  Police  effectiveness  varied
       greatly by district, ranging from reasonably good to ineffective. As
       in  previous  years,  the  Punjab  provincial  government  conducted
       regular training in technical skills and protection of human  rights
       for police at all levels. The  Karachi  city  government  reportedly
       gave facilities to the city's human rights  officers  for  training.
       During 2008 at least two NGOs (Sahil and SHARP) trained police.

   91. A Sentinel Country Risk  assessment  of  October  2008  prepared  by
       Jane's reports that the police were not regarded by  the  population
       as either friends or protectors but  that  they  were,  in  general,
       mistrusted and feared because their culture was one of  intimidation
       rather than service. They  were  also  subject  to  manipulation  by
       powerful landlords in rural areas and 'influentials' in the  cities.
       Corruption was rife. Investigative procedures were generally  brutal
       and frequently consisted of torturing a suspect until  a  confession
       was obtained.

   92. The HRCP Report for 2009  notes  that  in  the  Punjab  disciplinary
       action was taken against 1,688 officials of the police service.

   Arrest procedures and treatment whilst in detention

   93. According to the same USSD report an FIR is the legal basis for  any
       arrest. Police may initiate FIRs when complainants offer  reasonable
       proof a crime was committed. An FIR allows police  to  detain  named
       suspects for 24 hours  after  which  only  a  magistrate  can  order
       detention for an additional 14 days, if police shows such  detention
       is material to the investigation. In practice  the  authorities  did
       not fully observe these limits on detention.  FIRs  were  frequently
       issued without supporting evidence to harass or intimidate detainees
       or were not issued when adequate evidence was  provided  unless  the
       complainant paid a bribe. Police also detained relatives  of  wanted
       individuals to compel suspects to surrender.  Police  routinely  did
       not seek a magistrate's approval  for  investigative  detention  and
       often held detainees without charge until a court  challenged  their
       detention. Some women in detention were sexually abused. The  report
       observed that the law stipulates that detainees must  be  bought  to
       trial within 30 days of their arrest. Bail pending trial is required
       for bailable offences and permitted at the  court's  discretion  for
       non-bailable offences with sentences of less than 10 years. (We know
       from para 32 of the Special Immigration Appeals decision in Naseer &
       Others 2010] UKSIAC 77/2009 that individuals suspected of  terrorism
       can be held in preventative detention for  up  to  a  year  subject,
       notionally, to three-monthly review by a judicial board and  that  a
       recent  presidential  ordinance  of  October  2009   permits   those
       suspected of terrorism to be detained for  up  to  90  days  without
       judicial oversight or the right of access to a court.)

   Judiciary and the courts
   94. The same report explains that in Pakistan there  are  several  court
       systems with  overlapping  and  sometimes  competing  jurisdictions:
       criminal; civil and personal status; terrorism; commercial;  family;
       military; and  Sharia.  The  report  states  that  despite  the  law
       providing for an independent judiciary, in  practice  the  judiciary
       continues to be subject to executive branch influence at all levels.
        The USS Report March 2010 notes that lower courts  remain  corrupt,
       inefficient and subject to  pressure  from  wealthy,  religious  and
       political figures. Government  control  over  the  court  system  is
       achieved by the politicized nature of judicial promotions. Delay  is
       said to be endemic:
           " Delays in justice in civil and criminal  cases  arose  due  to
           antiquated  procedural  rules,  weak  case  management  systems,
           costly litigation to keep a case moving in the system, and  weak
           legal  education.  These  problems  undermined  the   right   to
           effective remedy and the right to a fair and public hearing.
            ...
           Lower courts  remained  corrupt,  inefficient,  and  subject  to
           pressure  from  prominent  wealthy,  religious,  and   political
           figures. The politicized nature of judicial promotions increased
           the  government's  control  over  the  court  system.   Unfilled
           judgeships and inefficient court procedures resulted  in  severe
           backlogs at both trial and appellate levels."
   95.  In many cases trials did not start until around 6 months after  the
       filing of charges, SHARP estimating that approx 55%  of  the  prison
       population was awaiting trial.


   96. The report also describes the continued  operation  in  Pashtun  and
       Baloch areas of local  council  meetings  (known  as  Panchayats  or
       Jirgas), at times in defiance of the established legal system.  Such
       councils, particularly prevalent in rural areas, settled  feuds  and
       imposed tribal penalties on perceived wrongdoers,  including  fines,
       imprisonment, or even the death penalty.
   Prison conditions


   97. Much of the evidence  before  us  on  prison  is  derived  from  the
       information contained  in  the  USSD  reports  for  2009  and  2010.
       According to them, prison conditions are extremely poor and fail  to
       meet international standards. The main  problems  are  overcrowding,
       ill-treatment by  prison  officials  (particularly  of  inmates  who
       refused to pay bribes) and inadequate food and medical care, leading
       to chronic health problems and  malnutrition  for  those  unable  to
       supplement  their  diet  with  help  from  family  or  friends.  The
       difficulties are exacerbated by lengthy pre-trial detention  and  it
       is reported that prisoners on remand were not always segregated from
       convicted criminals. Observations made in sources cited by  Drs  Lau
       and Balzani, for example, the Asian Human Rights  Commission  report
       2008, the Freedom House report of 2009, the HRCP report 2008 are  to
       similar effect.

   98. Overcrowding appears to be a  major  problem  and  was  reported  as
       widespread,  except  for  the  cells  of  wealthy   or   influential
       prisoners. The International Crisis Group  Asia  report  of  October
       2008 noted that the prisons were overburdened by 133% countrywide in
       2007.  According  to  SHARP,  95,000  prisoners  occupied  72  jails
       originally built to hold a maximum of 36,075  persons  (USSD,  March
       2010). The Asian Centre for Human Rights  (ibid)  recorded  that  in
       2007, 89,542  prisoners  occupied  82  prisons;  the  majority  were
       awaiting trial. The  Human  Rights  Commission  of  Pakistan  (HRCP)
       report of 2008 (published 1 April 2009 and cited in COIR  at  13.02)
       reported that the capacity for prisoners in 20 jails  in  Sindh  was
       9,000 but over 20,000 prisoners were kept there.  The  report  added
       that 59,000 prisoners were detained in 32 prisons  in  Punjab  which
       were meant for detaining no more than 21,000. At least 76  prisoners
       were reported to have died in prisons across the country during 2008
       and at least 163 prisoners had  been  injured  (COIR,  13.07)  SHARP
       reported that in 2009 there were 168 deaths in  jails  (USSD,  March
       2010; HRCP 2009). A report of 2007 by the same  body,  published  in
       May 2008, noted that prisoners  in  Pakistan,  especially  those  on
       death row, lived in cramped overcrowded cells and often faced  abuse
       (COIR, 13.04). Overcrowding is blamed on a sluggish criminal justice
       system. There is no information, however, on whether  the  rates  of
       overcrowding apply across the board or whether they  are  worse  for
       male or female prisoners. According to  the  HRCP  Report  for  2009
       7,700 prisoners remain on death row.


   99. Overcrowding has led to riots inside some prisons.

  100. In Pakistani prisons there are three  classes  of  cells.  Class  A,
       which is reserved for influential or wealthy prisoners,  allows  for
       the  employment  of  servants  and  provides  facilities   such   as
       television and furniture. At the other end of the spectrum  Class  C
       cells provide the most basic  of  accommodation  with  dirt  floors.
       Middle class prisoners, it seems, occupy Class B.


  101. It is reported that police often do  not  segregate  detainees  from
       convicted criminals and that prisoners with mental  illness  usually
       lack adequate care and are not segregated from  the  general  prison
       population.  The  failure  to  separate  prisoners  on  remand  from
       convicts is also noted in a Daily Times news  article  of  22  March
       2004 cited by Dr Balzani in her October 2008 report. There are  also
       reports of mistreatment of those in custody and  some  extrajudicial
       killings.

  102. However there are some signs of change. Apart from the   release  of
       substantial numbers of female prisoners awaiting trial  (as a result
       of the PWA reforms), the courts have taken  up  the  issue  of  poor
       prison conditions, a development Dr Lau characterises as part of the
       "new human rights culture". The Prime  Minister  has  declared  that
       prison reform will be  a  major  part  of  his  legislative  agenda.
       According to the International Crisis  Group  Asia  report  (October
       2008) his Cabinet intends to present a Bill in Parliament seeking an
       end  to  the  practice  of  imprisoning  defendants  awaiting  trial
       (although we have no information on its progress). The  same  report
       noted that better training of prison staff in recent years  and  the
       interaction of  more  qualified  personnel  have  somewhat  improved
       prison conditions. We note that following a complaint of torture  by
       a death row inmate in Adiala prison (in Rawalpindi),  the  judiciary
       launched  an  enquiry  into  prison  conditions  and   the   Prisons
       Department in June 2008. In October 2008 the  Daily  Times  reported
       that  after  the  imposition  of  national  judicial   policy,   the
       authorities released 1,000 prisoners.  The  Punjab  Home  Department
       conducted medical tests of 32,464 prisoners in 29 prisons across the
       province on the directives of Chief Justice Chaudhry when he visited
       prisons across the country  (USSD  March  2010).  The  International
       Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) has an agreement with  authorities
       to allow independent visits to prisons throughout the  country,  and
       the authorities at local, provincial, and national  level  permitted
       some  human  rights  groups  and  journalists  to   monitor   prison
       conditions for juvenile and female inmates (COIR, 13.05). There have
       been no reports of riots since 2008.

   Women and the law

  103. Since the experts' reports draw heavily on what is said about  women
       and the law in Pakistan in major country reports, we need  only  add
       some highlighting here. The latter  refer  to  gradual  progress  in
       enhancing the legal protection of women. The concluding comments  of
       the  30th  session  of  the  Committee   on   the   Elimination   of
       Discrimination against Women (11 June 2007, cited  in  COIR,  23.03)
       noted  a  number  of  positive  developments  in  Pakistan.  Despite
       expressing  a  number  of  concerns,  the  Committee  commended  the
       Pakistani government on the adoption of a National Plan of Action in
       1998, national policy for advancement and empowerment of women 2002,
       and  agenda  reform  action  plan  of  2005.   It   considered   the
       reorganisation of the Ministry of Women Development and the creation
       of a National Commission on the  Status  of  Women  to  be  positive
       developments and  welcomed  the  efforts  taken  to  support  female
       victims of violence. The Committee noted the  recent  legal  reforms
       aimed at eliminating  discrimination  against  women  and  promoting
       gender equality. It welcomed the 2002 amendments to articles 51  and
       59 of the Constitution under the legal framework order  to  increase
       women's political participation in the  National  Assembly  and  the
       Senate, the 2000 amendment to the  Pakistani  Citizenship  Act  1951
       providing for nationality to the children of  foreign  spouses,  the
       adoption in 2002 of the Prevention and Control of Human  Trafficking
       Ordinance, the adoption in 2004 of the Criminal Law Amendment Act to
       facilitate the prosecution of honour killing, and  the  adoption  in
       2006 of the PWA amending some of the  Hudood  Ordinances.  The  USSD
       Report for 2010  notes  that  in  2008  Parliament  outlawed  forced
       marriages. The HRCP Report for 2009  notes  that  the  Criminal  Law
       Amendment Bill, offering better protection against sexual harassment
       at the workplace by amending the PPC and the CCP was passed  by  the
       Senate.


  104. However, the major reports make  clear  that  the  effect  of  these
       changes in practice  has  been  limited.  The  general  position  is
       summarised in the USSD Reports 2009 and 2010 is as follows. Although
       the Pakistan constitution makes all citizens equal  before  the  law
       and prohibits discrimination on the  grounds  of  sex  and  although
       Pakistan is a signatory to the UN Convention on the  Elimination  of
       All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW), in practice women
       continue to face discrimination in family law, property law and  the
       judicial system.


  105. The Government of Pakistan's third and forth periodic reports to the
       UN Committee on the Rights of  the  Child,  dated  4  January  2008,
       stated that the PWA was designed to end practices such as preventing
       or obstructing women to get their  share  in  inheritance,  sale  of
       woman, forced marriage, nikah [Islamic wedding  ceremony]  with  the
       Holy Quran, custom of 'vani' or giving a woman in marriage to settle
       a feud and pronouncement  of  divorce  three  times.  These  inhuman
       practices have been made offences under the PPC (COIR February 2010,
        23.08). The Human Rights Commission for Pakistan (HRCP) Report 2008
       notes that there had been three relatively new laws  and  amendments
       safeguarding women against violence and  abuse,  namely  the  Honour
       Killing Act of 2004, the  Code  of  Criminal  Procedure  (Amendment)
       Ordinance, 2006, and the PWA Act  of  2006.  These  laws  deal  with
       honour killing, customs  of  swara  and  vani  [where  children  are
       promised in (forced) marriage to settle blood-feuds], allowing  bail
       to women in most of the offences and amending  the  Zina  Ordinance.
       However, this Report also cautions that these new  laws  have  still
       not been extended  to  the  Provincially  Administered  Tribal  Area
       (PATA) of NWFP- "which means that the crimes kept occurring  without
       being checked under proper laws."


  106. The USSD Report 2008 noted that  implementation  of  the  PWA  was  a
       problem because of the lack of training of police  and  the  lack  of
       awareness of the  bill's  technicalities  and  according  to  women's
       rights groups, the PWA was poorly enforced. However, according to the
       Aurat Foundation, prior to the PWA approximately 66%  of  the  female
       prison population was awaiting trial  on  adultery  related  offences
       under the Hudood ordinances whereas after its passage the authorities
       released from  prison  300  to  500  women  due  to  the  less  harsh
       guidelines in the bill. Para 23.08 of the COIR notes  that  the  USSD
       IRF Report 2009 stated that according to the Society for Human Rights
       and Prisoners Aid, the number of adultery-related cases against women
       considerably dropped during 2008-09.

  107. Paras 23.42-23.48 of the same  COIR  cover the  subject  of  domestic
       violence noting at 23.42 that:

            "On 17 February 2009, the Aurat Foundation  released  its  2008
           annual report on the 'Situation of  Violence  Against  Women  in
           Pakistan'. The report covered the  period  January  to  December
           2008 and recorded a total of 7,733  cases  of  violence  against
           women reported in the print media. Of those  cases,  5,686  were
           registered with the police. [57b]"


  108. The COIR  observes that on  4  August  2009  the  Domestic  Violence
       (Protection  and  Prevention)  was  passed  by  Pakistan's  National
       Assembly but has yet to be passed by the Senate, so it  remains  the
       case that there is  no  specific  legislation  prohibiting  domestic
       violence (23.39, 23.42.). Domestic violence remains a widespread and
       serious problem (23.43, 23.47). Para 23.46 records that:

        "The Freedom House Freedom in the  World  2009  Country  Report  on
        Pakistan observed that:


               "A combination of traditional  norms,  discriminatory  laws,
               and weak enforcement contributes  to  a  high  incidence  of
               rape, domestic abuse,  acid  attacks,  and  other  forms  of
               violence against women; according to  the  HRCP,  up  to  80
               percent of women are victims  of  such  abuse  during  their
               lifetimes. Female victims of rape and  other  sexual  crimes
               are often pressured by police not to file charges, and  they
               are sometimes urged by their  families  to  commit  suicide.
               Gang rapes sanctioned by  village  councils  as  a  form  of
               punishment for crimes  committed  by  the  targeted  woman's
               relatives continue to be reported,  despite  the  fact  that
               harsh  sentences  have  been   handed   down   against   the
               perpetrators in some cases." [19a]"

  109. Paras 23.49-23.61  deal with honour killings and  paras  23.62-23.66
       with rape. They observe that according to the HRCP  2008  report  in
       2008 at least 1,210 women were killed for various reasons during the
       year, including 612 in incidence of so-called honour killings.  This
       meant that approximately  3  women  were  killed  daily  across  the
       country. Paras 23.01-23.02 note that according to the  Human  Rights
       Commission of Pakistan report for 2008  (published  1  April  2009),
       cases of violence against women remained at a high level. Because of
       a lack of  education,  awareness  of  their  own  rights,  and  most
       importantly,  severe  economic  dependence,  women  were   extremely
       vulnerable in the face of  adversity.  The  government  and  private
       sector launched or continue to work on several schemes and  projects
       designed to address specific issues but  were  unable  to  make  any
       significant headway.


  110. On 30 March  2010  President  Asif  Zardari  signed  the  Protection
       Against Women and Harassment at Workplace Bill, aimed at providing a
       safe  working  environment.  Last-minute  amendments  extended   the
       protection to men as well. Punishment for the guilty,  or  violators
       of a code of conduct, ranges from a censure to an unspecified fine.

  111. On the release of women in prison and under  the  Hudood  Ordinance,
       the US State Department International Religious Freedoms report 2009
       stated that approximately 2,500 women had been released. It reported
       however that many were unable to return to their  homes  because  of
       social ostracism and most were housed  in  government-run  shelters.
       Women  who  were  arrested  under  the  Ordinance  on   charges   of
       fornication, adultery and possession of liquor were now having their
       cases heard under the PWA (COIR, 11.49).

  112. The Freedom House Freedom  in  the  World  2009  country  report  on
       Pakistan observed that there was a high incidence of rape,  domestic
       abuse, acid attacks and other forms of violence against women due to
       a combination of traditional norms,  discriminatory  laws  and  weak
       enforcement.

   Women and the criminal justice system

  113. We dealt earlier  with  what  is  said  in  the  background  country
       materials and by the experts concerning the police, the  courts  and
       prison conditions generally, but there are certain specific  matters
       relating to women that need highlighting here.

  114. The USSD Report 2008 noted that in  2005  authorities  expanded  the
       number of special women's police stations with all-female  staff  in
       response to complaints of custodial abuse of women, including  rape.
       Court orders and regulations prohibit male police  from  interacting
       with  female  suspects,  but  male   police   often   detained   and
       interrogated women at regular stations. Although  the  law  contains
       provisions for inmate release on probation,  scarcity  of  resources
       made this option impossible in most cases. An article from the  Dawn
       newspaper of 27 November 2009  reported  the  establishment  of  the
       first independent women's police station with a 24 hour helpline  in
       Karachi. It was intended  that  cases  and  investigation  would  be
       undertaken independently by female  police  officers  regardless  of
       whether women were victims or the accused.

  115. Earlier, in 2007, the USSD reported the  establishment  of  separate
       complaint cells at  police  stations  supervised  by  female  police
       officers and accessible 24 hours a day. In 2008 there were  said  to
       be 9 such police stations in Pakistan designed for women who do  not
       want to lodge a complaint at a regular  police  station.  Islamabad,
       Karachi and Lahore each have such a police station. There were  also
       several women's complaint centres at existing police stations  which
       offer  legal  assistance  and  counselling  to  female  victims   of
       violence.

       Women and prison conditions

  116. The report prepared by the HRCP 2008 refers  to  numerous  cases  of
       illegal confinement,  torture  and  harassment  at  police  stations
       throughout the year. Many women and girls were  said  to  have  been
       held without any cases being registered against them. Several  women
       reported being raped  in  police  custody.  In  many  cases,  female
       relatives of those wanted by the  police  were  held  in  a  bid  to
       pressure the wanted men to surrender themselves.

  117. It was reported that during 2008 around 64 children and 163 juvenile
       prisoners aged 8 to 18 were imprisoned with  adults  in  the  Adiala
       jail in Rawalpindi because they had to be kept with their  convicted
       mothers.  These  children  were  not  being   provided   the   basic
       necessities such as a proper diet, clean clothing,  books  and  toys
       and did not have a separate playground.

  118. It is recounted by the HRCP's 2008 report that the Senate  Committee
       on Women's Development suggested building a separate jail for  women
       after visiting a prison in Rawalpindi where it found the female ward
       had 172 detainees instead of its capacity of 80. An 87 acre piece of
       land had been acquired for the purpose. The  committee  also  called
       for enhancing the daily dietary allowance of Rs. 20 per prisoner  to
       at least Rs. 100 as there were  many  female  detainees  with  young
       children. It also recommended the provision of at  least  one  full-
       time medical specialist and one  medical  officer  for  the  women's
       wards as well as a skin specialist cope with the growing  number  of
       cases  of  scabies  and  other  diseases.  Responding  to  prisoners
       complaints  against  female  prison  wardens   and   superintendents
       regarding manhandling, abusive speech and beating, the Senate  urged
       the government to arrange special behavioural training  courses  for
       the staff and acquisition of services  of  a  psychiatrist  to  seek
       attitude change among the prisoners and prison staff. The  committee
       directed the prison  authorities  to  discontinue  the  practice  of
       taking male and female prisoners to court in the  same  vehicle  and
       suggested separate transport arrangements for female prisoners.


  119.  It would appear  that  the  release  of  large  numbers  of  female
       prisoners following the 2004-2007 law reforms has had an  impact  on
       overcrowding, but figures are difficult to ascertain.

  120. Figures provided by the HRCP Report for  2008  (for  an  unspecified
       period) indicate that of the 1,500 women in  prison  throughout  the
       country, 421 amongst them are convicted prisoners.  The same article
       reports that a study conducted by the  Society  for  Advancement  of
       Community Health Education  and  Training  (SACHET),  again  for  an
       unspecified period, indicated that the 7,000 women and  children  in
       Pakistani prisons included those awaiting trial.

  121. The South Manchester Law Centre Safe to Return? report has  a  brief
       section on violence against women in custody. It  acknowledges  that
       in July 2000 the government put forward measures  to  protect  women
       who came into contact with the criminal  justice  system  but  notes
       that the policy designed to introduce women's  police  stations  has
       not been implemented (although we note from other evidence that such
       policies  have  begun  to  take  effect).  It  points  to  a  policy
       prohibiting women from being detained after sunset but notes that it
       is not followed. A case study of a woman from  Multan  who  was  ill
       treated in police custody is set out  in  the  report.  The  authors
       conclude that false FIRs are registered against women, that there is
       bribery and corruption within the police force, that female as  well
       as male police officers use abusive tactics against female suspects,
       that the police intimidate females in custody with threats  of  rape
       and sexual assault and that women's access to justice is  obstructed
       by the influence of wealth.

   Domestic violence and honour killings

  122. Domestic violence remains a widespread and serious problem according
       to the USSD Report 2010. Husbands reportedly beat, and  occasionally
       killed, their  wives.  Other  forms  of  domestic  violence  include
       torture and shaving. In-laws  abused  and  harassed  married  women.
       Dowry and  family  related  disputes  often  resulted  in  death  or
       disfigurement by burning or acid. According  to  the  Aurat  (Woman)
       Foundation, an NGO working for female empowerment in Pakistan, cited
       in the USSD Report, the cases of violence  against  women  increased
       13% in 2008 from the previous year. It was reported that 1,384 women
       were killed in that year, 1,987 were abducted, there were 680  cases
       of domestic violence, 274 cases of  sexual  assault,  683  cases  of
       suicide and 50 cases of stove burning.  It  was  reported  that  604
       honour killings took place .According to a 2008 HRCP report, 80%  of
       wives in rural Punjab feared violence from their husbands and nearly
       50% in developed urban areas admitted that their husbands beat them.
       Women who tried to report abuse faced serious challenges. Police and
       judges were reluctant to take action  in  domestic  violence  cases,
       viewing them as family problems. Police, instead of filing  charges,
       usually responded by encouraging the parties  to  reconcile.  Abused
       women were returned to their abusive families.

  123. According to information in the same report, a 2005 law  established
       penalties for honour killings. Human rights  groups  criticised  the
       legislation because it allows the victim or the  victim's  heirs  to
       negotiate monetary restitution with the perpetrator of the crime  in
       exchange for dropping charges, a law known as qisas  and  diyat.  As
       honour crimes generally occurred within families, perpetrators  were
       able  to  negotiate  nominal  payments  and   avoid   more   serious
       punishment.

  124. Numerous  women's  rights  NGOs  such  as  the  Progressive  Women's
       Association, Struggle for a Change, War against Rape, Sehar and  the
       Aurat Foundation were active in urban areas. Their primary  concerns
       included domestic violence and honour crimes.

  125.  The  International  Refugee  Board  (IRB)  in  a  response  to   an
       information request entitled Pakistan: honour killings targeting men
       and women especially in the northern areas (2001 to 2006)  dated  24
       January 2007 is cited in the COIR (23.49-23.54). Honour killings are
       described as the custom in which  mostly  women  and  some  men  are
       murdered after accusations of sexual infidelity. The killers seek to
       avenge the shame that victims  are  accused  of  bringing  to  their
       families. They are known by different names depending on the area in
       Pakistan in which they are practised. In Sindh and Punjab  provinces
       they are referred to as karo kari and kala kali respectively  (where
       karo/kala refers to the "blackened" or dishonoured man and kari/kali
       to the "blackened" woman. They are called tor tora in the  NWFP  and
       Sinyahkari in Baluchistan). Such  killings  are  often  said  to  be
       carried out by men who believe their honour has been breached by the
       sexual misconduct of female family members even when it is  only  an
       allegation. The National Commission on the Status of Women indicates
       that it is not just  honour  killings  but  all  forms  of  domestic
       violence that are frequently  intended  to  punish  a  woman  for  a
       perceived  insubordination  supposedly  impacting  on  male  honour.
       According to the IRB they are reportedly the most prevalent in rural
       areas of Pakistan. More than half of all reported honour killings in
       2004 occurred in southern Sindh but the practice was  also  believed
       to be widespread in Punjab, Baluchistan, NWFP and the FATA. The HRCP
       noted an increase in these types of killings in urban areas such  as
       Lahore in 2005. The Human Rights Watch report for 2009  stated  that
       in 2008 particularly gruesome cases were  reported  from  Sindh  and
       Baluchistan provinces. Between January and December 2008  the  Aurat
       Foundation reported that 472 women were recorded as being killed  in
       honour killings, 1,516 were documented as murdered and 123 cases  of
       attempted murder were recorded. There were a total of 7,733 recorded
       cases of violence against women  in  2008.  Similar  statistics  are
       provided by the HRCP and other news reports.  The  HRCP  Report  for
       2009 notes that during 2009 there was a  13%  increase  in  violence
       against women, 1,404 women being murdered, 647 of them in  the  name
       of honour. Domestic violence cases rose from 137 in 2008 to  205  in
       2009.

  126. Further information on violence against women  is  provided  by  the
       Asian Human Rights Commission in February 2010 and covers  the  year
       2009. The Aurat Foundation, reports a total of  4,514  incidents  of
       violence against  women  between  January  and  June  2009.  Between
       January and May 2009, 90 women were believed to have been killed  in
       the name of honour in the  Punjab,  7  in  the  North-West  Frontier
       Province. However, the Commission notes that one can assume that all
       cases are not reported.

  127. The Human Rights Watch World Report for 2010 reports  that  violence
       and mistreatment of women and girls remain serious problems.  It  is
       reported that in an important  step  forward  Pakistan's  Parliament
       unanimously passed legislation in November 2009 to amend s.  509  of
       the PPC in order to penalise  sexual  harassment  of  women  at  any
       public or private workplace, or in public spaces. The changes to the
       Penal Code are expected to be made as part of a  more  comprehensive
       anti-sexual  harassment  bill  pending  in  Parliament.  In  another
       significant move, it is reported that the National  Assembly  passed
       the Domestic Violence (Prevention and  Protection)  Bill  in  August
       2009. The law seeks to prevent violence against women  and  children
       through quick criminal trials and a chain of  protection  committees
       and protection officers.

  128. Dr Shah in his February 2010 report notes that most cases  involving
       women's rights violations concerned  women  from  rural  and  tribal
       backgrounds and that most honour killings take place in Baluchistan,
       the Sindh provinces and the tribal areas of the NWFP.

  129. He identifies three broad patterns of honour  killings.  First,  the
       victims are mainly young men and women although women outnumber men.
       These young people either want  to  marry  each  other  against  the
       wishes of their families or they are suspected of  having  a  sexual
       relationship. Married women are rarely killed according to Dr  Shah.
       Second, honour killings generally take place in rural areas and  are
       rare in cities.  Third,  they  are  mainly  tribal  tradition.  Male
       perpetrators are generally able to escape punishment by fleeing from
       their home area and, for example, hiding in the mountains.

  130. The Safe To Return?  report refers to killings in the name of honour
       being a legitimate defence to murder. It is stated that in the  vast
       majority of cases the fact that the killing is carried  out  in  the
       name of honour serves to mitigate the severity of the punishment  or
       leads to acquittal.

  131. The CEDAW report of 3 August 2005 acknowledges that  the  government
       and people of Pakistan realise that  violence  against  women  is  a
       serious issue. It notes  that  this  is  routinely  highlighted  and
       reported in the media which creates a heightened  awareness  of  the
       problem and reports that the judiciary has played  a  proactive  and
       constructive role in combating violence against women. It notes that
       in 2001 a new section was added to the CCP; s. 174A is  specifically
       directed at curbing dowry-related violence which requires all  burns
       cases to be reported to the nearest  magistrate  by  the  registered
       medical practitioner  designated  by  a  provincial  government  and
       officer in charge of the station. Women's lack of  access  to  legal
       information, aid or protection is said to contribute to the violence
       against them. The government therefore launched the US $350  million
       Access to  Justice  Programme  with  the  assistance  of  the  Asian
       Development Bank. Women are among  the  main  beneficiaries  of  the
       programme. Legislation  against  pornography  and  prostitution  and
       against trafficking was also  introduced  in  2002.  Other  measures
       taken to combat violence against women are  also  reported:  women's
       police stations have been set up in 10 cities, government run crisis
       centres have been established which provide free legal  and  medical
       aid and temporary shelter to female victims of  violence,  including
       domestic violence. In the four years prior to the preparation of the
       report the centres provided assistance to nearly 5,000 women.  Seven
       additional centres were expected to be operational by June 2005; one
       of these was to be in Lahore. The government enacted  the  Women  in
       Distress and  Detention  Act  1996  which  establishes  a  fund  for
       assisting women in conflict with the law. The  Punjab  province  has
       revamped the medico-legal system to enable quick follow-up on  cases
       involving violence against women. Fifteen medico-legal centres  have
       been established to facilitate easier access to medico-legal aid.

  132. Information is provided on the  punishment  awarded  to  individuals
       accused of honour killings. Of the 160 cases decided  in  Punjab  by
       the lower judiciary (the time span is unclear), the  death  sentence
       was awarded to 52 persons and life imprisonment to an additional 59;
       the rest were awarded lesser punishments.

   Child custody

  133. From the observations of the experts on the issue of  child  custody
       and what is stated  in  the  major  country  reports,  the  position
       appears to be as follows. Under Pakistani family law which is  based
       on Islamic law, the father controls virtually  all  aspects  of  his
       family's life. He decides where his wife and children will live, how
       the children are to be  educated  and  whether  or  where  they  may
       travel. Courts rarely, if ever, give custody of children to a  woman
       who is not a Muslim, who will not raise  the  children  as  Muslims,
       does not plan to raise them  in  Pakistan,  or  has  remarried.  Any
       matter of custody can only be resolved through the appropriate local
       judicial system. In Pakistan most mothers do not earn an income. The
       courts keep this  in  mind  in  determining  what  is  in  the  best
       interests of the child. The father is legally bound to take care  of
       his children no matter what since he is the income earner. A  mother
       is not so bound. That is why, in most cases, the father  is  granted
       custody. Laws protecting the rights of mothers are written into  the
       Koran.  According to Dr Shah in his main report (para  54)  the  law
       recognises dual control of father and mother. Although the father is
       the legal and natural guardian of a  minor,  the  right  of  Hizanat
       (custody of a minor) vests in the mother. He refers to a case  cited
       in PLD 2008 Lahore 533 as authority for  the  proposition  that  the
       mother is entitled to custody of the male child until he has reached
       the age of seven years  and  of  her  female  child  until  she  has
       attained puberty. Dr Balzani in her  main  report  broadly  concurs,
       stating that in the Pakistan legal system women who are divorced are
       typically entitled to custody of children from  the  marriage  until
       sons reach the age of 7 and the daughters reach  puberty  (she  adds
       that at this point mothers may lose custody of  any  decision-making
       rights, although there is some flexibility as the best interests  of
       the child are regarded as paramount).  Dr Lau emphasised to us  that
       he considered that the courts adopt a pragmatic approach and tend to
       be guided by what they regarded as in  the  best  interests  of  the
       child, generally awarding custody to the mother in spite of the fact
       that Islamic law favours the father.

  134. The USSD Report records that  family  law  provided  protection  for
       women in cases of divorce, including  requirements  for  maintenance
       and laid out clear guidelines for  custody  of  minor  children  and
       their maintenance. However, many women were unaware of  these  legal
       protections or unable to obtain legal counsel to enforce them.

   Assistance to women


  135. The HRCP in its report dealing  with  2007  (dated  29  March  2008)
       states:


        "Shelters for women are grossly inadequate taking into account  the
        number of cases against women reported ever  year.  Police  station
        personnel are not trained properly to deal with cases  reported  by
        women and do not take their complaints seriously. Women's  stations
        are few  and  far  between  and  many  people  do  not  know  their
        locations. The government has set up a few women's shelters in  the
        main cities, all the while promising more shelters  every  year  to
        reach the target that they propose.


        Unfortunately, the existing  centres  are  under-staffed  and  ill-
        equipped to handle most cases, and are often unable to house  women
        in the building due to lack of space or  facilities.  Some  centres
        lie out of use. Promises of free medical and legal aid as  well  as
        psychological counselling are hardly ever followed through  due  to
        lack of funds and trained personnel. It is reported  that  only  17
        out of 25 government women crisis centres  are  operational.  Women
        have to either depend on the Darul Aman, which has a reputation for
        treating its occupants as inmates and with reports often  surfacing
        about abuse and drug rackets. The other options are private and NGO
        shelters which are extremely few and unable to  cater  on  a  large
        scale.


        There is also very little awareness about their government  created
        facilities for distressed women.  The  Gender  Crime  Cell  at  the
        National Police Bureau in Islamabad is little known to [the] public
        and is extremely constrained by lack of human  resources.   Details
        of complaints and reports it had received and disposed are not made
        public either  (NGO  Statement:  Pakistan  presented  at  the  38th
        Session of CEDAW Committee, United Nations, May 21, 2007)."


  136. In sections of the COIR dealing with assistance available  to  women
       it is noted that even though the government has expanded the  number
       of women's police stations, they did not function properly  (23.67),
       that  in  its  2008  report  the  USSD  said  that  in  addition  to
       approximately 250 facilities operating as ad hoc emergency  shelters
       for women in distress, there were 70  district-run  shelters  (Darul
       Amans). In some of these, women were abused (23.68),  and  they  had
       notoriety for being similar to detention centres with  curfews,  ill
       treatment and absence of  a  gender-sensitive  environment  (23.69).
       Reference is also made to an Inter Press Service News Agency article
       dated 8 March 2007 stating that most of these centres were  deserted
       ("the lack of women attending the centre  [being]  ...down  to  poor
       commitment,  coordination  and  lack  of  guidelines")  and  lacking
       resources for basic services.  At paras 23.57-58 reference  is  made
       to a statement dated 4 December 2007 from a local  Women's  Resource
       Centre noting that there is only one government centre operating  in
       Sindh (in Karachi) and in Lahore "only two working women hostels and
       very few private ones".  As regards NGO  assistance,  it  was  noted
       that numerous women's rights NGOs were active  in  urban  areas  and
       their  primary  concerns  included  domestic  violence,  the  Hudood
       Ordinance, and honour crimes (23.76). A Karachi NGO of lawyers had a
       separate desk to deal with the problems of women (23.78);  the  HRCP
       Report 2008 noted that private shelters continued to run and provide
       refuge as well as rehabilitation services allowed by their  services
       and outreach but their facilities were few and far between  (23.77).




  137. As some  of  the  sections  of  the  COIR  dealing  with  assistance
       available to women are significantly different  from  those  in  the
       2009 report, it is also pertinent to note  what  is  stated  in  the
       latter, some of whose entries (curiously) cite more recent  sources.
       At para 23.27 of the 2009 report it is stated:

           "In a Response to Information Request  dated  4  December  2007,
           regarding the circumstances under which single women could  live
           alone in Pakistan the Immigration and Refugee  Board  of  Canada
           (IRB) noted, following correspondence with an adjunct  professor
           of gender studies and international studies at the University of
           Denver, that:


                 'It is very hard for single women to  live  alone  both  in
                 urban and rural areas.    ...  It  depends  on  age,  class
                 education,   and   urban   or    rural    setting.    Young
                 unmarried/divorced women in all classes in urban areas find
                 it difficult to live alone. They cannot get  apartments  to
                 be  rented.  If  they  own  a  property,  they   can   more
                 conveniently opt to live alone but again  there  is  social
                 pressure around them and they have to  face  all  kinds  of
                 gossips and scandals. In  such  case  age  is  the  biggest
                 problem.  Older women can live alone but  still  they  feel
                 insecure socially and physically. We do have  examples  now
                 in the big cities where highly  educated  and  economically
                 independent women opt to live alone but their percentage is
                 very low. In the rural areas they mostly  live  with  joint
                 family even if they do not get along with them ...'"

  138. At 23.29 of this same Report it is added:

      "The same source noted:


      "The following information was provided in correspondence received  on
      22 November 2007  by a professor of law at the university  of  Warwick
      who specialises in women's human rights and gender and  the  law,  who
      has written various  publications  on  Pakistan  and  who  is  also  a
      professor at the University of Oslo:


        'The response  to  your  question  depends  on  the  circumstances,
        location, socio-economic, educational and  professional  status  of
        the single female. Generally it  would  be  accurate  to  say  that
        single women are rarely able to live on their own  without  a  male
        member of the family in Pakistan.  Reasons for  this  are  numerous
        but they primarily stem from custom and  culture  that  requires  a
        woman to have a male family  member  to  be  in  a  protective  and
        supervisory role.  Society also frowns upon women living  on  their
        own and [this] would not help the reputation of the  single  woman.
        You may find one in a million single woman who has  the  means  and
        can live in a big city with helpers, etc.  to  assist  and  protect
        her.  This of course is a minority and an exception rather than the
        rule.'

  139. Paragraph 23.37  cites an IRIN report dated 11 March 2008  observing
       that domestic violence remained "endemic" in Pakistan and  referring
       to "[a]  lack  of  safe  shelters  for  women  victims  of  domestic
       violence, limited awareness of the issue and the absence of specific
       legislation all compound[ing] the  problem". Other  entries  of  the
       2009 COIR deal with the services provided in the centres.  At  paras
       23.55 - 23.56 note is made of the  USSD  Report  2007  reference  to
       crisis centres run with  legal  NGOs  and  providing  the  following
       services:


      . Medical aid
      . Legal aid
      . Social Counselling
      . To investigate cases of violence/case history
      . Establishing linkages with law enforcing agencies/police  complaint
        cells
      . Training of micro-credit entrepreneurship
      . Rehabilitation through micro finance
      . Provision of interest free credit to R.15000/- in each case.

  140. Paras 23.61-2.62 refer to the USSD Report  2008  noting  that  there
       were "[n]umerous women's rights NGOs" being active  in  urban  areas
       and   "[t]heir primary  concerns  included  domestic  violence,  the
       Hudood Ordinance and honour crimes" and  the  website  of  the  NGO,
       Lawyers for Human Rights and Legal   Aid,  providing  details  of  a
       protection centre available  in  Karachi  and  the  website  of  the
       Progressive Women's Association  giving information about an "AASRA"
       shelter in Rawalpindi,  established  in  1999,  to  assist  domestic
       violence victims. This Association also mentions having "facilitated
       over 17,000 cases of abuse against women  in  1987"  and  lists  the
       facilitation as  including  offering  alternatives  for  residential
       living situations.

  141. We should also note that the  UKBA  Operational  guidance  Note  for
       Pakistan dated 4  February  2010,  includes  the  following  section
       (3.8):

           "3.8  Women victims of domestic violence


                        Some female applicants will apply for asylum or make
                        a human rights claim based on the grounds that  they
                        are the victims of domestic violence and are  unable
                        to seek protection from the authorities."


  142. The OGN concludes at para 3.8.8 that:

           "As noted above, case law has confirmed that Pakistani women are
           members of a particular social group within  the  terms  of  the
           1951 Refugee Convention.  Asylum claims from Pakistani women who
           have demonstrated that they face  a  serious  risk  of  domestic
           violence which will amount to persecution or torture or  inhuman
           or degrading treatment must be considered in the context of  the
           individual circumstances of each  claim.  In  individual  cases,
           sufficiency of protection by the state authorities  may  not  be
           available, and although internal relocation may be  possible  in
           some circumstances, where it is not a grant  of  asylum  may  be
           appropriate."


  143. Paras 3.11 deals with women accused of committing adultery or having
       an illegitimate child. Having outlined the changes ushered in by the
       PWA 2006, para 3.11.7 dealing  with  internal  relocation  for  such
       cases states that:


           "[v]ery careful consideration must be given to whether  internal
           relocation would be an effective way to avoid a real risk of ill-
           treatment/persecution at the hands of, tolerated by, or with the
           connivance of, state agents. If an applicant who  faces  a  real
           risk of ill-treatment/persecution in their home  area  would  be
           able to relocate to a part of Pakistan where they would  not  be
           at real risk, whether from state or  non-state  actors,  and  it
           would not be unduly harsh to expect them to do so,  then  asylum
           or humanitarian protection should be refused."

   The South Manchester Law Centre, "Safe to Return?" report

  144. Safe to Return? is  a  report  dated  January  2007,  written  by  N
       Siddiqui, S Ismail &  M Allen. It  describes  itself  as  a  "trans-
       national study of the complex issues which impact on Pakistani women
       who might  seek  refugee  protection  in  the  UK  against  domestic
       violence".

  145. Its study of women's refuges in Pakistan is based  on  a  number  of
       research methods, in particular qualitative interviewing, individual
       (legal) case studies, a field trip in November  2005-February  2006,
       where 'familiarisation' interviews were carried  out  with  relevant
       stakeholders, and a later field trip in June-July 2006, where one of
       the  researchers  (  assisted  some  of  the  time  by  a   research
       consultant)  undertook  visits  to  a  range  of  service  provision
       contexts in Pakistan, and carried out both individual interviews and
       (seven) group discussions (1.8). The report explains that it was not
       possible to identify  a  sample  using  formal  survey  or  sampling
       methods;  the  scattered  nature  of  provision,  and  the  lack  of
       formalised networks, meant that the two field  workers  had  to  use
       less formal methods to contact  potential  participants  (1.5.)  The
       study also assembled and drew upon a range  of  documentary  sources
       across both countries (1.1.). The report notes that  monitoring  and
       evaluation data was not available in Pakistan and  much  information
       was sourced from newspapers. The authors note that it was  difficult
       initially to make contact with service providers  in  Pakistan,  but
       that as the research progressed participants facilitated  access  to
       other service providers and to women  victims/  survivors  who  were
       using services (1.4.3.). The Pakistan-based research was carried out
       in the  regions  of  Punjab,  Sindh  and  the  North  West  Frontier
       Province, with specific focus on cities  in  these  regions,  namely
       Peshawar, Lahore, Faisalabad,  Islamabad,  Rawalpindi,  Karachi  and
       Hyderabad (1.5.1). Several shelters were visited in two of the three
       regions covered by the report.

  146. Service provision for women victims of domestic violence in Pakistan
       is described as "particularly severe" and inadequate, Para 11 of the
       report's summary states:

           "[this] can be seen at all levels, from legislation  through  to
           over-subscribed women's shelters which are limited in number and
           in resources, and crucially, to the lack  of  rehabilitation  or
           aftercare. There is no system of state care  or  re-housing  for
           women made homeless following violence; this fact alone plays  a
           major role in the decisions many women make to return to violent
           relationships,  exacerbated   by   their   weak   socio-economic
           position,  lack   of   education   and   financial   dependence.
           Additionally, the attitudes towards women who  attempt  to  live
           without a  male  relative  that  pervades  society  in  Pakistan
           results in their isolation  and  ostracism,  exposing  women  to
           further risk of harm."


  147. Para 12 of the summary deals with specific concerns  about  shelters
       in Pakistan:

           "The majority of shelters are grossly under resourced and  offer
           very poor or no childcare provision.  Policies  within  shelters
           which exclude boys over the age of five create  severe  dilemmas
           for women, and provide disincentives to  access  shelters.  They
           are usually overcrowded, provide sub-standard facilities, rarely
           have a key worker system,  offer  poor  working  conditions,  no
           casework supervision, and no training or worker  accountability.
           The workers often appear to run shelters with very little  input
           from trustees. Life  after  living  in  a  shelter  often  means
           returning to a violent situation, remarriage or returning to the
           natal family if they are willing or able to allow her access. In
           the absence of these 'options', women are often open  to  sexual
           exploitation to support the children and to avoid destitution."


  148. The report's view of internal relocation as stated at para 19 of the
       summary is that:

           "...This  study  has  demonstrated  the  limited  and  temporary
           circumstances in which women reach a 'place' which can be deemed
           'safe'. The  specific  conditions  relevant  to  women  in  both
           Pakistan and the UK (where they  may  face  involuntary  return)
           place most women  in  circumstances  which,  rather  than  offer
           safety, heighten potential danger."

  149. In the body of the report the authors note that  services  providing
       support for women victims/survivors in Pakistan do  not  necessarily
       have  domestic  violence  as  their  main  focus  of  work  (1.4.1).
       Although shelters do have  counsellors,  they  offer  little  or  no
       longer term support (1.4.2.2). Most of the  organisations  who  were
       supporting women victims/survivors  had  experienced  threatened  or
       actual violence and most employed security guards at their  premises
       (1.4.1).

  150. In chapter six, which is  devoted  to  the  subject  of  "Access  to
       services and shelter provision in  Pakistan",  the  authors  explain
       that the first stage of contact for a woman before  admission  to  a
       shelter is a crisis centre: "Crisis centres play a crucial  role  in
       assessing a woman's needs and the risk she faces. A woman  is  never
       turned away without a full assessment of her case...Lawyers,  advice
       workers and counsellors are available to offer immediate support  to
       women at the centres". Such centres accept referrals from  all  over
       Pakistan, including self referrals (6.2.1).

  151. Shelters, the report observes, are subdivided  into  (i)  government
       shelters,  (ii)  NGO  and  private  shelters  and  (iii)   "Islamic"
       shelters. Government shelters or  Dar-ul-Amans  are  funded  by  the
       provincial governments' Social Welfare and Women's  Departments  who
       issue guidelines on their running. Admissions to these shelters  are
       only accepted via the courts and police. The maximum period of  stay
       is three months but in some cases women can remain until their cases
       are resolved, which can be up to a year (6.3).  They  provide  food,
       clothing, accommodation as well as counselling and basic  vocational
       skills.  They have security guards posted at  the  entrance  of  the
       main  gates.  These  shelters  restrict  inmates'  travel   outside,
       conditions in them are extremely poor and the general  ethos  is  to
       treat women as prisoners. Some are overcrowded and the  workers  who
       run them appear to  have  little  input  from  shelter  managers  or
       trustees (6.3).

  152. The NGO and private shelters are more diverse. In Pakistan NGOs  and
       INGOs work in general in difficult conditions.  Their  focus  is  on
       providing short-term welfare services (6.11). The  authors  describe
       visits to some of the  better  private  sector  centres.  Dastak  in
       Lahore (funded by international  donors),  Mera  Ghar,  a  Christian
       shelter (funded by the Catholic church),  the  Edhi  shelter  house,
       Ghosa-e-aafiyat (a centre  funded  through  private  donations)  and
       Pannah, a shelter  in  Karachi  (funded  by  international  donors).
       Dastak is described as being protected by two armed security  guards
       twenty-four hours a day with a caretaker  and  warden,  an  in-house
       psychologist and a teacher (to  provide  basic  education  to  young
       children) also on the premises.  "The  address  of  the  shelter  is
       strictly confidential and the shelter has its own van  to  transport
       women to and from the shelter for legal, medical, reconciliation and
       mediation appointments".  It has a capacity to admit 30  women.  The
       women receive free meals, clothing and  legal  representation  (with
       small charges  for  legal  documents).  "The  disadvantages  of  not
       turning women away", the report discerns, "is that conditions,  even
       in this example of best practice, were overcrowded  and  limited  by
       European standards". It is said to be the only shelter  in  Pakistan
       that allows all women the freedom to leave the shelter between 9 and
       5, although there are arrangements  for  women  to  stay  out  later
       which, in order to protect the woman, involve the shelter contacting
       the police if she does not return at the  time  agreed:  a  list  of
       women residing at the shelter is sent to the  local  police  station
       every two weeks. Another shelter in Lahore,  the  Edhi  shelter,  is
       said to accept self referrals and to allow women to  remain  at  the
       shelter as long as they want and, whilst there,  to  leave  whenever
       they want; but they are  encouraged  to  reconcile  because  of  the
       generally held  view  that  women  cannot  survive  without  men  in
       Pakistan. There is no aftercare support for  women,  but  women  can
       return to the shelter if they need to.  Pannah, an  NGO  shelter  in
       Karachi, is said to be guarded 24 hours a day and to have a strictly
       confidential address.  Referrals  are  made  by  NGOs,  lawyers  and
       police. Aside from catering for the women by  providing  free  food,
       medical,  education  and  legal  assistance,  the  centre   runs   a
       vocational skills programme to empower women and  help  them  become
       economically independent.

  153. A description is also given of one example of an  "Islamic"  shelter
       which provides shelter provision framed with an explicitly "Islamic"
       approach.

  154. Features shared in common between government  and  private  shelters
       are noted as being that they never turn women away and  that  (as  a
       result of a recent change in government policy) they  do  not  admit
       boys of over the age of five (previously  boys  up  to  the  age  of
       eleven were admitted). "As a result  the  boys  are  separated  from
       their mothers and  sent  to  the  orphanages  or  madrassas  in  the
       locality" (6.3)

  155. In an overview of service provision for women  victims  of  domestic
       violence in Pakistan, it is stated:

           "Overall it was our impression that,  whilst  the  shelters  are
           under resourced (some of them acutely so), they have  been  able
           to implement some good practices, for  example,  in  some  cases
           offering in-house counselling and psychological  support.  Legal
           assistance is also immediately available to  women  from  female
           lawyers present in the crisis centres, or from lawyers based  in
           the same building as the crisis centres. Fieldwork  observations
           indicated that women in some shelters are encouraged to  develop
           skills that will empower them, with some shelters  offering  in-
           house training on a wide range of issues to raise  awareness  of
           women's rights..." (6.1).

  156. At 6.6. the report states that:

           "Generally, privately funded shelters or  those  with  religious
           affiliations provided better facilities. ... Pannah,  funded  by
           multiple donors, has excellent living conditions and offers more
           services to the women than  other  shelters.  ...Although  there
           were some commonalities  between  all  the  different  types  of
           shelters, the quality  of  provision  varied  considerably.  The
           residents of some shelters complained about the poor  diet  they
           were  given,  overcrowded  rooms   and   general   poor   living
           conditions, not having access to medical treatment, lawyers  not
           appearing at court hearings and restrictions on their  mobility.
           ..."

  157. Further commenting on the comparison between government and  NGO  or
       private shelters, the report states at 6.7.3:

           "In an acknowledged context of shortfall in provision,  the  NGO
           sector and privately-run shelters try to provide a safe home for
           women in a  country  that  offers  little  protection  to  them.
           Shelters were visited in two of the  three  regions  covered  by
           this report. In these shelters, the majority of women were  from
           rural areas. One key difference between NGO shelters  and  Darul
           Amans is that the latter  install  metal  fencing  within  their
           buildings to restrict women's mobility...The government shelters
           are still largely regarded as, and referred to as,  "sub-jails".
           The conditions could be considered as a contravention of women's
           human rights  -  since  freedom  of  movement  and  a  right  to
           independence and quality provision is greatly compromised.


           There are some NGO run shelters that offer similar  and  perhaps
           better living conditions than Darul Amans, including one shelter
           in Lahore which is regarded as  the  first  progressive  women's
           shelter in Pakistan. However, in general, polices and  practices
           of controlling women's behaviour and restricting their  mobility
           reinforce the customs and practices imposed on women in  society
           at large and limits the decisions they can make about  how  they
           live their lives.


           ...


           The majority of the shelters restrict women's mobility; often in
           the name of safety...The policy of most  shelters  is  to  allow
           women out of the buildings only  to  attend  court  hearings  or
           hospital appointments. This reinforces the male view that  women
           should remain indoors as if they go out the may do something  to
           dishonour the shelters. But the closed character of the shelters
           has attracted other  criticism,  including  the  charge  that  a
           number of shelters have developed into brothels."


  158. One of the main problems with  all  the  shelters  is  said  by  the
       authors to  be  the  lack  of  childcare  provision.  Childcare  and
       education are extremely limited and in  some  shelters  non-existent
       (6.6).  The other  service  observed  to  be  obviously  lacking  is
       aftercare work with women. Women in  shelters  are  limited  in  the
       choices they can  make  about  their  lives:  "[m]ost  of  them  are
       therefore either  forced  to  return  to  violent  relationships  or
       remarry...". However, at 6.15 the authors acknowledge that:

           "...if adequate provision is made available it  is  clearly  not
           impossible for a woman to live on her own, although as indicated
           earlier she will be very visible, under suspicion  as  a  'lone'
           woman, and vulnerable  to  harassment  and  exploitation.  If  a
           woman's  basic  needs  are  met  (for  example,   accommodation,
           financial assistance and protection) then a woman can survive."


  159. This observation is further qualified at 8.7, where, on the topic of
       lone women, the authors observe:

           "Participants  endorsed  the  prevailing  view  that   Pakistani
           communities  viewed  a  woman  living  or  travelling  alone  in
           Pakistan with suspicion. A woman living independently would have
           a range of  negative  assumptions  made  of  her  based  on  her
           behaviour and lifestyle. In turn, being thought  of  'badly'  by
           wider society effectively legitimates harassment  of  her...Many
           participants queried whether  the  UK  authorities  grasped  how
           unacceptable  it   is   amongst   members   of   the   Pakistani
           community...for women to live alone, particularly  without  male
           support...".


  160. At 8.11, dealing with internal relocation, it is stated:

           "All participants (apart from the Home Office)  stated  that  it
           would be difficult, if not impossible, for a lone woman, with or
           without minor children, to  live  safely  and  independently  in
           Pakistan. Whilst the situation of the woman might vary from case
           to case, the experience  of  legal  practitioners  handling  the
           relevant evidence supported these doubts about the viability  of
           internal relocation. Apart from the difficulty of obtaining work
           and  accommodation  in  her  attempts  to  settle  into  a   new
           community, participants concluded that a  lone  woman  would  be
           regarded with considerable  suspicion.  The  dangers  associated
           with the inter-connectedness of communities, and the  complicity
           of the police in the  way  in  which  they  service  individuals
           within communities, have been highlighted above and heighten the
           ensuing dangers of internal relocation."


  161. The authors add that the requirement for all citizens  to  carry  an
       identity card could compromise women's safety and prevent them  from
       accessing the limited services available.

  162. The report is not entirely clear on the subject of  confidentiality.
       The addresses of Dastak and  the  Edhi  shelter,  for  example,  are
       specifically described as being kept strictly confidential,  but  it
       appears from what is said earlier  that  women's  initial  point  of
       contact is normally with a crisis centre and that, before a woman is
       referred on to a centre, the policy is  for  the  centre  worker  to
       immediately inform the family that the woman is with them. "This  is
       done", the report states at 6.2.1, "to prevent husbands or  families
       from registering false cases against women or  the  NGOs  which  can
       lead to workers in NGOs being arrested...If  the  family  wishes  to
       visit or contact the  woman  they  are  told  to  make  arrangements
       through the office and a meeting will be arranged with  the  consent
       of the woman" (6.2.1).

  163. In 6.14 the  report  compares  shelters  in  Pakistan  and  the  UK,
       concluding:

           "Whilst the distribution and quality of provision in Pakistan is
           in many respects inferior to that of the UK, it is important  to
           note features of practice that are, in fact, better than the UK.
           Some shelters in Pakistan, for example, offer  immediate  access
           to lawyers, counsellors and psychologists. This is generally not
           available in the UK...One  other  crucial  difference...is  that
           [shelters in Pakistan] never turn a woman away, whereas  in  the
           UK shelters do have the option of turning women away."


  164. On the other hand, in contrast to the situation in the UK,  Pakistan
       agencies, it  is  noted,  "do  not  help  women  with  rehousing  or
       financial assistance after leaving the shelters" (6.15). In Pakistan
       class divisions also affects initial access of women to  a  shelter,
       her ability to access services once there,  and  the  situation  she
       faces  after  leaving  the  shelter  (6.15).  However,  the  initial
       impression that the latter had a greater range of options  gave  way
       to the view that "in reality they faced the same stigma and barriers
       around shame and honour experienced by women from poor  backgrounds.
       In fact they often stood to lose more if they fled because of  their
       status and privileged positions" (7.5.1).


   Submissions

  165. In their submissions both parties chose to focus  primarily  on  the
       appellant's case, only referring to general issues as and when  they
       thought it appropriate.


   Mr Fripp

  166. Amplifying his skeleton argument Mr Fripp before us emphasised  that
       the appellant's account had been accepted by the IJ and that on  the
       basis of her evidence her  husband  was  someone  who  had  taken  a
       prolonged interest in pursuing her  though  the  courts  and  making
       threats. The police had visited  her  parents'  house  a  number  of
       times.  Therefore we should regard the FIR as one that will continue
       to be pursued.  It was an FIR that contained not just the s.10  zina
       offence but also the attempted murder offence.  It was unlikely that
       at the relatively low level of the Pakistan judiciary she would  get
       bail or that the prosecution would not proceed to trial.   He  asked
       us to find that Dr Lau's understanding of Ordinance XXXV1 was likely
       to be the correct one and so the appellant would not be entitled  to
       automatic bail and would not be granted discretionary bail.

  167. Mr Fripp highlighted that Dr Lau and Dr Shah  agreed  that  for  the
       purposes of a  bail  application  an  FIR  supported  by  a  witness
       statement could be enough to mean that bail was denied.

  168. The facts of the appellant's case would need to be looked at by  the
       Tribunal, he  submitted,  against  the  backdrop  of  a  patriarchal
       society in which women were subject  to  a  high  degree  of  gender
       violence and there were pervasive problems of corruption.  Women  in
       Pakistan who had been exposed to allegations of adultery and  police
       detention were regarded as of damaged  character  and  faced  social
       isolation.  Relatives would  be  reluctant  to  help  out.   Someone
       intent on pursuing a malicious complaint could get quite a long  way
       in the courts. Dr Shah had accepted that a complainant could  obtain
       false medical evidence to back up their case.  Hence  the  appellant
       was unlikely to get bail and also unlikely to get a fair trial.

  169. Mr Fripp said he did not seek to suggest that in this case there was
       a risk of free standing persecution by the state (what he called the
       "Iqbal- type case": see decision reported by the IAT  in  June  2002
       known as Muzafar Iqbal, later cited as MI  (Fair  Trial,  Pre  Trial
       Conditions) Pakistan CG [2002] UKIAT 02239).  Rather  it  should  be
       seen as a case of persecution by a  non-state  actor,  her  husband,
       exploiting a defective legal system.  We should find that, far  from
       being willing or able to protect  the  appellant,  the  state  would
       collude in her persecution.

  170. If, however, the Tribunal considered it was an Iqbal-type case, then
       he would accept that that case  set  out  the  correct  legal  test,
       namely that the appellant would have to show she would face  a  real
       risk of a flagrant denial of a fair trial.  He did not seek to argue
       that the Pakistan judicial process was likely in general  to  result
       in such flagrant denial, although lower levels of the judiciary were
       considered to be infected by corruption, only that it was  a  system
       which  permitted  aggrieved  individuals  to   manipulate   it   for
       persecutory  ends,  especially  when,   as   here,   there   was   a
       discriminatory aspect.  Post-2006 a  relatively  isolated  case  was
       still capable of arising notwithstanding the 2006 PWA reforms.

  171. It  was  very  likely,  therefore,  submitted  Mr  Fripp,  that  the
       appellant would face being detained and remaining so until her  case
       came to trial. That could itself take more than  two  years  and  so
       even without having regard to her  possible  conviction,  she  would
       experience persecution  through  having  to  endure  extremely  poor
       prison conditions for up to two years.

  172. As regards country guidance, Mr Fripp  said  that  the  two  current
       cases having most relevance to the appellant's case were SN  and  HM
       (Divorced women - risk on return) Pakistan CG [2004] UKIAT 00283 and
       FS (Domestic violence - SN and HM - OGN) Pakistan  CG  [2006]  UKIAT
       000283, but that there  appeared  to  be  no  Tribunal  guidance  of
       continuing relevance concerning issues of detention  or  prosecution
       of women in Pakistan arising from malicious allegations.   He  asked
       the Tribunal to find that whilst in recent years the Pakistan  state
       had taken some steps to improve the position of women, including the
       2006 PWA, serious problems remained.

  173. The Tribunal should find, urged Mr Fripp, that the  appellant  would
       face persecution in her home area of Lahore and that she  would  not
       have a viable option of relocation. He contended that the background
       evidence, particularly that relating to the inadequacies of  women's
       shelters and the lack of any system of after-care  (he  referred  to
       the  Safe  to  Return?  report)  strongly  demonstrated   that   the
       difficulties a woman in the appellant's position would face would be
       immense.

   Mr Bourne

  174. The respondent's position as set out  in  a  skeleton  argument  and
       presented by Mr Bourne was that the appellant was  not  at  risk  of
       persecution from the state and, to the extent that she was  at  risk
       of violence from her husband, she would be able to obtain  effective
       state protection either directly  or  through  NGOs.   Even  if  the
       Tribunal found she was at  risk  in  her  home  area,  it  would  be
       reasonable to expect her to relocate to avoid the risk posed by  her
       husband.

  175. Applying the principles set out in Iqbal the threat  of  prosecution
       facing the appellant would not, he submitted, result in persecution.



  176. Mr Bourne asked us to find that existing Tribunal  country  guidance
       on the position of Pakistani women facing a real  risk  of  violence
       from their husbands, SN & HM  SN  &  HM  in  particular,  as  having
       continuing efficacy. Following SM & H,  the  Tribunal  should  first
       consider risk in the appellant home area and, if satisfied  she  was
       at risk there, whether  she  would  be  able  to  achieve  effective
       protection by relocating.   His  skeleton  argument  summarised  the
       respondent's position that the appellant did not have a well-founded
       fear of persecution thus:

                   "a. There is no evidence  that  the  Appellant  has  been
   charged  with  a  criminal  offence,            there  is  only  an   FIR
   registering a case against her;

             b. The Appellant cannot be  arrested  and  imprisoned  on  her
        return to Pakistan on the      basis of the allegations set out  in
        the FIR, as she is entitled to bail as of right and the      police
        would have to apply to the court for  a  warrant  for  her  arrest.
        There is       therefore no risk  of  pre-trial  detention  on  the
        basis of the allegation of adultery  made by her husband;


            c. There is no evidence to suggest the Appellant will not  have
        received a fair trial if  she is charged and the  case  is  pursued
        against her;


            d. If convicted the Appellant is  not  at  risk  of  the  death
        penalty; and


            e. The effect of recent changes to Pakistani  law  have  had  a
        significant  effect  on  the       position  of  women  subject  to
        allegations of  adultery,  demonstrating  a  liberalisation      in
        approach and changes in social and cultural norms."


  177. Of the three experts in this case Mr Bourne contended that  only  Dr
       Lau and Dr Shah were of any real help and that they were only  fully
       experts on issues of Pakistan  law.   Their  observations  otherwise
       were merely their own glosses on evidence which the  Tribunal  could
       evaluate for itself.

  178. Mr Bourne said  that  he  disputed  Mr  Fripp's  view  that  if  the
       appellant faced  persecutory  prosecution  it  would  not  be  state
       persecution,  but  private  actor  prosecution.   Subject   to   two
       differences, the appellant's case was an Iqbal-type case.  Thus  the
       appellant either had to show that  the  Pakistani  criminal  justice
       system  was  generally  persecutory  or  that  there  were  specific
       features of her case that would make her experience  of  the  system
       persecutory.  He considered the effect of Dr Shah's evidence  to  be
       that the criminal justice system is not  generally  persecutory  and
       that the appellant's case could not show any such special  features.
       The two differences from Iqbal were that the  appellant  here  is  a
       woman facing gender-specific charges and that since it  was  written
       there have been significant changes in Pakistani  law  and  practice
       affecting women.

  179. It was accepted, said Mr Bourne, that on return to her home area the
       appellant's husband was likely to learn she had returned  (something
       his later submission appeared to  resile  from),  but  that  as  the
       couple no longer lived  together,  there  would  be  no  risk  of  a
       repetition of the domestic violence she suffered previously.   There
       was no substance to Mr Fripp's claims that her  husband  and/or  his
       family was likely to target her for an  honour  killing  and,  since
       2005, honour killings have been fully criminalised.  To  the  extent
       that Dr Lau and Dr Balzani (chiefly  the  latter)  opined  that  the
       appellant would be at risk  of  honour  killing,  their  views  were
       derived from their own reading of the background  evidence  and  the
       latter did not demonstrate out what they said.  Dr Balzani  was  not
       presented as an expert on the law and her own research  was  largely
       anecdotal evidence of an unspecified kind.

  180. In Mr Bourne's submission the appellant had far too many hurdles  to
       surmount, each too dependent on speculation. She would have to  show
       (the numbering is our own): (i) that she would come to the attention
       of the authorities; (ii) that the police  would  decide  to  proceed
       with a prosecution based on the FIR, particularly  bearing  in  mind
       that the FIR was now 4 years old; (iii) that  she  would  be  denied
       automatic bail; (iv) that she would be  denied  discretionary  bail;
       (v) that there would be sufficient supporting evidence  to  persuade
       the court to let the prosecution proceed; (vi)  that  her  pre-trial
       detention would be of lengthy and/or  would  involve  ill-treatment;
       (vii) that whilst going through the  criminal  justice  process  she
       would not be able to get the help of a competent lawyer; (viii) that
       the trial or Session Court would be corrupt; that further appeal  to
       the  higher  Courts/Federal  Sharia  court  would  not   necessarily
       exonerate her; (ix) that even if at risk of persecution  in her home
       area she would not be able to access adequate help  from  a  women's
       shelter elsewhere; and (x) that she would  be  unable  to  get  help
       through her  family  with  finding  accommodation  of  her  own  and
       achieving the means to live. Whilst internal  relocation  for  women
       living on their own was not an attractive option, it was clear  that
       in the larger cities and towns such women were able to get by.  Each
       of these stages in the appellant's argument was, he submitted,  open
       to question and there was an accumulation of uncertainty.  It had to
       be  remembered  that  as  a  result  of   law  reforms  the   police
       investigation/prosecution would now have to be conducted by a police
       officer above the rank of Assistant Sub-inspector;  and  arrests  in
       cases of zina could not take  place  without  the  permission  of  a
       court; the appellant would now be entitled to bail as of right;  the
       police would have to produce evidence to support the FIR  complaint;
       the courts would be unlikely to let a prosecution proceed unless the
       evidence was adequate; and even if  it  did  proceed  there  was  no
       reason to think the  appellant's  trial  would  be  unfair  or  that
       further appeals to the higher courts/Federal Sharai Court would  not
       remedy any injustice.  Prison conditions could not be said to amount
       to ill-treatment.

   Legal Framework

  181. Both parties stated  that  they  treated  the  law  governing  cases
       raising issues of prosecution as persecution as correctly set out by
       Muzafar Iqbal. At para 25 of this decision the Tribunal noted:
           "25.  Where  evaluation  of   issues   of   prosecution   versus
           persecution must be made, it is vital  decision-makers  avoid  a
           fragmented approach. Particular care must be taken to  focus  on
           the criminal justice process involved as  a  whole.  Which  ever
           parts of the criminal law process are being examined - be it the
           initial laying of information,  the  bringing  of  charges,  the
           arrest, the detention, the  consideration  of  bail,  the  trial
           itself, the subsequent punishment - the  refugee  decision-maker
           must be alert to how these stages interact and  what  safeguards
           apply at each stage. Also relevant will be the nature of the law
           in  question  and  whether  its  provisions  adequately   ensure
           justice. Only a holistic approach to this issue can  ensure  the
           decision-maker weighs any harms involved cumulatively, not  just
           separately. .."
  182. At para 74 the following summary of conclusions was given:
           "1. Although it is not the purpose of  refugee  law  to  adjudge
           guilt or innocence under the national  law  of  the  country  of
           origin, the type of examination a  refugee  decision-maker  must
           conduct  when  considering  the  issue  of  prosecution   versus
           persecution is no less evaluative than it is in respect  of  any
           other issue. Incomplete or  sketchy  evidence  is  not  a  valid
           reason for failing to decide whether a claimant faces justice or
           injustice.
           2. Whether a prosecution amounts to persecution is a question of
           fact. All the relevant circumstances have to be considered on  a
           case-by-case basis.
           3. Particular care must  be  taken  to  focus  on  the  criminal
           justice process as a whole. Only a  holistic  approach  to  this
           issue  can  ensure   the   decision-maker   weighs   any   harms
           cumulatively and not just separately.
           4. Whether prosecution amounts to persecution must  be  analysed
           by reference to international human rights  norms.  The  utility
           behind doing so is that international human  rights  instruments
           contain specific guarantees relating  to  the  criminal  justice
           process and that these are increasingly used  in  major  general
           country reports to assess the performance of a State`s  criminal
           justice system.
           5. In line with the human rights approach to the  definition  of
           persecution (and protection) approved in Horvath and  its  basis
           in a notion of a hierarchy of  human  rights,  account  must  be
           taken of the fact that the right to  a  fair  trial  is  not  an
           absolute, non-derogable right. Just as under international human
           rights law examining the issue of fair trial in the  context  of
           return or refoulement there is  no  violation  unless  the  risk
           faced is that of a flagrant denial of a fair trial, so too under
           the  Refugee  Convention  prosecution   does   not   amount   to
           persecution unless likely failures in the fair trial process  go
           beyond shortcomings and pose a threat to the very  existence  of
           the right to a fair trial.
           6. When considering whether the generality of  citizens  face  a
           real risk of persecution under the criminal  justice  system  of
           their country of origin, it is important to establish the  scale
           of any violations of relevant human rights such as the right not
           to be exposed to ill treatment during detention or the right  to
           a fair trial. A useful benchmark is that set out in Article 3 of
           the Convention Against Torture,  namely  whether  the  level  of
           abuse of human rights  rises  to  the  level  of  a  "consistent
           pattern of gross, flagrant or mass violations of human rights".
           7. Applying these principles to this case, the  adjudicator  had
           sufficient evidence before him to establish: (i) that the police
           would no longer have any reason to target  the  appellant;  (ii)
           however, the charges facing the appellant  might  proceed,  even
           though false; (iii) but the  Pakistani  courts  would  recognise
           they were false and would exonerate him at least by the time  of
           the trial; (iv) that  he  might  nevertheless  first  undergo  a
           period of pre-trial detention; (v) although this would  mean  he
           experienced hardships, these would not  rise  to  the  level  of
           serious harm so as to make his a case of persecution rather than
           prosecution; (vi) even on the assumption  that  he  might  still
           face a real risk of serious harm from the relatives of  the  man
           killed at the demonstration (against which the authorities could
           not protect him), he would  be  able  to  avail  himself  of  an
           internal flight (protection) alternative."


  183. It is salient to observe that although the treatment of  prosecution
       as persecution in Muzafar Iqbal has  been  endorsed  by  the  higher
       courts in Harari [2003] EWCA Civ 807 and  Batayav  [2003]  EWCA  Civ
       1489 (the latter noting, however,  an  important  point  of  caution
       regarding use of phrases such as  "frequent",  "routine",  "general"
       and "systematic"), since  2002 there have been a number of important
       cases dealing with fair trial in an asylum or  extradition  context,
       both before the ECtHR is Strasbourg and in the UK, in particular the
       decision of the House of Lords in EM (Lebanon) [2008] UKHL 64  .  At
       para 34 of that case Lord  Bingham  made  reference  to  the   joint
       partly dissenting opinion of three judges of the European  Court  of
       Human Rights (ECtHR) - Judges  Bratza,  Bonello  and  Hedigan  -  in
       Mamatkulov and Askarov v Turkey (2005) 41 EHRR 25,  537,  para  OIII
       14, which helpfully encapsulates the existing position in Strasbourg
       case law regarding claims based on a real risk  of  exposure  to  an
       unfair trial:
           "While the court has not to date found  that  the  expulsion  or
           extradition of an individual violated, or would if  carried  out
           violate, article  6  of  the  Convention,  it  has  on  frequent
           occasions held that such a possibility cannot be excluded  where
           the person being expelled has  suffered  or  risks  suffering  a
           flagrant denial of a fair trial in the receiving  country.  What
           constitutes a 'flagrant' denial of justice has  not  been  fully
           explained in the  court's  jurisprudence  but  the  use  of  the
           adjective is clearly intended to  impose  a  stringent  test  of
           unfairness  going  beyond  mere  irregularities   or   lack   of
           safeguards in the trial procedures such as  might  result  in  a
           breach of article 6 if occurring within  the  Contracting  State
           itself. As the court has emphasised, article 1 cannot be read as
           justifying a general principle to the effect that a  Contracting
           State may not surrender an individual unless satisfied that  the
           conditions awaiting him in the country  of  destination  are  in
           full accord with each of the safeguards of  the  Convention.  In
           our view, what the word 'flagrant' is intended to  convey  is  a
           breach of the principles of fair trial guaranteed by  article  6
           which is so fundamental as to  amount  to  a  nullification,  or
           destruction of the very essence, of the right guaranteed by that
           article."
  184.  As to prison  conditions,  in  SH  (prison  conditions)  Bangladesh
       [2008] UKAIT 00076 the Tribunal noted at para 26 that  the  approach
       taken by the ECtHR to applications from persons alleging that prison
       conditions in High Contracting States violate Article 3 are usefully
       summarised in Ramirez Sanchez v  France  App.no.  59450/00,  BAILII:
       [2006] ECHR 685, 4 July 2006 as follows:
           "General principles
           115. Article 3 of the  Convention  enshrines  one  of  the  most
           fundamental values of democratic societies.  Even  in  the  most
           difficult of circumstances, such as the fight against  terrorism
           or crime, the Convention prohibits in absolute terms torture  or
           inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.
           116. In the modern world States face very real  difficulties  in
           protecting their populations from terrorist  violence.  However,
           unlike most of the substantive clauses of the Convention and  of
           Protocols Nos. 1  and  4,  Article  3  makes  no  provision  for
           exceptions and  no  derogation  from  it  is  permissible  under
           Article 15    2  even  in  the  event  of  a  public  emergency
           threatening the life of the nation (see Labita  v.  Italy  [GC],
           no. 26772/95, BAILII: [2000] ECHR  161,    119,  ECHR  2000-IV;
           Selmouni v. France [GC], no. 25803/94, BAILII: [1999] ECHR 66, 
           95, ECHR 1999 V; and Assenov and  Others  v.  Bulgaria,  BAILII:
           [1998] ECHR 98, judgment of 28 October 1998, Reports  1998-VIII,
           p. 3288,  93).  The  Convention  prohibits  in  absolute  terms
           torture  and  inhuman  or  degrading  treatment  or  punishment,
           irrespective of the conduct of the person concerned (see  Chahal
           v. the United Kingdom, BAILII: [1996] ECHR  54,  judgment  cited
           above,  79). The nature of the offence allegedly  committed  by
           the applicant  is  therefore  irrelevant  for  the  purposes  of
           Article 3 (Indelicato v. Italy,  no.  31143/96,  BAILII:  [2001]
           ECHR 599,  30, 18 October 2001).
           117. Ill-treatment must attain a minimum level of severity if it
           is to fall within the scope of Article 3. The assessment of this
           minimum depends on all the circumstances of the  case,  such  as
           the duration of the treatment, its physical  or  mental  effects
           and, in some cases, the sex, age and  state  of  health  of  the
           victim (see,  for  instance,  Ireland  v.  the  United  Kingdom,
           BAILII: [1978] ECHR 1, 18 January 1978, Series A no. 25, p.  65,
            162). ...
           118. The Court has considered treatment to be "inhuman" because,
           inter alia, it was premeditated, was  applied  for  hours  at  a
           stretch and  caused  either  actual  bodily  injury  or  intense
           physical or mental suffering. It  has  deemed  treatment  to  be
           "degrading" because it was such as  to  arouse  in  the  victims
           feelings of fear, anguish and inferiority capable of humiliating
           and debasing them (see, among other authorities, Kudla v. Poland
           [GC], no. 30210/96,  10  BHRC  269,    92,  ECHR  2000-XI).  In
           considering whether a punishment  or  treatment  is  "degrading"
           within the meaning of Article 3, the Court will have  regard  to
           whether its  object  is  to  humiliate  and  debase  the  person
           concerned and whether, as far as the consequences are concerned,
           it adversely  affected  his  or  her  personality  in  a  manner
           incompatible with  Article  3  (see,  among  other  authorities,
           Raninen v. Finland, BAILII: [1997]  ECHR  102,  judgment  of  16
           December 1997, Reports 1997-VIII, pp. 2821-2822,  55). However,
           the absence of any such purpose cannot conclusively rule  out  a
           finding  of  a  violation  of  Article  3  (see,   among   other
           authorities, Peers v.  Greece,  BAILII:  [2001]  ECHR  296,  no.
           28524/95,  74, ECHR 2001-III).
           119. In order for a punishment or treatment associated  with  it
           to be "inhuman" or "degrading",  the  suffering  or  humiliation
           involved must in any event go beyond that inevitable element  of
           suffering  or  humiliation  connected  with  a  given  form   of
           legitimate   treatment   or   punishment   (see,   among   other
           authorities, V.  v.  the  United  Kingdom  [GC],  no.  24888/94,
           BAILII: [1999] ECHR 171,  71, ECHR 1999-IX;  Indelicato,  cited
           above,  32; Ilascu and Others v. Moldova and Russia  [GC],  no.
           48787/99, BAILII: [2004] ECHR 318,  428,  428, ECHR  2004-VII;
           and Lors and Others v. the Netherlands, no.  52750/99,  BAILII:
           [2003] ECHR 59,  62, 4 February 2003).
           In that connection, the Court notes that  measures  depriving  a
           person of  his  liberty  may  often  involve  such  an  element.
           Nevertheless, Article  3  requires  the  State  to  ensure  that
           prisoners are detained in conditions that  are  compatible  with
           respect for their human dignity, that the manner and  method  of
           the execution of the measure do not subject them to distress  or
           hardship of an intensity  exceeding  the  unavoidable  level  of
           suffering inherent in detention and that,  given  the  practical
           demands  of  imprisonment,  their  health  and  well-being   are
           adequately secured (see Kudla v. Poland,  (2000)  10  BHRC  269,
           cited above,  94;  and  Kalashnikov  v.  Russia  no.  47095/99,
           BAILII: [2002] ECHR 596,  95, ECHR 2001-XI).  The  Court  would
           add that the measures taken must also be necessary to attain the
           legitimate aim pursued.
           Further, when assessing conditions of detention, account has  to
           be taken of the cumulative effects of those conditions, as  well
           as the specific allegations made by  the  applicant  (Dougoz  v.
           Greece, no. 40907/98, BAILII: [2001] ECHR 213,  46, ECHR  2001-
           II)."
  185. Given the close correspondence between  ill  treatment  contrary  to
       Article 3, persecution and serious harm, we  consider  this  summary
       sheds helpful light on claims to a real risk  of  suffering  one  or
       more of these types of harm.


  186. Para 339K of HC395 states that:


           "The fact that a person has already been subject to  persecution
           or serious harm, or to direct threats  of  such  persecution  or
           such harm, will be regarded  as  a  serious  indication  of  the
           person's well-founded  fear  of  persecution  or  real  risk  of
           suffering  serious  harm,  unless  there  are  good  reasons  to
           consider that such persecution  or  serious  harm  will  not  be
           repeated."

  187. Para 339O, headed "Internal Relocation", states:


            "(i) The Secretary of State will not make:
             (a) a grant of asylum if in part of the  country  of  origin  a
             person would not have a well founded fear of being  persecuted,
             and the person can reasonably be expected to stay in that  part
             of the country; or
             (b) a grant of  humanitarian  protection  if  in  part  of  the
             country of return a person  would  not  face  a  real  risk  of
             suffering serious  harm,  and  the  person  can  reasonably  be
             expected to stay in that part of the country.
              (ii) In examining whether a part of the country of origin  or
           country  of  return  meets       the  requirements  in  (i)  the
           Secretary of State, when making his decision on whether to grant
           asylum or humanitarian  protection,  will  have  regard  to  the
           general circumstances prevailing in that part of the country and
           to the personal circumstances of the person.
           (iii) (i) applies notwithstanding technical obstacles to  return
           to the country of origin or country of return."



   ASSESSMENT: GENERAL

   The experts

  188. It is right to say that there was a  great  deal  of  common  ground
       between Dr Lau and Dr Shah on  matters  of  Pakistan  law  and  both
       representatives acknowledged that both had given  evidence  in  good
       faith and on the basis of real expertise in the  field  of  Pakistan
       law. In any event, we found the evidence both gave  as  to  relevant
       aspects of Pakistan law and practice to be  weighty.   Both  possess
       formidable academic credentials and have also been able to  draw  on
       the opinions of lawyers and judges practising in Pakistan  (Dr  Shah
       having  experience  as  a  law  practitioner  in  Islamabad).   Both
       impressed us by their readiness to adjust their  position  according
       to the state of the evidence as it developed during the proceedings.
        However, whilst we recognise that both have also written on aspects
       of Pakistan society as well as on matters of Pakistan law,  we  note
       that by and large they based their opinions on such matters  on  the
       background evidence as found in major country reports. Although both
       had published work dealing with such aspects it was far  less  clear
       to us that what they  told  us  about  such  aspects  reflected  any
       particular  expertise.  Dr  Lau,  for  example,  was  not   entirely
       consistent in the evidence he gave concerning whether  an  attempted
       murder suspect would be  accepted  by  a  Darul  Aman  and  ventured
       opinions on the level of risk to women of honour killings  that  did
       not distinguish  carefully  between  key  variables.  Dr  Shah,  for
       example, ventured to suggest that in Lahore cases of persecution  by
       government officials are taken seriously and in that city "[m]ost of
       the people are educated and wealthy", a suggestion very difficult to
       square with the background country information.  It  was  noticeable
       that at the hearing both experts were readier  to  qualify  some  of
       their opinions on non-legal issues under cross-examination. Dr Shah,
       for example, conceded that in his written report his  references  to
       Lahore just cited his primary focus was on  formal  legal  processes
       normally followed rather than actual practices.  A further, related,
       caveat we have is that is that once these two  experts  turned  from
       evaluating general issues of law to evaluating social and  political
       matters and the appellant's particular case each  in  our  view  was
       rather too ready to adopt and defend a view on her likely  situation
       on return, without fully  addressing  the  evidence  pointing  to  a
       different view.  For example, in his report Dr Lau for his part said
       he  was  sure  that  the  appellant  could  not  achieve  safety  by
       relocating as the police would locate her; yet under questioning  at
       the hearing stated a different view, without mentioning his shift in
       position.  Dr Shah seemed too ready to  assume  that  the  appellant
       would be able to seek and obtain police protection in her home area.

  189.  We found Dr Balzani's use of answers sent  to  her  by  two  lawyer
       contacts in Pakistan  very  useful  and  this  lent  weight  to  her
       observations on the law and practice in Pakistan.  We also recognise
       that in an important sense hers was the hardest task in that she was
       asked to cover a great deal of ground relating to the general  legal
       and social situation in Pakistan and the position of women generally
       as well as women facing adultery accusations.   However,  whilst  we
       are grateful for her help in drawing together  different  background
       sources of relevance  and  conveying  comments  by  two  lawyers  in
       Pakistan, we must confess to finding her own observations of limited
       help otherwise.  Her own lack of legal expertise did  not  stop  her
       stating her opinion incorrectly on a number  of  legal  matters;  Dr
       Shah in his written oral evidence correctly identified a  number  of
       such errors (although it is fair to say that  her  error  concerning
       marital rape is also made by the latest US State Department report).
        She did not furnish sufficient information about her  own  research
       methodology on the main issues at stake in this appeal.  Much of her
       interview-based research conducted with men and  women  of  Pakistan
       origin in the UK appeared to be with Ahmadis, whose  experiences  in
       Pakistan are likely to  be  very  different  from  most  Pakistanis.
       Quite a few of the opinions she expressed in  her  report  were  not
       sourced.  Her readiness to state  dogmatic  conclusions  both  about
       general legal, social and political matters  and  about  the  likely
       risk facing the appellant did not instil confidence in us  that  she
       reached her  conclusions  by  a  proper  consideration  of  evidence
       pointing for and against them.  We accept she was sincere in seeking
       to discharge her  duty  to  the  Tribunal  to  assess  the  evidence
       objectively, but we do not think her evidence  reflected  sufficient
       command of the subjects covered.

  190. There were a number of differences  between  the  three  experts  on
       matters other than Pakistan law. For example,  they  did  not  agree
       over the issue of whether the appellant's husband was likely to  get
       custody of  the  appellant's  children.  To  take  another  example,
       although Dr Lau found it outrageous (in oral evidence) that Dr  Shah
       should say  (in  his  February  2010  report)  that  allegations  of
       adultery are common and often the precursors of divorce, Dr  Balzani
       had expressed the same view in her report of October 2008 where  she
       maintained that it was known that husbands accused  their  wives  of
       adultery simply to get  rid  of  them.  However,  since  we  derived
       limited assistance from all three on  such  matters,  we  need  only
       refer to such differences in limited contexts in the course  of  our
       later analysis of the appellant's case.

   FIRs

  191. We find  Dr  Lau's  and  Dr  Shah's  evidence  on  FIRs  to  reflect
       faithfully the background evidence and to clarify  it  considerably.
       On the one hand, an FIR on its  own  does  not  demonstrate  that  a
       person faces prosecution.  It is not a charge document  and  whether
       anything results from it  depends  on  the  outcome  of  the  police
       investigation into it.  Both Dr Lau and Dr Shah confirmed that there
       were many "stale" or "stagnant" FIRs.  Even  if  the  police  decide
       (after investigation of an FIR) to draw up a charge sheet, they  may
       decide not to proceed in  the  light  of  comments  made  by  police
       lawyers. If they do proceed to prosecute on the basis of an FIR, the
       court will normally only allow that prosecution to proceed if it  is
       supported by independent evidence. On the other hand, once  the  FIR
       is registered at the police station, the police fall under a duty to
       investigate it and to decide whether to bring the matter  to  court.
       Even though the police lawyers who advise them are police  employees
       and have no independent powers to filter out weak cases, it  appears
       their advice normally carries eight.   Sometimes  the  lower  courts
       will not expect much by way of evidence and both Dr Lau and Dr  Shah
       agreed  that  some  types  of  evidence  could  be  manufactured  by
       complainants.  In addition, an FIR remains registered unless a lower
       court has not allowed a prosecution based on it to  proceed  or  (on
       application for judicial review) a High Court has quashed it.  If  a
       person was known to have left the country, even for some  period  of
       time, that will not necessarily result in  its  reactivation  either
       indirectly (through prompting from the complainant) or directly.  Dr
       Shah did not disagree with Dr Lau's assessment that the current  FIR
       system  contained  inadequate  safeguards   against   vexatious   or
       malicious complainants using it as a source of harassment or  worse.
       The absence of any substantial independence of prosecution decisions
       from the police decisions is a serious flaw.


  192. However, it appears that the misuse of FIRs in  adultery  cases  has
       now been ended  by  the  PWA  2006  reforms.  The  law  has  changed
       radically. It is no  longer  possible  for  husbands  to  have  FIRs
       registered at the local police station; this can only  happen  if  a
       judge agrees to it. The important proviso is that FIRs alleging zina
       that were registered before 1 December 2006 can still proceed  under
       the Zina Ordinance.

   The Police

  193. It was common ground between  the  three  experts  that  there  were
       serious  problems  affecting  the  police  in  Pakistan,  especially
       corruption.  At the same time,  the  evidence  fell  well  short  of
       establishing (nor did Mr Fripp seek to argue) that  in  general  the
       police were fundamentally unwilling or unable to carry out  law  and
       order functions and ensure the protection of the public.  It  cannot
       be said that there is a consistent pattern of  police  impunity  for
       wrongdoings: we note from the HRCP 2009 Report that in  the  Punjab,
       for example, the authorities have taken disciplinary action  against
       1688 police officials. In  the  cities  the  police  at  the  higher
       echelons are said to be highly educated.


  194. Of particular importance to the issues dealt with in  this  case  is
       the fact that the powers of the police to arrest  and  detain  women
       had been severely constrained by legislative  reforms  in  2004-2007
       and subsequent case law it may be that further legislation aimed  to
       protect victims of domestic violence will eventually be passed.

  195. One matter on which Dr Lau and Dr Shah felt unable  to  comment  was
       whether police had the power to detain  someone  who  had  absconded
       from bail  without  first  obtaining  authorisation  from  a  court,
       especially if that person was a woman.  However, in the  context  of
       an asylum-related appeal, it does not seem to us that much turns  on
       the apparent difference. For even if we assume that  the  police  do
       have this power and would  be  likely  to  exercise  it,  all  three
       experts observed that there is provision for a lawyer to  seek  pre-
       arrest bail. Thus a person returning to his or  her  home  area  may
       well have the ability to protect themselves against possible  police
       arrest by arranging for a lawyer to apply for pre-arrest bail at the
       same time.

      The judiciary and the courts

  196. We do not understand any of the experts  to  assert,  nor  does  the
       background evidence support the view that the Pakistan judiciary  is
       fundamentally corrupt.  That said,  significant  failings  are  very
       evident, especially at the level of the lower courts and the  courts
       in rural areas, where incompetence, corruption  and  other  failings
       are prevalent.  In our opinion, however, these problems have  to  be
       kept in perspective. Pakistan's very  adverse  rating  for  judicial
       corruption (ranked third  worst  by  Transparency  International  in
       2006) was reached largely on  the  basis  of  evidence  as  to  what
       happens at the lower levels of the judiciary.  Furthermore,  in  the
       cities and larger towns the standards of the judiciary are  said  to
       be higher and there exist numerous NGOs and a volatile  press  often
       able to  monitor  cases  and  their  outcomes.   Nor  should  it  be
       forgotten that recent political developments in Pakistan have  shown
       that the  judiciary  in  general  has  been  able  to  play  a  very
       influential (activist) role (even if sometimes a  quite  politicised
       role) in bringing about a less executive-dominated  distribution  of
       power and authority.


  197.  So far as concerns the treatment women  receive  from  the  courts,
       whilst Dr Balzani is certainly right in  describing  the  courts  as
       dominated by men who reflect the patriarchal  values  of  the  wider
       society, several factors  already  touched  on  suggest  significant
       advances.  First, changes affected by amendments introduced in  2006
       [by Ordinance XXXVI] have accorded women a right to  automatic  bail
       except in very limited circumstances.  Second, the PWA 2006  appears
       to have put a virtual end to aggrieved husbands  using  the  law  to
       mount unfounded adultery charges leading to the incarceration  of  a
       very significant number of women.  Since 2004  higher  level  police
       officers now have to  conduct  the  investigations  and  the  courts
       control the process.  The  2006  reforms  also  included  provisions
       which act as an additional deterrent to false accusations:  men  can
       be charged with marital rape; and if  they  bring  adultery  charges
       found to be baseless, they themselves can face prosecution.   Third,
       although these legal reforms cannot be said either to reflect or  to
       have  resulted  in  more  liberal  practices  in  Pakistan   society
       generally, they clearly have not just been paper changes.  The great
       majority of  an  estimated  2,500  women  incarcerated  on  adultery
       charges have been released.  Further legislative changes are likely,
       notwithstanding the  vocal  hostility  of  fundamentalist  political
       parties and groups.  Fourth, in relation to zina offences, the court
       system provides for cases to be taken to the Federal  Sharia  Court.
       In recent years  its  rulings  have  been  extremely  protective  of
       women's rights and strong in striking down injustices. There is some
       legitimate concern that it may soon be forced, by  a  seemingly  odd
       alliance between fundamentalists and legal experts, to rule some  of
       the PWA 2006 provisions invalid as being contrary  to  Islamic  law,
       but neither Dr Lau nor Dr Shah suggested that the relatively liberal
       approach of the higher courts to women would not persist.


   Cases in which a  complaint  of  adultery  has  been  the  subject  of  a
   registered FIR prior to the coming into force of the PWA 2006.

  198. Notwithstanding the above, it was the opinion of Dr Shah, eventually
       echoed by Dr Lau, that cases in which a complaint  of  adultery  has
       been the subject of an FIR registered with the police prior  to  the
       coming into force of the PWA 2006 would be dealt with under the Zina
       Ordinance. Their opinions were supported  by  the  decision  of  the
       Supreme Court of Pakistan in Shakeel v State, PLD 2010 Supreme Court
       47 which Dr Shah cited to us. We would observe, however,  that  such
       cases are a residual category likely to be relatively few in number.

   Prison conditions

  199. As noted earlier, there is a broad consensus in  the  major  country
       reports that prison conditions in Pakistan are  extremely  poor  and
       fail to  meet  international  standards,  the  main  problems  being
       overcrowding, instances of ill-treatment  by  prison  officials  and
       inadequate food and medical care. That said, there are some signs of
       improvement in the more recent period and  we  note  that  no  major
       international body has argued that conditions  in  Pakistan  prisons
       generally fall below the high threshold of Article 3  ill  treatment
       as enunciated by the ECtHR  in  Ramirez  Sanchez  (or  by  their  UN
       International Civil and Political Covenant (ICCPR)  equivalent)   In
       any  event,  we  lack  evidence  sufficient   to  show   that   that
       imprisonment  in  Pakistan  routinely  results  in   conditions   or
       practices that would generally be said to breach Article  3.  We  do
       not know, for example, whether prisoners are locked up too  much  of
       the time, not being permitted enough time out  of  their  cells  for
       fresh air,  exercise,  recreation  and  the  like.  There  is  scant
       information on sanitation and on ventilation,  bedding  and  laundry
       facilities. It may be that if relatives are allowed to supply  food,
       they would also  be  permitted  to  provide  other  necessities  and
       services, but we were not provided with any  evidence  on  this.  We
       have no information on visiting  arrangements  and  little  evidence
       relating to the availability  of  medical  care.  We  are  not  told
       whether the same conditions apply to male and female  prisoners.  We
       note that prison officials  kept  juvenile  offenders  in  the  same
       facilities as adults but in separate barracks and it is likely  that
       there are different facilities for women too. Dr Balzani's report of
       October 2008 collates several sources and refers to a 1996 report by
       the UN Special  Rapporteur  on  the  use  of  fetters  in  Pakistani
       prisons; however there is no mention of this as a continued practice
       in the more recent evidence before us.


  200. (We would also note that neither party  in  this  appeal  sought  to
       argue to the contrary, although Mr Fripp correctly highlighted  that
       under Article 3  case  law,  assessment  of  the  impact  on  prison
       conditions on any particular individual  has  to  be  undertaken  by
       reference to a wide range of considerations including age,  sex  and
       health.)


   Women and bail

  201. The only major point of disagreement between  Dr  Lau  and  Dr  Shah
       concerned whether a woman facing a charge of attempted murder  would
       be entitled to automatic bail by virtue of the amendment made to the
       Code  of  Criminal  Procedure  (Second  Amendment)  Ordinance,  2006
       (Ordinance XXXVI).  We remind ourselves of the precise text of  this
       provision:


      "Amendment of section 497, Act V of 1898. - In the  Code  of  Criminal
      Procedure, 1898 (V of 1898), in section 497, in  sub-section  (1),  in
      the first proviso, the words "or any woman" shall be omitted and after
      the first proviso amended as aforesaid,  the  following  new  provisos
      shall be inserted; namely:-


              "Provided further that a woman accused  of  such  an  offence
              shall be released on bail, as if  the  offence  is  bailable,
              notwithstanding anything contained  in  schedule-II  to  this
              Code or any other law for the time being in force:


              "Provided further that a woman may  not  be  so  released  if
              there appear reasonable grounds for believing  that  she  has
              been guilty of an offence relating  to  terrorism,  financial
              corruption and murder and such  offence  is  punishable  with
              death or imprisonment for life or imprisonment for ten years,
              unless having regard to the facts and  circumstances  of  the
              case, the court directs that she may be released on bail:


              Provided further that where a woman accused of an offence  is
              refused bail  under  the  foregoing  proviso,  she  shall  be
              released on bail if she has been detained  for  a  continuous
              period of six months and whose trial for such offence has not
              been concluded, unless the court is of the opinion that delay
              in the trial of the accused has been occasioned by an act  or
              omission of the accused or any other  person  acting  on  her
              behalf."


  202. We also remind ourselves that, although aided by two eminent experts
       in Pakistan law, we are having to consider matters of interpretation
       of law which to us is foreign law and to do so without  the  benefit
       of much by way of relevant Pakistan case  law.  The  fact  that  the
       courts in Pakistan use English and operate  a  system  of  precedent
       roughly modelled on the English legal system makes our task slightly
       easier, but no less deserving of caution on our part.


  203. The second proviso just cited clearly imposes a twofold requirement:
       one relating to the type of offences; another relating to the  types
       of punishment.  We agree with Dr Lau and Dr Shah that  the  "murder"
       exception must include attempted murder because the phrase  used  is
       "relating  to  murder".   On  the  issue  of  whether   the   second
       requirement relating to types of punishment  encompasses  punishment
       "up to 10 years" (Dr Lau's position)  or  "10 years  or  over"  (Dr
       Shah's position), we take note of Mr Fripp's submission that if  the
       drafters had meant the latter they could have said so, but the  same
       could be said about Dr Lau's construction ("up to  10  years").   On
       the principle of euisdem generis, the class of exceptions dealt with
       in this amendment  is  clearly  intended  to  cover  only  extremely
       serious or grave punishments: the other two of the trilogy are death
       and life imprisonment.  If Dr Lau was right,  the  exception  would
       include all offences which carried  a  maximum  of  10 years,  even
       though the relevant minimum might range from 0-9 years.  That  would
       mean including, so far as we understand matters, a significant range
       of offences, not all of which  could  be  categorised  as  extremely
       serious or grave. They include, for example, the following  offences
       under the PPC:  s.386 (extortion) s.392 (robbery), s.412  (receiving
       stolen property) and s.413 (handling stolen  property).  Accordingly
       we are satisfied that there is a right to  automatic  bail  both  in
       relation to the outstanding s.10 zina  offence  and  the  s.324  PPC
       offence of attempted murder (which carries a maximum sentence of  10
       years imprisonment).


  204. We are unclear, however, that the right of  women  to  bail  can  be
       wholly absolute.   That  is  not  only  counterintuitive  (since  it
       suggest that  even  dangerous  women  charged  with  (non-terrorist)
       multiple murder could not be detained) but difficult to square  with
       the further provision in the same Ordinance  limiting  detention  of
       women awaiting trial to 6 months.  It might  be  argued  that  this
       provision was only meant to  cover  women  detained  prior  to  this
       reform or women who fell under the exceptions to automatic bail, but
       equally it appears to contemplate residual categories of  women  who
       miss out on bail.  But we have nothing to suggest that women  facing
       either adultery or attempted murder charges would fall into  one  of
       these residual categories. Certainly the fact that she has absconded
       from bail previously would not disentitle a woman to automatic  bail
       if she was entitled to it: see Mumtaz Ali v State.

  205. If we are wrong about the automatic bail provision, and  the  matter
       of bail for a woman in the position of the appellant caught  by  the
       exceptions to Ordinance XXXIV would in fact fall  to  be  considered
       only for discretionary bail, then on balance we  would  accept  that
       there is a real risk that such a woman would be  denied  bail.   The
       matter is, however, finely balanced. We acknowledge  that  the  case
       law cited by Dr Lau and Dr  Shah  does  show  that  the  courts  are
       prepared not to treat absconding as a reason in itself  for  denying
       bail. There is also the fact that for a woman being  a  mother  with
       children appears to act as a factor in favour of bail being granted.
       We also accept that of the three main  considerations  Dr  Lau  said
       would be applied by the courts when  deciding  whether to grant bail
        ( (1) the seriousness of the offence; (2) danger to the public; and
       (3) the risk the accused would interfere with  the  criminal  trial)
       the appellant would only fall under  the  first.   However,  in  the
       appellant's case it is not simply that she had  absconded  from  the
       Provincial government's territory; she had also fled  the  country's
       jurisdiction and also  been  the  cause  of  lengthy  delay  in  the
       processing of her case. We have not been shown any  case  indicating
       that  discretionary  bail  would   be   granted   easily   in   such
       circumstances.  Further, as Mr Fripp pointed out, we cannot  exclude
       that the appellant's husband may have obtained statements  from  his
       named witness and perhaps fabricated other evidence and so, that  is
       to say, ensuring the courts would  consider  there  was  independent
       evidence/a prima facie case.


  206. Continuing to examine what our position would have been had  we  not
       found there was an automatic right of bail available to a  woman  in
       the appellant's position, we would then have further  accepted  that
       on denial of bail a woman in such a position would face a period  of
       detention of at  least  several  months.   The  background  evidence
       contained nothing  to  suggest  that  a  case  like  this  would  be
       expedited.

  207. We do not think, however, on  this  scenario  that  women  similarly
       situated  to  the  appellant  would  face  more  than  6 months  in
       detention.  We see no reason to think  that  the  further  safeguard
       contained in the 2006 amendment to Ordinance XXXVI would not operate
       (save in terrorist cases) in favour of  every  woman,  at  least  in
       urban  areas  where  the  courts  are  likely  to  exercise   normal
       individual vigilance.

Women and prison conditions

  208. We have already dealt with prison conditions. On the  basis  of  our
       earlier findings we would assess that whilst  conditions  in  prison
       may be poor, the evidence falls well short of establishing  that  in
       general they amount to ill-treatment for detainees of either sex.

   Adultery charges against women

  209. From our earlier summary of the expert and background  evidence,  it
       is clear that the 1979 Zina Ordinance has been significantly altered
       by legal reforms in 2004  and  2006.  Pre-2006  the  Zina  Ordinance
       stipulated two types of punishment for zina: hadd and tazir.  A case
       fell  into  the  tazir  category  when  the  requirements  for  hadd
       punishment (4 adult male Muslims' testimonies or a confession)  were
       not met. The punishment for tazir for married and unmarried  persons
       is rigorous imprisonment for a minimum of 4  and  a  maximum  of  10
       years. Offences involving rape carry no less than  4  and  not  more
       than 25 years. Under the Zina Ordinance police  often  abused  their
       powers by registering  FIRs  based  on  unfounded  allegations.  Any
       police officer above  the  rank  of  assistant  sub-inspector  could
       investigate the matter.  As a result of the Criminal law (Amendment)
       Act 2004 and the PWA 2006, police were prohibited from effecting  an
       arrest  without  the  permission  of  a  court  in  cases  of  zina.
       Investigation had to be conducted by an  officer  at  the  level  of
       superintendent of police.  As noted by Dr  Shah,  another  important
       change brought about by the 2004 Act was that "the  police  have  to
       convince the court that  an  offence  has  actually  been  committed
       rather than merely a complaint made by a family  member  or  husband
       (see 2005 Yearly Law Reports 1634)". As a result  of  the  Ordinance
       XXXVI amendments, women became entitled to  automatic  bail  in  all
       cases  except  for  offences  relating   to   terrorism,   financial
       corruption and murder and such offences are punishable  with  death,
       or imprisonment for 10 years (s.497). Further even women denied bail
       under the discretionary provisions are to be admitted to bail  after
       6 months if their trial is not concluded and the delay is not caused
       by her.

  210. The PWA 2006 also made significant changes  to  bail  provisions  in
       cases involving both zina liable to  hadd  under  s.5  of  the  Zina
       Ordinance and fornication under s.496B of the PPC.   Both  are  made
       bailable offences, meaning that bail is the "indefensible  right  of
       the accused" Dr Shah at para 30 of his report cites in  support  PLD
       1963 Supreme Court 478.

  211. In addition the PWA 2006 took all offences out of the Zina Ordinance
       except zina liable to hadd punishment.  The offence of rape was also
       taken out of the Ordinance and inserted into the PPC Code (s.375) so
       that, inter  alia,  the  evidential  requirement  of  4 adult  male
       witnesses is abolished and marital rape is instituted as an offence.
        Zina liable to tazir is renamed fornication and inserted  into  the
       new PPC  as  a  new  section  496B.  False  accusation  of  zina  or
       fornication are created as separate offences (PWA s.7,  s.21).  Zina
       liable to hadd punishment cannot (as before) be convertible  into  a
       complaint of fornication or vice versa. The power to register a case
       as zina has been taken away by s.8  PWA  and  give  to  the  Session
       Judge.  Likewise no court  is  allowed  to  take  cognisance  of  an
       offence of fornication under s.496B except  on  a  complaint  lodged
       before a first class magistrate.  The court is required  to  examine
       two witnesses on oath as to the act of fornication.  If there is  no
       sufficient ground for proceeding, the complaint shall be  dismissed.
       The courts also have an additional power in the case  of  a  husband
       who has made untrue accusations of zina to convict him.   A  wronged
       wife can make an application for dissolution of their marriage under
       lian.  According to Dr Shah an allegation of zina by  a  husband  is
       sufficient ground  for  obtaining  divorce  on  the  basis  of  mere
       aversion towards her husband.


Honour killings


  212. It is clear  from  the  background  evidence  that  honour  killings
       remains a serious problem in Pakistan; something like 600 women  are
       killed each year in honour killings.  However, we would  reject  the
       view that it is as prevalent and entrenched a problem as Dr Balzani,
       the authors of the Safe  to  Return?  report  (who  state  that  men
       charged with honour killings are normally  acquitted)  and  to  some
       extent Dr Lau, contended it was. First, the worst  examples  of  the
       phenomenon are largely confined to areas of Pakistan where the Jirga
       systems still hold sway, such as the North West  Frontier  Province.
       Second, it is clear that the continuing incidents of honour killings
       are predominantly located in rural areas of  Pakistan,  not  in  the
       urban areas. Third, the legislative reforms  introduced  during  the
       past decade to  safeguard  women  against  violence  and  abuse,  in
       particular the Honour Killings Act 2004 and the adoption in 2006  of
       the Criminal Law Amendment Act  to  facilitate  the  prosecution  of
       honour killings have clearly had a significant effect. To  reiterate
       figures cited earlier from  the  CEDAW  Report,  of  the  160  cases
       decided in Punjab by the lower judiciary (the time span is unclear),
       the death sentence was awarded to 52 persons and  life  imprisonment
       to an additional 59; the rest were awarded lesser punishments.

   Child Custody


  213. The Tribunal recalls that in EM (Lebanon) [2008] UKHL 64  the  House
       of Lords was concerned with the application in Lebanon of Sharia law
       relating to the custody of children stipulating that at the age of 7
       the physical custody of a male child custody would pass by force  of
       law to his father or another male member of his family; any  attempt
       by the mother to retain custody of him there would be bound to fail.
       Whatever may be the position  in  Lebanon,  it  is  clear  from  the
       evidence we have as  to  law  and  practice  in  Pakistan  that  the
       position is somewhat different. Whilst the law continues  to  favour
       the father, in  practice  the  courts  seek  to  adopt  a  pragmatic
       approach, awarding custody to the mother wherever  that  appears  in
       the best interests of the child.

   Women and domestic violence


  214. The existing Tribunal country guidance cases dealing with victims of
       domestic violence in Pakistan are SN and HM and FS. In para 47 of SN
       and HM the Tribunal stated that, absent any evidence filed on behalf
       of the appellants,  it  would  consider  the  account  of  available
       assistance for women at risk from family problems, as set out in the
       CIPU Country Report for Pakistan, April 2004.  Having  set  out  the
       relevant passages of that report the Tribunal then stated:
           "48. The same CIPU Country Report accepts that  internal  flight
           options are limited for women, but it does not state that  there
           are no internal flight possibilities and each case  will  depend
           on its own particular factual matrix. We find that some  support
           is  available  in  the  cities,  and  we   also   consider   the
           geographical scale  of  Pakistan  (covering  an  area  of  about
           307,374 square miles, with a  population  of  140,470,000);  the
           question of internal flight will require  careful  consideration
           in each case. The general questions  which  Adjudicators  should
           ask themselves in cases of this kind are as follows -
                 (a)Has  the  claimant  shown  a  real  risk  or  reasonable
                 likelihood of continuing hostility  from  her  husband  (or
                 former husband) or his family members, such as to  raise  a
                 real risk of serious harm in her former home area?

                 (b)If yes, has she shown that she would have  no  effective
                 protection in her home area against such a risk,  including
                 protection available from the Pakistani state, from her own
                 family members, or from a current partner or his family?

                 (c) If yes, would such a risk and lack of protection extend
                 to any other part of Pakistan to which she could reasonably
                 be expected to go ...having regard to the  available  state
                 support, shelters, crisis centres, and  family  members  or
                 friends in other parts of Pakistan?"


  215. The italicised summary of FS, so far as is relevant here, states:


                 "(2) The background evidence on the position  of  women  at
                 risk of domestic violence in Pakistan, and the availability
                 to them of State protection remains as set out  in  SN  and
                 HM.  ... It appears  that  the  current  intention  of  the
                 authorities is to improve the  State  protection  for  such
                 women, although progress is slow.  Every  case  will  still
                 turn  on  its  particular  facts  and  should  be  analysed
                 according to the step by step approach set out at  para  48
                 of SN and HM, with particular  regard  to  the  support  on
                 which the appellant can call if she is returned."


  216. More recently, in SN (Pakistan) [2009] EWCA Civ 181, Scott Baker  LJ
       noted that:


                 "31.  We  were  referred  to  a  number  of  documents   in
                 particular a Home Office operational guidance note and a US
                 State Department report relating to Pakistan, both of which
                 documents were very recent in relation to the date  of  the
                 original hearing before  Immigration  Judge  Walters.  Miss
                 Chan, for the Secretary of State, submits that, on  careful
                 reading, these documents take matters no further. She  also
                 observes that there is no country guidance dealing with the
                 general  question  of  single  women  with  children  being
                 returned to Pakistan. It is true that there is  no  country
                 guidance. Perhaps it  would  be  helpful  if  there  was  a
                 country guidance case dealing with  issues  that  arise  in
                 such circumstances."


  217. We would observe that it was not strictly correct to say  there  was
       no existing Tribunal country guidance on single women  in  Pakistan.
       The current country guidance cases of SN and HM and  FS  then  gave,
       and still do give, some guidance on the  position  of,  inter  alia,
       single women  - considered as one of the categories of women at risk
       from family problems (it would appear that neither  of  these  cases
       was drawn to Scott  Baker  LJ's  attention).  However,  particularly
       bearing in mind that both these cases are now several years old  and
       in them the Tribunal had little before them  by  way  of  background
       evidence apart from a CIPU report, we take his Lordship's comment as
       a helpful reminder of the need to have regard to the latest  country
       information (from as many sources as possible) to ascertain  whether
       it discloses the need for any revision of existing Tribunal  country
       guidance covering the position of women victims of domestic violence
       and other women affected by family problems in  Pakistan  (including
       single women). There is not any existing country guidance that  deal
       specifically with the issue of women facing accusations of  adultery
       and past observations in reported cases have, of course,  considered
       the position prior to the 2004-2007 reforms.


  218. The importance of having regard to the latest country information is
       also highlighted for us by the nature of the  expert  report  by  Dr
       Balzani. Leaving aside  our  earlier  comments  on  her  report  and
       addendum, it is noticeable that a significant number of her  sources
       are not based on recent research. The only exception is the  January
       2008 Safe to Return? report, but even that report is  now  over  two
       years old and its own fieldwork research dates from  trips  made  in
       2005 and 2006. It also relies in part on several older sources.

  219.  Turning in more detail to the Safe to Return? report, it  has  some
       other features (besides being several  years  old)  which  call  for
       caution on our part. It is a campaigning document written in part by
       legal representatives who act for women in UK  asylum-related  cases
       and in places expressly notes that it  reflects  the  experience  of
       such representatives (see the reference at 8.11 to  "the  experience
       of legal practitioners handling the relevant evidence"). The  report
       also contains a critique of the existing case law  of  the  Tribunal
       and higher courts on internal  relocation  which  it  considers  too
       restrictive; it is not simply an  assessment  of  the  situation  in
       Pakistan. Further we find certain features relating to the nature of
       its principal findings and conclusions troubling. Many are  set  out
       in the form of broad generalisations with  very  little  by  way  of
       qualification. The reason why that is a concern is that the  authors
       candidly explain elsewhere in the report  that  their  research  had
       various limitations: that their primary research only covered  parts
       of Pakistan; that they did not have  access  to  comprehensive  data
       regarding women's centres in Pakistan and that it relied heavily  on
       a limited number of  interviews  (individual  and  collective)  with
       various participants who were either victims of domestic violence or
       service providers for such women. The report also  acknowledges  the
       need for more research and for  more  diverse  data  (presently  the
       authors explain, researchers are heavily reliant on press cuttings).
       On one or two key points of detail (see below our  discussion  about
       confidentiality)  its  findings  are  unclear.  Such  qualifications
       should in our view have made the authors less ready to generalise.


  220. However, it remains that by virtue of  the  empirical  research  the
       authors conducted, and the fact that they seek to put  that  in  the
       context of other studies and reports available,  it  represents  the
       most  detailed  study  that  exists.   In  addition,  although   the
       limitations of the reach and quality of their own  research  do  not
       deter the authors from advancing a series of broad  generalisations,
       the specific observations made by the principal  field  worker  (and
       her assistant) show a clear determination to record  faithfully  all
       aspects, positive and negative, of the service  provisions  visited.
       (It is also  a  valuable  source  of  information  on  subjects  not
       intrinsically related to domestic violence - see e.g.  its  coverage
       in chapter 4 of the legal context impacting on women in  Pakistan  -
       but these are now somewhat dated).

  221. We turn then, to our main conclusions.  Having  considered  all  the
       available evidence, it does not seem to us that  it  calls  for  any
       major modification of existing Tribunal country guidance on domestic
       violence. Existing guidance recognises that women  in  Pakistan  who
       are divorced or are the victims of domestic  violence  or  who  will
       return  as  single  women  face  difficulties   arising   from   the
       patriarchal nature of the society there and the subservient position
       of women. Since FS there have been some important legal reforms  and
       a number of state and private initiatives designed to alleviate  the
       position of such women. It would be  wrong  to  say  they  have  had
       little noticeable effect (consider e.g. the mass  release  of  women
       from prisons; the dramatic changes to the laws relating to  adultery
       and the ending of the option  for  husbands  to  register  adultery-
       related FIRs at police stations); however,  political  and  economic
       events since the fall from power of General Musharaff  have  created
       countervailing forces. It would be unwise, therefore, to assume  the
       situation will not be subject to change in the next few years.

  222. It remains our  assessment  that  within  Pakistan  there  are  many
       differences in  the  way  that  family,  tribal  and  cultural  (and
       sometimes religious) patterns of living impact on  the  position  of
       women. One of the persons interviewed by the main  Safe  to  Return?
       fieldworker noted, for  example,  the  sharp  contrast  between  the
       position of women from rural areas as compared with that  of   women
       in Lahore: "Lahore  is  a  city  and  here  women  are  progressive"
       (6.7.1). Such variations and different perceptions in a country with
       a large population spread over a large  geographical  area  make  it
       very difficult to generalise as to what will be the situation facing
       returning women who are victims of domestic violence.  Against  this
       background it  continues  to  make  very  good  sense  that  country
       guidance should continue to avoid broad generalisations  and  should
       emphasise the need for examination of  the  individual's  particular
       circumstances.  That is as true whether one is examining risk  in  a
       person's home area or in a place of potential relocation.

  223. However, as regards the issue of internal relocation as  it  affects
       women who are divorced or who are victims of  domestic  violence  or
       who will return as single women, it is  important  to  examine  more
       closely what services exist for  them  by  way  of  crisis  centres,
       shelters or refuges and to consider  these  taking  into  account  a
       range of factors  such  as  class,  age,  health,  education,  child
       responsibilities etc.

  224. We have devoted considerable space to what is said in the background
       evidence about women's crisis centres, shelters and refuges. That is
       because the evidence on which Mr Fripp relies  includes  the  expert
       report of Dr Balzani and on the 2008 Safe to Return? report, both of
       which appear, at least in some passages, to take the  position  that
       women's shelters in general do  not  offer  adequate  protection  to
       women victims of domestic violence in  Pakistan.  If  that  view  is
       accepted, then existing Tribunal  country  guidance  requires  major
       revision.

  225. We do not criticise Dr Balzani or the authors of the Safe to Return?
       report for advancing such a view for it must be said that there  are
       some items of evidence which, taken in isolation,  would  appear  to
       lend it strong support: for example it  is  said  in  a  2007  press
       report that government centres for such women are "deserted" and  it
       is said by one source that they are  only  open  to  women  who  are
       referred by courts. Some of the women interviewed by the authors  of
       the Safe to Return? report made serious criticisms of the care  they
       had received. But, as we hope will be clear from our lengthy summary
       of the relevant background evidence, on these and  other  points  of
       fact it is not always a situation where the evidence only points one
       way. We must also bear in mind that whilst the  fieldwork  conducted
       by the main Safe to Return? researcher sheds  significant  light  on
       the state of service provision, there does not exist any study  that
       has conducted an independent nationwide survey of such  centres  and
       the conclusions reached in many other sources are based  on  just  a
       few examples or on anecdotal evidence.


  226. We shall come shortly to the evidence  relating  to  the  appellant,
       which included the fact that her father sought to secure a place for
       her in a government Darul Aman in Lahore but was told they could not
       assist someone who faced an FIR alleging serious  criminal  charges.
       We also take account of Dr Lau's  opinion  that  generally  speaking
       Darul Amans were unlikely to take an attempted murder suspect.

  227. Having considered all the evidence, we find that  women's  shelters,
       whether government or private, are unlikely to turn  women  away  if
       they face  charges  relating  to  adultery.  As  regards  government
       shelters the evidence was indeed that they are principally  designed
       for use by women who have been referred by the courts.  Further,  as
       we have seen, one of the main purposes of setting  up  shelters  for
       women has been to respond to husbands  seeking  to  misuse  adultery
       laws for their own ends. There is virtually no evidence  to  suggest
       that women are turned away in respect of such charges.  Although  we
       lack clear evidence, we also doubt that women would be  turned  away
       from shelters if they face other serious criminal charges  that  are
       raised against them  in  conjunction  with  adultery  charges.  Once
       again, workers in the shelters would  be  all  too  aware  that  the
       husbands involved in such cases seek to misuse not just the adultery
       laws but other laws when acting oppressively  against  their  wives.
       (How  workers  would  react  to  a  woman  facing  criminal  charges
       unrelated to a background of domestic violence/adultery is much less
       clear, but even here we would note that the general  thrust  of  the
       background evidence is that women are not turned away.)

  228. At all events, what has to be considered is not simply the  position
       in government centres but the state of overall  provision  for  such
       women and in this regard it is clear that, in the  void  created  by
       inadequacies in state provision, a significant role  is  played,  at
       least in a number of urban parts of Pakistan, by private  charitable
       organisations, NGOs and INGOs (If Dr Lau's experience is anything to
       go by, it would also appear that  private  charitable  organisations
       can step in to take over existing Darul Amans.)

  229.  The evidence adduced by Mr Fripp highlighting the serious drawbacks
       of existing government and private centres affords  good  reason  in
       our view not to accept uncritically sources which appear  too  ready
       to present a benign picture.  Equally, we find some of the  negative
       descriptions given in some of the sources to be  far  too  sweeping,
       particularly given the evident lack of any comprehensive  survey  of
       provision nationwide.

  230. The claim that government centres are only open to women referred to
       by the courts and/or police is consistent with the major reports and
       with the findings set out in Safe to Return? (at 6.3), but it  would
       be quite  wrong  to  draw  from  this  the  inference  that  service
       provision in Pakistan for women victims of domestic violence overall
       is underused or only open to women referred by the authorities.  The
       claim that government centres  are  "deserted"  cannot  be  entirely
       correct, since the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan  noted  that,
       at least so far as concerns crisis centres, 17 (out of 25)  of  them
       were operational and, according to the Safe to Return?  report,  the
       position overall is that shelters are "oversubscribed". Furthermore,
       it is important not to lose sight of the fact that service provision
       in the private sector is often described as  responding  via  crisis
       centres (which in turn are open, in  some  instances  at  least,  to
       referrals from  all  over  Pakistan,  including  self-referrals)  to
       direct contact made by women in trouble.

  231.  It  is  extremely  difficult  to  accept  the  assertion  that  the
       centres/refuges generally fail to keep their addresses  secret  from
       the families of such women. According to the Safe to Return? report,
       the first points of contact for women who are  victims  of  domestic
       violence are the crisis centres. This  report's  authors  appear  to
       have found that at this stage crisis centre workers will often  make
       contact with the woman's family or relations, but their findings  on
       this subject are described as being based only on what was found  in
       one crisis centre where the researcher did an internship (6.2.1.) It
       is stated:

           "If the woman is accepted by the shelter then  the  worker  will
           immediately inform the family that she is  with  them.  This  is
           done to prevent husbands  or  families  from  registering  false
           cases against women or the NGOs which can  lead  to  workers  in
           NGOs being arrested...If the family wishes to visit  or  contact
           the women they are told to make arrangements through the  office
           and a meeting will be arranged with the consent of the woman."

  232. However, in the next  paragraph  the  authors  emphasise  that  "The
       address of the shelter is strictly confidential". And,  as  we  have
       already highlighted, they describe the procedure  at  three  of  the
       specific centres visited as  being  to  keep  the  refuge's  address
       strictly confidential without suggesting  that  this  procedure  was
       ineffective. This report also makes very clear that in any event  in
       almost all these refuges those who run them employ  security  guards
       around the clock.


  233. Although the evidence, especially that set out in the most  detailed
       treatment contained in Safe to Return? is  not  entirely  clear,  it
       seems that the crisis  centres  can  sometimes  inform  the  women's
       family that they are involved (this also serves the objective  which
       many centres appear to have of helping the  women  and  families  to
       reconcile), but that  in  any  event  women's  shelters  keep  their
       addresses strictly confidential. Whilst Safe to  Return?  and  other
       sources also make clear that there have been problems in a number of
       (if not most) centres where family members have made threats against
       the centre and centre workers,   at  the  same  time  the  fieldwork
       visits recorded in Safe to Return? do not suggest that  any  of  the
       centres visited generally failed as a  consequence  to  protect  the
       women they helped.


  234. As regards conditions, it is sufficiently clear that in general such
       centres/refuges are under-resourced and that women  in  them  suffer
       varying degrees of hardship. In some centres it  would  appear  that
       they lack even very basic facilities. However, as is acknowledged by
       the authors of Safe to Return?, private  centres  offer  a  somewhat
       better standard of assistance than government centres and conditions
       in some of the private centres visited (which admittedly  were  said
       to be considered as the "better" ones) were not described as falling
       short of basic minimum standards (Pannah, indeed, was  described  as
       having "excellent living conditions"). It must also be borne in mind
       that it would appear from the Safe to Return? report  that  quite  a
       few of the centres in the private sector offer a number of  services
       to  women,  including  legal  assistance,  counselling,   vocational
       training,  employment  opportunities,  health  care  and   sometimes
       education for any children.   It is clearly not the case  that  this
       private sector provision is generally of a high  standard;  even  in
       this sector conditions  in  some  centres  are  grossly  inadequate.
       However, it is difficult to gainsay that the generality of  existing
       centres manage to provide effective assistance to women who turn  to
       them for help without exposing them to  conditions  that  are  below
       basic minimum standards.


  235. It appears to be suggested by some passages in the Safe  to  Return?
       report, that women's  centres/refuges  generally  expose  the  women
       occupants to sexual exploitation and prostitution. We  do  not  know
       what some of the active women's NGOs and lawyers  in  Pakistan,  who
       refer women to such centres have made/would  make  of  the  Safe  to
       Return? critique, although we would not be surprised  if  some  took
       umbrage at the implied suggestion that they are routinely  complicit
       in a pattern of inhuman and degrading treatment of  women  who  have
       turned to them for help. But there was no suggestion that any of the
       shelters  visited  by  the  Safe  to  Return?   researcher(s)   were
       considered by them to expose women occupants to sexual  exploitation
       or prostitution. The essential fact as we see it is  that  all  that
       can safely be said is that at present some of the  existing  centres
       fail to protect their women occupants and  some  provide  conditions
       that fall below basic standards. There is  no  empirical  basis  for
       concluding that the above negative features mean  that  in  existing
       centres conditions generally are inhuman or degrading or even unduly
       harsh.  Whilst therefore we consider that decision makers need to be
       vigilant for further evidence that may come to light based on a more
       comprehensive survey, we consider the  background  evidence  overall
       continues to indicate that although there are far  too  few  centres
       relative to the  underlying need for them, women who are victims  of
       domestic  violence  are  able,  through  the  diverse   network   of
       government centres, women's NGOs and private  charities,  to  obtain
       assistance and protection in urban parts of Pakistan away from their
       family networks.


  236. We wish to emphasise, however, that what emerges very strongly  from
       the Safe to Return? report is that it is not  sufficient  simply  to
       consider the issue of internal relocation by  reference  to  whether
       there are available and adequate centres/refuges. Focus  has  to  be
       not only on the provision but the general position  women  who  make
       use of such centres will find themselves in the longer term.

  237.  One of the main conclusions of the report is that there is  a  lack
       of after-care and rehabilitation and the absence of  any  re-housing
       for women made homeless following violence.  Its  authors  emphasise
       that this fact plays a major role  in  limiting  the  decisions  and
       choices such women then go on to make (see para 11). But the  report
       also informs us that although in several centres/refuges, women  are
       expected to leave after a relatively short time, those who run  them
       do sometimes allow women to stay longer  and  sometimes  even  allow
       them back. So whilst we think  the  Safe  to  Return?  report  draws
       helpful attention to the need to look at the  longer-term  situation
       such women face, we do not find that the evidence contained in  this
       report or the other sources helps us very much in  forming  a  clear
       picture of how women victims of domestic violence who have made  use
       of women's centres and refuges then resolve  their  difficulties  in
       terms of finding places to live and work. The Safe to Return? report
       argues that the position is that in general such women end up  being
       forced to return to their abuser husbands/families or  face  serious
       exploitation. But there is very little empirical evidence  cited  in
       support of these broad generalisations and,  given  the  numbers  of
       women said to use these services, we would  have  expected,  if  the
       general position was that these centres/shelters routinely failed to
       end the cycle of oppression the women who turn to  them  face,  that
       would have been evident in the form of more reported  cases  in  the
       press or in the  Pakistan  Human  Rights  Commission  report  or  in
       available cases studies. Nevertheless, the uncertain  state  of  the
       evidence makes it imperative in our view  that  decision-makers  pay
       particular   regard   to   how    they    think    the    individual
       applicant/appellant will be able to manage  getting  on  with  their
       lives after they have left the centres/refuges.


  238. We need to consider further to what extent  other  factors  such  as
       class, age, culture, tribe, religion  etc  can  further  modify  the
       position of women victims of domestic violence.

  239. It is fairly clear that women who have their own financial means  or
       access to financial help from family members or friends or  who  are
       well-educated or professional women are likely to be able to  secure
       residential accommodation. We accept the  observation  made  by  the
       Safe to Return? authors that possessing a class status higher up the
       social ladder does not mean  that  such  women  do  not  still  face
       discrimination and a degree of  stigmatisation.  However,  even  the
       authors themselves accept that if women have  financial  means  they
       can in general survive (see 6.15) and the  evidence  is  lacking  to
       indicate that such women are in general unable to  cope  with   such
       difficulties; although clearly some do not cope and  some  may  even
       find they have lost more than poorer women (7.5.1) .

  240. On the other  hand,  concerning  age,  it  would  appear  that  most
       centres/refuges do not adequately cater for the needs of young girls
       on their own (Safe to Return?,  6.10)  and  young  adult  women  are
       likely to find it more difficult to live alone than others (we  note
       that is also the view taken by the Canadian IRB in December 2007).

  241. Another important variable concerns women  who  have  male  children
       over five. From the Safe to Return? research,  taken  together  with
       other materials,  we are satisfied that women with  boys  over  five
       may not be able to find a centre or refuge that will allow  them  to
       live together; the boys above this age are placed in  orphanages  or
       madrassahs in the area. As described by the Safe to Return? report:

           "[O]n admittance the mother is informed of this policy  and  has
           to then make a choice of being with  her  sons  or  accepting  a
           place at the shelter. If the woman chooses to enter the  shelter
           her sons are referred to the local madrassas or orphanages. This
           practice has not taken into consideration the impact this has on
           the children who may have been a witness to the violence.  Apart
           from the trauma of separation from their mother the children may
           have specific psychological  needs  because  of  their  previous
           experiences in their homes".

  242. We do not say that such arrangements are necessarily to be  seen  as
       making the mother and her son's relocation unreasonable,  only  that
       this may be  a  factor  which  has  considerable  significance  when
       considering the reasonableness of internal relocation.


   ASSESSMENT - THE APPELLANT


  243. It is not in dispute that if the appellant can succeed in showing  a
       well-founded  fear  of  persecution,  it  would  be  for  a  Refugee
       Convention reason, namely membership of a particular  social  group.
       The latest Home Office OGN for 4 February 2010  continues  to  agree
       with the decision reached years ago in Shah and Islam  [1999]  2  AC
       629 that women in Pakistan constitute a particular social group  for
       such purposes.


   Point of Return


  244. Despite suggestions to the contrary by Dr Lau in his  report  (which
       he departed from in evidence before us,) we find that the  appellant
       would not be at risk of being identified by the authorities  at  the
       point of return to Pakistan, to whichever of the major  cities  that
       was.  Dr Lau and Dr Shah  were  both  sure  that  there  existed  no
       central register of FIRs, nor did either suggest that there was  any
       centralised register of persons facing criminal charges; and, as far
       as we can ascertain, lists compiled  of  wanted  persons  would  not
       extend to criminal cases such as the appellant's.  We  can  proceed,
       therefore, to  first  consider  the  appellant's  situation  on  the
       hypothesis (first) of a return to her home area.


   Past Persecution


  245. Before considering whether  the  appellant  faces  current  risk  on
       return to her home area we must remind ourselves that  there  is  no
       dispute about her past experiences.  When she lived with her husband
       he was insensitive, humiliating and cruel; "he would drink a lot and
       beat me". In July 2006, after she had fled to her father's house, he
       had filed a FIR against her falsely accusing her  of  adultery  with
       another man and also alleging that she and this man had attempted to
       murder his house-servant. Contrary  to  the  assertion  made  by  Mr
       Bourne in the respondent's additional submissions,  the  appellant's
       husband had later made a threat to kill her. He had also  threatened
       her brother.  In response to her husband lodging a  FIR  the  police
       had arrested her and detained her at  the  police  station  for  two
       days.  She described the conditions there as terrible and said  that
       the police subjected her to humiliation.  Mr Bourne sought to submit
       that the appellant's experiences  at  the  police  station  did  not
       amount to serious harm.  We accept that the  appellant's  assessment
       of  her  brief  detention  may  have  been  influenced  by  her  own
       subjective state of shock rather than the objective severity of  the
       conditions and treatment she experienced.  On  its  own  we  do  not
       consider that her brief detention amounted to persecution or serious
       harm.  However, we are required to  consider  her  past  experiences
       cumulatively covering not only this brief  detention  but  also  the
       domestic violence she experienced at the hands of her  husband,  the
       ease with which he was able to have  her  detained  and  to  inflict
       damage to her reputation on the back of a false accusation, together
       with his later threat to kill her and his ongoing harassment of  her
       parents. We note that Article  4(4) of the  Qualification  Directive
       recognises that  past persecution can arise from the threat as  well
       as the actuality of serious harm/ It states that :


           "The fact that a person has already been subject to  persecution
           or serious harm, or to direct threats  of  such  persecution  or
           such harm, will be regarded  as  a  serious  indication  of  the
           person's well-founded  fear  of  persecution  or  real  risk  of
           suffering serious harm, unless there." (Emphasis added)

  246.  We  have  no  doubt  that  taken   cumulatively   the   appellant's
       interrelated experiences as just described amounted  to  persecution
       and serious harm.  Accordingly, we must approach her case so  as  to
       examine the question of whether there are good reasons  to  consider
       that such persecution or serious harm will not be repeated.


  247. Before proceeding to examine whether  the  appellant  would  face  a
       repetition of the persecution she experienced  before,  we  need  to
       address a difficulty that has arisen as to the accepted facts.   The
       case was set down for a reconsideration hearing on  the  basis  that
       the findings  of  IJ  Buchanan  should  stand.   The  IJ  found  the
       appellant's account credible, stating that her account as set out in
       her asylum interview and witness statement was true  (para  50)  and
       the respondent's skeleton confirmed that the appellant was "entitled
       to the benefit of the acceptance of her  account  by  IJ  Buchanan".
       Yet both the respondent and Mr Fripp's skeleton arguments  and  main
       submissions to us have proceeded on the  basis  that  all  that  had
       happened is that the  police  had  registered  an  FIR  against  the
       appellant and then arrested her, in IJ Buchanan's words at  para  14
       of his determination "so as to be able to carry out an interview and
       investigation into the complaint".  By proceeding on  such  a  basis
       both parties failed  to  have  regard  to  the  appellant's  earlier
       evidence in a witness statement that she had been charged and  taken
       to court.


  248. The IJ's presentation of the facts does mention  the  charge  claim.
       As recorded by him at para 14, the appellant  said  in  her  witness
       statement that:

           "[S]he had only been allowed to leave the police station because
           the charges against her were still under investigation  and  the
           police had to finalise the registration of  a  FIR  against  her
           under Hudood Law.  However, the police,  on  the  basis  of  her
           husband's complaint, had then decided to register  the  case  of
           adultery under Hudood Law and had decided to charge  her  on  31
           July 2006."

  249. On the other hand, the IJ makes no  reference  to  her  having  been
       taken to court, indeed he describes being taken to court as what she
       feared would have happened next had she not fled: see para 15.


  250. In response to  questions  we  asked  regarding  this  tension,  the
       appellant's representatives submitted that we should proceed on  the
       basis that the appellant had been charged,  whereas  the  respondent
       submitted it was more likely  she  did  not  understand  the  formal
       procedures involved in her case.

  251.  We share the respondent's doubt that the appellant's claim  in  her
       witness statement that she was charged can be right: if she had been
       charged and taken to court (she gave a  specific  date),  it  should
       have been possible for her to have produced not  just  the  FIR  but
       documents stamped by the court.  There should also perhaps have been
       available a court summons, particularly as she had a lawyer. In  the
       end, however, we have decided that this tension in  the  appellant's
       evidence does not matter for the purposes of this appeal.   Although
       at one point Mr Bourne described the progression from  a  registered
       FIR to a charge brought before the court as the first in a series of
       speculative hurdles, he had earlier told us  he  accepted  that  the
       next stage would be for the police  to  charge  her  and  bring  the
       matter to court. Further and in any event, we consider that even had
       the appellant not made reference to being charged, it was reasonably
       likely that charging would have been/would be the next  step.   This
       was a case in which the police had gone to the lengths of  arresting
       and detaining her.  On the basis of the expert evidence  of  Dr  Lau
       and Dr Shah, the police were thereby acting unlawfully; they  should
       have gone first to the court for  permission  to  do  this:  changes
       brought into effect in  2004  made  that  a  new  requirement.   But
       whether their action was lawful or unlawful, it demonstrated  active
       police interest and their comments to the appellant  in  the  police
       station clearly conveyed that in their own minds she was the  guilty
       party.  We also know the police had maintained an active interest in
       the appellant's case. We can therefore proceed  on  the  basis  that
       whether the police had or had not formally charged  her  before  she
       fled Pakistan,  formal charges would be a likely next step and that,
       if such a step has not happened already, it would happen  when   the
       police came to learn, as we  think  they  certainly  would,  of  her
       return.


  252. Although the position set out in the respondent's  skeleton  was  to
       the contrary, Mr Bourne conceded before us that  on  return  to  her
       home area the appellant's husband would soon come to hear about this
       and would then  inform  the  police.   Given  that  the  police  had
       continued to visit her home on  a  periodic  basis  since  she  left
       Pakistan, it is very likely they would then reactivate the FIR  and,
       as just explained, lay charges against the appellant under  s.10  of
       the Zina Ordinance and s.324 of the PPC.

  253. We are satisfied that notwithstanding the reforms ushered in by  the
       PWA 2006 that the appellant would still face charges under  s.10  of
       the Zina Ordinance.  Section 8 of the PWA makes it quite clear  that
       its provisions are not retrospective  and  Pakistan  case  authority
       cited by Dr Shah confirms that even charges arising out of  pre-2006
       FIRs continue under the old law.  Hence the appellant will not  have
       the protection afforded by the PWA.  (However, if the PWA did  apply
       to her, the charges made against her under s.10 could not have  been
       converted into a charge of fornication and the courts, who would now
       have full control of the process from the outset, would  not  permit
       the appellant's husband to seek to reformulate a fresh FIR.)

  254. The s.10 charge, however, is bailable and Dr Lau and  Dr  Shah  were
       adamant that whilst the charge she would face would be under the old
       Zina Ordinance, the procedure for bail in her case would be governed
       by the law as reformed in 2004-2007.  The  police  investigation  of
       her case would now have to be conducted  at  a  more  senior  level.
       Neither Dr Lau nor Dr Shah was able to assist us  with  whether  the
       police would be able to arrest (and  more  importantly)  detain  the
       appellant prior to her coming before a court.  One factor indicating
       this could happen is the fact it happened to her  before  (in  2006)
       even after the 2004 reforms made it unlawful.  On  the  other  hand,
       one of the stated objects and purposes of the PWA 2006 was  to  take
       control over adultery accusations away from the police and  hand  it
       to the courts.  Further, both experts pointed  out  that  there  was
       provision in Pakistan law for lawyers to arrange for pre-arrest bail
       hearings.  Given that the appellant's  family  had  already  paid  a
       lawyer to deal with her case, we see no  reason  to  think  such  an
       arrangement could not be made (we  deal  in  more  detail  with  our
       assessment of her or their financial  circumstances  below).   Hence
       the appellant would not be at risk of detention except by order of a
       court.


  255. We have already set out our findings on the issue of bail for  women
       as a result of the 2004-2007 reforms.  There is no dispute  that  in
       respect of the s.10 offence under the Zina Ordinance she  would  get
       bail as of right.  In our judgment she would also  get  bail  as  of
       right on the s.324 CCP charge.  Whilst we are not persuaded that the
       amended provisions of  Ordinance  XXXV1  establish  wholly  absolute
       rights, we can see no reason why the courts would  consider  that  a
       woman on an attempted murder charge based on  an  FIR  laid  by  her
       husband  alleging  adultery  should  cause  them  to  disapply  this
       provision. However, if we had found  she  would  not  get  automatic
       bail, we would have been likely to find she  would  not  be  granted
       discretionary bail, essentially because she will be someone who  had
       absconded from the jurisdiction by fleeing abroad and who  has  also
       been responsible for a lengthy delay in the criminal process.

  256. But even if not detained the appellant would remain in the  criminal
       justice process and continue to face prosecution under  an  old  law
       which would mean that the husband would not need to worry about  his
       false accusations resulting in him being charged.  Assuming,  as  we
       must, that a more senior police officer  will  conduct  any  further
       police work on her case, it is nevertheless accepted that the police
       have continued to visit the appellant's  parents'  home  to  enquire
       whether she is still abroad.  They will clearly see her  as  someone
       who has absconded from justice and can be expected to insist on, and
       obtain from the court, stringent conditions of  bail  which  require
       her to live at an identified address in her home area.  Furthermore,
       the remand and trial process is likely to be prolonged; Dr  Lau  and
       Dr Shah told us her case could drag on for several years.  By virtue
       of her arrest and detention in a police station for  two  days,  the
       appellant's  reputation  has  already  been  tarnished  and  it   is
       reasonable to expect that her husband will  seek  to  deprecate  her
       reputation further whilst she remains in Lahore  under  strict  bail
       conditions.  We know that  defendants  are  said  to  have  to  make
       "frequent court  appearances"  (US  State  Department  Report  March
       2010). That being so, it is likely that the appellant's husband will
       seek to use these as a means of harassing the appellant.

  257. It is the husband's conduct that gives us most  cause  for  concern,
       although not in as many respects as Mr Fripp contends.

   Child custody

  258. Given that one of the appellant's own experts (Dr Lau)  appeared  to
       think that in practice the Pakistan courts would seek to favour  the
       woman in a custody dispute, we are unsurprised that Mr Fripp did not
       seek to press the contention that the appellant's husband would also
       seek to take legal action to obtain custody of his children. In  any
       event, we find that the evidence before us simply does  not  support
       any suggestion that he has any ongoing interest in his daughters. It
       was the fact that the appellant did not bear him  a  son,  that  the
       appellant described as being one of the motivating  factors  in  his
       subsequent  mistreatment  of  her.  Despite  her  evidence  that  he
       telephoned her parents' home frequently, it has never been suggested
       that he has said to them he wants anything to do with her daughters.
       It was suggested at one point by Dr Balzani and Mr  Fripp  that  her
       husband, even though having no real interest in the children,  might
       nevertheless seek to press for their custody as part of his  attempt
       to use the law in whatever way he could  to  oppress  her.  However,
       that is pure speculation on their part and since her husband has not
       sought to introduce custody into the dispute previously  we  see  no
       proper basis for inferring that he would do  so  now.  Having  found
       that the appellant would not face  detention,  we  do  not  need  to
       consider what would happen to her children in that eventuality,  but
       we are satisfied that if  any  need  arose  her  family  would  make
       arrangements for care of her  children.   So  far  as  concerns  the
       position of her children in the event she sought help from a women's
       shelter elsewhere in Pakistan,  we  deal  with  that  below  in  the
       section addressing internal relocation.

   Honour killing

  259. Given our earlier assessment of the problem of honour killings we do
       not think it is likely that her husband will actually seek  to  kill
       her or have her killed: in addition to two factors we  have  already
       identified (her home area not being an area  of  the  country  where
       Jirga councils hold sway; hers being an urban, not a rural area)  we
       note that she is a married woman and that  married  women  are  much
       less likely to be the target of honour killings than a single women.
       In addition, his father is a lawyer whose  family's  reputation  (we
       infer) would suffer if his son sought to take the law into  his  own
       hands; the dispute has arisen in Lahore involving two families  with
       professional status.  This  is  a  far  cry  from  the  tribal-based
       genesis of most continuing occurrences of honour killings.

  260.  Equally, however, it is accepted that the appellant's  husband  has
       previously made a threat to kill the appellant and her  brother  and
       that he has continued to visit her parents' home and to  make  clear
       that he will not stop his vendetta against the appellant.  We  think
       it reasonably likely that  when  she  returns  he  will  repeat  his
       threatening and intimidating behaviour  and  will  see  the  ongoing
       court proceedings as a way of frightening and demoralising her.   We
       remind ourselves that persecution can arise from threats  (certainly
       threats to kill) as  well  as  from  acts:  see  Article  9  of  the
       Qualification  Directive.   In  our  judgment,  whilst  her   likely
       encounter with the Pakistan criminal justice  process  will  not  in
       itself give rise to persecutory harm,  it  will  do  so  when  other
       circumstances  are  added  to  the  equation,  in   particular   the
       circumstance that her husband is very likely to continue to threaten
       and intimidate her.

  261. It is said by Mr Bourne that if the appellant's husband continues to
       behave in an intimidating way, there would be nothing to stop her or
       her parents or brother seeking and obtaining  police  protection  in
       her home area.  However, for such  protection  to  be  effective  it
       would have to operate at the local level and it is  not  in  dispute
       that the local police have already shown they take the side  of  the
       appellant's husband.  It also appears that when the husband comes to
       the house he is accompanied by other men who can be presumed  to  be
       also ready to continue to take an active  interest  in  intimidating
       the appellant's family.  The appellant has  expressed  concern  that
       she had harmed her family's reputation. Whilst they have decided  to
       stand by her nevertheless, we do bear in mind the advancing  age  of
       her parents and the fact that they may be less  able  to  deal  with
       social pressures brought to bear by a  man  ready  to  camp  outside
       their home when he wishes. In these particular circumstances  we  do
       not consider that there would be effective protection  in  her  home
       area, notwithstanding that the appellant would  not  face  detention
       during the trial process.


  262. We should make clear that we have reached our  assessment  that  the
       appellant would be at risk in her home area without  regard  to  the
       likely outcome of her trial.  For the avoidance of  doubt,  however,
       we would record that we consider it highly  likely  that  her  trial
       would result either in a Session court finding there was no case  to
       answer or in her acquittal.   It  is  accepted  that  the  husband's
       accusations are false.  Even making allowances for  the  possibility
       he could obtain false medical evidence, the police would not be able
       to produce the type of forensic evidence that the courts are said to
       expect in adultery cases post-2006.  The husband and  the  witnesses
       named in the FIR would run the serious risk of being found  to  have
       lied under oath.  The elapse of time would make it less likely  that
       any crime scene evidence produced would withstand scrutiny.

  263. Mr Fripp, with some support from Dr Lau and Dr Balzani,  has  argued
       that as the appellant would be tried  before  a  Session  Court,  it
       would be relatively easy for the husband and his father to bribe the
       judge.  We have already set out our conclusion that whilst we accept
       there is a significant amount of evidence to  show  that  corruption
       takes place at the lower levels of the Pakistan judicial system, the
       evidence falls well short of showing that it is endemic or that  for
       defendants before such courts there is a real risk that they will be
       convicted as a result of corruption.  Further, if both Dr  Shah  and
       Dr Lau are right and a Session Court is equivalent to a Crown  Court
       in England and Wales, then the level of judges is relatively  senior
       anyway.  We do not consider that the appellant has shown  she  would
       be in a different position  from  any  other  defendant  on  similar
       charges.  Indeed, since all urban judges will know  of  the  reasons
       why the PWA 2006 reforms were made, and that  many  cases  involving
       women charged with adultery have been thrown out on appeal to higher
       courts, we think it a great deal less likely they would be ready  to
       go out on a limb in a  case  where  the  evidence  would  not  stand
       scrutiny.  There is the additional factor that the case will come up
       in Lahore where the standards of lawyers and judges at all levels is
       generally higher than elsewhere, certainly than  in  the  towns  and
       rural areas.  It remains,  however,  that  the  appellant's  overall
       circumstances whilst awaiting trial, would give rise to a real  risk
       of persecutory harm in her home area.


   Internal Relocation


264. Para 339O of the Statement of Immigration Rules HC 395 as amended  make
   clear     that  it  is  always  necessary  to  examine   the   particular
   circumstances of the      individual concerned. Relying  heavily  on  the
   evidence of both Dr Lau and Dr       Balzani  and  the  Safe  to  Return?
   Report, Mr Fripp submitted that the appellant   would not have  a  viable
   option of internal relocation whereas Mr Bourne urged       that we  take
   the opposite view.


  265. As regards safety, we reject Mr Fripp's submission that wherever the
       appellant  sought  to  move  in  Pakistan  the  authorities  or  her
       husband's family would track her down.  Mr Fripp  has  properly  not
       suggested that someone in her position would be on  any  centralised
       database and we can find no evidence to suggest that. As regards her
       husband and his family we take account of the interconnectedness  of
       families in Pakistan. Equally, however, we bear in mind the evidence
       indicating that (at least in  the  private  sector)  centres/refuges
       generally keep their locations confidential. We consider that it  is
       of material  importance  that  Pakistan  is  a  very  large  country
       geographically and has a large population, estimated in July 2008 as
       nearly 173 million and that there is no evidence to suggest that the
       state  agencies  either  at  a  federal  or  provincial  level  hold
       sophisticated nationwide databases on  their  citizenry.  Whilst  it
       appears that in some instance local police are  told  the  names  of
       women residing temporarily in centres or refuges for  women  victims
       of domestic violence, there is insufficient evidence  to  show  that
       this leads to persons outside the local areas being able  to  access
       that information.


  266. We consider that if the appellant  seeks  to  relocate  in  Pakistan
       there is only a remote  possibility  of  the  appellant's  husband's
       family being able  to  trace  her  through  official  or  unofficial
       channels. Although the appellant's husband comes from a professional
       family having a lawyer for a father, the evidence does not  indicate
       that this family has power or  influence  of  the  type  that  might
       enable it to gain the  assistance  of  the  Pakistan  police  and/or
       security services in tracking down the appellant.

  267. As to reasonableness, we have already set out our assessment of  the
       general position regarding the availability of assistance  to  women
       in the form of shelters. In  short  we  concluded  that  whilst  the
       services offered are far too few and have many shortcomings, even in
       the private NGO sector, nevertheless it cannot be  said  that  women
       returning to Pakistan who seek to access such shelters would  be  at
       real risk either of being denied  assistance  or  of  receiving  ill
       treatment in them. Nor do we consider  the  fact  that  the  shelter
       workers might come to know that the appellant faced criminal charges
       would cause a woman in the appellant's position to be  turned  away,
       since their services are particularly designed to help women fleeing
       from husbands who have made false accusations against them.   Whilst
       we have earlier observed that there can  be  issues  of  mothers  in
       shelters facing separation from male children when  they  reach  the
       age of 5, the appellant has no sons, only two daughters.

  268. We note Mr Fripp's submission that the appellant has no  history  of
       employment and has modest education and that away from her home area
       she would lack potential male or other support.  She  also  has  two
       young female children and would face particular pressures as a young
       mother on her own. These factors would  interact  with  the  general
       societal discriminations faced by women in Pakistan. We accept  that
       these features will give rise to some degree of  hardship.  However,
       we would first of all observe that she  and  her  children  have  no
       known health problems and that  she  has  already  shown  a  certain
       degree of resourcefulness in having been able to leave her husband's
       home, then seek safety first with her parents and then with  friends
       of theirs and then take steps to travel to the UK and  seek  asylum.
       It is true that in taking these steps the appellant had the  support
       of her family but that, it seems to us, is  an  extremely  important
       background consideration in her case: they have not disowned her (as
       some families do with women similarly situated to her) and they have
       shown in the past that they have been ready and able  to  help  with
       obtaining legal assistance and financial assistance.

  269. The appellant now says in her most recent witness statement  and  in
       evidence to us that her father no longer has property or assets  and
       faces expensive medical treatment and would not be able to assist as
       before,  something  she  repeated  before  us.  We   consider   this
       inconsistent with her earlier evidence that her father had sold only
       some of his property and gold to help her leave the country; and  in
       our judgment she has not adequately explained how it has come  about
       that she can say he  no longer has any other property or  any  gold.
       In any event, it remains, even on her own latest  account,  that  he
       has  a  pension  following  retirement  from   employment   in   the
       professional sector and she has  not  suggested  that  the  family's
       standard of living has declined. We also know that the appellant has
       three sets of relatives, none of whom are said to be poor or to have
       expressly turned their back on her. Given the lengths to  which  her
       father and mother went to before to assist her we  do  not  consider
       that they would leave her to relocate elsewhere in Pakistan  without
       any kind of family assistance, whether in the form of  financial  or
       other assistance. Even though the appellant's level of education  is
       modest, it is still above that of many women in  the  larger  cities
       and she (although she chose to give evidence before  us  through  an
       interpreter) speaks English.  We agree with Dr Shah that this  would
       be an asset for some employers in the  big  cities.  She  would,  of
       course, have two young children and so if she  were  to  work  would
       need help with their care during the day, but it  seems  clear  that
       such help is available at a low cost.


  270. The appellant says that she fears social isolation and disgrace. The
       expert and background evidence highlights the damage done to women's
       reputation by being made the subject of FIRs  relating  to  adultery
       allegations and being detained in police custody. We do not seek  to
       belittle the difficulties the appellant will face in her  home  area
       as a result of her husband's  past  vendetta  against  her  and  his
       likely continued pursuit of her through the courts, but  we  do  not
       consider that in other parts of Pakistan her  history  would  become
       known or that  she  would  need  to  make  it  known  to  those  she
       associated with.  It is clear from the background evidence  that  in
       the larger cities single women with children can get by and there is
       not the same level of social scrutiny that  occurs  in  the  smaller
       towns and rural areas.

  271. For the above reasons we conclude that the appellants would  have  a
       viable option of internal relocation.

   Accordingly our disposal of the appellants' cases is as follows:

   The IJ materially erred in law and his decision is set aside.

   The decision we remake is to dismiss the appellants' appeals.

   Signed


   Senior Immigration Judge Storey
   (Judge of the Upper Tribunal)

              ANNEX A: DECISION FINDING A MATERIAL ERROR OF LAW



      PANEL:                           Senior Immigration Judge Southern
                       Senior Immigration Judge Ward
                       Mrs J Harris

REASONS FOR THE DECISION THAT THERE IS AN ERROR OF LAW
IN THE DETERMINATION,  8 January 2009

1.    Reconsideration has been ordered of the determination  of  Immigration
    Judge Buchanan who,  by  a  determination  dated  29th  February  2008,
    dismissed the appellant's appeal.

2.    The appellant, who is a citizen of Pakistan born on 10th  April  1981,
    arrived in the United Kingdom in August 206 and claimed asylum  shortly
    afterwards. The basis of her claim was that she faced a  real  risk  of
    persecutory ill-treatment on return to Pakistan on account of  entirely
    false allegations of adultery, theft and assault made  against  her  by
    her abusive husband from whom she was estranged because of his  violent
    behaviour  towards her.

3.    The Immigration Judge found the appellant to  be  a  credible  witness
    and accepted her account in its entirety. He  accepted  also  that  the
    appellant had been arrested by police after an FIR had been issued  and
    that she had absconded from her bail, secured with  the  assistance  of
    her father, in order to flee to the United  Kingdom  after  her  father
    concluded that no safe refuge  could  be  found  for  her  anywhere  in
    Pakistan.

4.    The conclusions reached by the Immigration Judge upon  these  findings
    of fact are inconsistent and contradictory.  He said that at  the  time
    the appellant left Pakistan she had a well-founded fear of  persecution
    and was "at continuing risk" but said  also  that  she  had  "effective
    protection" from her parents.

5.    Although finding that  the  appellant  left  the  country  only  after
    attempts to find a safe haven elsewhere in  Pakistan  had  failed,  the
    Immigration Judge dismissed  the  appeal  because  he  found  that  the
    introduction of the Protection of Women (Criminal Laws  Amendment)  Act
    in December 2006 was a complete  answer  to  the  appellant's  fear  of
    persecution because he understood that to result in the  revocation  of
    the Hudood Ordinances so that the appellant no longer faced any risk of
    imprisonment.

6.    There are a number of  difficulties  with  that  assessment.   We  are
    satisfied that the  understanding  of  the  Immigration  Judge  of  the
    evidence before him relating to the effect of the Act was fundamentally
    flawed and inaccurate. He appeared to have concluded that the  prospect
    of an adultery charge had fallen away altogether whereas  the  evidence
    before him suggested only that the  process  of  prosecution  may  have
    changed. He said there was no remaining risk of  imprisonment  but  the
    Immigration Judge did not  deal  with  the  evidence  before  him  that
    pointed to there remaining a risk of imprisonment upon conviction  even
    before a secular court.

7.    Further, the Immigration Judge appears to  have  overlooked  the  fact
    that, even if he were correct to find that the adultery allegations had
    fallen away, the appellant still potentially faced arrest because there
    remained outstanding the other allegation  in  the  FIR  of  theft  and
    assault. As, on the findings of the Immigration  Judge,  the  appellant
    had absconded from bail, the  prospect  of  being  readmitted  to  bail
    despite this  should  she  be  arrested  on  return  should  have  been
    considered.

8.    Taken together we are satisfied  all  this  amounts  to  a  sufficient
    error in reasoning and a sufficient misunderstanding of the appellant's
    case and the evidence before the Immigration Judge as to constitute  an
    error of law. Those errors were material because we cannot be sure that
    the outcome would have been the same if not for them.

9.    That being the case the  decision  of  the  Immigration  Judge  cannot
    stand and the Tribunal must substitute a fresh decision to allow or  to
    dismiss the appeal.  But it is common ground  and  agreed  between  the
    parties that the Immigration Judge was entitled to reach  the  findings
    of fact he did and that the appellant should not  be  deprived  on  the
    acceptance of her factual account.

10.   Therefore, with the agreement of  the  parties,  we  direct  that  the
    starting point for the reconsideration hearing that is to  follow  will
    be  the  findings  set  out  between  paragraphs   50  to  52  of   the
    determination, based on the summary of the appellant's account  as  set
    out between paragraphs 11 to 20.  Other  than  that  the  determination
    shall be set aside and be of no effect.

11.   The Tribunal shall carry out a fresh assessment of the risk  faced  by
    the appellant upon return to Pakistan on the basis  of  those  findings
    but in the context of the current objective country  evidence  and  any
    expert evidence which the parties choose to put forward.




                  ANNEX B: BACKGROUND MATERIALS


|                                                                       |
|The News Alert, 'Harassment of Women Now a Crime in Pakistan'          |
|30/03/2010                                                             |
|                                                                       |
|                                                                       |
|US Department of State, '2009 Human Rights Report: Pakistan'           |
|                                                                       |
|11/03/2010                                                             |
|                                                                       |
|                                                                       |
|AAJ TV, 'PM announces 10pc quota for women in CSS'                     |
|08/03/2010                                                             |
|                                                                       |
|                                                                       |
|Word Press, 'Pakistan reaffirms commitment to empowerment of women at  |
|UN forum'                                                              |
|04/03/2010                                                             |
|                                                                       |
|                                                                       |
|Hot Peach Pages - pages from directory of domestic violence agencies   |
|and women's organisations, www.hotpeachpages.net/asia/asia1.html       |
|                                                                       |
|20/02/2010                                                             |
|                                                                       |
|                                                                       |
|Asian Human Rights Commission, 'Pakistan: Constant violence against    |
|women in 2009'                                                         |
|                                                                       |
|05/02/2010                                                             |
|                                                                       |
|                                                                       |
|Asian Human Rights Commission, 'Pakistan: Acid attacks continue to be a|
|serious concern'                                                       |
|                                                                       |
|22/01/2010                                                             |
|                                                                       |
|                                                                       |
|Human Rights Watch, 'World Report 2010: Pakistan'                      |
|20/01/2010                                                             |
|                                                                       |
|                                                                       |
|UK Border Agency, 'Country of Origin Information Report'               |
|18/1/2010                                                              |
|                                                                       |
|                                                                       |
|DAWN.com, 'Women police station opened in Karachi'                     |
|27/11/2009                                                             |
|                                                                       |
|                                                                       |
|Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada, 'Pakistan: Resources available|
|to female victims of violence in Karachi, Islamabad and Lahore'        |
|                                                                       |
|26/11/2009                                                             |
|                                                                       |
|                                                                       |
|Asian Human Rights Commission, 'Pakistan: Police complicity and        |
|judicial inaction lead to the murder of a girl on the pretext of an    |
|honour killing'                                                        |
|                                                                       |
|14/05/2009                                                             |
|                                                                       |
|                                                                       |
|Asian Human Rights Commission, 'Pakistan: State of Human Rights in 2008|
|- Chapter 5: Rights of the disadvantaged (Women; Children; Labour)'    |
|01/04/2009                                                             |
|                                                                       |
|                                                                       |
|COIS Report on Pakistan                                                |
|04/2009                                                                |
|                                                                       |
|                                                                       |
|UK Border Agency, 'Operational Guidance Note for Pakistan'             |
|15/02/2009                                                             |
|                                                                       |
|                                                                       |
|UK Border Agency, 'Operational Guidance Note: Pakistan'                |
|04/02/2009                                                             |
|                                                                       |
|17.                                                                    |
|                                                                       |
|                                                                       |
|                                                                       |
|Ministry of Women Development, 'Gender Reform Action Plan', 'GTZ       |
|Capacity Building', 'Gender Based Governance Systems', 'Counselling    |
|/Helpline'                                                             |
|2009                                                                   |
|                                                                       |
|18.                                                                    |
|Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada, 'Pakistan: Treatment of failed|
|refugee claimants in Pakistan, including whether failed Pakistani      |
|refugee claimants are interviewed and detained by the Federal          |
|Investigation Agency (FIA) upon their return to Pakistan'              |
|02/12/2008                                                             |
|                                                                       |
|                                                                       |
|19.                                                                    |
|Inter Press Service News Agency (IPS), 'Rights-Pakistan: Helpless      |
|Against Honour Killings'                                               |
|22/11/2008                                                             |
|                                                                       |
|20.                                                                    |
|HJT Research, 'Shocking Inter Ministry figures reveal over 1,000 honour|
|killings in Pakistan in past 3 years'                                  |
|14/11/2008                                                             |
|                                                                       |
|21.                                                                    |
|Asian Human Rights Commission, 'Pakistan: The induction of new         |
|ministers shows violent, anti-women sentiments seeping back into       |
|political vogue'                                                       |
|12/11/2008                                                             |
|                                                                       |
|22.                                                                    |
|Asian Human Rights Commission, 'Pakistan: Government tries to derail   |
|the case of a young girl who was shot dead after being mauled by the   |
|murderer's dogs'                                                       |
|07/11/2008                                                             |
|                                                                       |
|23.                                                                    |
|COIS Report on Pakistan                                                |
|11/2008                                                                |
|                                                                       |
|24.                                                                    |
|Asian Human Rights Commission, 'Pakistan: A girl is mauled by dogs and |
|later killed on the pretext of an honour killing'                      |
|26/10/2008                                                             |
|                                                                       |
|                                                                       |
|25.                                                                    |
|Asian Human Rights Commission, 'Pakistan: To stop honour killings there|
|must be a bigger crackdown on illegal Jirgas - Getting away with murder|
|in Pakistan'                                                           |
|24/10/2008                                                             |
|                                                                       |
|                                                                       |
|26.                                                                    |
|Rays of Development Organization (Pakistan), 'Violence against women   |
|becoming more frequent'                                                |
|21/10/2008                                                             |
|                                                                       |
|27.                                                                    |
|Asian Human Rights Commission, 'Pakistan: Three girls handed over to a |
|man who killed his wife on the pretext of honour killing as            |
|compensation'                                                          |
|21/10/2008                                                             |
|                                                                       |
|28.                                                                    |
|International Crisis Group, 'Reforming the Judiciary in Pakistan'      |
|16/10/2008                                                             |
|                                                                       |
|29.                                                                    |
|Inter Press Service News Agency (IPS), 'Rights-Pakistan: Rape Survivor |
|Families Struggle Against Odds'                                        |
|30/09/2008                                                             |
|                                                                       |
|30.                                                                    |
|Inter Press Service News Agency (IPS), 'Rights-Pakistan: Live Burial of|
|Women - Activists Demand Action'                                       |
|15/09/2008                                                             |
|                                                                       |
|31.                                                                    |
|Asian Human Rights Commission, 'Pakistan: Murder of mother and daughter|
|on the pretext of honour killing'                                      |
|29/08/2008                                                             |
|                                                                       |
|32.                                                                    |
|Asian Human Rights Commission, 'Pakistan: Five women buried alive,     |
|allegedly by the brother of a minister'                                |
|11/08/2008                                                             |
|                                                                       |
|33.                                                                    |
|HJT Research, 'NGO finds violence against women is increasing in       |
|Pakistan'                                                              |
|22/07/2008                                                             |
|                                                                       |
|34.                                                                    |
|Asian Human Rights Commission, 'Pakistan: A girl raped in custody by   |
|police officers and her sister kept nude in lock up'                   |
|21/07/2008                                                             |
|                                                                       |
|35.                                                                    |
|Asian Human Rights Commission, 'Pakistan: Government makes no moves to |
|save the lives of the couple under constant threat of honour killing'  |
|18/07/2008                                                             |
|                                                                       |
|36.                                                                    |
|Compass Direct (USA), 'Girls in Pakistan Kidnapped, Allegedly Forced to|
|Convert'                                                               |
|11/07/2008                                                             |
|                                                                       |
|37.                                                                    |
|Inter Press Service News Agency (IPS), 'Population- Pakistan:          |
|Illegality Inducing Unsafe Abortions'                                  |
|11/07/2008                                                             |
|                                                                       |
|38.                                                                    |
|Freedom House, "Pakistan: Freedom in the World 2008"                   |
|02/07/2008                                                             |
|                                                                       |
|39.                                                                    |
|Asian Human Rights Commission, 'Pakistan: Threat of death of a young   |
|couple under the name of honour killing'                               |
|30/06/2008                                                             |
|                                                                       |
|40.                                                                    |
|IRIN, 'Pakistan: Women suicides cases on the rise - by why?'           |
|26/06/2008                                                             |
|                                                                       |
|41.                                                                    |
|Human Rights Watch, 'Universal Periodic Review of Pakistan'            |
|05/05/2008                                                             |
|                                                                       |
|42.                                                                    |
|HJT Research, 'Human Rights Commission of Pakistan says 2007 was a     |
|"brutal year for women'                                                |
|17/04/2008                                                             |
|                                                                       |
|43.                                                                    |
|BBC 'Violence against Pakistani Women'                                 |
|15/04/2008                                                             |
|                                                                       |
|44.                                                                    |
|Human Rights Commission of Pakistan,: 'State of Human Rights in        |
|2007-Chapter 5: Rights of the disadvantaged (Women; Children; Labour)' |
|29/03/2008                                                             |
|                                                                       |
|45.                                                                    |
|IRIN, 'Pakistan: Domestic Violence endemic but awareness slowly rising'|
|                                                                       |
|11/03/2008                                                             |
|                                                                       |
|46.                                                                    |
|US Department of State, 'Country Reports on Human Rights Practices     |
|2007'                                                                  |
|11/03/2008                                                             |
|                                                                       |
|47.                                                                    |
|Human Rights Watch: Report on Pakistan                                 |
|2008                                                                   |
|                                                                       |
|48.                                                                    |
|Nadia Siddiqui, Sajida Ismail, Meg Allen, '"Safe to Return?" Pakistani |
|women, domestic violence and access to refugee protection - A report of|
|a trans-national research project conducted in the UK and Pakistan'    |
|2008                                                                   |
|                                                                       |
|49.                                                                    |
|Miz-Link-Pakistan, www.mizlink-pakistan.com, 'Women of Pakistan'       |
|2007/2008                                                              |
|                                                                       |
|50.                                                                    |
|Refworld: Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada,  'Pakistan:         |
|Circumstances under which single women could live alone'               |
|http://www.unhcr.org/refworld/docid/4784deeec.html                     |
|14/12/2007                                                             |
|                                                                       |
|51.                                                                    |
|IRB, Canada, 'Pakistan: Circumstances under which single women could   |
|live alone'                                                            |
|04/12/2007                                                             |
|                                                                       |
|52.                                                                    |
|Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada, 'Pakistan: The protection of  |
|Women (Criminal Laws Amendment) Act, 2006 and its implementation'      |
|03/12/2007                                                             |
|                                                                       |
|53.                                                                    |
|HJT Research, 'Pakistan's Punjab province worst for violence against   |
|women'                                                                 |
|14/08/2007                                                             |
|                                                                       |
|54.                                                                    |
|UN 'Concluding Comments of the Committee on the Elimination of         |
|Discrimination against Women: Pakistan'                                |
|01/06/2007                                                             |
|                                                                       |
|55.                                                                    |
|HJT Research, 'Pakistan NGO records over 1,300 honour killings in 2006'|
|                                                                       |
|17/04/2007                                                             |
|                                                                       |
|56.                                                                    |
|UK IND, Operational Guidance Note: Pakistan                            |
|15/03/2007                                                             |
|                                                                       |
|57.                                                                    |
|Inter Press Service News Agency, 'Pakistani: Deserted Women's Help     |
|Centres Speak of Apathy'                                               |
|08/03/2007                                                             |
|                                                                       |
|58.                                                                    |
|US Department of State, 'Country Reports on Human Rights Practices     |
|2006: Pakistan'                                                        |
|06/03/2007                                                             |
|                                                                       |
|                                                                       |
|59.                                                                    |
|Voice of America News, 'Gunman kills Female Pakistani Minister'        |
|20/02/2007                                                             |
|                                                                       |
|                                                                       |
|60.                                                                    |
|Human Rights Watch, 'World Report 2007: Pakistan'                      |
|11/01/2007                                                             |
|                                                                       |
|61.                                                                    |
|Kashf Foundation - 'Financial Services for all, www.kashf.org,'        |
|                                                                       |
|2007                                                                   |
|                                                                       |
|62.                                                                    |
|Martin Lau, 'Twenty-Five Years of Hudood Ordinances - A Review' 64 Wash|
|& Lee L Rev 1291                                                       |
|2007                                                                   |
|                                                                       |
|63.                                                                    |
|Manza Hussain, '"Take My Riches, Give Me Justice": A Contextual        |
|Analysis of Pakistan's Honor Crimes Legislation', Harvard Journal of   |
|Law & Gender [Vol. 29(1) Winter 2006]                                  |
|2006                                                                   |
|                                                                       |
|64.                                                                    |
|Asian Human Rights Commission, 'Update (Pakistan): Special             |
|investigation sent to investigate the murder of a 13 year old girl     |
|allegedly killed by her in-laws on the pretext of honour killing'      |
|30/09/2005                                                             |
|                                                                       |
|65.                                                                    |
|CEDAW - Consideration of reports submitted by States parties under     |
|article 18 of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of        |
|Discrimination against Women - Combined initial, second and third      |
|reports of States parties                                              |
|                                                                       |
|03/05/2005                                                             |
|                                                                       |
|                                                                       |
|66.                                                                    |
|Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada, 'Pakistan: All available      |
|information pertaining to First Information Reports (FIRS)'            |
|22/07/2004                                                             |
|                                                                       |
|                                                                       |
|67.                                                                    |
|Article 2 (Asian Legal Resource Centre), 'Women and religious          |
|minorities under the Hudood Laws in Pakistan'                          |
|02/07/2004                                                             |
|                                                                       |
|                                                                       |

