

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

    Cvetkovs (visa - no file produced - directions) Latvia [2011] UKUT 00212
                                                                       (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On  17 May 2011                               |On 6 June 2011               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       MR JUSTICE BLAKE, THE PRESIDENT
                   MR BATISTE, JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                            VISA OFFICER, WARSAW
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Mr sergejs cvetkovs

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance

1. Where a visit visa application is refused because  the  Visa  Officer  is
not satisfied of the appellant's intentions as  a  result  of  only  limited
documents  being  produced  and  translated;  and  the  respondent  breaches
Procedure  Rules  by  failing  to  send  documentation  to   the   Tribunal,
directions can be given indicating that unless the respondent complies  with
the rules it may be that  the  Tribunal  will  assume  that  the  appeal  is
unopposed.

2. Where  the  respondent  breaches  Procedure  Rules  by  failing  to  send
documentation  to  the  Tribunal,  and  the  First-tier  Tribunal  issues  a
reasoned decision, based on the material before it, allowing the  appeal,  a
challenge by the respondent based on sufficiency of reason  is  unlikely  to
prosper on an application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is  an  appeal  by  the  Visa  Officer  against  the  decision  of
    Immigration Judge Rowlands who allowed Mr  Cvetkovs'  appeal  from  the
    Visa Officer's refusal of his application for a  visit  visa  dated  21
    September 2010. In this determination we will refer to the  parties  as
    they were before the First-tier Tribunal, Mr Cvetkovs as the  appellant
    and the Visa Officer as the respondent.


 2. From the limited information before us, it appears that  the  appellant
    is a stateless person who is resident at an address in Riga, Latvia. He
    applied for a visa operating as leave to enter to visit his sister  who
    is resident  in  the  United  Kingdom.  The  sponsor  and  her  partner
    submitted evidence of their means and accommodation and have  explained
    that they are responsible  for  the  funds  that  the  appellant  would
    require to travel to and from the United Kingdom  and  to  support  him
    whilst he remains here.

 3. The Visa Officer was aware that the appellant had  visited  the  United
    Kingdom previously and had left within the appropriate period.  Details
    of those visits were not apparent on  the  papers  before  us,  but  we
    understand there were two such visits in 2008  and  2009  and  on  both
    occasions the appellant returned to Latvia.

 4. The Visa Officer's refusal notice states as follows:-

        "You have not presented satisfactory evidence of your personal  and
        financial circumstances in Latvia.  Whilst  you  have  submitted  a
        translation of your college letter  some  of  the  other  documents
        submitted have not  been  translated.  I  am  therefore  unable  to
        determine the contents of these documents and they therefore, carry
        little evidential  weight.  You  have  not  submitted  satisfactory
        evidence of your employment, income, property, savings  or  assets.
        Full knowledge of your circumstances is an important  consideration
        when assessing your application. In the absence  of  such  evidence
        you have not satisfied me that your circumstances are as settled as
        claimed and that you are  committed  to  ties  outside  the  United
        Kingdom. I am therefore  not  satisfied  that  you  are  a  genuine
        visitor or you will leave the UK on  completion  of  your  proposed
        visit."

      Elsewhere in the notice of decision it was stated:-


        "I note that you have previously travelled to the  United  Kingdom,
        however each application must be considered on its own merits and I
        am not satisfied that your previous travel  outweighs  my  concerns
        over your current application".


 5. The appellant appealed and  in  support  of  his  appeal  provided  the
    additional          information from his sponsors.  He  asked  for  the
    appeal  to  be  determined  on  the  papers.  The  problem  facing  the
    Immigration Judge was that he had not been provided with a respondent's
    bundle and accordingly knew little or nothing about the purposes of the
    appellant's visit, from the documents that  he  had  provided  and  had
    translated to the Visa Officer, and other data  that  might  have  been
    contained in the application form.

 6. The respondent's failure to provide the material documents in this case
    is a clear breach of the obligation on him imposed by rule  13  of  The
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedural)  Rules  2005.  It  is  not
    sufficient to provide the IJ with simply the notice of the decision  to
    which the  appeal  relates.  The  application  form  and  any  material
    submitted by the applicant needs to be provided under rule 13(1)(b)  as
    does any other  document  referred  to  in  the  decision  pursuant  to
    13(1)(c). A failure to provide this material is not merely a breach  of
    the respondent's obligation under the Procedural Rules it will  usually
    frustrate the effective hearing  of  the  appeal.  In  many  cases  the
    appellant himself will wish to rely upon material that he  has  already
    provided to the Visa Officer.


 7. The IJ allowed the appeal because he concluded  that  the  adequacy  of
    maintenance and accommodation evidence by the sponsor and  her  partner
    combined with the previous compliance with  the  Immigration  Rules  on
    earlier visits enabled him to  be  satisfied  that  the  appellant  was
    indeed a genuine visitor who intends to leave the United Kingdom at the
    end of the period of the visit as stated by him and who will be able to
    be maintained and accommodated without recourse  to  public  funds  and
    employment.

 8. The Visa Officer sought permission to appeal  on  the  basis  that  the
    Immigration Judge had not given sufficient reasons for  explaining  why
    he was satisfied as to the appellant's intentions. Permission to appeal
    was granted on 1 March 2011 on the basis that it  was  surprising  that
    the appellant had not provided any such information for the purpose  of
    this appeal once a negative decision had been reached. Directions  were
    given on 29 March for further documentary evidence  to  be  served  but
    nothing was served by either party. We consider it was unfortunate that
    permission to appeal was granted in this case given the Visa  Officer's
    clear default in failing to provide the IJ with the relevant documents.
    It may well have been that the college letter that was  produced  would
    have been evidence to satisfy the IJ as to the  appellant's  status  in
    Latvia and reason to return there. We cannot say.  However  it  is  not
    open to the Visa Officer to complain of the inadequacies  of  the  IJ's
    reasoning on the material  before  him  where  the  ECO's  default  has
    prevented the IJ from having the documents  he  was  entitled  to  have
    before him.


 9. We detect no error of law in this case. The IJ  gave  reasons  for  his
    conclusion that the appellant met the requirements of the rules. In the
    particular circumstances of this case no more was necessary  to  comply
    with the duty to give a reasoned decision.

10. For the future, we consider that Immigration Judges of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, Immigration and Asylum Chamber are entitled to be  robust  in
    determining Entry Clearance appeals  where  the  Visa  Officer  is  not
    satisfied as to the purpose of the visit from  the  documents  produced
    but fails to provide those documents to the Tribunal.   We  trust  that
    Visa Officers will give effect to Rule 13 and provide  the  application
    documents. The importance of doing so will become  even  more  apparent
    when s. 85A of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 inserted
    by s. 19 of the UK Borders Act 2007 comes into force on  23  May  2011.
    That section has the effect of significantly reducing  the  opportunity
    for supply of documents that were not before the decision maker at  the
    material time.

11. In our judgment, where the Visa Officer has not provided the  documents
    that he is required to provide, it is open to the First-tier  Judge  to
    issue directions that if such  documents  are  not  provided  within  a
    prompt timetable the appeal will be decided on the basis that the  Visa
    Officer no longer opposes the appeal or supports any contention that he
    makes in the decision letter. The appeal can then  be  decided  on  the
    papers, and in the absence of evidence of  some  mandatory  ground  for
    refusal it is likely that the appeal will succeed.

12. For its part, in  such  cases,  judges  of  the  First-tier  and  Upper
    Tribunal considering applications for permission  to  appeal  from  the
    respondent on the basis that there was insufficient evidence before  or
    reasoning by the First-tier Judge should generally refuse them.  It  is
    not in the public interest that a public official in flagrant breach of
    the obligations upon him or her should be able to dispute  the  Judge's
    assessment on such information as was available; this is certainly  the
    case where there has been no  prompt  response  to  the  directions  we
    envisage  being  made  in  [11]  above.  We  recognise  that  different
    considerations may arise where there are mandatory reasons  to  refuse,
    but even then the starting principle should  be  that  it  is  for  the
    respondent  to  provide  the  information  that  can  be  independently
    assessed.


13. For these reasons this appeal is dismissed. The Visa Officer  must  now
    reconsider the matter in the light of the IJ's satisfaction  that  this
    appellant was indeed a genuine visitor who met the requirements of  the
    Rules.


                               Signed                    Date








                               Mr Justice Blake
                               President of the Upper Tribunal
                               (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)





