
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Smith (appealable decisions; PTA requirements; anonymity) [2019] UKUT 00216
(IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 May 2019                                 |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                             MORGAN HAYAT SMITH
                        (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr I. Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr B. Amunwa, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis &
                  Co Solicitors


(1)  A decision by the First-tier Tribunal not to decide a ground of  appeal
constitutes a "decision" for the  purposes  of  s.11(1)  of  the  Tribunals,
Courts and Enforcement Act 2007. It may therefore be appealed to  the  Upper
Tribunal.

(2)  If an appellant's appeal before the  First-tier  Tribunal  succeeds  on
some grounds and fails on other grounds, the appellant will not be  required
to apply for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal in  respect  of  any
ground on which he or she failed, so long as a determination of that  ground
in the appellant's favour would not have  conferred  on  the  appellant  any
material (ie tangible) benefit, compared with the benefit flowing  from  the
ground or grounds on which the appellant was successful  in  the  First-tier
Tribunal.

(3)  In the event that the respondent to the appeal  before  the  First-tier
Tribunal obtains permission  to  appeal  against  that  Tribunal's  decision
regarding the grounds upon which the First-tier Tribunal found in favour  of
the appellant, then, ordinarily, the appellant will be  able  to  rely  upon
rule 24(3)(e) of the 2008 Rules in order to argue in  a  response  that  the
appellant should succeed on the grounds on which he or she was  unsuccessful
in the First-tier Tribunal. Any such response must be filed  and  served  in
accordance with those Rules and the Upper Tribunal's directions.

(4)  If permission to appeal is required,  any  application  for  permission
should be made to the First-tier Tribunal in accordance with rule 33 of  the
Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)
Rules 2014, within the time limits there set out. This includes cases  where
the appellant has succeeded  on  some  grounds  but  failed  on  others,  in
respect of which a material benefit would flow (see (2) above).

(5)  There is, however, no  jurisdictional  fetter  on  the  Upper  Tribunal
entertaining an application  for  permission  to  appeal,  even  though  the
condition contained in rule 21(2)(b) of the 2008 Rules has not been met,  in
that the First-tier Tribunal has not refused (wholly or partly), or has  not
refused to admit, an application for  permission  to  appeal  made  to  that
Tribunal. Rule 7(2)(a) of the 2008  Rules  permits  the  Upper  Tribunal  to
waive any failure to comply with a requirement of the  Rules.  The  guidance
in EG and NG (UT rule 17: withdrawal; rule 24: Scope) Ethiopia  [2013]  UKUT
00143 (IAC) is otherwise confirmed.

(6)  The Upper Tribunal is, nevertheless, very unlikely  to  be  sympathetic
to a request that it should invoke rule 7(2)(a),  where  a  party  (A),  who
could and should have applied for permission to  appeal  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal against an adverse decision of that Tribunal,  seeks  to  challenge
that decision only after the  other  party  has  been  given  permission  to
appeal against a decision in the same proceedings which was in favour of A.

      (7)  When  deciding  whether  to  make  an  anonymity  direction,  the
      starting point is that open justice is a fundamental principle of  our
      legal system. Subject to statutory  prohibitions  on  disclosure,  any
      derogation from that principle should be allowed only  to  the  extent
      that is necessary in order to  secure  the  proper  administration  of
      justice. As a result, just as is the case in other jurisdictions,  the
      parties in immigration proceedings should be named,  unless  doing  so
      would cause harm, or create the risk of harm, of such a nature  as  to
      require derogation from the basic principle.  In most cases  involving
      international protection, anonymity of an individual will be required,
      lest the proceedings themselves should aggravate or give rise to  such
      a risk. That will normally be the case throughout the  course  of  the
      proceedings, including any appeals.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

A. Introduction

   1. The respondent (hereafter the claimant) is a citizen of Belgium,  born
      in July 1988.  He has a history of offending as  a  juvenile.   As  an
      adult,  he  was  convicted  in  2017  of  disclosing  private   sexual
      photographs and films with intent to cause distress;  four  counts  of
      battery; assaulting a constable; and failing to surrender  to  custody
      at the appointed time. The offence of battery was committed whilst the
      claimant was on bail.


   2. On 15 September 2017, after considering the claimant's representations
      as to why he should not be  deported  from  the  United  Kingdom,  the
      Secretary of State made a deportation order against the claimant.   He
      did not appeal against that decision and was deported  on  3  November
      2017.


   3. Two days later, the claimant attempted to return but was refused entry
      to the United Kingdom.  On 14 January 2018, the claimant was  arrested
      by police, having entered in breach of  the  deportation  order.   The
      claimant was removed on 18 March 2018.   The  following  day,  he  was
      encountered embarking on a ferry in Scotland. He was removed again  on
      7 May 2018.


   4. On 31 May 2018, the claimant again  entered  the  United  Kingdom,  in
      breach of the deportation order.  On 15 June 2018,  the  claimant  was
      convicted of knowingly entering the United Kingdom in  breach  of  the
      deportation order, for which he was fined.






      B. The decision letter


   5. Those acting for the claimant subsequently made representations, which
      the Secretary of State treated as an application for  the  deportation
      order to be  revoked.   On  19  July  2018,  the  Secretary  of  State
      explained why he had, in effect, decided not to  do  so.   The  letter
      took account of the claimant's assertion that  he  had  lived  in  the
      United Kingdom for the majority of his life, having lived here between
      the ages of 5 and 9 before returning to the  United  Kingdom  in  2011
      aged 12.  The Secretary  of  State,  on  the  basis  of  the  evidence
      submitted, refused to accept that the claimant had  been  resident  in
      the United  Kingdom  in  accordance  with  the  Immigration  (European
      Economic Area)  Regulations  2016  ("the  2016  Regulations"),  for  a
      continuous period of five years.


   6. The decision letter noted that the claimant had "lost  his  temper  on
      three separate occasions against 2 females and on those occasions,  he
      in fits of anger assaulted both of them".  This included  pushing  his
      ex-partner by  the  throat  until  she  passed  out,  after  which  he
      "continued to torment her by posting private and indecent  photographs
      of her on the  internet  in  order  to  humiliate  her".   On  another
      occasion, the claimant  threw  items  around  his  flat,  hitting  his
      current partner with a wooden incense dispenser, as a result of  which
      she was taken to hospital for treatment.   He  subsequently  assaulted
      his current partner by slamming her into  a  bathroom  mirror,  before
      pinning her down on the floor and placing a blanket  around  her  face
      and neck.


   7. The decision letter found  that  the  claimant  had  a  propensity  to
      reoffend and represented a very genuine  and  persistent  sufficiently
      serious threat to the public to justify maintaining  his  deportation.
      Having considered the issue of proportionality, by  reference  to  the
      claimant's submissions about difficulties he would  face  in  Belgium,
      the letter concluded  that  it  would  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
      claimant to go to Belgium and resume his life there.


   8. The letter explained in detail why, in circumstances of the claimant's
      case,  his  deportation  to  Belgium  would   not   disproportionately
      interfere with his rehabilitation.


   9. At paragraph 58 of the letter, the Secretary of State  concluded  that
      deportation was proportionate and in accordance  with  the  principles
      and regulations of 23(6)(b) of the 2016 Regulations.


  10. The decision letter then turned to consider Article  8  of  the  ECHR.
      Paragraph 59 reads:-

         "In addition to considering your client's position under EU law and
         the EA Regulations 2016, consideration has separately been given to
         whether your client's deportation would breach the United Kingdom's
         obligations under the European Convention of Human Rights (ECHR)."


  11. The letter noted the various elements  of  the  claimant's  Article  8
      claim, which were that he had a girlfriend in the United Kingdom,  who
      was pregnant; that his mother remained in the United Kingdom; and that
      he had established a private life  by  virtue  of  his  residence  and
      education in the United Kingdom.  So far as the claimant's partner was
      concerned, the Secretary of State considered that the claimant did not
      have a genuine and subsisting relationship with her, in light  of  his
      conviction for battery  against  that  partner.   There  was  also  no
      evidence of co-habitation.


  12. So far as private life was concerned, the  letter  explained  why  the
      Secretary of State did not consider that the claimant was socially and
      culturally integrated in the United Kingdom.   This  was  because  the
      claimant was a persistent offender, having been convicted 8  times  of
      15 offences within a relatively short period of  time  in  the  United
      Kingdom and his "conviction history indicates an anti-social  attitude
      towards the public and community and shows that he has not  integrated
      into the United Kingdom society".  It was not  considered  that  there
      would be very significant obstacles to the claimant's integration into
      Belgium.


  13. At paragraph 79 of the letter, the Secretary  of  State  undertook  an
      analysis of whether there were very compelling circumstances, such  as
      to make it  incompatible  with  Article  8  for  the  claimant  to  be
      deported.  For the reasons given, it was concluded that there were  no
      such circumstances in the claimant's case.


  14. Paragraph 84 of  the  letter  concluded  the  Article  8  analysis  as
      follows:-

         "Having carefully  considered  the  facts  about  [the  claimant's]
         circumstances it is considered that  [the  claimant's]  deportation
         would not  breach  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations  under  ECHR
         Article 8 because the public interest in deporting  [the  claimant]
         outweighs his right to private and family life"


  15. Under the heading "Appeal", the letter told  the  claimant  that  "you
      have a right of appeal against the decision under regulation 36 and 37
      of the 2016 EEA Regulations.  Information on how  to  appeal  and  the
      time limits for appealing are contained in the attached notice".


      C. Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal


  16. On 3 August 2018, the claimant (who remained in  the  United  Kingdom)
      filed a notice of appeal in the First-tier Tribunal.  The  grounds  of
      appeal contended that the claimant did  not  meet  the  threshold  for
      deportation of an EEA national with permanent residence and  that  his
      deportation would disproportionately interfere with his EU rights "and
      his rights under the European Convention of  Human  Rights,  including
      article 8".


  17. The case was heard at Harmondsworth on 15 October 2018 by  Immigration
      Judge Lal.  The claimant was present at the hearing and gave evidence,
      upon which he was cross-examined.  The judge also heard evidence  from
      the claimant's mother and his current partner "who confirmed that  she
      had been the victim of the [claimant's] offending in the past but  she
      thought that he had changed" (paragraph 60 of the decision).


  18. The judge found that the claimant had been in the United  Kingdom  for
      over five years and had acquired a permanent right of residence.   The
      judge was satisfied that the claimant "did produce  credible  evidence
      of some insight into his crimes" and that he had "reasonably addressed
      issues of anger management, the impact of his actions on  victims  and
      how he would deal with those situations  which  he  accepts  were  the
      cause of his previous problems".  The judge concluded that deportation
      on serious grounds of public  policy/public  security  "are  not  made
      out", finding that the claimant is "back with his partner and  he  has
      no links with Belgium" (paragraph 25).  There was "credible  evidence"
      that the claimant "has family life in the UK with his mother and  that
      all  his  siblings  and  his  partner  are  here  and  it   would   be
      disproportionate to expect [the claimant]  to  leave  the  UK  at  the
      present time" (paragraph 26).  In the light  of  these  findings,  the
      judge allowed "the appeal against the  deportation  order"  (paragraph
      28).


  19. Paragraph 27 of the judge's decision reads as follows:-

         "27. In the light of its findings above the Tribunal did not go  on
             to consider Article 8 separately."


D. Challenging the First-tier Tribunal's decision


  20. The  Secretary  of  State  applied  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
      permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  against  the  judge's
      decision to allow the claimant's appeal under  the  2016  Regulations.
      The grounds contended that the judge had been wrong to  conclude  that
      the claimant had acquired a permanent right of residence,  given  that
      "residence alone is insufficient" and there were no findings that  the
      claimant had lived for the requisite time in accordance with the  2016
      Regulations.   That  error  infected   the   judge's   proportionality
      findings.  The judge had also failed to have regard to Schedule  1  to
      the 2016 Regulations, wherein paragraph 3 was of particular relevance,
      given the  claimant's  persistent  offending.   The  judge  had  also,
      according to the Secretary of State, failed to give  adequate  reasons
      for the findings in respect of the claimant's criminal  offending;  in
      particular, since the pre-sentence report considered the  claimant  to
      be at high risk of causing serious harm to women.


  21. Permission to appeal was granted by a judge of the First-tier Tribunal
      on 1 November 2018, by reference to each of the Secretary  of  State's
      grounds.  On 24 January 2019, shortly before the hearing in the  Upper
      Tribunal, the claimant's solicitors filed a response under rule 24  of
      the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 ("the 2008 Rules").
       The response contended that the First-tier  Tribunal  judge  had  not
      erred in his conclusions in respect  of  the  2016  Regulations.   The
      response also, however, contained  what  was  described  as  a  "cross
      appeal", in which  the  claimant  "hereby  makes  an  application  for
      permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal (directly) to cross  appeal
      the determination of FTJ Lal in respect of the findings  (specifically
      non-findings) in relation to Article  8  ECHR"  (paragraph  16).   The
      response went on to give reasons why the  application  for  permission
      was being made out of time.  As to this, the claimant:-

         " ... asks the Court (sic) to note that the [claimant] appealed  on
         two grounds against the decision of  the  SSHD;  firstly  that  the
         decision was in breach of EU Law and secondly   that  the  decision
         breached his rights under ECHR.  The  appeal  was  allowed  on  the
         former ground and that  therefore  there  was  no  benefit  in  him
         appealing the decision in relation to the latter. If  it  were  the
         case that Appellant's (sic) should appeal on all grounds (even less
         favourable) to which they have been successful on it will result in
         a chaotic administration of the Tribunal appeal system and contrary
         to the  overriding  objective  in  both  the  FTT  and  Upper  Tier
         Procedure Rules" (paragraph 18).


  22. The response stated that the Secretary of State had made a decision to
      refuse the claimant's human rights claim and that  an  appeal  against
      that refusal was, accordingly, before the First-tier  Tribunal  judge.
      It "was not open to him to just decide not to deal with it as  he  did
      in paragraph 27 of the determination and reasons".


  23. The response explained that the claimant's human rights claim was,  in
      part, based on the fact that he contended he  had  an  entitlement  to
      British citizenship through his adopted  British  father.   There  was
      evidence before the First-tier Tribunal to  support  this  contention,
      including an adoption certificate.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  judge,
      when faced with this  submission,  declined  to  deal  with  it.   The
      relevant part of the judge's decision is as follows: -

         "9.  Mr Grennan [Home Office Presenting Officer] submitted that the
             proper remedy for the [claimant] was by way of judicial review
             and this of nationality (sic) had never  been  raised  before.
             He urged the Tribunal to carry on with the appeal.

         10.  The Tribunal agreed with Mr Grennan as it was  faced  with  an
             appeal against the deportation order.  If it  was  to  be  now
             advanced that  the  [claimant]  was  not  a  national  of  the
             receiving country than  that  [sic]  had  to  be  specifically
             raised with the SSHD.  It had not been done so  in  this  case
             [sic]."






F. Proceedings in the Upper Tribunal


  24. The appeal came before Julian Knowles J, and Upper Tribunal Judge Gill
      for hearing on 29 January 2019.  The  hearing  was  adjourned.   Upper
      Tribunal Judge Gill gave  directions  on  30  January,  requiring  the
      Secretary of State to explain his reasons for failing to  comply  with
      earlier directions of the Upper Tribunal, which had  required  service
      of a skeleton argument.  She also directed  that  the  parties  should
      file and serve skeleton arguments addressing, inter alia, whether  the
      First-tier Tribunal had jurisdiction to entertain  the  appeal,  given
      that regulation 34(4) of the 2016 Regulations required an  application
      to revoke an EA deportation order to be made from outside  the  United
      Kingdom; and whether the permission of the  First-tier  Tribunal/Upper
      Tribunal was required in order for the claimant  to  cross-appeal  the
      decision of the First-tier Tribunal judge on the ground that the judge
      did not consider the claimant's Article 8 claim.


  25. The adjourned hearing was heard by the  present  constitution  of  the
      Upper Tribunal on 7 May 2019.  By that  time,  the  parties  had  each
      served  a  number  of   skeleton   arguments,   speaking   notes   and
      applications.  We found these documents  of  considerable  assistance,
      supplemented as they were by the oral submissions of Mr Jarvis and  Mr
      Amunwa.


      G. The jurisdictional issue


  26. The first issue is whether the First-tier Tribunal had jurisdiction to
      decide the  claimant's  appeal  under  the  2016  Regulations.   Upper
      Tribunal Judge Gill's directions of 30 January referred to  regulation
      34.  So far as relevant, this reads as follows: -

         "Revocation of deportation and exclusion orders


         34.- (1) An exclusion order remains in force unless it  is  revoked
                  by the Secretary of State under this regulation.


             (2)  A deportation order remains in force-


                   a) until the order is revoked under this regulation; or


                   b) for the period specified in the order.


             (3)  A person who is subject to  a  deportation  or  exclusion
                  order may only apply to the Secretary of State to have  it
                  revoked on the basis that there has been a material change
                  in the circumstances that  justified  the  making  of  the
                  order.


             (4)  An application under  paragraph  (3)  must  set  out  the
                  material  change  in  circumstances  relied  upon  by  the
                  applicant and may only be made  whilst  the  applicant  is
                  outside the United Kingdom.


             (5)  On receipt of an application  under  paragraph  (3),  the
                  Secretary of State must revoke the order if the  Secretary
                  of State considers that the criteria for  making  such  an
                  order are no longer satisfied.


             (6)  The Secretary  of  State  must  take  a  decision  on  an
                  application under paragraph (2) no later than  six  months
                  after the date on which the application is received."


    So far as appeals  are  concerned,  regulation  37,  again  so  far  as
    relevant, provides as follows: -

         "37.- (1)     Subject to paragraph (2), a  person  may  not  appeal
                 under regulation 36 whilst in the United Kingdom against an
                 EEA decision -

                 (a)   to refuse to admit that person to the United Kingdom;



                 (b)   to revoke  that  person's  admission  to  the  United
                     Kingdom;

                 (c)   to make an exclusion order against that person;

                 (d)   to refuse to revoke a deportation or exclusion order
                     made against the person;

         ...

         37.- (2) Sub-paragraphs (a) to (c) of paragraph (1) do  not  apply
                 where the person is in the United Kingdom; and -

           ..."


  27. The first point to observe is that neither the representatives nor the
      First-tier Tribunal judge appeared to have been aware at all  of  what
      is said in regulations 34 and 37.  So far as the  First-tier  Tribunal
      judge was  concerned,  this  may  be  because  the  judge  considered,
      wrongly, that the EEA appeal was  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
      decision to make a deportation order against the claimant, rather than
      its being against the decision to refuse to revoke that  order.   This
      is apparent from paragraphs 3 and 29 of the Judge's decision.


  28. It is also apparent that  the  writer  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
      decision letter was unaware of regulation 34(4), which - as we  see  -
      provides that an application to revoke a deportation order may be made
      only whilst the applicant is outside the United Kingdom.  Whether  the
      Secretary of State is able to waive that requirement in such a way  as
      to  keep  the  resulting  decision  within  the  ambit  of  the   2016
      Regulations is a moot point.  It is, however, an issue upon which  the
      parties did not make discrete submissions and, in  the  circumstances,
      we are not persuaded that it is appropriate for us to say  more  about
      it.


  29. Attention in fact focused upon regulation 37(1)(d) which,  as  we  can
      also see, provides in terms that a person may not appeal whilst in the
      United  Kingdom  against  an  EEA  decision  to  refuse  to  revoke  a
      deportation order made against that person. The appellant was  in  the
      United Kingdom when the notice of appeal was filed.


  30. In Anwar and Adjo v the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
      [2010] EWCA Civ 1275, the Court of Appeal  considered  the  effect  of
      section 92 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  which,
      as then in force, provided as follows:

         "92. Appeal from within United Kingdom: general

             (1)  A person may not appeal under section 82(1) while  he  is
                  in the United Kingdom unless his appeal is of  a  kind  to
                  which this section applies.

             (2)  This section applies to an appeal against an  immigration
                  decision of a kind specified  in  section  82(2)(c),  (d),
                  (e), (f) and (j).

             .....

             (4)  This  section  also  applies  to  an  appeal  against  an
                  immigration decision if the appellant-

             (a)  has made an asylum claim, or a human rights claim,  while
                  in the United Kingdom, or

         ......"


  31. In Nirula v the First-tier Tribunal (Asylum and Immigration Chamber  &
      another) and Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2012]  EWCA
      Civ 1436, the Court of Appeal explained that Sedley LJ's  judgment  in
      Anwar had, in effect, been misunderstood: -

         "27. The question that arose in Anwar was whether a tribunal  could
             proceed  to  a  determination  in  a  deception  case  if  the
             appellant was inside the  United  Kingdom.  The  Secretary  of
             State had determined that the appellant had obtained leave  to
             remain by deception; on appeal the Secretary of State objected
             to the tribunal hearing the appeal because the  appellant  was
             in the United  Kingdom.  The  tribunal  decided  it  did  have
             jurisdiction  and,  moreover,  that  the  appellant  had   not
             obtained leave by deception. The Secretary of  State  obtained
             an order for reconsideration and, on reconsideration, the  AIT
             decided that  the  appeal  could  not  be  pursued  while  the
             appellant remained in the United Kingdom and there was thus no
             jurisdiction in the tribunal to  entertain  the  appeal.  This
             court then granted permission to appeal to Mr Anwar as well as
             to another appellant (Ms Pangeyo) who raised the  same  point.
             By the time Mr Anwar's appeal came to be heard, the  Secretary
             of State  had  agreed  that  he  had  not  obtained  leave  by
             deception but since the case  was  ready  for  argument,  both
             sides were heard on  the  question  of  jurisdiction  "at  the
             court's request" (para 9). "

         28.  Anwar is  therefore  a  considered  decision  of  this  court,
             contained in a reserved judgment, on the  question  whether  a
             tribunal (then the AIT, now the FTT) has jurisdiction to  hear
             an appeal  against  removal  in  a  deception  case  when  the
             appellant is in the United Kingdom. Sedley LJ (with whom Lloyd
             and Sullivan LJJ agreed) set  out  the  facts,  the  statutory
             provisions and the issues, explaining how the  first  tribunal
             came to consider that they  did  have  jurisdiction.  He  then
             proceeded to decide the jurisdiction point under  the  heading
             "Jurisdiction"

         29.   "...In  circumstances  in  which  this  court  has  requested
             argument on a  point  about  jurisdiction  and  has  expressly
             decided that question, its reasoning must be treated  as  part
             of the ratio of the case. Mr Ockelton thought that because the
             point on jurisdiction had been taken in Anwar's two  cases  as
             per paragraph 23 above, the whole of the rest of this  passage
             was obiter with the result that, had it been relevant  to  his
             decision, he could have  disagreed  with  it  because  it  was
             wrong. This is with respect a misunderstanding of the doctrine
             of precedent in two quite separate ways. In the  first  place,
             judges at first instance should accept a  considered  judgment
             of this court on a question of jurisdiction as a judgment that
             binds them. In the second place Mr Ockelton was able to decide
             (in my view correctly) that the point on jurisdiction had been
             taken in this case. In these  circumstances  his  own  remarks
             about what the position would be if the  point  had  not  been
             taken at all (or not been taken  by  the  right  person)  were
             themselves obiter, as he himself acknowledges in his judgment.
             On the basis on which Mr Ockelton proceeded (namely  that  the
             views on  jurisdiction  in  Anwar  were  obiter),  it  is  not
             appropriate for a first instance  judge  to  say  obiter  that
             considered remarks of this court are wrong. One consequence is
             a disruption to the body of authority by which  tribunals  are
             guided. If he believes that the view of this court is wrong, a
             judge of first instance should give permission to  appeal.  If
             this court where it falls for decision in an appropriate  case
             considers the view to be wrong (and obiter) it will say so and
             first instance tribunals will know where they are.

         30.  Of course any decision of this court  is  only  authority  for
             what it decides and  for  any  reasoning  necessary  for  that
             decision. One thing that is immediately clear from  paragraphs
             19-23 of the Anwar decision is that nothing  is  said  on  the
             question whether the tribunal is entitled to take a  point  on
             its own jurisdiction of its own motion. That is a point  which
             remains open for decision. It is not a particularly  difficult
             decision. In my view any tribunal is entitled (and indeed well
             advised) to air any doubts it has about its  jurisdiction  and
             invite submissions on that question and then decide it.  Anwar
             does not question that proposition in any way.

         31.  Mr  Ockelton,  however,  thought  (para  47(b))  that  it  was
             "implicit" in Anwar that the  jurisdiction  point  has  to  be
             taken by the party affected and it is true that  in  paragraph
             19 of his judgment Sedley LJ says that the point would operate
             in bar of the proceedings "once the point  was  taken  by  the
             Home Office". But that did not mean that only the Home  Office
             could take the point: it simply reflected the fact that in the
             two cases before the court the Home Office had in  fact  taken
             the point. In any event there is an air of  unreality  in  the
             suggestion that, if the tribunal takes  the  point,  the  Home
             Office does not. In the first place, the Home Office  may  not
             be represented before the tribunal; in  that  event  it  would
             border on the absurd to say that the tribunal cannot take  the
             point of its own motion. If the Home Office is represented (as
             it was in this case), the representative will naturally permit
             the tribunal to make the running. If the  appellant  fails  to
             persuade the tribunal that it has jurisdiction, it would again
             border on the absurd for the tribunal to have specifically  to
             ask the Home Office representative if he wants  to  object  to
             its jurisdiction to  hear  the  appeal  and  to  wait  for  an
             affirmative answer. If the Home Office does not think it  fair
             or right to take the point it can always say so (and in a case
             such as Anwar it may have a public law duty to say so) and the
             tribunal can then proceed.

         32.    Mr Ockelton also thought (para 47(c)) it wrong to say that a
             failure to consider the  issue  of  jurisdiction  can  give  a
             tribunal a jurisdiction it would  not  otherwise  have.  Anwar
             does not so say. What it does say is  that  the  Secretary  of
             State can choose not to take any jurisdictional  objection  if
             she wishes to take that course, just as a defendant can  waive
             his entitlement to plead limitation or,  more  likely,  choose
             not to plead a limitation  defence.  If  a  tribunal  gives  a
             decision  without  anybody  considering   the   jurisdictional
             position, the decision may be precarious but  as  Mr  Ockelton
             himself points out in para 53 the decision  stands  until  set
             aside. It will  become  less  precarious  once  the  time  for
             applying for permission to appeal has expired.

         33.  Mr Ockelton also pointed out (para 47(a)) that  there  was  no
             consideration in Anwar  of  the  terms  of  the  Secretary  of
             State's Notice of Decision. In the present case the Notice  of
             Decision does expressly say that Mr  Nirula  had  a  right  of
             appeal which he could exercise "After  removal".  Mr  Ockelton
             considered that, if it was  necessary  for  the  Secretary  of
             State to take the jurisdiction point, she had taken  it  then.
             For my part, I agree with that conclusion but that does not in
             any way influence my decision that the jurisdiction point  can
             be taken by the tribunal just as much as by the  Secretary  of
             State.

         34.  I would  therefore  reject  Mr  Malik's  submission  that  the
             Secretary of State had  herself  to  take  the  jurisdictional
             point and would hold that it was open to the FTT itself to  do
             so. It made the correct decision on the  point  since  it  was
             clear that Mr  Nirula was not abroad - he was actually in  the
             room at the appeal hearing."


  32. In the light of Nirula, it is, therefore, plain  that,  regardless  of
      what occurred (or, more to the point, did not occur)  at  the  hearing
      before the First-tier Tribunal, the Upper Tribunal is entitled to take
      the "jurisdiction" point and  that,  if  we  conclude  the  First-tier
      Tribunal did not have jurisdiction to decide the appeal under the 2016
      Regulations, this was an error of  law.   Neither  Mr  Jarvis  nor  Mr
      Amunwa sought to argue the contrary.


  33. Instead, the claimant's case for saying that the  First-tier  Tribunal
      did have jurisdiction rests upon the judgment of Michael  Fordham  QC,
      sitting as a deputy judge of the High Court, in  BXS  v  Secretary  of
      State for the Home Department [2014] EWHC 737 (Admin).


  34. BXS  concerned  the  effect  of  regulation  24A  of  the  Immigration
      (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006, which provided as follows:-

         "24A (1) A deportation or exclusion order  shall  remain  in  force
                  unless it is revoked by the Secretary of State under  this
                  regulation.

               (2)    A person who is subject to a deportation or exclusion
                  order may apply to the  Secretary  of  State  to  have  it
                  revoked if the person considers that there been a material
                  change in the circumstances that justified the  making  of
                  the order.

              (3) An application under paragraph  (2)  shall  set  out  the
                  material  change  in  circumstances  relied  upon  by  the
                  applicant and may only be made  whilst  the  applicant  is
                  outside the United Kingdom.

              (4) On receipt of an application  under  paragraph  (2),  the
                  Secretary of State shall revoke the order if the Secretary
                  of State considers that the criteria for  making  such  an
                  order are no longer satisfied.

              (5) The Secretary of  State  shall  take  a  decision  on  an
                  application under paragraph (2) no later than  six  months
                  after the date on which the application is received."


  35. Regulation 27(1) of the 2006 Regulations provided that: -

         "(1) ... a person may not appeal under regulation 26 whilst  he  is
             in the United Kingdom against an EEA decision -
           ...


               a) to refuse to revoke a deportation order made against him."


36. The following provisions of  the  judgment  of  the  deputy  judge  are
    relevant for our purposes: -

         "23. If, ... the uncompromising language of Regulation  24A,  which
             describes  an  exclusive  route  of   revocation   under   its
             provisions and requires that an application  must  be  out  of
             country, were incompatible either with EU law or the  European
             Convention on Human Rights, then I would have no hesitation in
             concluding that that uncompromising effect could not  lawfully
             be visited  on  a  claimant  for  whom  it  would  be  such  a
             violation.  Whether  by  reading  in  words  or  reading   the
             provision down, there would in my judgment be no difficulty in
             arriving at that conclusion.  There  are  no  clear  words  of
             primary legislation (for the purposes  of  section  3  of  the
             Human Rights Act) that would mandate the  maintenance  of  the
             otherwise uncompromising shape of Regulation 24A."

         24.  What arises in the present case is a question  as  to  whether
             the mere act of removing an  individual  pursuant  to  an  EEA
             deportation order, so that they are  placed  in  the  position
             envisaged by Regulation 24A, is of itself a violation of their
             human rights. It is not difficult to think of  examples  where
             that action would plainly be a violation of human rights.  The
             fact that the regulations permit the individual from abroad to
             apply for the deportation order to be revoked may very well be
             a good and  perhaps  a  complete  answer  in  most  case  when
             considering  the  implications  of  the  ongoing  exclusionary
             effect of a deportation order. But one can suppose examples of
             an individual who is  not  fit  to  fly,  or  examples  of  an
             individual whose family life will necessarily be harmed by the
             action of  removing  them,  or  by  the  necessary  period  of
             exclusion  from  the  United  Kingdom  while  they  make   the
             envisaged out of country  application  or  pursue  an  out  of
             country appeal. Circumstances of that nature can be  envisaged
             in which that action of itself could constitute a violation of
             Convention rights. That being  so,  if  Regulation 24A  stood
             alone and were exhaustive of all remedies and  rights  of  the
             individual,  then  there  would,  in  my   judgment,   be   an
             incompatibility with the human rights  protections  guaranteed
             by the Human Rights Act. In such a case, as it  seems  to  me,
             the Secretary of State would only be acting consistently  with
             her statutory human rights duty (under section 6 of the Human
             Rights Act) where the removal, of itself, could be said to  be
             consistent with and not  to  violate  those  applicable  human
             rights. That does lead to two conclusions.

         ...

         54.  As for in-country appeal or  out  of  country  appeal,  in  my
             judgment, it must follow that if revocation can  lawfully  and
             justifiably be required to be pursued out of country, then  it
             follows that insistence that any consequential appeal  be  out
             of country can also be justified. I  ought  to  add  that,  in
             fact, as it happens, the out of country  appeal  position  was
             already part of the EEA regime, not only  from  2006  but,  in
             fact, going to the previous Regulations of 2000. I ought  also
             to add, in the context of appeal rights, that  parliament  has
             in section 109 of the  2002  Act  recognised  that  different
             appeal provisions have been made in EEA cases than in non-EEA.
             None of  that,  of  course,  was  to  empower  the  making  of
             provisions that were contrary to Convention rights.

         ...

         56.  My answer to issue 1 then, for all  those  reasons,  is  that
             there is no incompatibility, either in EU or Human Rights  Act
             terms, in the  insistence,  leaving  aside  the  narrow  human
             rights point which I  have  analysed,  the  insistence  on  an
             application for revocation based on  change  of  circumstances
             and human rights and an appeal being pursued out  of  country,
             even though they would not be in a non EEA case.

         ...

         59.  I ought to make it clear, at this point, that I do not accept
             the submission that the decision  of  19 March 2013  was  of
             itself an unlawful one in the  light  of  the  now  recognised
             relevance that article 8 can have for a removal. The same  is
             true of the letter of 28 March 2013 from UKBA. It  is  right
             that the Secretary of State was not at that stage  considering
             the article 8  implications  of  the  mere  act  of  removal.
             Moreover, I have held that  that  is  a  proper  human  rights
             argument which an individual must always be entitled to  raise
             and which engages the Secretary of  State's  section 6  Human
             Rights Act duty. However, the fact in this case  is  that  the
             claimant's  solicitors  very  clearly  were  invoking  as  the
             relevant  provision,  regulation  24A,  and  were  inviting  a
             revocation based on material change in the  circumstances.  In
             circumstances where that contention was rejected and in  which
             I have held that the regulation which requires the application
             to be out of country is compatible both with EU and ECHR  law,
             and in circumstances where the Secretary of State  came  later
             in the decision 15 November 2013 to grapple with  article 18
             and the question of removal, there is no ground on  which  the
             court could be justified in intervening. Nor, in my  judgment,
             could there be any utility in  the  point  so  as  to  justify
             relief."


  37. The Upper Tribunal accepts the submissions of Mr Jarvis, on behalf  of
      the Secretary of State, that it is not possible to  extract  from  the
      judgment in BXS any support for the proposition  that,  as  a  general
      matter, regulation 37(1)(d) of the 2016 Regulations should be  somehow
      "read down", so as to enable the  present  claimant  to  prosecute  an
      appeal under those Regulations whilst he is  in  the  United  Kingdom.
      What concerned the deputy judge was  the  fact  that  there  might  be
      circumstances in which the mere fact of removal could violate  Article
      8 of the ECHR.


  38. As  Mr  Jarvis  pointed  out,  however,  regulation  33  of  the  2016
      Regulations requires the Secretary of State,  when  giving  directions
      for  removal,  to  turn  his  mind  specifically  to  that  issue,  in
      circumstances where the individual concerned has not appealed  against
      the EEA decision, but would be entitled to do so  and  remains  within
      time to do so, from within the United Kingdom; or where the individual
      has so appealed but the appeal has not been  finally  determined.   In
      the claimant's case, the decision to remove by way of deportation  was
      taken in 2017, when he was in the United Kingdom.   The  claimant  did
      not challenge that decision.


  39. Furthermore and in any event, we have seen that the decision letter in
      the claimant's case separately addressed the claimant's submissions by
      reference to Article 8 of the ECHR.  The  letter  thus  comprised  two
      separate decisions;  namely,  a  decision  to  refuse  to  revoke  the
      deportation order and a decision to refuse the claimant's human rights
      claim.


  40.  Section 82(1)(b) gives a person a right of appeal to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal where the Secretary of State has decided to  refuse  a  human
      rights claim made by that person.  Section  84(2)  provides  that  the
      ground of appeal is that removal would be unlawful under section 6  of
      the Human Rights Act 1998.


  41. Accordingly, the claimant was entitled, through the mechanism  of  the
      human rights appeal, to contend that his removal would violate Article
      8, including (if it were the position)  that  the  mere  fact  of  his
      removal would constitute such a violation, irrespective of the outcome
      of his out of country appeal under the 2016 Regulations.


  42. In the light of paragraphs 29 to 39 above, we conclude that the First-
      tier Tribunal  judge  did  not  have  jurisdiction  to  determine  the
      claimant's appeal under the 2016 Regulations and that he erred in  law
      in purporting to do so. The notice of appeal filed in August 2018  was
      of no effect. We set aside the judge's decision in respect of the 2016
      Regulations  and  remake  it  by  substituting  a  decision   formally
      dismissing the appeal for want of jurisdiction.






      H. The human rights appeal


  43. For the reasons we have just given, the First-tier Tribunal judge was,
      in fact, seized of an appeal under section 82(1)(b) of the  2002  Act.
      That is accepted by Mr Jarvis and also by his colleague,  Mr  Wilding,
      in the latter's skeleton argument of 12 February 2019.   The  position
      is, accordingly, exactly that hypothesised by Sales LJ at paragraph 30
      of Amirteymour v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2017]
      EWCA Civ 353, albeit by reference to the previous legislative regime:


          "Depending on the facts, if the Secretary of State did  happen  to
          address Article 8 arguments in her decision letter in such a case,
          it might be possible to say that the Secretary of State had waived
          the requirement for an application form to be completed in respect
          of her exercise of her residual discretion under the 1971  Act  by
          reference to Article 8 and that she had then made  two  decisions,
          an "EEA decision"  in  relation  to  entitlements  under  the  EEA
          Regulations and an "immigration  decision"  within  the  scope  of
          section 82(1) of the 2002 Act,  with  distinct  rights  of  appeal
          under    regulation    26(1)    and    under     section     82(1)
          respectively........"


  44. It would be desirable if, henceforth, the Secretary of State  were  to
      make it plain in decision letters of the present kind that he  is  not
      only deciding an application by reference to 2016 Regulations but also
      refusing a human rights claim under section 82(1)(b) of the 2002  Act.
      Such an approach may well have assisted the parties and the  judge  in
      the present case.


  45. As we have noted, the  claimant's  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal included a specific reference to Article 8 of the ECHR.  That
      could only be taken as a challenge to the passages of the Secretary of
      State's decision letter, where article 8 was expressly and extensively
      considered.   Section  86(2)(a)  imposes  a  duty  on  the  First-tier
      Tribunal to determine any matter raised as a  ground  of  appeal.   At
      paragraph 27 of the First-tier Tribunal judge's decision, however, the
      judge "did not go on to consider  Article  8"  in  the  light  of  his
      findings in respect of the 2016 Regulations.


      (a) Did the judge make a decision?


  46. Before us, there was some discussion as to whether paragraph 27 of the
      First-tier Tribunal judge's decision constituted a  decision  for  the
      purposes of section 11(1) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act
      2007.  This provision confers a right of appeal "on any point  of  law
      arising from a decision made by the First-tier Tribunal other than  an
      excluded decision".  Mr Jarvis indicated that the Secretary  of  State
      might wish to reserve his position on this matter.


  47. With respect to Mr Jarvis, the answer is, in our view,  manifest.   In
      paragraph 27, the First-tier Tribunal judge was making a decision  not
      to consider Article 8.  That  was  a  decision  in  violation  of  the
      obligation placed upon the Tribunal by section 84 of the 2002 Act.  It
      would, we find, be highly undesirable if the position were  otherwise.
      If a judge's refusal  to  decide  a  human  rights  appeal  cannot  be
      categorised as a decision within the scope of  section  11(1)  of  the
      2007 Act, the only remedy will be judicial  review.   As  the  present
      case shows, such as a bifurcation of routes of  challenge  would  give
      rise  to  complexity,  delay  and  expense.   It  cannot   have   been
      Parliament's intention, in enacting the 2007 Act, to bring about  such
      a state of affairs.


      (b) Challenging the judge's decision


  48. Having said this, how should the claimant have sought to challenge the
      decision  in  paragraph  27?   Here,  attention  focuses  on  rule  24
      (response to the notice of appeal) of  the  2008  Rules.   So  far  as
      relevant, this provides as follows: -

         "24.

         ...

         (1)(A)   Subject to any direction given by the  Upper  Tribunal,  a
              respondent may provide a response to a notice of appeal.

           (2)    Any response provided under paragraph  (1A)  must  be  in
              writing and must be sent or delivered to the  Upper  Tribunal
              so that it is received.

              (a) if an application for permission to appeal stands as  the
                   notice of appeal, (which it does here) no  later  than  1
                   month after the date on which  the  Respondent  was  sent
                   notice that permission to appeal had been granted;

         ...

           (3)    The response must state -

         ...

              (e)  the grounds on which the  respondent  relies,  including
                   (in the case of an appeal against the decision of another
                   tribunal),  any  grounds  on  which  the  respondent  was
                   unsuccessful in the proceedings which are the subject  of
                   the appeal, but intends to rely in the appeal; and

         ... "


  49. In EG and NG (UT rule 17: withdrawal; rule 24: Scope) Ethiopia  [2013]
      UKUT 00143 (IAC), the Upper Tribunal had before it a case in which the
      claimants had succeeded  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  Article  3
      grounds, by reason of them facing a real risk of torture or inhuman or
      degrading treatment if returned to Ethiopia, but where the  First-tier
      Tribunal had dismissed their appeals on asylum grounds, on  the  basis
      that the claimants were excluded from  the  benefits  of  the  Refugee
      Convention (and, likewise, from those of the Qualification Directive).
       The Secretary of State  sought  and  obtained  permission  to  appeal
      against the decision  to  allow  the  appeal  on  Article  3  grounds,
      following which the claimants filed responses under rule 24, in  which
      they contended that their appeals should have been allowed  under  the
      Refugee Convention etc.


  50. The Upper Tribunal found as follows: -

         "33. Mr Eicke said that we have no power except that  given  us  by
             statute and so we have no power  to  hear  an  appeal  without
             permission.  Parliament says unequivocally that a right may be
             exercised only with permission (2007 Act  section  13(3)).  An
             application can only be made in writing  (First-tier  Tribunal
             Rules, rule 24(1)) and an application for permission cannot be
             entertained by the Upper Tribunal unless  an  application  has
             been made first to the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Upper  Tribunal
             Rules 21(2)(b)). Mr Eicke said  that  it  made  no  sense  for
             provisions that required permission to be  obtained  before  a
             hearing in writing from a First-tier Judge to be  swept  aside
             and replaced by a system  that  enabled  a  respondent  to  an
             appeal to assert as of right arguments that were raised by the
             respondent in a notice of appeal which could otherwise only be
             raised  with  permission  given  in  response  to  a   written
             application.

         34   Miss Dubinsky contended that appeal rights cannot  be  lightly
             displaced but we agree with  Mr  Eicke  that  we  cannot  give
             ourselves jurisdiction we do not have and it is not for us  to
             create a right of appeal  without  permission.  The  claimants
             cannot appeal the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  because
             they do not have permission to appeal and the  Upper  Tribunal
             has no power to give permission to appeal  unless  the  First-
             tier Tribunal has refused permission (rule 21(2) of the  Upper
             Tribunal Rules).

         35.  It does not follow from this that there are  no  circumstances
             when claimants would be  unable  to  argue  that  any  of  the
             findings adverse to the respondent are wrong or that the First-
             tier Tribunal erred in law by not allowing the appeal for more
             reasons than it did but the claimants cannot rely on  rule  24
             notices as an alternative to seeking permission to appeal.

         36.  Mr Eicke submitted that a rule 24 Notice was  analogous  to  a
             Respondent's Notice under  rule  52  of  the  Civil  Procedure
             Rules. There a party that is seeking permission to appeal from
             the appeal court must ask for  permission  and  a  party  that
             (alternatively) wishes to ask the appeal court to  uphold  the
             order of  the  lower  court  for  reasons  different  from  or
             additional to those given by the lower court must give  notice
             of that intention. His point was that the need for  permission
             to cross-appeal was well understood in civil  proceedings  and
             seeking it was not something that the respondent to an  appeal
             in the Upper Tribunal could be expected to ignore.

         37.  In many ways  the  provisions  of  rule  52  of  the  CPR  are
             analogous to a rule 24 Notice but they are not the same. Under
             rule 52.3(2) of the CPR a party that does not have  permission
             to appeal from the lower courts can seek it  from  the  higher
             court but in the civil courts the failure to secure permission
             from the lower court (even if through culpable neglect) can be
             remedied  by  the  higher  court  but  the  failure  to   seek
             permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal cannot be corrected
             by the Upper Tribunal. The First-tier Tribunal must  decide  a
             written application for permission to appeal before the  Upper
             Tribunal can be involved (see rule 24(1) of the 2005 Rules and
             rule 21(2) of the Upper Tribunal Rules). This is a  cumbersome
             procedure  once  proceedings  have  begun  before  the   Upper
             Tribunal. An application in writing can be made at any  stage,
             and a judge deciding a case in the  Upper  Tribunal  could  no
             doubt  withdraw  and  determine  a  written  application   for
             permission to appeal as a judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
             However if  the  judge  did  not  extend  time  (for  such  an
             application would almost  always  be  very  late)  or  refused
             permission to appeal there would no doubt  be  an  application
             for an adjournment so that the papers could be  put  before  a
             judge sitting the Upper Tribunal. This, we find, must  be  the
             deliberate intention of the rules and  rather  underlines  the
             importance of a party that needs permission to appeal  seeking
             it in accordance with  the  prescribe  time  scales  and  well
             before a rule 24 notice would ordinarily be appropriate.

         38.  Against this background we look carefully at the terms of rule
             24 of the Upper Tribunal Rules.  Although the rule  prescribes
             a  time  scale  for  providing  a  respondent's   notice   and
             prescribes its contents, the rule does not  create  a  general
             obligation on a respondent to provide a notice at all.  Rather
             if the respondent chooses  to  send  a  notice  then  rule  24
             prescribes its content. In this case directions echo the  rule
             and specify the contents of a Notice rather than insist on one
             being served.

         39.  Certain  of  the  requirements  are  informative  rather  than
             controversial, such  as  stating  the  respondent's  name  and
             address, whether the respondent wants a hearing and, usefully,
             whether or not the respondent  opposes  the  appeal.      Rule
             24(3)(e), it was submitted, assists the appellant. It requires
             the respondent to state in the response:

                  "The grounds on which the respondent relies including  (in
                  the case of an appeal  against  the  decision  of  another
                  Tribunal)  any  grounds  on  which  the   respondent   was
                  unsuccessful in the proceedings which are the  subject  of
                  the appeal, but intends to rely on in the appeal."

         40.  The 2002 Act provides statutory grounds of appeal to the First-
             tier Tribunal (see section 84(1)) but the Secretary  of  State
             can never appeal to the First-tier Tribunal and so cannot rely
             strictly on the grounds listed at section 84(1) which are  all
             grounds of appeal against an immigration decision. It  follows
             that "grounds" in rule  24  must  have  a  wider  meaning  and
             include any reason relied upon by the parties to  support  the
             decision. It does not follow that a  respondent  can  raise  a
             point in a response  that  should  have  been  raised  in  the
             respondent's own appeal.

         41.  Ms Dubinsky argued that the rule 24 response permitted her  to
             argue, without seeking permission to appeal, that  the  First-
             tier Tribunal should have resolved any point in the claimant's
             favour that the claimant relied  upon  before  the  First-tier
             Tribunal. Ms Dubinsky submitted that this rule is incapable of
             being interpreted in  a  way  that  does  not  assume  that  a
             respondent can challenge a First-tier Tribunal's  decision  in
             this manner without permission to appeal having been  granted.
             Ms Dubinsky argued that a respondent who opposes an appeal can
             be expected, without need for express confirmation, to rely on
             grounds which were successful before the First-tier  Tribunal.
             It would hardly be informative for  an  appellant  before  the
             First-tier Tribunal who succeeded in persuading the First-tier
             Tribunal (for example) that a decision was not  in  accordance
             with the immigration rules (section 84(1)(a)) to  be  required
             to state in a notice that it relied  on  the  same  successful
             ground when responding to an appeal brought by  the  Secretary
             of State and the rule makes no such requirement. Rule 24(3)(e)
             requires the respondent to state if  it  intends  to  rely  on
             grounds that were unsuccessful "in the proceedings  which  are
             the subject of the appeal" but  intends  to  rely  on  in  the
             appeal to the Upper Tribunal.   Ms Dubinsky submitted that the
             rule does not make sense unless it  is  interpreted  to  mean,
             without qualification, that there is a right  to  say  that  a
             ground that was unsuccessful before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
             should have succeeded.

         42.  When Mr Eicke addressed  us  on  rule  24(3)(e)  he  tried  to
             circumvent Ms Dubinsky's submission by  emphasising  that  the
             claimants were required to identify any grounds on which  they
             intended to rely including grounds "on  which  the  respondent
             was unsuccessful in the proceedings which are the  subject  of
             the appeal".  He said that the words "which are the subject of
             the appeal" are crucial. The proceedings which are the subject
             of the appeal were not, he submitted, all the proceedings that
             were before the First-tier Tribunal, but only the  proceedings
             that were before  us  and  the  proceedings  before  us,  were
             identified by reference to the grant of permission to  appeal.
             Clearly, if he is right, the points relied on by the claimants
             are excluded because they were not part of that grant.

         43.  The bright line distinction between the First-tier section  85
             appeal and the Upper Tier section 11 appeal  suggested  by  Mr
             Eicke's argument is inconsistent with the continuum  suggested
             by section 104(4) of the 2002 Act and by rule 17A of the Upper
             Tribunal Rules. A section 11 appeal does not continue  when  a
             section 85 appeal has been abandoned. Similarly a  section  11
             appeal does not exist without regard to the section 85  appeal
             that encapsulated the dispute between  the  parties.  In  some
             ways this is an unattractive line of argument. It follows that
             we do not accept that the words "in the proceedings which  are
             the subject of the appeal" are limited to the grounds on which
             permission to appeal has been given.  The  "proceedings"  that
             are the "subject of the appeal" are those that came before the
             First-tier Tribunal and it is those "proceedings" that are the
             subject to further appeal.

         44.  Ms Dubinsky's contention that rule 24 is meaningless unless it
             permits raising any points that failed to impress  the  First-
             tier Tribunal, including a point that  should  have  been  the
             subject of an appeal, is attractive but is, we find, wrong.

         45.  Although section 11 of the  2007  Act  extends  the  right  of
             appeal (with permission and subject to excluded decisions)  to
             an appeal "on any point of law" save for extraordinary  cases,
             a party will not normally be given permission to  appeal,  and
             will not be expected to seek permission  to  appeal,  a  point
             that would not make a  material  difference  to  the  outcome.
             However that party might  still  have  very  good  reasons  to
             respond to an appeal by arguing that the  First-tier  Tribunal
             should have dismissed or allowed the appeal for reasons  other
             than those given in the Determination or  rather  for  grounds
             which were  unsuccessful  in  the  proceedings  that  are  the
             subject of the appeal.

         46.  Suppose a man seeks entry clearance as a husband  and  suppose
             that the Entry Clearance Officer finds that he has  not  shown
             that he can be either accommodated or maintained in accordance
             with the  rules.  A  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  may  decide,
             arguably  wrongly,  that   the   husband   can   satisfy   the
             accommodation   requirements   but   not    the    maintenance
             requirements. In  that  event  the  judge  would  dismiss  the
             appeal. The Entry Clearance Office would have no  interest  in
             appealing. He is content with  the  decision  to  dismiss  the
             appeal.  The  husband  however  may  want  to  challenge   the
             decision. He might want to argue that the decision that he did
             not satisfy the maintenance requirements was wrong in law  and
             he may be given permission to appeal. In that event the  Entry
             Clearance Officer may well want to argue  not  only  that  the
             decision  that  the  husband  did  not  meet  the  maintenance
             requirements was right but that the decision that he did  meet
             the accommodation requirements was wrong.  In  short,  without
             wanting to appeal the decision, the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
             may want to rely on a ground that failed before the First-tier
             Tribunal. Rule 24 permits the Entry Clearance Office  to  give
             notice of his intention to raise such a point in a  reply.  In
             short rule 24 does have a meaning that does not depend  on  Ms
             Dubinsky's premise and we reject  the  construction  that  she
             urged on us. Rule 24 does not create a right of  appeal  to  a
             party who has not asked for permission to appeal. Rule  24  is
             not in any way to do with seeking permission to appeal and  it
             is not an alternative to seeking permission  where  permission
             is needed.  It is to do  with  giving  notice  about  how  the
             respondent intends to respond to the appeal that the appellant
             has permission to pursue. If a respondent wants to argue  that
             the First-tier  Tribunal  should  have  reached  a  materially
             different conclusion then the respondent needs  permission  to
             appeal.

         47.  This is probably more significant in international  protection
             cases than entry clearance cases  because  an  appeal  can  be
             allowed on different grounds. An appellant may have shown, for
             example, alternatively, that he is a refugee, or  entitled  to
             humanitarian protection or that removal  is  contrary  to  his
             rights under article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human
             Rights.  The  beneficial  consequences  of  success  would  be
             different in each case. For  example  a  person  found  to  be
             entitled to humanitarian protection may want to argue that  he
             should have been recognised as a refugee whilst the  Secretary
             of State may want to argue that the appeal  should  only  have
             been allowed with reference to article 8. In such  cases  both
             parties would want a result materially different from the  one
             decided by the Tribunal and both  should  seek  permission  to
             appeal."


  51. We must respectfully take issue with paragraph 37 of EG.  Despite  the
      mandatory nature of  rule  21(2)  of  the  2008  Rules,  there  is  no
      jurisdictional  fetter  on  the   Upper   Tribunal   entertaining   an
      application for permission  to  appeal,  even  though  the  First-tier
      Tribunal has not refused (wholly or partly)  or  has  not  refused  to
      admit, an application for permission to appeal made to that  Tribunal.
      Rule 7 (failure  to  comply  with  rules  etc),  so  far  as  relevant
      provides: -

         "7.(1)   An irregularity resulting from a failure  to  comply  with
                any requirement in these Rules, a practice  direction  or  a
                direction, does not of itself render void the proceedings or
                any step taken in the proceedings."

           (2)    If a party has failed to comply  with  a  requirement  in
                these Rules, a practice direction or a direction, the  Upper
                Tribunal may take such action as it  considers  just,  which
                may include -

                (a)     waiving the requirement;


         ..."


  52. In Ved  and  another  (appealable  decision;  permission  application;
      Basnet) [2014] UKUT 00150 (IAC), the appellants applied to the  First-
      tier Tribunal for permission to appeal against a decision  that  their
      appeals to that Tribunal were  not  valid.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
      refused to entertain the applications.  The appellants then applied to
      the Upper Tribunal for permission to appeal.


  53. The Upper Tribunal held that even though, for  the  purposes  of  rule
      21(2)(b), the First-tier Tribunal  had  not  refused,  or  refused  to
      admit, the application for permission to appeal, it was appropriate to
      apply rule 7(2) so  as  to  waive  that  requirement  and  enable  the
      appellants to apply for permission direct to the Upper  Tribunal.  The
      Upper Tribunal held as follows: -

         "24. On the particular facts of the present case,  the  requirement
             in rule 21(2), that the  appellant  should  have  applied  for
             permission to the First-tier Tribunal and been refused or  had
             their application not admitted, clearly should not be a reason
             to preclude the appellants from applying for permission to the
             Upper Tribunal.  We would, however,  emphasise  the  following
             important points.

         25.  ... the existence of rule 7(2)(a) is not  in  any  way  to  be
             regarded as excusing appellants from  first  applying  to  the
             First-tier  Tribunal  for   permission   to   appeal,   before
             approaching the Upper Tribunal.   Indeed,  we  cannot  readily
             envisage a situation where the Upper Tribunal would be  likely
             to accept an  application  for  permission  from  a  party  to
             proceedings in the First-tier Tribunal who has chosen  not  to
             make any prior application to that Tribunal,  whether  or  not
             such an application would be out of time. The same  is  likely
             to be true where no such  prior  application  is  made,  as  a
             result of inadvertence."


  54. Although it is necessary to make that caveat to paragraph  37  of  EG,
      the point made in paragraph 25 of Ved holds good,  in  the  particular
      circumstances with which EG was concerned. The Upper Tribunal is  very
      unlikely to be sympathetic to a request that  it  should  invoke  rule
      7(2)(a), where  a  person  who  could  and  should  have  applied  for
      permission to appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  against  an  adverse
      decision of that body seeks to challenge that  adverse  decision  only
      after the other party has been given permission to  appeal  against  a
      decision in the same proceedings which was in  favour  of  the  first-
      mentioned person.


  55. So far as the present case is concerned,  we  consider  that  the  key
      question is what is meant by "a materially  different  conclusion"  in
      paragraph 46 of EG.


  56. There is, we find, considerable force in Mr Amunwa's submission  that,
      in the case of the claimant, there was no material benefit to  him  in
      applying for permission to appeal against the decision of  the  First-
      tier Tribunal judge (as we find it to be) not to determine  his  human
      rights appeal, given that, on the face of the  judge's  decision,  the
      claimant had succeeded in resisting removal by reference to  the  2016
      Regulations.   As  a  general  matter,  it  would  be  undesirable  if
      individuals were encouraged  to  seek  permission  to  appeal  against
      adverse decisions which, if decided  differently,  would  confer  upon
      them no tangible benefit, given the  decision  in  their  favour.  The
      litigation of what in most circumstances would be academic  issues  is
      not in the interests of the overriding objective.


  57.  In EG, the appellants would plainly have been in a materially  better
      legal position, if they had been found by the First-tier  Tribunal  to
      have  the  status  of  refugees  within  the  scope  of  the   Refugee
      Convention, rather than persons who could not,  for  the  present,  be
      removed without a real risk of Article 3 mistreatment. They would have
      enjoyed the benefits of that Convention.


  58. We do not consider that the answer to the question of what is meant by
      "a materially different conclusion" necessarily turns upon whether (as
      here) two distinct appeals are in play.  A paradigm instance exists in
      section 82 of the 2002 Act, where subsection (1)(a) confers a right of
      appeal  against  the  decision  to  refuse  protection  claim,  whilst
      subsection (1)(b) confers such a right in respect of the refusal of  a
      human rights claim.  A person who succeeds in a protection  claim,  on
      the basis that he or she is found to be a refugee or a person entitled
      to the grant of humanitarian protection, may have been unsuccessful in
      a human rights appeal brought by reference to Article 8 of  the  ECHR.
      In such circumstances, there would be nothing to be gained by  seeking
      permission to appeal in respect of the Article 8 human rights decision
      of the Tribunal.


  59. We accordingly conclude that the test of materiality,  as  articulated
      in EG and as further explained above, remains the  correct  touchstone
      in respect of the appellate system  contained  in  the  2002  Act  (as
      amended by the Immigration Act 2014) and in the 2016 Regulations.


  60. In the present case, therefore, the claimant was entitled to raise, in
      his rule 24 response, the Article 8  grounds  on  which  he  had  been
      unsuccessful  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   That   means   it   was
      unnecessary for those advising the claimant to couch  this  aspect  of
      the response in terms of a "cross  appeal",  with  all  the  attendant
      procedural complexity that an application  for  permission  to  appeal
      would, at that stage, entail.


  61.  It may be helpful to set out our general conclusions under this Part:


      (i) A decision by the First-tier Tribunal not to decide  a  ground  of
          appeal constitutes a "decision" for the purposes of s.11(1) of the
          Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007. It  may  therefore  be
          appealed to the Upper Tribunal.


      (ii)    If  an  appellant's  appeal  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
          succeeds on some grounds and fails on other grounds, the appellant
          will not be required to apply for  permission  to  appeal  to  the
          Upper Tribunal in respect of any ground on which he or she failed,
          so long as a determination  of  that  ground  in  the  appellant's
          favour would not have conferred on the appellant any material  (ie
          tangible) benefit, compared with  the  benefit  flowing  from  the
          ground or grounds on which the appellant  was  successful  in  the
          First-tier Tribunal.


      (iii)  In the event that the respondent to the appeal before the First-
          tier Tribunal obtains permission to appeal against that Tribunal's
          decision regarding the grounds upon which the First-tier  Tribunal
          found in favour of the appellant, then, ordinarily, the  appellant
          will be able to rely upon rule 24(3)(e) of the 2008 Rules in order
          to argue in a response that the appellant should  succeed  on  the
          grounds on which he or she  was  unsuccessful  in  the  First-tier
          Tribunal. Any such response must be filed and served in accordance
          with those Rules and the Upper Tribunal's directions.


      (iv)    If permission to  appeal  is  required,  any  application  for
          permission should be made to the First-tier Tribunal in accordance
          with rule 33  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)
          (Immigration and Asylum  Chamber)  Rules  2014,  within  the  time
          limits there set out. This includes cases where the appellant  has
          succeeded on some grounds but failed  on  others,  in  respect  of
          which a material benefit would flow (see (ii) above).


      (v)  There is, however, no jurisdictional fetter on the Upper Tribunal
          entertaining an application for permission to appeal, even  though
          the condition contained in rule 21(2)(b) of the 2008 Rules has not
          been met, in that the First-tier Tribunal has not refused  (wholly
          or partly), or has  not  refused  to  admit,  an  application  for
          permission to appeal made to that Tribunal. Rule  7(2)(a)  of  the
          2008 Rules permits the Upper Tribunal  to  waive  any  failure  to
          comply with a requirement of the Rules. The guidance in EG and  NG
          (UT rule 17: withdrawal; rule  24:  Scope)  Ethiopia  [2013]  UKUT
          00143 (IAC) is otherwise confirmed.


      (vi)    The Upper Tribunal  is,  nevertheless,  very  unlikely  to  be
          sympathetic to a request that it should invoke rule 7(2)(a), where
          a party (A), who could and should have applied for  permission  to
          appeal to the First-tier Tribunal against an adverse  decision  of
          that Tribunal, seeks to challenge that  decision  only  after  the
          other party has been given permission to appeal against a decision
          in the same proceedings which was in favour of A.

      (c) Disposal of the human rights appeal


  62. As will be apparent, once it is determined that the claimant  can  use
      rule 24 to challenge paragraph 27 of the First-tier  Tribunal  judge's
      decision, that challenge  must  succeed.  So  much  is  common  ground
      between the parties.  The judge failed to make a  lawful  decision  on
      the claimant's appeal against the refusal of his human rights claim.


  63. The judge's error was, in the circumstances, material.   The  decision
      in the human rights appeal is set aside and requires to be re-made.


  64. We have seen that,  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge,  it  was
      contended on behalf of the  Secretary  of  State  that  the  issue  of
      whether the claimant could prove on  balance  that  he  is  a  British
      citizen  was  one  which  had  to  be  resolved  by  judicial   review
      proceedings. We did not hear submissions on what  relevance,  if  any,
      the claimant's assertion of  British  citizenship  will  have  to  his
      unresolved human rights appeal.  A person who asserts that his or  her
      removal would be unlawful under section 6  of  the  Human  Rights  Act
      1998, and whose circumstances engage Article 8(2) of  the  ECHR,  must
      succeed if the challenged decision is not one which  can  lawfully  be
      made in respect of that person: Charles (Human Rights  Appeal:  Scope)
      [2018] UKUT 89 (IAC). At first sight,  therefore,  the  issue  of  the
      claimant's nationality may not be capable of being side-stepped.


  65. On the other hand, section 1(1) of the Immigration Act  1971  entitles
      the Secretary of State to qualify the right  of  those  who  have  the
      right of abode to live in and come and go into  and  from  the  United
      Kingdom, to the extent that "may be required ... to enable their right
      to be established or as may  be  otherwise  lawfully  imposed  on  any
      person". The Secretary of State might, therefore, contend that  he  is
      entitled to have an application for recognition as a  British  citizen
      determined in a particular manner, so as to  resist  its  adjudication
      within the framework of a human rights appeal.


  66.  This issue is one  which  requires  adjudication  at  Upper  Tribunal
      level.  We  have  accordingly  decided  to  re-make  the  decision  in
      claimant's human rights appeal. The parties  are  hereby  directed  to
      address this issue in their skeleton arguments, which shall  be  filed
      and served not later than 14 days before the resumed hearing.


      I.  Anonymity


  67. Upper Tribunal Judge Gill's directions required the  parties  to  make
      submissions as to anonymity of the claimant.  We have  considered  the
      parties' submissions.  We find that the First-tier Tribunal judge  was
      wrong to order anonymity and we lift his order.  The  judge's  reasons
      were that he considered it "in the interests of justice"  to  make  an
      anonymity  direction.   (paragraph  2).    The   judge   provided   no
      explanation of why he had reached this conclusion.


  68.  The starting point is that open justice is a fundamental principle of
      our legal system. Any derogation from that principle should be allowed
      only to the extent that is necessary in order  to  secure  the  proper
      administration of justice. As a result, just as is the case  in  other
      jurisdictions, the parties in immigration proceedings should be named,
      unless doing so would cause harm, or create the risk of harm, of  such
      a nature as to require derogation from the basic principle.   In  most
      cases involving international protection, anonymity of  an  individual
      will be required, lest the proceedings themselves should aggravate  or
      give rise to such a risk. That will normally be  the  case  throughout
      the course of the proceedings, including any appeals.


  69. Applying the correct  approach  to  the  present  case,  we  note  the
      claimant has a partner, who was pregnant at the time  of  the  hearing
      before the First-tier Tribunal judge.  The partner  is  not  named  in
      this decision.  We are not satisfied that the claimant has shown  that
      naming him in our decision would give rise to any material harm to the
      partner or any other third party.


  70. The claimant would, no doubt, prefer it if our decision did not  refer
      to him by name. He is not,  however,  asserting  a  risk  of  harm  to
      himself, as in the case of a person seeking international  protection.
      Irrespective of whether the Article 8 rights of the  claimant  or  any
      other person are in due course found to be of such a kind as to defeat
      the Secretary of State's attempt to remove the  claimant,  the  public
      has a right to know about the  criminal  behaviour  of  the  claimant,
      which led to the decision that he should be deported. There is also  a
      strong public interest in recording the fact  that  the  claimant  has
      repeatedly behaved in flagrant contravention of what is, on its  face,
      a valid deportation order.


  71. The claimant's request for anonymity is refused.


      J. Decision


72. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making  of  errors
    on points of law.  The decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  the
    appeal under the 2016 Regulations is set aside and re-made by  formally
    dismissing it. The decision in the appeal against the  refusal  of  the
    claimant's human rights claim is set aside and will be re-made  by  the
    Upper Tribunal.



                      Signed                     Date: 24 June 2019






                      The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                      President of the Upper Tribunal
                      Immigration and Asylum Chamber
