
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

MK (section 55 - Tribunal options) Sierra Leone [2015] UKUT 00223 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London                  |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 19 December 2014. [Further                 |.............................|
|Submissions: 20 January 2015]                 |..........                   |


                                   Before

       The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey, President of the Upper Tribunal
                        Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins


                                   Between

                                     MK
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

Appellant:    Did not attend and was not represented.
Respondent:   Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

     i) Where it is contended  that  either  of  the  duties  enshrined  in
        section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 has
        been breached, the onus  rests  on  the  appellant  and  the  civil
        standard of the balance of probabilities applies.  There is no onus
        on the Secretary of State.


    ii) As regards the second of the statutory duties  [the  need  to  have
        regard to  statutory  guidance  promulgated  by  the  Secretary  of
        State], it is  not  necessary  for  the  decision  letter  to  make
        specific reference to the statutory guidance.

   iii)  The  statutory  guidance  prescribes  a  series  of  factors   and
        principles which case workers and decision makers must consider.

    iv) Where the Tribunal finds that there has been a breach of either  of
        the section 55 duties, one of the options available is remittal  to
        the Secretary of State for reconsideration and fresh decision.

     v) In considering the appropriate order, Tribunals should have  regard
        to their adjournment and case management powers, together with  the
        overriding  objective.   They  will  also  take  into  account  the
        facilities available to the Secretary of State under the  statutory
        guidance, the desirability of finality and  the  undesirability  of
        undue delay.  If  deciding  not  to  remit  the  Tribunal  must  be
        satisfied that it is sufficiently  equipped  to  make  an  adequate
        assessment of the best interests of any affected child.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

                                  ANONYMITY

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) the Upper Tribunal makes an Anonymity Order.  Unless the  Upper
Tribunal or Court orders otherwise, no report  of  any  proceedings  or  any
form of publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the
original  Appellant.  This  prohibition  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
parties.

Introduction

 1. This appeal has its origins  in  a  decision  made  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department (hereinafter the  "Secretary
    of State"), dated 03 September 2013, whereby it was  decided  that  the
    original Appellant, a national of Sierra Leone, aged 31  years,  should
    be deported from the United Kingdom.  The reason proffered  for  taking
    this action was expressed as the original Appellant's  "conviction  for
    the following offences: four counts of robbery, three counts of  having
    an imitation firearm with intent  to  commit  indictable  offences  and
    handling, for which you were sentenced  to  five  years  imprisonment".
    The Appellant's appeal against this decision was allowed by the  First-
    tier Tribunal (the "FtT").  Pursuant to  the  grant  of  permission  to
    appeal, this Tribunal, in its determination dated 23 October 2014,  set
    aside the decision of the FtT.

 2. It is uncontroversial that the Appellant has been in the United Kingdom
    since 1986, when he was aged three years.   Although his mother made an
    unsuccessful asylum claim, both he  and  she  were  granted  indefinite
    leave to remain in September 2000.  His  offences  were  committed  two
    years later, when he was aged 18 years.  Having served his sentence  of
    imprisonment, he committed a further  offence,  namely  using  a  motor
    vehicle while uninsured, which attracted the penalty of  a  conditional
    discharge.   The  reason  proffered  for  the   Secretary  of   State's
    dilatory conduct is formulated in the decision letter in the  following
    terms :

         "Your case was not referred to the Criminal Case Work  Team  whilst
         you were serving your custodial  sentence.   You  were,  therefore,
         released from prison without deportation consideration ......


         On 28 March 2013 you applied to the Home Office for a No Time Limit
         Stamp to be  endorsed  in  your  passport.   Your  criminality  was
         subsequently identified ....."

    On behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State,  it  was  concluded  that  the
    presumption that the public  interest  requires  the  Appellant  to  be
    deported from the United Kingdom had not been displaced.


The Two Tribunal Decisions to Date

 3. The FtT made findings to the following effect: that the  Appellant  had
    taken advantage of his imprisonment  to  undergo  appropriate  courses,
    designed to address the  reasons  for  his  offending  and  to  prevent
    reoffending; he has subsequently  been in regular,  steady  employment;
    certain initial steps to establish his own business have been taken; he
    has secured a coaching qualification, with a view to working with those
    in the age bracket of 6 to 14 years; he is the father of two  children,
    one of whom is aged six years and whom he sees at fortnightly intervals
    and supports with payments of �150 per month; he has been a member of a
    family unit consisting of the Appellant, his partner and  her  son  for
    some three years; he plays a significant  role  in  the  lives  of  his
    younger brothers (the father being deceased); and there  are  no  known
    remaining family members in his country of origin.

 4. In his determination setting aside  the  decision  of  the  FtT,  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Perkins highlighted one of the  stand  out  features  of
    this case, in [3]:

         "Although the deportation order was made in  2013  the  convictions
         leading to the deportation order were recorded in 2002 and there is
         evidence that in the very long period between  his  coming  out  of
         custody and the deportation decision being made  the  claimant  had
         sorted out his life.  Although his  private  life  was  not  beyond
         criticism he  has  established  a  regular  relationship  with  his
         daughter, to whom he makes regular financial  support  and  he  has
         established another serious relationship with a partner."


    Judge Perkins determined to set aside the decision of the  FtT  on  the
    ground that it  was  vitiated  by  error  of  law  constituted  by  the
    unsustainability  of  the  reasons  given  for  allowing  the   appeal.
    Succinctly, these were found to be lacking in logic and coherence.  The
    case was then relisted for hearing before this Tribunal for the purpose
    of re-making the decision of the FtT.


 5. As noted above, the Appellant did not attend  the  hearing  which  this
    Tribunal proceeded to conduct.  This Tribunal explored, inter alia, the
    question of whether the decision of  the  Secretary  of  State  was  in
    accordance with section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and  Immigration
    Act 2009.  A written submission directed to  this  discrete  issue  was
    duly provided by the Secretary of  State's  representative.   We  shall
    consider this issue first.

     Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009

 6. Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act  2009  (the
    "2009 Act") provides:

         "(1) The Secretary of State must  make  arrangements  for  ensuring
    that -


                    a)  the  functions  mentioned  in  sub-section  (2)  are
                       discharged having regard to the need to safeguard and
                       promote the welfare of children who are in the United
                       Kingdom."


    This is what may be described as the umbrella,  overarching  duty.   It
    obliges the Secretary of State to devise systems and structures for the
    purpose specified.  This  duty  is  formulated  in  unqualified  terms.
    Subsection (2) elaborates:


     "(2)     The functions referred to in sub-section (1) are -


                   (a) any function of the Secretary of State in relation to
                       immigration, asylum or nationality;


                    a) any  function  conferred  by  or  by  virtue  of  the
                       Immigration Acts on an Immigration Officer ...


              (3) A person exercising  any  of  those  functions  must,  in
              exercising the function, have regard to any guidance given to
              the person by the Secretary of State for the purpose of  sub-
              section (1)".


    The latter is the crucial, case-by-case duty to be  discharged  by  the
    Secretary of  State's  decision  makers  and  caseworkers.  It  too  is
    formulated in the language of an unqualified duty.


7.   The genesis of section 55 is found  in  a  provision  of  international
    law, Article 3(1) of the UN Convention  on  the  Rights  of  the  Child
    ("UNCRC", 1989):

         "In all actions concerning children, whether undertaken  by  public
         or  private   social   welfare   institutions,   courts   of   law,
         administrative  authorities  or  legislative   bodies,   the   best
         interests of the child shall be a primary consideration."

     In the field of immigration, therefore, the  enactment  of  section  55
    discharges an international law obligation of the UK Government.  While
    section 55 and Article 3(1) of  the  UNCRC  are  couched  in  different
    terms, there may not be any major difference between them in substance,
    as the decided cases have shown. The final striking feature of  section
    55 is that it operates to protect all children who are  in  the  United
    Kingdom: there is no qualification such as residence or nationality.

8.   What is required of the Secretary of State's case workers and  decision
    makers by section 55 of the 2009 Act, where it applies, was  considered
    in extenso recently by this Tribunal in JO and Others (section 55 duty)
    Nigeria  [2014]  UKUT   00517   (IAC).    This   case   decided   that,
    fundamentally, it is manifestly insufficient for a  decision  maker  to
    pay mere lip service  to  the  two,  inter-related  duties  imposed  by
    section 55.  The  substance  of  the  primary  duty  must  be  properly
    acknowledged, the relevant children must be identified and  their  best
    interests must then be considered,  to  be  followed  by  a  considered
    balancing exercise.  In assessing the best interests of  each  affected
    child, the decision maker must be properly informed.   Furthermore,  it
    must be apparent from the terms of the decision that the best interests
    of  each  affected  child,  as  assessed,  are  ranked  as  a   primary
    consideration and accorded a primacy of importance, as required  by  ZH
    (Tanzania) 2011 UKSC 4, at [26] and [33] especially.  See [7] - [10] of
    JO (Nigeria) and, in particular, the following passage in [11]:

         "I  consider  that,  properly  analysed,  there  are  two   guiding
         principles, each rooted in duty.  The first is  that  the  decision
         maker  must  be  properly  informed.   The  second  is  that,  thus
         equipped, the decision maker must conduct a careful examination  of
         all relevant information and factors .....


         Being adequately informed and conducting a scrupulous analysis  are
         elementary pre-requisites to the inter-related tasks of identifying
         the child's best interests  and  then  balancing  them  with  other
         material considerations.  This balancing exercise  is  the  central
         feature of cases of the present type.  It cannot  realistically  or
         sensibly be undertaken unless and until  the  scales  are  properly
         prepared."


    This is how this Tribunal analysed the first of the two duties  imposed
    on the Secretary of State by section 55 of the 2009 Act.

 9. In JO (Nigeria), this Tribunal also gave consideration to the second of
    the duties imposed by section 55, namely - per section 55(3) - to  have
    regard to the statutory guidance promulgated by the Secretary of State.
    The statutory guidance is entitled "Every Children Matters - Change for
    Children" and was published in  November  2009.   It  is  described  as
    "Statutory Guidance to the UK Border Agency on Making  Arrangements  to
    Safeguard and Promote the Welfare of Children".  It prescribes a series
    of procedures and arrangements applicable to  relevant  decisions.   It
    also deals with matters such as service development,  the  training  of
    staff, effective inter-agency working  and  information  sharing.   The
    passages which apply most clearly to the  context  of  immigration  and
    asylum decisions are contained in paragraphs 1.14, 1.15, 1.16, 2.6, 2.7
    and 2.8.  These are reproduced in the second schedule to this judgment.



10. With specific reference to the separate duty imposed on  the  Secretary
    of State's case workers and  decision  makers  by  section  55(3)  this
    Tribunal stated in JO (Nigeria), at [12]:

         "In considering whether this discrete duty has been  discharged  in
         any given case, it will be necessary for the appellate or reviewing
         court or tribunal to  take  cognisance  of  the  relevant  guidance
         .............   juxtaposing  this  with  the  representations   and
         information provided by the person or  persons  concerned  and  the
         ensuing decision."

    This passage also draws attention  to  the  obligatory  nature  of  the
    requirement: the decision maker "must" have  regard  to  the  guidance,
    which itself enshrines a further duty, per paragraph 2.7, which  states
    that the Secretary of State's agents "must  .......  act  according  to
    ....." same [emphasis added].  Having referred  to  the  guidance,  the
    judgment continues:


         "I consider that these provisions, considered in  tandem  with  the
         principles enunciated by the  Supreme  Court  and  the  public  law
         duties  rehearsed  above,  envisage  a  process  of   deliberation,
         assessment and final decision of some depth. The antithesis, namely
         something cursory, casual or superficial, will plainly  not  be  in
         accordance with the specific duty imposed by section 55(3)  or  the
         overarching duty to have  regard  to  the  need  to  safeguard  and
         promote the welfare of any children involved in,  or  affected  by,
         the relevant factual matrix.  Ditto cases where the decision making
         process and its product entail little more than giving lip  service
         to the guidance."

     As this passage makes clear, the two duties imposed on  the  Secretary
    of State by section 55 are  inter-related.   While  the  first  may  be
    regarded as the overarching, or umbrella, duty it cannot be  viewed  in
    isolation from the second.  Moreover, the  second  of  the  two  duties
    incorporates,  through  the  statutory   guidance,   both   substantive
    considerations and procedural mechanisms  designed  to  facilitate  and
    promote the due discharge of the first duty.

Relevant Immigration Rules

11.  The legal framework within which the Secretary of State's decision  was
    made includes certain  provisions  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  namely
    paragraphs  396,  398,  399  and  399A.   We  have,  for   convenience,
    reproduced these in a schedule to this judgment.  In brief compass, the
    effect of these provisions of the Rules is that there is a  presumption
    that the public interest requires deportation of the person  concerned;
    where Article 8 ECHR is raised, the Secretary of  State  must  consider
    whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies;  and  if  neither  applies,  the
    public interest in deportation will be outweighed by other factors only
    in "exceptional circumstances".   In paragraph 399, the focus is on (a)
    children, with attendant  qualifying  conditions  and  (b)  sentimental
    partners, again with attendant qualifying conditions.

The Secretary of State's Case

12.  As noted above, the Tribunal invited argument on the specific issue  of
    whether, in making the impugned decision, the Secretary  of  State  had
    discharged the duties imposed by  section  55  of  the  2009  Act.   In
    response, Mr Jarvis drew attention to  the  Appellant's  reply  to  the
    "Notice  of  Liability  for  Deportation   and   Questionnaire"   (Form
    ICD.0350).  It was argued, correctly, that this  provides  a  mechanism
    for the recipient to bring relevant children to the  attention  of  the
    Secretary of State.  The pro-forma was duly completed by the Appellant,
    in June 2013.  In doing  so  he  detailed  the  relationship  with  his
    partner, which dates from 2011; various  particulars  relating  to  his
    daughter, then aged six years;  similar  particulars  relating  to  his
    stepson, then aged almost eight years; the identities of their  carers,
    his former partner and  current  partner;  his  contact  with  the  two
    children; and the adverse impact on them  by  reason  of  his  proposed
    removal from the United Kingdom.  He asserted that his  daughter  would
    be "devastated" if this were to materialise.  As regards  his  stepson,
    he stated:

           "[XY] takes me as his father and I take  him  as  my  biological
           son. He always sits with me when I am home, falls asleep  on  my
           lap and tries to stay awake until I get home.  His  father  left
           when he was born and I am all he has left as his father  figure.
           He needs me.  Also I love him so much.  Don't take  me  from  my
           family."

      Accompanying  the  completed  pro-forma  were  the  children's   birth
      certificates  and  various  letters,  including  one  written  by  his
      partner.

13.   In  his  submissions,  Mr  Jarvis  criticised  the  adequacy  of   the
      information provided by the Appellant.  We cannot agree.   We  are  of
      the opinion that the Appellant presented the Secretary of State with a
      thoughtfully composed, articulate case containing adequate information
      relating to both  children  and  his  relationships  with  them.   One
      discrete aspect of the submissions of Mr Jarvis entailed the following
      assertion:

           "All of the documents and information submitted  were  carefully
           considered by the SSHD's decision maker."

     We draw attention to this  formulation  since,  within  this  assertion
      there is an implicit acknowledgement, which we consider correct,  that
      there was a duty on the decision maker to give  careful  consideration
      to all available information.  One of the questions  which  arises  is
      whether  this  discrete  duty  was  discharged.   In  answering   this
      question,  we  consider  it  incumbent  on  the  Tribunal  to  examine
      carefully the letter of decision. In doing so, we would observe  that,
      in  the  fields  of  immigration  and  asylum  decision  making,   the
      importance of the letter of decision cannot  be  overstated.   In  the
      great majority of cases, this is the only mechanism which  conveys  to
      the applicant - and, where challenged, the Tribunal - the substance of
      the Secretary of State's decision, the main  factors  considered,  the
      underlying  reasoning  and  the  legal  rules  to  which  effect   was
      purportedly given.

The Secretary of State's Decision Analysed

14.  Having scrutinised those passages in the decision letter purporting  to
    consider  Article  8  ECHR,  we   consider   the   following   analysis
    appropriate:

    (a)  No consideration is given to the Appellant's role in the lives  of
         his younger brothers.  There is simply a bare statement  "....   It
         is noted that you have two siblings and your mother residing in the
         UK".

    (b)  There is no assessment or  acknowledgement  of  the  role  of  the
         Appellant in the life of his stepson, aged seven years.

    (c)  There are  significant  flaws  in  the  passage  relating  to  the
         Appellant's relationship with his daughter, who is now  aged  seven
         years:

             "....  You have not  submitted  any  substantial  evidence  to
             demonstrate that you are in a genuine and subsisting  parental
             relationship with your  daughter,  or  that  you  support  her
             financially or otherwise."

         This  passage  is  clearly  unsustainable,  having  regard  to  the
         information provided by the Appellant in his representations to the
         Secretary of State (supra) and the  unchallenged  findings  of  the
         FtT, rehearsed above.

    (d)   There  is  no  clear  finding,  or  assessment,  of  whether  the
         deportation  of  the  Appellant  from  the  United  Kingdom   would
         interfere with the right to respect for private or family  life  of
         the other persons  in  the  matrix  whose  Article  8  rights  were
         engaged.

    (e)  The consideration given  to  the  related  issue  of  whether  the
         Appellant has any enduring connections with his country  of  origin
         is confined to the following bare sentence:
             "However, it is not considered that you have no ties to Sierra
             Leone, the country to which you would be deported."

         This is strikingly unparticularised.

15.  The consideration given specifically by the decision maker  to  section
    55 of the 2009 Act also merits scrutiny.   In [26] of the text,  it  is
    stated:

         "Paragraph 399(a) of the Immigration Rules specifies  the  criteria
         which must be satisfied in order for a parental relationship with a
         child to out weigh the public interest in deportation in line  with
         Article 8 of the ECHR.  The criteria reflect the duty in section 55
         of the [2009 Act] to have regard  to  the  need  to  safeguard  and
         promote the welfare of children who are in the  United  Kingdom  as
         interpreted in recent case law, in particular  ZH  (Tanzania).   In
         view of this, consideration has  been  given  to  the  criteria  in
         paragraph 399(a) and we have come to the following conclusions."

    What "conclusions" follow? In the several  succeeding  paragraphs,  the
    decision maker concluded that by  reason  of  the  proportions  of  the
    Appellant's sentence of imprisonment -  five  years  -  the  "criteria"
    under all of paragraph 399(a),  paragraph  399(b)  and  paragraph  399A
    "will not be considered". There  is  no  analysis  of  the  Appellant's
    relationship with his stepson or daughter and,  as  highlighted  above,
    there are significant errors concerning this latter relationship.  Most
    striking of all, there is no analysis or assessment of the  welfare  or
    best interests of either of these children.  As  regards  the  stepson,
    the consideration given to this issue is confined  to  identifying  the
    possibility of continuing long distance communication. As  regards  the
    daughter, the consideration afforded to this issue is  limited  to  the
    statement that she will remain in the case of her primary carer, namely
    her mother.

16.  As the decision in JO (Nigeria) highlights, in all cases where  section
      55 applies,  the  spotlight  will  inevitably  focus  with  particular
      penetration on the Secretary of State's letter of  decision.   In  the
      present case, the decision letter consists of 57  numbered  paragraphs
      filling  almost  seven  pages   of   relatively   dense   type.    The
      consideration given by the decision  maker  to  the  children's'  best
      interest is expressed in five paragraphs comprising  a  total  of  six
      sentences.  Three of these sentences are anodyne.  The other three are
      conclusionary.  There is  no  analysis  or  identification  of  either
      child's  best  interests  and  no  consideration  thereof,  with   the
      exception of the bare statements that the Appellant could continue  to
      communicate with his family from abroad and that  his  daughter  would
      remain in the care of her primary carer.  As noted in our analysis  in
      [12] above, the decision maker's characterisation of  the  Appellant's
      relationship with his  daughter  is  flawed  and  unsustainable.   The
      conclusion reached in JO (Nigeria) was that there had been a breach of
      each of the inter-related statutory duties.  The  decision  letter  in
      that case was considered to be "woefully  inadequate":  see  [15].  We
      consider that the decision  letter  in  the  present  case  is  little
      better.

17.  The analysis in [16] above does not impel inexorably to the  conclusion
      that there has been a breach of the first of the duties  enshrined  in
      section 55 of the 2009 Act. We consider it appropriate to  stand  back
      and consider the evidential matrix as a  whole.  Furthermore,  we  are
      mindful of the dictum in Zoumbas v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
      Department [2013] UKSC 74, at [23], that the Secretary of State ".....
      does not have to record and deal with every piece of evidence  in  her
      decision letter".  We do not suggest otherwise.  In the fact sensitive
      context of Zoumbas, the Supreme Court was satisfied about the adequacy
      of the decision letter.  In the quite different factual context of the
      present case, we are not thus satisfied, having regard to our analysis
      above.  In thus concluding we do not intend to promulgate any  general
      rule or principle. Every case will be intensively fact sensitive.

18.  We turn to consider the separate question of whether the second of  the
      duties enshrined in section 55 of the  2009  Act,  which  compels  the
      decision maker to have regard to the Secretary  of  State's  guidance,
      has been performed. We have examined the  statutory  guidance  in  [9]
      above and we refer also to the second schedule to this  judgment.   In
      considering whether the discrete duty imposed  by  section  55(3)  has
      been discharged in any given case, the exercise to be performed by the
      Tribunal  does  not  differ  significantly  from  that  undertaken  in
      determining whether the first of the section 55  duties,  namely  that
      contained  in  subsection  (1)(a),  has  been  discharged.   In   both
      instances, the Tribunal is required to examine the evidence available.
       Where appropriate, reasonable  inferences  will  be  made.  Moreover,
      where it is contended that either of the duties enshrined  in  section
      55 has been breached, we consider that the onus rests on the Appellant
      and that the civil standard of the balance of  probabilities  applies.
      There is no onus on the Secretary of State.

19.  On behalf of the Secretary of  State,  Mr  Jarvis  submitted  that  the
      decision letter does not  have  to  make  specific  reference  to  the
      statutory  guidance.   We  agree.  While  explicit  reference  to  the
      guidance would plainly be preferable and should not rank as a  counsel
      of perfection, we consider that this issue is one of substance and not
      form.  So much is clear from the decision of the Court of Appeal in AJ
      (India) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011]  EWCA  Civ
      1191, where the contrary argument was rejected: see  especially  [25],
      [43](b) and [44] - [45].  In that case, however,  the  conclusions  of
      the Court of Appeal related mainly to the  first  of  the  section  55
      duties.  While Counsel for the Appellant also formulated a  submission
      relating to the duty to have regard to  the  statutory  guidance:  see
      [25]. This was not expressly addressed in either of the two  judgments
      of the Court.

20.  We consider it important to assess the effect of the relevant  passages
      contained in the statutory guidance.  In our  judgment,  the  guidance
      prescribes a series of factors and principles  which  caseworkers  and
      decision makers must consider and to which they should strive to  give
      effect in every case.  Its language is, in the  main,  open  textured.
      It is an instrument which is somewhat detached and high level.  It  is
      designed to put officials on the right path when  deciding  individual
      cases.  The only exhortation of a concrete and practical nature  which
      it contains is that children should be consulted and their wishes  and
      feelings taken into  account  "wherever  practicable".  This  specific
      requirement is contained  in  Part  2  of  the  instrument,  which  is
      entitled "The Role of the UK Border Agency in relation to Safeguarding
      and Promoting the Welfare of Children".  Having regard to  the  nature
      of this  instrument  and  the  language  employed,  we  construe  this
      requirement as an instruction to  decision  makers  that  they  should
      consider  the  desirability  of  consulting  affected   children   and
      ascertaining their wishes and feelings in  any  given  case.   In  the
      relatively extensive combined experience of both members of the  panel
      in section 55 cases, neither is  aware  of  any  case  in  which  this
      requirement has actually been given effect.

21.  Given that there is no mention, express or oblique,  of  the  statutory
      guidance in the Secretary of State's decision,  the  question  in  the
      present case is whether it can be properly inferred that the  decision
      maker had regard to the material  parts  of  the  statutory  guidance.
      While the decision letter must be considered in conjunction  with  all
      other relevant evidence an intense focus on its terms is  unavoidable.
      One searches in vain in the decision letter for clues  or  indications
      favouring an affirmative response  to  the  question  we  have  posed.
      There is no reference to or quotation from the statutory guidance.  In
      the  text,  the  relevant  passages  are  nowhere  reproduced,  either
      verbatim or in substance.  The possibility of consulting the  affected
      children is nowhere mentioned.   None  of  the  obligatory  principles
      enshrined in paragraph  2.7  of  the  guidance  is  given  expression.
      Furthermore, there is no mention of the primary  statutory  provision,
      section 55(3), and no indication that the decision maker was alert  to
      the discrete duty which  this  imposes.   While  we  acknowledge  that
      paragraphs 396 - 399A of the Immigration Rules must be  considered  in
      this context, we consider that  their  provisions  do  not  provide  a
      conclusive answer to the question we have formulated: and the contrary
      was not argued.  Both the statutory duty and the  relevant  provisions
      of the guidance are  framed  in  specific  and  exacting  terms.   The
      conclusion to be drawn from our analysis is that a breach of the  duty
      imposed by section 55(3) of the 2009 Act has been established.

22.  We take this opportunity to highlight that in all cases  where  section
      55 of the 2009 Act applies, the requirement  to  perform  the  twofold
      statutory duties is unaffected by the statutory reforms  made  by  the
      Immigration Act 2014 and, in particular, the insertion of the new Part
      5A into the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.   There  has
      been no amendment of section 55 of the  2009  Act.   It  continues  to
      apply with full vigour.  It has not been modified in any  way  by  the
      most recent flurry of statutory  activity.   Given  that  "qualifying"
      children feature in  Part  5A,  per  section  117B(6)(a)  and  section
      117C(5), in the context of Article 8 ECHR, there is, of  course,  some
      overlap between the two statutory regimes:  the  section  55  exercise
      will be duplicated to some extent in the Article 8 exercise.   In  the
      present appeal, no specific issue concerning the relationship  between
      these two statutory regimes falls to be determined.  Both regimes will
      have to be given full effect by the Secretary of State in  appropriate
      cases.

Remedy

23.  Given our conclusion that there has  been  a  breach  of  each  of  the
      duties enshrined in section 55 of the  2009  Act,  what  order  should
      follow?  We directed specific argument on this issue.  In response, Mr
      Jarvis, on behalf of the Secretary of State, formulated the  following
      submission:

           "In  respect  of  the  Tribunal's  duties  and/or   powers   the
           Respondent firstly accepts that, in principle, where  there  has
           been a total failure to consider the best interests of the child
           (and where the SSHD was aware of the existence of that child  at
           the date of the decision) the Tribunal should allow  the  appeal
           on the basis that the SSHD's decision is not in accordance  with
           the law to the extent that it awaits a lawful  decision  by  the
           SSHD acting as the primary decision maker ....


           In the alternative, where  there  has  been  engagement  with  a
           consideration of the best interests  of  the  relevant  children
           ....  but the Tribunal considers that consideration flawed,  the
           Respondent  submits  that  the  Tribunal  should  make  its  own
           findings on what section 55 requires through Article 8 ECHR."

     It was further submitted that the present case belongs  to  the  second
      of the two categories thus formulated.

24.  Immigration  and  asylum  appeals  are  regulated  by  Part  5  of  the
      Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  (the  "2002  Act").
      Appeals  are  brought  under  section  82.   They  are  determined  in
      accordance with section 86 which, so far as material, provides:

         "(1) This section applies on an appeal under section 82(1) ....

         (3)  The Tribunal must allow the appeal insofar as it  thinks  that
      -

                    a) A decision against which the appeal is brought or  is
                       treated as being brought was not in  accordance  with
                       the law (including immigration rules), or


                    a) A discretion exercised in making a  decision  against
                       which the appeal is brought or is  treated  as  being
                       brought  should  have  been  exercised   differently.
                       ......

         (5)  Insofar as subsection (3) does not apply, the  Tribunal  shall
              dismiss the appeal."

     Appeals to the Upper  Tribunal  are  governed  by  section  11  of  the
      Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 (the "2007  Act"),  whereby
      an appeal lies on any point of law arising  from  a  decision  of  the
      First-tier Tribunal (the "FtT") with permission. Pursuant  to  section
      12, where the Upper Tribunal  finds  that  the  decision  of  the  FtT
      involved the making of an error of law, it is empowered to  set  aside
      such decision.  Where it does so, the twofold options are (a) to remit
      the case to the FtT with directions for its reconsideration or (b)  to
      re-make the decision.

25.  In the present case, as noted in [2] above, this Tribunal  has  already
      ordered that the decision of the FtT be set aside.   No  remittal  was
      ordered.  The hearing which has been conducted was designed to operate
      as a re-making exercise.  Mr Jarvis submits that a re-making  by  this
      Tribunal is appropriate and that the outcome should be a dismissal  of
      the original appeal. Given the effect and constraints of the statutory
      regime, outlined above, we consider the correct  approach  to  be  the
      following.  In every case where the Upper Tribunal concludes that  the
      decision of the FtT is vitiated by an error of law  constituted  by  a
      failure to find a breach of either of the duties contained in  section
      55 of the 2009 Act and sets aside the decision in  consequence,  three
      options arise.  The first is to re-make the decision of the FtT.   The
      second is to remit the case to the FtT  for  the  same  purpose.   The
      third is to allow the appeal  on  the  basis  that  the  Secretary  of
      State's decision was not in accordance with the law thereby  requiring
      the Secretary of State, as primary decision maker,  to  make  a  fresh
      decision giving effect to the assessment and conclusions of the  Upper
      Tribunal.

26.  The following question arises: what course should  the  Upper  Tribunal
      take if it considers itself insufficiently informed to make  a  proper
      assessment of the best interests of any affected child?   We  consider
      that the test which should be applied is the essentially  prosaic  one
      of whether the Upper Tribunal considers itself  sufficiently  equipped
      to re-make the decision of the FtT which has been set aside.   If  the
      application of this test yields a negative outcome, neither  re-making
      by the Upper Tribunal nor remittal to the FtT will be appropriate.  We
      are satisfied that this test accords with the decision of the Court of
      Appeal in AJ (India) (supra).  There is no suggestion  in  AJ  (India)
      that the  FtT,  in  determining  the  initial  appeal,  or  the  Upper
      Tribunal, having set aside the decision of the FtT, is obliged to  re-
      make the decision in every case.    Re-making  is  discretionary,  not
      obligatory.

27.  We turn to consider whether there is anything in the  jurisprudence  of
      the Court of Appeal which  precludes  either  the  FtT  or  the  Upper
      Tribunal from deciding an appeal such as the present in a manner which
      requires  the  Secretary  of  State  to  re-make  the  decision  under
      challenge.  The decision in AJ (India) (supra) is  authority  for  the
      proposition that  where  the  FtT  decides  that  a  decision  of  the
      Secretary of State is not in accordance with the law on account  of  a
      failure to discharge the first of the section 55 duties  the  Tribunal
      is not obliged to remit the case to the Secretary of State for a fresh
      decision. In thus deciding, the Court of Appeal rejected the  contrary
      argument advanced by the Appellant. It stated:

           "[21]  ....  The duty of the Tribunal under section 86(3) is  to
                 determine the appeal.  It must allow the appeal insofar  as
                 it thinks that the Secretary of State's decision  'was  not
                 in  accordance  with   the   law   (including   immigration
                 rules)'......


           [22]   The Tribunal has power to hear evidence, make findings of
                 fact and decide points of law."

     In [24], Pill LJ added:

     "Paragraph 24 of ZH does  not  assist  the  Appellant.   Baroness  Hale
           plainly contemplated that the  Tribunal  must  consider  section
           55".

     Notably, the argument rejected was one that  the  FtT  was  obliged  to
      remit: see [18] - [21] and [24].  Upon a careful reading, the decision
      is silent on the question of whether the FtT is empowered to remit  in
      an appropriate case.

28.  In AJ India, the  Court  of  Appeal  gave  consideration  to  a  recent
      decision of another division of that Court, DS  (Afghanistan)  v  SSHD
      [2011] EWCA Civ 305.  In that case, section 55 of the  2009  Act  came
      into operation subsequent to the impugned decision of the Secretary of
      State but before the Tribunal's determination of the  ensuing  appeal.
      The Appellant appealed to the Court of  Appeal,  which  delivered  two
      judgments of substance.  In the second of these, Lloyd LJ  stated,  at
      [71]:

           "Nevertheless, it seems to me that the AIT ought to  have  borne
           this obligation in mind when deciding the appeal, because of the
           Tribunal's role as decision maker: see R (Razgar) v SSHD  [2004]
           UKHL 27, at [15].  The position might have been different if the
           role of the Tribunal were not  that  of  being  a  part  of  the
           decision making process.  If its  function  were  equivalent  to
           that  of  deciding  a  conventional  appeal  or  a  conventional
           judicial review application, then the process might  be  limited
           by reference to material which  had  been  before  the  decision
           maker and to the law as it stood at the time of  that  decision.
           But it has long been clear that the role of  the  AIT,  now  the
           First-tier Tribunal or the Upper Tribunal, as the case  may  be,
           is not constrained in this way. ...."

     Rimer LJ, the  third  member  of  the  Court,  agreed  with  Lloyd  LJ.
      Neither DS nor AJ (India) expressly addressed the question of  whether
      either the FtT or the Upper Tribunal,  where  it  finds  a  breach  of
      either, or both, of the duties imposed by section 55, is empowered  to
      determine the appeal in a manner which requires the Secretary of State
      to reconsider the matter and make a lawful decision.

29.  We turn to consider whether any guidance on this issue can  be  derived
      from the Court of Appeal's  further  contribution  to  the  developing
      jurisprudence on this subject in SS (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013]  UWCA  Civ
      550.  This case  concerned  the  deportation  of  a  foreign  criminal
      pursuant to section 32(5) of the UK Borders  Act  2007.   The  ensuing
      challenge was based on the contention that  this  would  infringe  the
      Appellant's right to respect for private and family life under Article
      8 ECHR was dismissed.  Delivering the main judgment of the Court, Laws
      LJ noted that the Appellant placed "much reliance" on  section  55  of
      the 2009 Act: see [12]. Having recorded that the Appellant's  argument
      invoked, inter alia, both section 55(1) and  the  statutory  guidance,
      Laws LJ formulated the Appellant's submission thus, at [34]:

           "....  In determining an Article 8 claim where a child's  rights
           are affected, the child's best interests must be  properly  gone
           into: that  is  to  say  they  must  be  treated  as  a  primary
           consideration and the Court or  Tribunal  must  be  armed  -  if
           necessary by its own initiative - with the facts required for  a
           careful examination of those interests and where in  truth  they
           lie."

     The Court did not dissent from this proposition, as  the  next  ensuing
      passage indicates, at [35]:

         "While in  very  general  terms  I  would  not  quarrel  with  this
           proposition (though I consider that the circumstances  in  which
           the Tribunal should exercise an inquisitorial  function  on  its
           own initiative will be extremely rare), its practical bite  must
           plainly depend on the  nature  of  the  case  in  hand.   It  is
           necessary to consider the deportation of foreign criminals as  a
           particular class of case; and, of course, the  circumstances  of
           this case itself."

      Neither  section  55  nor  the  statutory  guidance  features  in  the
      remainder of the judgment.  The third member of  the  Court,  Mann  J,
      added, at [62]:

         "I agree with Laws LJ that the circumstances in which the  Tribunal
         will require further enquiries  to  be  made,  or  evidence  to  be
         obtained, are likely to be extremely rare.  In the vast majority of
         cases the Tribunal will expect the relevant interests of the  child
         to be  drawn  to  the  attention  of  the  decision  maker  by  the
         individual concerned.  The decision  maker  would  then  make  such
         additional  enquiries  as  might  appear  to  him  or  her  to   be
         appropriate.  The scope for the  Tribunal  to  require,  much  less
         indulge in, further  enquiries  of  its  own  seems  to  me  to  be
         extremely limited, almost to the extent that  I  find  it  hard  to
         imagine when, or how, it could do so."

30.  We consider that from the perspective of section 55 of  the  2009  Act,
    the main principle to be distilled from SS (Nigeria) is that  in  cases
    where the Tribunal is assessing the best interests of an affected child
    it should normally do so on the basis of the available evidence without
    more. The decision strongly discourages the Tribunal from conducting an
    inquisitorial exercise. But Laws LJ stated that the  Tribunal  must  be
    "armed ... with the facts required for a careful  examination"  of  the
    affected child's best interests.  This invites the following  question:
    in cases where the  Tribunal  does  not  consider  itself  sufficiently
    equipped to conduct an adequate best interests assessment, what are its
    options?  In  particular,  is  one  of  the  available  alternatives  a
    disposal order the effect whereof is that the Secretary of  State  must
    make a fresh, lawful decision, rectifying the failure  to  perform  the
    section 55 duties in the first place?  Furthermore, if an order of this
    kind is an available option, what  is  the  test  or  criterion  to  be
    applied by the Tribunal in deciding whether to invoke it?


31.  We consider that the unspoken premise in the SS (Nigeria) principle  is
    in truth something of an assumption, namely, that in the  typical  case
    the Tribunal will be sufficiently armed and equipped to properly assess
    the child's best interests. This is  expressed  most  strongly  in  the
    judgment of Mann LJ.  It entails an  expectation  that,  in  the  great
    majority of appeals, the Tribunal  will  have  sufficient  evidence  to
    enable it to conduct this exercise properly.  The most  obvious  source
    of this evidence, in the usual case, will be the material  laid  before
    the decision maker by the Appellant. There is a very broad spectrum  in
    this respect.  At one end  thereof  the  Appellant,  who  may  have  no
    representation,  composes  some  brief  and   possibly   confusing   or
    incoherent sentences which are transmitted to the  decision  maker  for
    consideration and form part of the evidence before  the  Tribunal.   At
    the other end of the spectrum, the  Appellant's  case  is  compiled  by
    competent and experienced practitioners and consists  of  coherent  and
    impressively composed representations, supplemented by  materials  such
    as  birth certificates,  school  records,  character  testimonials  and
    expert  reports,  whether  medical  or  otherwise.  Between  these  two
    extremes  there  may,  potentially,  be  many  different  permutations.
    Furthermore,  in  some  cases,  the  evidence  will  be  clarified  and
    amplified by well planned and presented oral testimony. We suggest that
    the SS (Nigeria) principle must be considered in this light.

32.  The SS (Nigeria) principle must also be balanced with what the  Supreme
    Court has pronounced in its two landmark decisions  and,  indeed,  what
    the Court of Appeal said in SS itself.  As we have highlighted, one  of
    the striking features of the decision in SS is the  Court's  acceptance
    of the argument that the child's best interests "must be properly  gone
    into" and the Court or Tribunal must be "... armed ...  with the  facts
    required for a careful examination of those interests ...":  see  [34].
    We consider that this chimes with what this Tribunal said more recently
    in JO (Nigeria) [2014] UKUT 00517 (IAC).  First, it distilled from  the
    opinion of Baroness Hale in ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4  the  principle
    that  the  decision  maker  must  be  properly  informed   (see   [8]),
    highlighting the importance accorded to "the  quality  of  the  initial
    decision" at [36].  Second, this Tribunal acknowledged  the  stress  in
    Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] 1 WLR 3690 on the importance of having  "a  clear
    idea of a child's circumstances"  and  the  necessity  for  "a  careful
    examination of all relevant factors when the interests of a  child  are
    involved in an Article 8 assessment": per Lord Hodge, at [10].   Third,
    this Tribunal drew attention to the Tameside principle and the Padfield
    principle, at [10]. It stated:

         "These principles also give sustenance to the proposition that  the
         duties enshrined in section 55  cannot  be  properly  performed  by
         decision makers in an  uninformed  vacuum.   Rather,  the  decision
         maker must be properly equipped by possession of a  sufficiency  of
         relevant information."

    Continuing, this  Tribunal  identified  two  guiding  principles,  each
    rooted in duty, at [11]:


         "The first is that the decision maker must  be  properly  informed.
         The second is that, thus equipped, the decision maker must  conduct
         a careful examination of  all  relevant  information  and  factors.
         These principles have a simple  logical  attraction,  since  it  is
         difficult to conceive how a  decision  maker  could  properly  have
         regard to the need to safeguard and  promote  the  welfare  of  the
         child or children concerned otherwise.  Furthermore,  they  reflect
         long recognised standards of public law.  Being adequately informed
         and conducting a scrupulous analysis are elementary  pre-requisites
         to  the  inter-related  tasks  of  identifying  the  child's   best
         interests   and   then   balancing   them   with   other   material
         considerations."

    We consider that there is no disharmony between  the  decision  of  the
    Tribunal in JO (Nigeria) and the  relevant  decisions  of  the  Supreme
    Court and the Court of  Appeal.   Furthermore,  the  contrary  was  not
    argued.

33.  The full context within which these issues arise must,  of  course,  be
    appreciated.  In this respect, the central theme of SS (Nigeria) is the
    powerful weight  to  be  attributed  to  the  factor  of  Parliamentary
    intervention in the  field  of  the  deportation  of  foreign  national
    offenders through the provisions of the UK  Borders  Act  2007.   These
    provisions must now be considered in conjunction with the new  Part  5A
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 inserted by section
    19 of the Immigration Act 2014 (the "2014 Act"), the effect whereof  is
    that the public interest expressed by Parliament is  probably  stronger
    than before.   In SS (Nigeria) Laws LJ, summarising, stated in [55]:

         "Proportionality, the absence of an 'exceptionality' rule  and  the
         meaning  of  'a  primary  consideration'  are  all,  when  properly
         understood, consonant with the force to be attached in cases of the
         present kind to the two drivers of the decision maker's  margin  of
         discretion: the policies source and  the  policies  nature  and  in
         particular to the great weight which the 2007 Act attributes to the
         deportation of foreign criminals."

         [Our emphasis.]

     In a later passage, Laws LJ refers to "the  extremely  pressing  public
    interest in the Appellant's deportation":  see  [58].  Accordingly,  in
    cases of this kind, in the proportionality scales, the  factor  of  the
    best interests of any affected child,  while  a  matter  of  undeniable
    importance, is to be balanced with a public  interest  of  unmistakable
    potency.  This must be borne in mind in every case where, having  found
    a breach of either of the two duties imposed by section 55 of the  2009
    Act, the Tribunal is considering the appropriate consequential course.

34.  We consider that there are four significant aspects of  section  55  of
    the  2009  Act  which  do  not  feature  with  any  prominence  in  the
    jurisprudence of the Court of Appeal.  The first is that the  Secretary
    of State is the primary decision maker.  The second  is  that  the  two
    duties enshrined in section 55 are imposed on the  Secretary  of  State
    and no one else. The third is the guidance made under section 55(3) and
    the related statutory duty imposed on decision makers  to  have  regard
    thereto: this has received at best scant attention,  coupled  with  the
    fact that there is no meaningful way in which tribunals can give effect
    to certain aspects thereof.  The fourth, as we have highlighted  above,
    is that in the trilogy of decisions examined, the Court of  Appeal  has
    not decided the question of whether one of the options available to the
    Tribunal, where a breach of either or both of  the  duties  imposed  by
    section 55 is found, is to make an  order  the  effect  whereof  is  to
    require the Secretary of State to make fresh, lawful decision. Thus the
    fetters imposed on this Tribunal by binding precedent are limited.

35.  We would highlight that where either the  FtT  or  the  Upper  Tribunal
    finds that there has been a breach by the Secretary of State of either,
    or both, of the duties imposed by section 55 of the 2009 Act, a further
    assessment of  and  decision  concerning  the  best  interests  of  any
    affected child must be made.  The  author  of  such  decision  will  be
    either the relevant Tribunal or the Secretary of State.   There  is  no
    other candidate decision maker. We have raised  the  question  of  what
    test or criterion the Tribunal should apply in deciding  which  of  the
    two candidate agencies should make the  fresh  decision.   We  turn  to
    consider this discrete issue further.

36.  In examining these issues, we consider it  appropriate  to  reflect  on
    the realities of the scenario of an appeal in which either the  FtT  or
    the Upper Tribunal decides that the impugned decision of the  Secretary
    of State is unlawful by virtue of a failure to perform either  or  both
    of the duties imposed by section 55 of the 2009 Act.  The following are
    typically recurring scenarios in practice:

    (a)  In some cases (such as  the  present)  the  Appellant  is  neither
         present nor represented.  In this category of appeals,  no  further
         evidence bearing on the best interests of any affected  child,  nor
         any elucidation or amplification of extant relevant evidence,  will
         be adduced by or on behalf of the Appellant.


    (b)  In other cases, the Tribunal might be informed by the Appellant or
         his representative that further relevant evidence can  be  adduced,
         giving rise to an application to adjourn the final determination of
         the appeal.  In some instances of this kind,  the  source  of  such
         further evidence not infrequently includes an expert in  the  field
         of medicine or psychiatry or psychology or social care.

    (c)  A third, and different, scenario is one where it is evident to the
         experienced member/s of the Tribunal that the  Secretary  of  State
         has failed to assemble relevant and available  evidence  in  making
         the impugned decision.  Such  evidence  may  include  a  sentencing
         transcript, a criminal  record,  a  pre-sentence  report,  a  post-
         sentence prison or  probation  report  or  extant  social  services
         reports or records.  As a general rule, evidence of this kind is in
         the custody of other public authorities and can be obtained by  the
         Secretary of State on request.

    (d)  There is another realistic scenario, namely  one  wherein  it  may
         appear to the Tribunal that the impugned decision of the  Secretary
         of State was undermined and  impoverished  by  a  failure  to  give
         effect to the requirement in Part 2 of the statutory guidance that,
         in appropriate cases, children should be consulted and their wishes
         and feelings should be taken into account  "wherever  practicable":
         see [19] above.  This is most likely to occur  in  cases  where  it
         appears to the Tribunal that the  information  and  representations
         put forward on behalf of the Appellant invited further enquiries or
         elucidation or evidence gathering of this kind on the part  of  the
         Secretary of State.

     These scenarios are not designed to be exhaustive.  They  are,  rather,
    typical  of  the  realities  of  immigration  and  asylum  appeals   in
    contemporary litigation.  Furthermore, none  of  them  is  self-sealed:
    depending on the context of the individual case, some  may  partake  of
    the ingredients of others.

37.  In the scenarios outlined above, in the wake of  a  finding  by  either
    Tribunal that the Secretary of State has breached either of the  duties
    enshrined in section 55 of the 2009 Act the possibility of the exercise
    of case management powers by either of the two  Tribunals  arises.   In
    the case of the FtT, the procedural regime is contained in the Tribunal
    procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Rules
    2014, in operation from 20 October  2014.   Rule  4(2)  establishes  an
    umbrella power to give a direction  "in  relation  to  the  conduct  or
    disposal of proceedings at any time".  Rule 4(3), without prejudice  to
    the generality of the aforementioned power, empowers the FtT to,  inter
    alia -

         "......  permit or require a party or  another  person  to  provide
         documents, information, evidence or submissions to the Tribunal  or
         a party."

     There is also  a  power  of  adjournment  or  postponement.  Equivalent
    powers are conferred on the Upper Tribunal by rule 5  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  Furthermore, in both Tribunals,
    the overriding objective includes a specific provision that the parties
    must help the Tribunal to further such objective  and  co-operate  with
    the Tribunal generally.  We consider that the powers highlighted  above
    could, in principle, be exercised by either Tribunal in the wake  of  a
    finding of a breach by the Secretary of State of either,  or  both,  of
    the duties enshrined in section 55 of the 2009 Act.  The context of the
    individual case would  be  determinative  of  the  Tribunal's  decision
    whether to have resort to any of these powers.

38.  We consider that there can be no objection in principle to an order  of
    the Tribunal the effect whereof is to require the Secretary  of  State,
    rather than the Tribunal, to perform the two duties imposed by  section
    55.  There is no jurisdictional bar of which we are aware.  It has long
    been recognised that there is a category of cases in which it  is  open
    to both tiers to allow the appeal on the basis that  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision was not in accordance with  the  law  without  further
    order, thereby obliging the Secretary of  State,  as  primary  decision
    maker, to re-make the decision,  giving  effect  to  and  educated  and
    guided by such correction and guidance  as  may  be  contained  in  the
    Tribunal's determination.  This is  not  contested  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State. In this context, we draw attention to the  decision
    of the Upper Tribunal in T (Section 55 BCIA  2009  -  Entry  Clearance)
    (Jamaica) [2011] UKUT 00483 (IAC).  In [24] of this decision, one finds
    echoes of what was said by  Lloyd  LJ  in  DS  (Afghanistan),  at  [71]
    (supra).  In that case, the vitiating factor in the impugned  decision,
    as found by the FtT, was a failure to apply section 55 of the 2009 Act:
    see [14].  The Upper Tribunal allowed the appeal  on  the  main  ground
    that section 55 did not apply to the child in question, who was outside
    the United Kingdom.  In an obiter  passage,  the  President  added,  at
    [25]:

         "Where an immigration decision is flawed for failure to have regard
         to  an  applicable  policy  outside  the  Immigration  Rules,  then
         immigration Judges of both Tribunals have no appellate function  to
         review the merits of the exercise of discretion or a judgment  that
         is required to be made.  Except in most unusual circumstances,  the
         most that can be done is for the appellate decision to record  that
         the decision making process is flawed and  incomplete  and  so  the
         application or decision in question remains outstanding and not yet
         properly determined (see AG and Others Kosovo [2007] UKAIT 00082)."

    This is one illustration of an appeal context in which  the  effect  of
    the  Tribunal's  order  determining  the  appeal  is  to  require   the
    Respondent to make a fresh, lawful decision.   We  are  conscious  that
    such an order was not made in  T  (Jamaica).   However,  the  President
    observed, in [32]:


         "The scheme of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007  does
         not assign the function  of  primary  fact  finding  to  the  Upper
         Tribunal."

    The order made was one of remittal to  the  FtT.   Notably,  the  Upper
    Tribunal's directions in [34] - [38] directly required  the  Respondent
    to undertake further specific enquiries and, echoing the terms  of  the
    statutory  guidance  and  the  observations  of  Baroness  Hale  in  ZH
    (Tanzania), to interview the affected child.

39.  Our survey of the  relevant  jurisprudence,  governing  principles  and
    statutory framework yields the following conclusions:

     a)  Where either the FtT or the Upper Tribunal decides that there  has
        been a breach by the Secretary of State of  either  of  the  duties
        imposed  by  section  55  of  the  2009  Act,  both  Tribunals  are
        empowered, in their final determination of the  appeal,  to  assess
        the best interests of any affected child and determine  the  appeal
        accordingly. This exercise will be appropriate in cases  where  the
        evidence is sufficient to enable the Tribunal to conduct a properly
        informed assessment of the child's best interests.


     b)  However, there may be cases where the Tribunal forms the view that
        the assembled evidence is insufficient for this  purpose.  In  such
        cases, two options arise.  The first is to  consider  such  further
        relevant evidence as the Appellant can muster  and/or  to  exercise
        case management powers in  an  attempt  to  augment  the  available
        evidence.  The second is to determine the appeal in a manner  which
        requires the Secretary of State to make  a  fresh  decision.  While
        eschewing prescription, we observe that this  course  may  well  be
        appropriate in cases where it appears  to  the  appellate  tribunal
        that a thorough best interests assessment may require interview  of
        an affected child or children in accordance  with  Part  2  of  the
        Secretary of State's statutory guidance.


     c) In choosing between the two options identified above,  Judges  will
        be guided by their assessment of the realities of the litigation in
        the particular case and the basis on which the Secretary  of  State
        has been found to have acted in breach of either  or  both  of  the
        section 55 duties.  It  will  also  be  appropriate  to  take  into
        account the desirability of  finality  and  the  undesirability  of
        undue delay.


Conclusions

40.  Giving effect to the approach outlined above we decide as  follows.   A
    fuller and more considered assessment of the best interests of the  two
    children in question  is  indubitably  required  in  this  case.   This
    follows from our analysis of the Secretary of State's decision in  [14]
    - [16] above and our identification of  the  various  deficiencies  and
    shortcomings therein. We take into  account  that  inquisition  by  the
    Tribunal has been strongly discouraged by the Court  of  Appeal  in  SS
    (Nigeria). Furthermore, given that this Appellant is unrepresented  and
    did not attend  the  appeal  hearing,  the  prospects  for  efficacious
    judicial inquisition  are,  realistically  remote.  In  the  particular
    circumstances of  this  case,  and  not  without  some  misgivings,  we
    conclude that this Tribunal should proceed to make  its  assessment  of
    the best interests of the children concerned.

41.   In  conducting  this  exercise,  we  remind  ourselves   of,   without
    repeating, the information summarised in [1]  -  [2]  and  [12]  above,
    together with [14] - [16].  In summary, the Appellant is the biological
    father of a daughter now aged seven years who lives  a  separate  life.
    As found by the FtT, he has a regular relationship with  his  daughter,
    which entails joint activities fortnightly and  he  supports  her  with
    payments of  �150.00  per  month.   We  readily  infer  that  this  not
    insignificant payment enhances the quality of his daughter's  life  and
    contributes to her upkeep and maintenance.  As regards the  Appellant's
    step son, who is now aged seven  years,  the  Appellant  has  been  the
    father figure in the family unit in question for some four  years.  The
    other member of this unit is the boy's mother, the Appellant's partner.
     We note the finding of the FtT that this is a "serious  relationship".
    We accept the Appellant's written assertion that his step son views him
    as his biological father and vice-versa.   The  step  son  has  had  no
    father in his life since birth.   We  further  accept  the  Appellant's
    claim that he loves his step son and  that  his  step  son  needs  him.
    These two children are at a critical stage of  their  development.   We
    also take into account the highly positive findings of the FtT relating
    to the Appellant's conduct and lifestyle since the  commission  of  the
    index offences some 13 years ago and his youth when he committed  them.
    Weighing all of these factors, we conclude that the best  interests  of
    both children will undoubtedly be served and promoted if the status quo
    is preserved.

42. The next step in the exercise of re-making the decision of the  FtT  is
    to consider this appeal within the framework of Article  8  ECHR.  With
    the advent of the Immigration Act 2014, we are mandated  by  Parliament
    to give effect to the new Part 5A of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 (the "2002 Act").  We do so in the following structured
    way:


 i)      Section 117A:


     This is the first provision in the new Part 5A of the 2002 Act.  It is
         engaged in the present case  since  the  Tribunal  is  required  to
         decide whether the impugned  deportation  order  would  breach  the
         right to respect for private and family life under Article  8  ECHR
         enjoyed by the Appellant and the  other  three  persons  concerned,
         thereby contravening section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.  Under
         the new statutory provisions, the  "public  interest  question"  is
         defined as "the question of whether an interference with a person's
         right to respect for private and family  life  is  justified  under
         Article 8(2)".  In determining this question, we are  enjoined,  in
         the present case, to "have regard to" the considerations  specified
         in section 117B and section 117C.


    ii) Section 117B:


        We begin by  acknowledging  the  uncompromising  statement  of  the
        legislature that the maintenance of effective immigration  controls
        is in the public  interest.   Further,  Parliament  has  enunciated
        unequivocally that it is in the public interest that those  seeking
        to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are able to speak English.
         We find that the Appellant is such a person.  We note the  further
        public interest that those seeking to enter or remain in the United
        Kingdom are financially independent  and  we  infer  from  all  the
        available evidence that  the  Appellant  is  such  a  person.   The
        requirement enshrined in section 117B(4) to attribute little weight
        to a private life  or  a  relationship  formed  with  a  qualifying
        partner established at a time when the  person  is  in  the  United
        Kingdom unlawfully does not arise, since the Appellant was  at  all
        material times  lawfully present in the United Kingdom, having been
        granted indefinite leave to remain in  September  2000.   The  same
        assessment applies to the requirement to give little  weight  to  a
        private life established when a  person's  immigration  status  was
        precarious. The deportation order was not made until 13 years after
        the Appellant had been granted indefinite leave to remain.

   iii) Section 117C:


        We begin by acknowledging Parliament's unambiguous declaration that
        the deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest, the
        more so according to the seriousness of the offence committed.   In
        this respect, we consider that the Appellant's offending occupies a
        position of moderate gravity in the notional scale of  criminality.
        We find that "Exception 1" does not apply as the Appellant has  not
        been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most of  his  life
        and there is no evidence warranting a finding that there  would  be
        very significant obstacles to his reintegration into his country of
        origin.  As regards "Exception 2", we find, as did  the  FtT,  that
        the Appellant has a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  a
        British citizen who is, hence, a "qualifying partner".  We  further
        find that the Appellant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
        relationship with the two seven year old children concerned who, as
        the birth  certificates  demonstrate,  are  British  citizens  and,
        hence, each is a "qualifying child".


    iv) Section 117C(5): Unduly harsh - the partner

        This leaves the question of whether, per  section  117C(5)  of  the
        2002 Act, the effect of the Appellant's deportation on his  partner
        or either child would  be  "unduly  harsh".   Given  the  statutory
        language, the impact on each of the three persons concerned  is  to
        be considered separately.  As regards the Appellant's  partner,  we
        consider that the separation caused by deportation and the  natural
        consequences  thereof  would  undoubtedly  be  harsh  as  it  would
        abruptly sever emotional ties and support, terminate a genuine  and
        serious relationship of some four years vintage and remove the only
        father figure from the family unit and,  hence,  the  life  of  the
        partner's seven year old son.  However, we are obliged to recognise
        that these are  normal  and  typical  effects  of  deportation,  in
        circumstances where  the  statutory  criterion  of  "unduly  harsh"
        requires something over and above the usual consequences.   We  are
        required to act on the evidence and conclude that there is  nothing
        in the available evidence which would warrant a finding  that  this
        criterion is satisfied.


     v) Section 117C(5): Unduly harsh - the two children

        We turn  to  consider  the  question  of  whether  the  Appellant's
        deportation would have an unduly harsh effect on either of the  two
        children concerned, namely his biological  daughter  and  his  step
        son, both aged seven years.  Both children are at a critical  stage
        of their development.   The Appellant is a  father  figure  in  the
        life of his biological daughter.  We readily infer  that  there  is
        emotional dependency  bilaterally.   Furthermore,  there  is  clear
        financial dependency to a not insubstantial degree.   There  is  no
        evidence of any other father figure  in  this  child's  life.   The
        Appellant's role has evidently been ever present, since her  birth.
        Children do not have  the  resilience,  maturity  or  fortitude  of
        adults. We find that the abrupt removal of the Appellant  from  his
        biological daughter's life would not merely damage this child.   It
        would, rather, cause a gaping chasm in  her  life  to  her  serious
        detriment.   We consider that the impact on  the  Appellant's  step
        son would be at least as serious.  Having regard  to  the  evidence
        available and based on findings already made, we conclude that  the
        effect of the Appellant's deportation on  both  children  would  be
        unduly harsh.  Accordingly, within the matrix of  section  117C  of
        the 2002 Act, "Exception 2" applies.


    vi) Section 117C(6):

         The next, and final, step in this staged exercise is to give effect
        to section 117C(6).  This is engaged in the present case since  the
        Appellant's sentence of imprisonment in 2002 exceeded  four  years.
        He was sentenced to five years  imprisonment.   Thus  the  Tribunal
        must determine the question of whether "there are  very  compelling
        circumstances, over and above those described  in  [Exception  2]".
        We consider that, having  regard  to  the  statutory  language  and
        especially the words  in  parenthesis,  "in  particular",  the  two
        sections do not contain an exhaustive list of  the  factors  to  be
        considered and weighed in deciding whether the deportation  of  the
        Appellant would be a disproportionate interference with  the  right
        to respect for family life enjoyed by all  four  persons  concerned
        under Article 8(1) ECHR.   Thus  we  also  take  into  account  the
        following additional considerations. The Appellant has  spent  much
        of his life, including  all  of  his  adult  life,  in  the  United
        Kingdom.  The evidence warrants the findings that he is a reformed,
        rehabilitated member of society; a responsible parent who takes his
        duties seriously; a supportive partner; a person of some  industry;
        and someone who is fully integrated into United  Kingdom  life.  He
        has been lawfully present in  the  United  Kingdom  throughout  the
        entirety of his 13 years sojourn.   Having  obtained  his  coaching
        qualification he is equipped to make a significant contribution  to
        the lives of  many  children.  If  his  case  had  been  considered
        timeously by  the  Secretary  of  State  he  would  have  been  the
        beneficiary of a more  benign  statutory  deportation  regime.  If,
        notwithstanding this consideration, he had been deported  following
        completion of his incarceration, he would have been eligible for re-
        admission to the United Kingdom following the elapse of ten  years.
        Being the beneficiary of indefinite leave to remain since September
        2000, the Appellant would, reasonably, have believed at this remove
        that deportation  for  his  offending  would  not  eventuate.   The
        Appellant has taken advantage of the  administrative  oversight  on
        the part of the Secretary of State to  demonstrate  that  he  is  a
        responsible, law  abiding,  reformed,  integrated  and  industrious
        member  of  United  Kingdom  society,  a  trusted  partner  and   a
        responsible father.  We take into account also the public  interest
        which is served by stable family units whose membership includes  a
        father and a mother.

   vii) Section 117C: Conclusion

43. Finally, we balance all of the findings and considerations  highlighted
    above with the potent public interest in  the  deportation  of  foreign
    criminals.  We remind ourselves that in this case  the  deportation  of
    the Appellant will be proportionate unless there  are  very  compelling
    circumstances exceeding those enshrined within Exception 2.  The court,
    or tribunal, is  the  ultimate  arbiter  of  proportionality.  We  have
    identified above a range of facts and factors which we now  balance  in
    the round.  Under the new statutory regime, Parliament  has  recognised
    that the public interest does not require the  deportation  of  certain
    foreign criminals.  Blanket exile for the entire cohort  has  not  been
    decreed.  Furthermore, under the Human Rights Act 1998, Parliament  has
    entrusted the courts with the  power  and  responsibility  of  deciding
    whether the deportation of a person would be disproportionate.   It  is
    the court which conducts the balancing exercise  and  is  the  ultimate
    arbiter.  Our conclusion is  that,  in  a  case  which  is  undoubtedly
    challenging  and  marginal,  unusual  and  highly  fact  specific,  the
    deportation of this Appellant would interfere  disproportionately  with
    the family life rights of  the  four  persons  concerned.  All  of  the
    circumstances, considered  as  a  whole,  have  the  quality  of  "very
    compelling", that is to say, a  case  that  is  not  merely  strong  or
    persuasive but irresistibly so.

THE NEW IMMIGRATION RULES

44. Having first considered the primary legislation, we  turn  to  consider
    the new provisions of the Immigration Rules which  were  introduced  in
    tandem with the new foreign national offender deportation regime in the
    2002 Act. We have decided to proceed in this  sequence  as  this  seems
    logical, given the primacy  of  primary  legislation.  The  Immigration
    Rules were amended simultaneously by HC532 which took effect on 28 July
    2014. They are contained in Appendix  FM.   As  we  are  re-making  the
    decision of the FtT we are obliged to  give  effect  to  both  the  new
    statutory regime and the new provisions of the  Rules:  YM  (Uganda)  v
    Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  1292.
    Paragraph A362 makes clear that in criminal deportation cases  a  claim
    under Article 8 ECHR "will only succeed" where the  provisions  of  the
    new Rules are satisfied. There is no linkage with,  indeed  no  mention
    of, the primary legislation. The critical provisions are  contained  in
    paragraphs A398 - 399A.


45. We give effect to the new provisions of the Immigration  Rules  in  the
    following way:

    (a)  The starting point is paragraph 398(a), the effect whereof is that
         the deportation of the Appellant from the United Kingdom is  deemed
         to be conducive to the public  good  and  in  the  public  interest
         because the offence of which he was convicted in 2002  attracted  a
         sentence of imprisonment exceeding four years.


    (b)  The next step  is  to  consider  whether  paragraph  399  or  399A
         applies.  If  neither  of  these  provisions  applies,  the  public
         interest in deportation "...  will  only  be  outweighed  by  other
         factors where there are  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
         above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A."


    (c)  We consider that paragraph 399(a)(i)  applies  since,  as  appears
         from our findings above, we are satisfied that the Appellant has  a
         genuine and  subsisting  parental  relationship  with  two  British
         citizen children who are aged under 18 years and are in the  United
         Kingdom.


    (d)  In accordance with the remaining provisions of paragraph  399,  we
         must decide two further questions.  First, would it be unduly harsh
         for either child to go  to  live  in  the  Appellant's  country  of
         origin?  Second, would it be  unduly  harsh  for  either  child  to
         remain in the United Kingdom without the Appellant?  In  order  for
         the Article 8 ECHR claim to  succeed,  both  questions  require  an
         affirmative answer.  The second of these tests  replicates  Section
         117C(5) of the 2002 Act.  The  first  belongs  exclusively  to  the
         Rules.


    (e)  In giving effect to the  new  statutory  regime  we  have  already
         supplied an affirmative answer to the  second  question:  see  [44]
         above.  In considering the first question, we  find  no  reason  to
         make any distinction between the two children concerned.  Both  are
         aged seven years.  Inevitably, their age and current  circumstances
         generally are factors of major significance.  As we have  observed,
         both children are at a critical stage of their  development.   They
         have spent the entirety of their lives in the United Kingdom.  They
         are, in consequence,  fully  absorbed  in  the  language,  culture,
         norms, practices and lifestyle of United Kingdom society.  The next
         factor of obvious significance is the  foreign  country  concerned,
         Sierra Leone.  A basic comparative  exercise  juxtaposing  the  two
         countries being considered will almost invariably  be  required  in
         answering the question  posed  by  paragraph  399(a)(i)(a)  of  the
         Rules.   In  conducting  this  exercise,  it   will   normally   be
         appropriate  for  the  Court  or  Tribunal  to  make   some   basic
         assumptions relating to, and to take judicial notice of, elementary
         and general matters pertaining to United Kingdom  society,  subject
         of course to any evidence  to  the  contrary.   As  regards  Sierra
         Leone, we take judicial notice of the facts that this  is  a  third
         world west African  state  whose  recent  history  has  featured  a
         lengthy war and   military  coup.   It  has  a  severely  depressed
         economy  which  is  predominantly  agricultural.  Life  expectancy,
         income and  standard  of  living  bear  no  comparison  with  their
         counterparts in the United Kingdom.  While English is the  official
         language, it is only nominally so.  The effects  of  the  ten  year
         civil war were ruinous.  Life expectancy remains at 40  years,  one
         of  the  lowest  globally.   Much  of  the  grave  destruction   of
         infrastructure during the civil war has not been restored and, most
         recently, the country has been  afflicted  by  the  terrible  Ebola
         outbreak.

46. The determination of the two questions which we have posed  in  [44](d)
    above requires an evaluative assessment on the part  of  the  Tribunal.
    This is to be contrasted with a fact finding exercise.  By way of self-
    direction, we are mindful that "unduly  harsh"  does  not  equate  with
    uncomfortable, inconvenient, undesirable or merely difficult.   Rather,
    it poses a considerably  more  elevated  threshold.   "Harsh"  in  this
    context, denotes something severe, or bleak.  It is the  antithesis  of
    pleasant or comfortable.   Furthermore,  the  addition  of  the  adverb
    "unduly" raises an already elevated standard still higher.   Approached
    in this way, we have no hesitation  in  concluding  that  it  would  be
    unduly harsh for either of the  two  seven  year  old  British  citizen
    children concerned to be abruptly uprooted from  their  United  Kingdom
    life setting and lifestyle and exiled to this struggling,  impoverished
    and plague stricken west African state. No reasonable or right thinking
    person would consider this anything less than cruel.


47. The final question is whether it would be unduly harsh for either child
    to remain in the United Kingdom  without  the  Appellant.   This  is  a
    different  question  from  that  considered  in  [46]  above.  We  have
    identified a range of facts and considerations bearing on  this  issue.
    Once again, an evaluative judgment on  the  part  of  the  Tribunal  is
    required.  In performing this exercise we view everything in the round.
     The Appellant plays an important role in the lives  of  both  children
    concerned particularly that of his step son.  He  is  the  provider  of
    stability, security, emotional support and financial  support  to  both
    children.  We have rehearsed above the various benefits and  advantages
    which he brings to  the  lives  of  both  children,  coupled  with  his
    personal attributes and merits.  We remind ourselves of section  55  of
    the 2009 Act.  We acknowledge the distinction between harsh and  unduly
    harsh. We remind ourselves again of the  potency  of  the  main  public
    interest in play, emphasised most recently by the Court  of  Appeal  in
    SSHD v MA (Somalia) [2015] EWCA Civ 1192.  The outcome of  our  careful
    reflections in this difficult and borderline case and  in  an  exercise
    bereft of bright luminous lines is as follows.  Balancing  all  of  the
    facts and factors, our conclusion is that the severity of the impact on
    the children's lives of the Appellant's abrupt exit with all that would
    flow therefrom would be of such proportions as to be unduly harsh.


The Immigration Rules: Conclusion

48. Accordingly, giving effect to paragraph A362 of the Rules, we  conclude
    that the case made under Article 8 ECHR succeeds under this regime.

49. In  considering  and  giving  effect  to  the  new  provisions  of  the
    Immigration Rules,  we have  not  found  it  necessary  to  attempt  to
    resolve any of the interesting and potentially complex issues  relating
    to the interplay between the  2002  Act,  as  amended  and  the  Rules.
    Furthermore, we are mindful that we have not received argument  on  any
    of these issues.  The consideration that a significant regime has  been
    introduced by primary legislation and how this is to  interact  with  a
    different species of legal regulation, namely  the  Immigration  Rules,
    raises a number of questions.  The  Rules,  per  section  1(4)  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971, are designed to give expression to "the  practice
    to be followed in the administration of this  Act  for  regulating  the
    entry into and stay in the United Kingdom of  persons  not  having  the
    right  of  abode".   Is  there  any  disharmony  between  the   primary
    legislation and the Immigration Rules?  What is the starting point  for
    Tribunals? What is the correct sequence in the analysis? Are any of the
    new provisions of the Rules ultra vires the  parent  legislation?   And
    are the new Rules a complete Article 8 code? If so, how  are  Tribunals
    to give effect to the provisions of primary legislation?  Are Tribunals
    not the arbiter of what considerations other than  those  specified  in
    sections 117B and 117C can permissibly be taken  into  account,  having
    regard to the language of section 117A(2)?  The Tribunal is, after all,
    the ultimate arbiter of proportionality. The new  statutory  provisions
    are replete with exercises in fact finding and evaluative  judgment  to
    be performed by  tribunals.   Furthermore,  there  may  be  conflicting
    definitions of "foreign criminal": see section 117D(2),  paragraph  378
    of the Immigration Rules and section 32 of the  UK  Borders  Act  2007.
    And what is to be done if a person "succeeds" under the 2002  Act,  but
    not the Rules, or vice versa?  We would add that this is  not  intended
    to be an exhaustive menu.

50. In this judgment, we have confined  ourselves  to  pronouncing  on  one
    discrete aspect of the new legal regime, in  our  observation  in  [22]
    above that the duties imposed  by  section  55  of  the  2009  Act  are
    undiluted and unmodified. As  regards  the  host  of  other  intriguing
    issues,  further  jurisprudential  developments  and,  hopefully,  high
    quality advocacy are awaited with interest.  For our part:

         "[We] have stirred these points, which  wiser  heads  in  time  may
         settle."

    These are the words of Holt CJ, quoted by Lord Denning in Rahimtoola  v
    The Nizan of Hyderabad [1958] AC 379.

DISPOSAL AND ORDER

51.  Giving effect to our analysis, findings and conclusions above,  we  re-
      make the decision of the FtT by allowing the Appellant's appeal.


                                   Signed:


                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

          PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                                                        Date:  19 March 2015

                                 APPENDIX 1


             Paragraphs 396, 398, 399 and 399A, Immigration Rules



396. Where a person is liable to deportation the presumption shall  be  that
the public interest requires deportation. It is in the  public  interest  to
deport where the Secretary  of  State  must  make  a  deportation  order  in
accordance with section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007.

398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary to  the
UK's obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention, and


    a)  the deportation of the person from  the  UK  is  conducive  to  the
       public good and in  the  public  interest  because  they  have  been
       convicted of an offence for which they  have  been  sentenced  to  a
       period of imprisonment of at least 4 years;


    b)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to the public
       good and in the public interest because they have been  convicted  of
       an offence for  which  they  have  been  sentenced  to  a  period  of
       imprisonment of less than 4 years but at least 12 months; or


    c)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to the public
       good and in the public interest because, in the view of the Secretary
       of State, their offending has caused  serious  harm  or  they  are  a
       persistent offender who shows a particular disregard for the law,

the Secretary of State  in  assessing  that  claim  will  consider  whether
paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, the public  interest  in
deportation will only be outweighed by other factors where there  are  very
compelling circumstances over and above those described in  paragraphs  399
and 399A.

399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c) applies if -

a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship  with  a
child under the age of 18 years who is in the UK, and

           (i)   the child is a British Citizen; or


           (ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for at least the
              7 years immediately preceding the  date  of  the  immigration
              decision; and in either case

               (a) it would be unduly harsh for the child  to  live  in  the
                  country to which the person is to be deported; and


               (b) it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain  in  the
                  UK without the person who is to be deported; or


    b)  the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship with a  partner
       who is in the UK and is a British Citizen or settled in the UK, and

           i) the relationship  was  formed  at  a  time  when  the  person
              (deportee) was in  the  UK  lawfully  and  their  immigration
              status was not precarious; and
          ii) it would be unduly harsh for that  partner  to  live  in  the
              country to which the person is to  be  deported,  because  of
              compelling circumstances over and above  those  described  in
              paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and
         iii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to remain in the UK
              without the person who is to be deported.

399A. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c) applies if -

   a) the person has been lawfully resident in the UK for most of his  life;
      and


   b) he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and

   c)  there would be very significant obstacles to his integration into the
      country to which it is proposed he is deported.




                                 APPENDIX 2

                  Every Child Matters - Change for Children

    Statutory Guidance to the UK Border Agency on making arrangements to
                safeguard and promote the welfare of children

   Issued under section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act
                            2009 (November 2009)

                           Paragraphs 2.6 - 2.8

Making Arrangements to Safeguard  and  Promote  Welfare  in  the  UK  Border
Agency

2.6.
The  UK  Border  Agency  acknowledges  the  status  and  importance  of  the
following: the European Convention for the Protection of  Human  Rights  and
Fundamental Freedoms, the International  Covenant  on  Civil  and  Political
Rights, the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural  Rights,
the EU Reception Conditions Directive, the Council of Europe  Convention  on
Action Against Trafficking in Human Beings, and the  UN  Convention  on  the
Rights of the Child. The UK Border Agency must fulfil  the  requirements  of
these instruments in relation to children whilst  exercising  its  functions
as expressed in UK domestic legislation and policies.

2.7.
The UK Border Agency must also act according to the following principles:
Every child  matters  even  if  they  are  someone  subject  to  immigration
control.
In accordance with the UN Convention on the Rights of  the  Child  the  best
interests of the  child  will  be  a  primary  consideration  (although  not
necessarily  the  only  consideration)  when  making   decisions   affecting
children[1].
Ethnic identity, language, religion, faith, gender and disability are  taken
into account when working with a child and their family.
Children should be consulted and the wishes and feelings of  children  taken
into account wherever practicable when decisions affecting  them  are  made,
even though it will not always be possible to  reach  decisions  with  which
the child will agree. In instances where  parents  and  carers  are  present
they will have primary responsibility for the children's concerns.
Children should have their applications dealt with in a timely way and  that
minimises the uncertainty that they may experience.

2.8.
When speaking to a child or dealing with a  case  involving  their  welfare,
staff must be sensitive to each child's needs. Staff must  respond  to  them
in a way that communicates respect, taking into  account  their  needs,  and
their responsibilities to safeguard and promote their welfare


............................................................................


The full text of the document can be viewed here:
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/25
7876/change-for-children.pdf



-----------------------
[1]
     [2] Cf. UNHCR Guidelines on Determining the Best Interests of the
Child, pages 14 -15 section entitled "The Use of the Term 'Best Interests'
in the CRC" (CRC = Convention on the Rights of the Child).



