

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Katsonga ("Slip Rule"; FtT's general powers) [2016] UKUT 00228 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Stoke                                |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 29 January 2016                            |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                            JANE MILAMBO KATSONGA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Howard, instructed by Fountain Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeetie, Home Office Presenting Officer.

1. The 'Slip Rule', rule 31 of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Procedure  Rules,
   cannot be used to reverse the effect of a decision.

2. Following the repeal by the 2014 Act of subsections (3) to (6)  of  s  86
   of the 2002 Act, the First-tier Tribunal appears to have no duty or power
   to 'allow' or 'dismiss' an appeal.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. These proceedings concern Ms Jane Milambo Katsonga, who appears to be a
    national of either Zimbabwe or Zambia or both.  She came to the  United
    Kingdom in June 2004 on a six month visit visa.  On the expiry of  that
    visa she remained without leave.  In February 2014 she claimed  asylum,
    asserting  that  she  was  from  Zimbabwe  and  giving  a  history   of
    difficulties there before she left some ten years previously.  She also
    claimed that as she had resided in the United Kingdom  for  ten  years,
    although she appeared  to  have  formed  no  close  relationships,  her
    removal would breach  her  rights  under  article  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.


 2. The Secretary of State refused her claims in a letter dated  29  August
    2014.  The Secretary of State noted that, although she now  claimed  to
    be Zimbabwean for the purposes of a refugee claim, she  had  previously
    supported  applications  for  visas  with  a  Zambian  passport.    Her
    credibility was further damaged by the delay before making  her  claim.
    She failed to provide any substantiation of her  claimed  history.   If
    there were any substance in it she would be able to relocate to another
    part of Zimbabwe and be employed  there.   Her  article  8  claim  fell
    outside the rules and her circumstances where not such as to give her a
    right  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  despite  not  meeting  the
    requirements of the rules.  The consequential decision that she  should
    be removed from the United Kingdom is dated 3 September 2014.

 3. Ms Katsonga appealed.  There was a case management hearing  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal, but then the appeal was adjourned on two or  three
    occasions before coming before Judge O'Rourke for a substantive hearing
    on 13 May 2015.  Judge O'Rourke heard oral evidence from the appellant,
    who  appeared  in  person  and  made  submissions.   There  were   also
    submissions on behalf of the respondent.   The  judge  found  that  the
    appellant had no well-founded fear of persecution in either  Zambia  or
    Zimbabwe.  At paragraph 22(ii) the judge found that the appellant would
    find it difficult to readjust to life in Zimbabwe but  given  that  she
    was effectively destitute in the United Kingdom she would be  no  worse
    off in Zimbabwe.  So far as article  8  was  concerned,  the  appellant
    accepted that she had no family life in  the  United  Kingdom  and  the
    judge gave at paragraph 24 reasons for considering that her  return  to
    Zambia or Zimbabwe would not cause a disproportionate  interference  in
    her article 8 rights.  Following that paragraph is the heading  "Notice
    of Decision", under which there are three sentences as follows:

           "The appeal is refused on asylum grounds.
           The appeal is refused on humanitarian protection grounds.
           The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds."

 4. The determination is dated 13 May 2015 and was sent out on 14 May 2015.
     Applications for permission  to  appeal  against  that  decision  were
    submitted by  a  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State and by solicitors on behalf of the  appellant.   The
    Home Office application set out grounds as follows:


           "The judge of the First-tier Tribunal has made a material  error
           of law in the determination.
           Application for amendment of determination  (Rule  60  Procedure
           Rules).
           Please find attached determination of Immigration Judge O'Rourke
           under cover of an IA60 Notice  dated  15/05/2015,  allowing  the
           appeal of Ms J Milambo Katsonga  against  the  decision  of  the
           Secretary of State to refuse her application for asylum.
           The decision to allow the appeal appears to be inconsistent with
           the Immigration Judge's findings of fact.  The decision to allow
           the appeal seems therefore  to  be  a  "slip  of  the  pen"  and
           amenable to amendment pursuant to the Slip Rule.   Please  treat
           this as an application  for  the  determination  to  be  amended
           pursuant to Rule 60(1) of the 2005 Procedure Rules.
           This application was served on the appellant...."

 5. The appellant's application for permission to appeal was  supported  by
    grounds asserting that the judge had failed properly to  determine  the
    question of  the  appellant's  nationality,  failed  to  apply  country
    guidance, had inadequately reasoned her conclusions on asylum, and  had
    failed to explain why her finding that the appellant's difficulties  in
    integration into Zimbabwe were not sufficient to cause the appeal to be
    allowed under the immigration rules.  No action appears  to  have  been
    taken on that application.

 6. The Secretary of State's application was, however, judging by a note on
    the file, passed by the judge who was supposed to be dealing with it to
    the Resident Judge at  Newport,  with  a  request  that  he  ask  Judge
    O'Rourke to correct and  re-promulgate  the  determination.   That  was
    done, and Judge O'Rourke issued a  further  determination  on  17  June
    2015.  It is identical in all respects to the first determination, save
    that the last line now reads "the appeal is  refused  on  human  rights
    grounds".  Against  that  determination  the  appellant  also  appeals,
    submitting grounds identical to those against the first  determination,
    but adding grounds in relation to its correction.   The  grounds  point
    out that the Secretary of State was in error in referring to rule 60 of
    the Procedure Rules, and  suggesting  that  the  determination  as  now
    issued is contrary to  the  finding  in  relation  to  the  appellant's
    difficulty in readjusting to life  in  Zimbabwe.   First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  Reid  granted  permission,  apparently  in  relation   to   both
    determinations.

 7. Although the matter was not the subject of any submission before us, it
    is perhaps worth beginning  with  Judge  O'Rourke's  use  of  the  word
    "refused".  The appeal was subject to the  appeals  provisions  in  the
    2002 Act before their amendment by the Immigration Act  2014.   Section
    86(3) provided that the Tribunal must allow the appeal  insofar  as  it
    thought that the grounds were made out, but s-s (5) reads:

           "Insofar as sub-section (3) does not apply, the  Tribunal  shall
           dismiss the appeal."

    "Dismissed" rather than "refused" is therefore  the  appropriate  word.
    Quite what the position is now we do not know.  Sub-sections (3)-(6) of
    s 86 were repealed by the 2014 Act.  There appears to be no replacement
    provision.  Clearly there  is  now  no  obligation  on  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to allow or dismiss an appeal.  Bearing in mind that the First-
    tier Tribunal's powers are limited to those found in  the  statute,  it
    must be doubtful whether the First-tier Tribunal is even  empowered  to
    allow or dismiss an appeal following the 2014 amendments.   Fortunately
    we do not have to determine that issue.

 8. Of more immediate concern in the present appeal is  the  ambit  of  the
    "Slip Rule", formerly to be found at  rule  60(1)  of  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005, and now in rule 31 of  the
    Tribunal Procedure Rules 2014.  That rule reads as follows:

        "Clerical mistakes and accidental slips or omissions
        31.  The Tribunal may at any time correct any clerical  mistake  or
        other accidental slip or omission in a decision, direction  or  any
        document produced by it, by -
        (a) providing notification of the amended decision or direction, or
        a copy of the amended document, to all parties; and
        (b) making any necessary amendment to any information published  in
        relation to the decision, direction or document."

 9. There appears to be no clear authority on the meaning and  use  of  the
    "Slip Rule".  It is, however, instructive to consider  the  authorities
    on the meaning of CPR 40.12, allowing the Court to correct at any  time
    "an accidental slip or omission in a judgment or order".   Despite  the
    width of the wording in the CPR, there is an important  restriction  on
    the power given by that rule.  The power is there to enable a  misprint
    to be corrected, or to make the judge's  meaning  clear:  Bristol-Myers
    Squibb v Baker Norton Pharmaceuticals Inc [2001]  EWCA  Civ  414.   The
    power cannot be used to change the substance of a  judgment  or  order:
    further authorities are cited at CPR 40.12.1 in the White Book.  It  is
    because the judge can use the slip  rule  only  to  make  his  original
    meaning plain rather than to change his  original  decision,  that  the
    Civil Procedure Rules and the Tribunal's Procedural  Rules  contain  no
    provision for consultation with the parties.  Indeed it is difficult to
    see that  the  parties  ought  to  have  any  input  into  the  judge's
    expression of what he originally meant.

10. We do not think that the power under the slip rule enables  a  decision
    to be reversed at the instance of the losing party. Once a decision has
    been given in a particular sense it may be  subject  to  setting  aside
    under rule 32 or the appellate process.  In all other respects,  having
    made and sent out the decision, Judge O'Rourke was  functus.   For  the
    foregoing reasons we regard the purported  use  of  the  slip  rule  to
    produce the second determination in the present  case  as  ineffective.
    We allow the appeal against the second  determination  on  the  grounds
    that the First-tier Tribunal had no jurisdiction to  make  that  second
    determination.

11.  The  first  determination  is  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  That is the determination against which both parties  sought
    permission to appeal.  The Secretary of State's application appears  to
    have been the first received.  Although Judge O'Rourke took the  action
    we have indicated, there was no actual decision  whether  to  grant  or
    refuse permission to appeal.  In  the  circumstances,  and  sitting  as
    judges of the First-tier Tribunal, we grant both the Secretary of State
    and  the  appellant  permission  to  appeal  against  Judge  O'Rourke's
    decision, in each case on all the grounds advanced.  That brings before
    the Upper Tribunal the appeal or appeals against Judge O'Rourke's first
    and only valid determination.  Our determination of that appeal  has  a
    measure of agreement from the parties.  It is  that  the  determination
    contains errors of law  as  identified  in  the  Secretary  of  State's
    grounds and, further, in the judge's failure to give  adequate  reasons
    for  her  conclusions  on  the  asylum  appeal.   We  set  aside  Judge
    O'Rourke's decision and remit the appeal for fresh determination  by  a
    judge other than Judge O'Rourke.  No findings of fact are preserved.










                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL



                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                         Date: 31 March 2016
