
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

SM and Qadir v Secretary of State for the Home Department (ETS - Evidence -
Burden of Proof) [2016] UKUT 00229 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London                  |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 05 and 08  February and                    |                             |
|03, 04 and 07 March 2016                      |.............................|
|                                              |....                         |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                  The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey, President
                      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini


                                   Between

                             SM and Ihsan Qadir
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

First  Appellant:   Mr  M  Biggs,  of  counsel,  instructed   by   Universal
                  Solicitors
Second Appellant: Mr Z Malik, of counsel, instructed by AWS Solicitors
Respondent:   Mr R Dunlop, of counsel, instructed by  the  Government  Legal
                  Department


     i) The Secretary  of  State's  generic  evidence,  combined  with  her
        evidence particular to these two appellants, sufficed to  discharge
        the evidential burden of proving that their TOEIC certificates  had
        been procured by dishonesty.

    ii) However, given the  multiple  frailties  from  which  this  generic
        evidence was considered to suffer and, in the light of the evidence
        adduced by  the  appellants,  the  Secretary  of  State  failed  to
        discharge the legal burden of proving dishonesty on their part.


Glossary of Terms

Mindful of the proliferation of jargon and acronyms in the sphere  to  which
these appeals belong, we preface  our  judgment  with  the  following  short
glossary:

"ACCA":           Association of Chartered Certified Accountants

"CCL":            Central College of London

"ETS":                            "Educational   Testing   Services",    the
                  international entity which provided the Home  Office  with
                  services relating  to  English  language  testing  in  the
                  United Kingdom.

"False positive": An incorrect finding that a TOEIC testing student  cheated
                  in some unspecified way.

"False negative": An incorrect finding that a TOEIC student  did  not  cheat
                  in the testing.

"GCID":           General Case Information Database

"IELTS":          International English Language  Testing  System",  one  of
                  the recognised  English  language  qualifications  in  the
                  Immigration Control system.

"Invalid":             The ETS assessment  of  TOEIC  testing  scores  which
must be rejected.

 "LSBF":          London School of Business and Finance

"Questionable":    The  ETS  assessment  of  TOEIC  scores  which  must   be
                  considered doubtful.

"SELT":           Secure English Language Test

"TOEIC":          Test of English for International Communication

"TOEFL":          Test of English as a Foreign Language

"UKBA":           The United Kingdom Borders Agency.

"UKVI":           UK Visas and Immigration




                       DECISION

Introduction

 1. These appeals belong to the relatively substantial cohort of  so-called
    "ETS/TOEIC" cases. In each case the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department (the "Secretary of State") has made  a  decision  cancelling
    the Appellants' leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  on  the  ground
    that they secured an English  language  qualification,  recorded  in  a
    "TOEIC" certificate, by fraud. Each Appellant appealed, unsuccessfully,
    to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (the  "FtT"),   whose   decisions   were
    subsequently set aside by this Tribunal as erroneous  in  law.  In  the
    case of the Appellant SM, the error of law identified was, in  essence,
    a  disproportionate  reliance  on  the  Secretary  of  State's  generic
    evidence without dealing adequately with the Appellant's evidence and a
    lack of adequate reasons. In the case of the Appellant  Mr  Qadir,  the
    FtT was held to have erred in law on the issue of burden of  proof.  It
    now falls to this Tribunal to remake the decisions of the FtT.

ETS/TOEIC Cases Generally

 2. The general background of this  particular  sphere  of  litigation  was
    explained in R (Gazi) v Secretary of State for the Home Department (ETS
    - judicial review) (IJR) [2015] UKUT 327 (IAC)  at [1] in these terms:

         "The  litigation  context  in  which  this  challenge  unfolds   is
         conveniently identified in an earlier decision of this Tribunal,  R
         (Mahmood) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014]  UKUT
         439 (IAC), at [1]:


             "This is another of the currently plentiful crop of soi-disant
             "ETS" judicial review cases. These have gained  much  currency
             during recent months, stimulated by action taken on behalf  of
             the Secretary of State for the Home Department ("the Secretary
             of State"), the Respondent herein, in  the  wake  of  the  BBC
             "Panorama" programme broadcast  on  10  February  2014.  "ETS"
             denotes  Educational  Testing  Services,   a   global   agency
             contracted  to  provide  certain   educational   testing   and
             assessment services to the Secretary of  State.  In  order  to
             secure leave to remain in the United Kingdom, by virtue of the
             relevant provisions of the Immigration Rules it was  incumbent
             on the Applicant to provide evidence that he  had  obtained  a
             specified type of English language qualification.  The  action
             taken on behalf of the Secretary of State, which the Applicant
             challenges by these proceedings, was based  on  an  assessment
             that the English language certificate on which he  relied  had
             been procured by deception."


         "The decision in Mahmood was promulgated in September 2014. At  the
         outset, it is convenient to be aware that the  vocabulary  in  this
         sphere includes in particular the following:-

         "TOEIC":  this  denotes  "Test   of   English   for   International
         Communication".
         "ETS": this denotes the entity Educational Testing Service Limited,
         one of the  Home  Office  suppliers  of  "secure  English  language
         testing".

 3. The "broader landscape" was outlined, at [45], as follows:


         "Some of  the  decisions  in  the  broad  ETS/TOEIC  category  have
         generated a right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT"),  in
         country. This has occurred typically in  cases  where  the  student
         concerned has been challenged at port upon returning to the  United
         Kingdom from, for example,  a  visit  to  the  country  of  origin,
         followed by an in-country appealable decision of the  Secretary  of
         State. Others have generated a right of appeal exercisable only out
         of country (as in the present case). Other cases,  believed  to  be
         the majority, have generated  judicial  review  challenges,  as  in
         Mahmood and the present case. Thus there is a slowly expanding body
         of case law in this sphere. In all of these cases, the Secretary of
         State has relied on evidence of a generic kind.  This  consists  of
         the witness statements of Rebecca Collings  and  Peter  Millington,
         both dated 23 June 2014. The statements of these two witnesses have
         neither evolved nor altered since then. In some cases,  as  in  the
         present one, these statements are supplemented by a further witness
         statement of another Home Office official."


    The "evolving landscape", noted in [47], has continued to develop.


 4. Notably in Gazi, there was some emphasis on judicial  review  providing
    an inadequate forum for the determination of legal challenges  of  this
    species,  to  be  contrasted  with  the  several  advantages  of   such
    challenges unfolding within the statutory appeals  framework.   See  in
    particular [36]:


         "At this juncture  it  is  convenient  to  consider  the  issue  of
         alternative remedy, given the inextricable nexus between this issue
         and the Applicant's first ground of challenge. In my  judgment  the
         substance and contours of the  Applicant's  improper  purpose  case
         confirm that an appeal to the FtT, pursued out  of  country,  is  a
         demonstrably superior mechanism for this species of challenge  than
         an application for judicial review which, as  has  been  repeatedly
         observed, invokes a judicial supervisory jurisdiction and is not an
         appellate  process.  The  presentation  of  the  Applicant's   case
         involved a detailed,  forensic  examination  of  the  Secretary  of
         State's evidence, coupled with a lengthy  exposition  of  the  main
         issues raised in the expert report of Dr Harrison.  I  consider  it
         appropriate to highlight what this judicial review hearing  lacked:
         there was no examination in  chief  or  cross  examination  of  the
         Applicant or any witness on his behalf;  nor  was  there  any  live
         evidence from any witness on behalf of the Secretary of State;  and
         there was no examination  in  chief  or  cross  examination  of  Dr
         Harrison or any other expert witness. All of these missing  factors
         arise in a litigation context in which the bona fides and character
         of the Applicant  are  important  issues.  However,  there  was  no
         opportunity to evaluate the Applicant's demeanour or to assess  his
         performance under cross examination."

 5. This area of litigation is nothing if not organic, as  is  demonstrated
    by the growing body of jurisprudence.  In July 2015 the Court of Appeal
    promulgated two decisions: R (Mehmood and Ali) v Secretary of State for
    the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 744 and R  (Sood)  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 831.  The  next  landmark
    occurred in the several decisions of this  Tribunal  made  in  December
    2015: R (Jakhu) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  (ETS:
    legitimate expectations)  (IJR)  [2015]  UKUT  693  and  R  (Roohi  and
    Another) v Secretary of State for the Home Department (2014 Act:  saved
    appeal rights) (IJR) [2015] UKUT 685.

 6. The present appeals are the first of several heralding a new  phase  in
    Upper Tribunal litigation in this field. They are said to  raise  fresh
    issues,  not  previously  the  subject  of  judicial  consideration  or
    determination. In particular, litigants  are  now  concentrating  their
    attentions on (in summary) the strength and quality of the Secretary of
    State's evidence, the exacting burden  of  proving  deception  and  the
    range of evidence which can be adduced by litigants  in  aid  of  their
    cause.

The Appellants' Cases

 7. Reduced to their main  essentials,  the  Appellants'  cases  have  four
    components. First, it is contended that the  evidence  upon  which  the
    Secretary of State's decision was taken is  insufficient  to  discharge
    the burden of establishing that either Appellant engaged  in  deception
    in the matter of his TOEIC Certificate.  Second, the Appellants rely on
    their own evidence, central to which is the claim that they  have  been
    proficient in the English language  for  some  considerable  time,  are
    persons of good character and had no need or incentive to cheat.   They
    also rely on their evidence relating to how they say  the  testing  was
    undertaken by them and the surrounding circumstances.  In addition, the
    Appellants pray in aid the evidence of  two  witnesses  in  particular.
    The first is Dr Harrison, an expert in voice recognition, whose  report
    was considered  in  Gazi.   The  second  is  Richard  Watson,  the  BBC
    investigative journalist who was involved in the production of the  now
    infamous "Panorama" programme broadcast on 10 February 2014.

The Secretary of State's Evidence

8.   In order to succeed in these appeals the onus rests  on  the  Secretary
    of State to prove that both Appellants  were  guilty  of  deception  in
    procuring  their  respective  TOEIC  Certificates.  Appropriately,  the
    evidence on behalf of the Secretary of State was adduced  first.   This
    is reflected in the framework of this judgment.

9.   We record that on behalf of the Secretary of State  a  heavily  delayed
    application was made at the beginning  of  the  five  day  hearing  for
    permission to adduce certain further evidence. In a preliminary  ruling
    (see Appendix 1), the Tribunal acceded to this in part.   When  two  of
    the five days of hearing had been completed, a further application  was
    made on behalf of the Secretary of State.  The gist of this application
    was that directions were sought from  the  Tribunal  to  accommodate  a
    desire to engage an expert witness.  For the reasons rehearsed  in  its
    second ruling the Tribunal refused this application (see  Appendix  2).



10.  The evidence adduced on behalf of the Secretary of State consisted  of,
    firstly, certain documentary evidence. We summarise this thus:

      a) The computerised spreadsheet entries  derived  from  the  "Look  up
         Tool" relating to the two Appellants, with accompanying explanatory
         witness statement.


      b) An "Explanation of IELTS Scoring" document.

      c) Evidence relating to SELT  Centres  in  Leeds  in  January/February
         2012.

      d) Mr Qadir's interview record.

      e) Certain  bank  statements  relating  to  an  account  held  by  the
         Appellant SM.

      f) A document certifying  SM's  attendance  at  a  college  ("Kaplan")
         between August and September 2006.


      g) A UKVI letter relating to the  revocation  of  the  Tier  2  and  4
         licence held by the London School of Business and Finance ("LSBF").




      h) A letter relating to the revocation of the sponsor licence  of  the
         Central College of London ("CCL").

      i) Certain UKVI "GCID" case records pertaining to the Appellant SM.

11.  Some of the above documents were  produced  piecemeal  as  the  hearing
    progressed.  The further evidence adduced in this way  included  slides
    originating from an international workshop in  human  assisted  speaker
    recognition held in 2010, organised by the USA  National  Institute  of
    Standards and Technology.

12.  Mr Green, a Home Office employee, gave  written  evidence  relating  to
    the two spreadsheet computer printouts purporting to record the outcome
    of the ETS testing of the voice samples purporting to relate to the two
    Appellants.  He  did  not  have  the  expertise  or  qualifications  to
    elaborate on these two brief documents. On the face  of  the  documents
    ETS devised a dichotomy of  "invalid"  and  "questionable"  TOEIC  test
    results.  The Home Office, in turn, has developed a system whereby upon
    receipt of the ETS testing analysis outcomes these are matched  to  the
    person who  has  the  name,  date  of  birth  and  nationality  of  the
    certificate holder. This is known as the "Lookup Tool". Mr Green  added
    that some 200,000 student  visas  are  issued  in  the  United  Kingdom
    annually.  There are 1,700 Government approved colleges, of which 1,300
    have the kitemark of "highly trusted".   ETS  is  one  of  the  largest
    English testing organisations in the world, assessing some  50  million
    tests per annum.  Pursuant to the  mechanisms  noted  above,  the  Home
    Office has made decisions that  TOEIC  certificates  were  procured  by
    fraud in some 33,000 cases.

13.  The evidence adduced on behalf of the Secretary of State was  completed
    by the witness statements and oral testimony of  Rebecca  Collings  and
    Peter Milllington.  As all who have any familiarity with this sphere of
    litigation know,  the  evidence  of  these  two  witnesses,  in  purely
    documentary form, has been adduced on behalf of the Secretary of  State
    in a substantial number  of  "ETS/TOEIC"  cases  (possibly  all),  both
    statutory appeals (mainly) and judicial review challenges  (see  Gazi).
    One of the landmark features of the hearing of these appeals  was  that
    this was the first occasion upon which these two witnesses  have  given
    viva voce evidence.  They had not previously  been  cross  examined  or
    judicially questioned on the contents of their  witness  statements  in
    any other case.  Their two witness statements have become known as  the
    Secretary of State's "generic  evidence",  rolled  out  in  every  case
    belonging to this cohort.

Ms Collings

14.  A synopsis of Ms Collings' witness statement is contained in  Gazi,  at
    [6] - [8].  It is convenient to reproduce this here:

           "[6]   The generic witness statement of Ms Collings is  made  in
                 the context of a regulatory  era  wherein  the  Immigration
                 Rules and/or Home Office policies require large numbers  of
                 immigrants to demonstrate English language competence to  a
                 certain standard and via prescribed  mechanisms.   The  ETS
                 entity is one of a small number of Home Office suppliers of
                 so-called "Secure English Language  Testing"  ("SELT")  and
                 was appointed in 2011  following  a  procurement  exercise.
                 ETS  notifies  those  examined  of  their   grades   by   a
                 certificate.  It operates test centres where the  requisite
                 examination   is   undertaken.    The   Home   Office   has
                 consistently been alert  to  the  risk  of  fraud  in  this
                 sphere.


           [7]    The Home Office  was  first  alerted  to  "the  potential
                 issues with testing at ETS" upon receipt of a letter  dated
                 06 January 2014 from the BBC.  The makers of the "Panorama"
                 programme claimed to have uncovered evidence of fraud which
                 included  the  active  collusion   and   participation   of
                 employees at  the  ETS  test  centres.   The  investigation
                 focused on two specific  centres.  One  of  these  is  Eden
                 International College, where the  Applicant  underwent  his
                 test. On 06 February 2014 the Home  Office  made  a  public
                 announcement that ETS testing in  the  United  Kingdom  was
                 being suspended.  At this  stage  ETS  had  been  operating
                 tests for  almost  three  years.   The  Panorama  programme
                 followed,  on  10  February  2014.   The  contents  of  the
                 programme convinced the Home Office that there had been  "a
                 serious breach of the licence and of use of the immigration
                 system".  In particular:


                       ".....  In relation to ETS test centres,  individuals
                       were able to pay to pass the English  language  test.
                       Proxy test  takers  were  seen  taking  the  speaking
                       element of the test and answers were  seen  read  out
                       from  the  front  of  a  class  supposedly  taking  a
                       multiple choice element of the test."


                 Immediately thereafter, ETS interacted with the Home Office
                 in the provision of unspecified "data, trend  analysis  and
                 other evidence".  Next, in late March 2014, the Home Office
                 was informed by ETS -


                       "...  that it had been able to identify impersonation
                       and proxy testing using voice  recognition  software.
                       Early analysis demonstrated evidence of cheating, but
                       ETS confirmed that it would  take  time  to  complete
                       analysis for all tests taken since the licence  began
                       in April 2011 ...


                 ETS sent the Home Office the results of the analysis of the
                 first batch of test centres on 24 and 28 March 2014."


                 Ms Collings averments continue:


                       "Following the provision of this data the Home Office
                       had a teleconference with ETS  on  01  April  [2014].
                       The discussion focused on the  first  batch  of  test
                       analysis.  ETS described that any test categorised as
                       cancelled (which later became known as  invalid)  had
                       the  same  voice  for  multiple  test   takers.    On
                       questioning they advised that they were certain there
                       was evidence of proxy test taking of impersonation in
                       those cases."


                 [Emphasis supplied.]

                 It is agreed that the Applicant's  case  is  one  of  those
                 belonging to this initial tranche.


           [8]    Continuing, Ms Collings explains  that  ETS  devised  two
                 categories, namely "invalid" and "questionable".  All  were
                 subject to the same  sanction:  cancellation  of  the  test
                 certificate.  At this, the initial, stage some 10,000  test
                 scores had been analysed by ETS.   The  majority  of  these
                 were cancelled as invalid, while the others were  cancelled
                 as questionable.


                 The rationale of the ensuing decisions made  under  section
                 10 of the 1999 Act is explained thus:


                       "We recognised that where ETS had  cancelled  a  test
                       score because of impersonation and proxy test  taking
                       that test score had been obtained by  deception.   We
                       further recognised that persons in that position  who
                       then used that test score had sought to obtain  leave
                       by deception."


          Ms Collings also makes the following claim:


                       "Where the details of the  certificate  on  the  Home
                       Office file matched those provided in the  data  from
                       ETS  as   an   invalid   result,   we   undertook   a
                       consideration of all relevant factors (including  for
                       example possible human rights  grounds)  which  might
                       mean that removal was not appropriate.  Where no such
                       circumstances existed, we took a decision  to  remove
                       the applicant ....  under section 10(1)(b) ...."


                 It is far from clear  whether  this  exercise  entailed  an
                 examination of each  case  individually.  The  averment  is
                 opaque.  As  the  deponent  notes,  upon  service  of  such
                 decisions section 10(8) operates to invalidate the leave to
                 enter or remain previously granted to the person concerned.
                 While such decisions generate a right of  appeal,  this  is
                 exercisable from abroad only."

15. In evidence Ms Collings adopted her witness statement. Her evidence was
    augmented in cross examination and in  response  to  certain  questions
    from the panel.  She explained that a Home Office delegation  travelled
    to the ETS Headquarters in the United States in June 2014. Ms  Collings
    was not a member. This was considered necessary in order to  understand
    better the ETS voice testing processes. The  first  batch  of  the  ETS
    analysis results had been received by 28 March 2014, at which stage  it
    was acknowledged that further scientific analysis would  be  necessary.
    This would entail the use of voice recognition  software.   During  the
    period January to  March  2014  there  were  frequent  Home  Office/ETS
    communications, usually by the medium of teleconference,  resulting  in
    agreed notes of the discussions.  None of these has been provided.  Nor
    did Ms Collings bring to the hearing any  of  the  emails  and  letters
    identified in, but not attached to, her witness statement.  We  observe
    that this is not harmonious with elementary  good  litigation  practice
    and is in breach of every litigant's duty of candour owed to the  court
    or tribunal: see  R  (Mahmood)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department (Candour/Reassessment of Duties;  ETS:  Alternative  Remedy)
    IJR [2014] UKUT 00439 (IAC), at [24] especially.

16. At this point it is convenient to identify the  categorisation  devised
    and applied by ETS in its review of the batches of test  results  under
    scrutiny:

    (i)  Invalid.


    ii) Questionable.


    In her evidence, Ms Collings disclosed that the Home  Office  (and  not
    ETS) operated a third class, constituted by students whose test results
    were categorised neither invalid nor questionable  (by  ETS)  but  were
    considered illegitimate by the Home Office on the sole ground that such
    students had taken their test  at  a  centre  where  large  numbers  of
    invalid and questionable results had been diagnosed.  The existence  of
    this further, third category had not  been  disclosed  in  the  witness
    statements of either Ms Collings or the  other  principal  Home  Office
    witness, Mr Millington (infra).  It emerged for the first  time  in  Ms
    Collings'  evidence.   There  was  a  vague  suggestion,  without   any
    supporting evidence (such as figures) whatsoever, that some students in
    the "questionable" category were offered the opportunity to undergo the
    test a second time.


17.  Ms Collings confirmed that while the Panorama  programme  provided  the
    impetus for the extensive Home  Office/ETS  interaction  from  February
    2014, the Home Office had previously  expressed  to  ETS  its  concerns
    about the apparently high numbers of top score  results  emerging  from
    certain TOEIC testing centres.  ETS was deputed to investigate this and
    duly reported that no cheating was taking place. However, the  Panorama
    documentary which focused on two TOEIC test centres (Eden  College  and
    Universal Training Centre), establish that 11 students who had achieved
    full marks took their tests at  these  centres.  Ms  Collings  did  not
    challenge the suggestion that this reflected adversely on ETS.

18.  Ms Collings was unable to specify with precision the  date  upon  which
    the Home Office and ETS agreed that  a  process  of  voice  recognition
    analysis should be undertaken. As the results of this  analysis  became
    available, the Home Office relied on them and in all cases in which ETS
    made an "invalid" designation action  was  taken  against  the  student
    concerned, subject only to consideration of whether  there  were  human
    rights grounds militating against removal of the person concerned  from
    the United Kingdom.  Based on  the  information  provided  by  ETS,  Ms
    Collings and  her  Home  Office  colleagues  considered  it  "extremely
    likely" that cheating had taken place. She was unable to  instance  any
    student with an "invalid" result  against  whom  action  had  not  been
    taken. Ms Collings agreed that certain shadows have been cast over  the
    reliability of the ETS testing methods. These  included  in  particular
    her evidence relating to  concerns  emerging  in  May  2013  (i.e.  the
    previous year) about the ETS  verification  of  suspect  "top  scores".
    Furthermore, a number of these suspect scores had been obtained at  the
    two test centres involved in the Panorama broadcast.

19.   Questioning  readily  identified  the  limitations  of  Ms   Collings'
    evidence. She professes no expertise or qualifications relating to  the
    quintessentially scientific subject  matter.   She  is  a  graduate  in
    European and Urban Regional Studies.  She had no  involvement  in  this
    saga until mid-January 2014.  Her direct involvement terminated  around
    June 2014.  Her evidence was not supported by any of the records  which
    evidently exist (supra).  It  is  evident  that  she  and  Home  Office
    colleagues were entirely dependent on what was relayed to them by  ETS.
    We shall comment on this infra.

Mr Millington

20.  The decision in Gazi  contains,  at  [9]  -  [15],  a  synopsis  of  Mr
    Millington's witness statement, which we reproduce at this juncture:

           "[9]   The second  generic  witness  statement  is  that  of  Mr
                 Millington. This discloses that his rank  within  the  Home
                 Office  is  that  of  Assistant  Director,   with   current
                 responsibility  for  the  network  of  "Sponsor  Compliance
                 Officers" in certain parts of the United  Kingdom.  He  had
                 previously directed the unit  which  processed  in  country
                 Tier 4 student applications.  This confirms that there  was
                 a first phase, which dated from February to June  2014.  At
                 this juncture, it is appropriate to  highlight  the  single
                 piece of documentary evidence relating to the  decision  in
                 the  Applicant's  case  which  has  been  produced  by  the
                 Secretary of State.  It consists of a  photocopied  excerpt
                 from a spreadsheet taking the form  of  a  horizontal  line
                 containing six pieces of information: the "ETS Registration
                 ID", the Applicant's first and last names, the  test  date,
                 the Applicant's date of birth and  the  name  of  the  test
                 centre.  Neither the word "invalid"  or  "cancellation"  or
                 any derivative of either appears.


           [10]   The active enquiries and  other  steps  described  by  Mr
                 Millington in his statement did not begin until June  2014,
                 at which stage, accompanied by a government solicitor and a
                 colleague, a visit was made to ETS headquarters in the USA.
                  ETS is described as  "the  world's  largest  private  non-
                 profit educational testing  and  assessment  organisation",
                 administering approximately 50 million  tests  annually  in
                 25,000 test centres in 192 countries.   Its  systems  allow
                 for the scoring of around 64,000 tests daily.  It is  also,
                 supposedly, a "world leader in respect of fraud  prevention
                 and detection".  ETS receives, and stores,  the  electronic
                 files relating to the spoken and written responses of  each
                 student.  Random marking of individual files is  undertaken
                 by multiple accredited "markers".  The analysis  of  speech
                 recordings is one of the anti-fraud measures which ETS  has
                 developed  during   recent   years.    Conscious   of   the
                 limitations attendant upon these measures, ETS  had,  prior
                 to the Panorama programme, begun testing and developing so-
                 called "biometric voice  recognition".   The  mechanics  of
                 this are described in these terms:


                       "The basic  technology  extracts  biometric  features
                       from an individual's speech to generate  voice  print
                       (the voice equivalent of a finger print).  This voice
                       print can then be run against  samples  to  establish
                       whether the sample is likely a recording of the  same
                       person  who  had  generated  the  voice  print  or  a
                       different person."


              It is  claimed  that  in  2011  ETS  procured  the  necessary
                 software from a provider which  had  successfully  operated
                 this technology in other sectors.  No  particulars  of  the
                 provider, software or the arrangement, have been  disclosed
                 due to a confidentiality agreement.


           [11]   ETS claims (per Mr Millington)  that  technology  testing
                 undertaken in 2012/13 entailed over 70,000 pairings of non-
                 matching comparisons.  This was a pilot testing scheme and:


                       "The  results  ....   were  that   matching   samples
                       produced values that were higher than values from the
                       non-matching samples the majority of the time, with a
                       less than 2% error rate ....


                       ETS  accepted  that  voice  biometric  technology  is
                       currently imperfect ...   too  many  false  positives
                       would fatally undermine the integrity  of  the  voice
                       biometric system ...."


                 As a result, it  is  claimed  that  the  "thresholds"  were
                 reformulated conservatively, with a consequential reduction
                 in "the probability of false positives".  The trial of  the
                 technology  was  considered  to  have   been   "successful"
                 prompting a decision to extend its use to the TOEIC  arena.
                 Making due  allowance  for  the  opacity  of  some  of  the
                 averments which follow in the  witness  statement,  neither
                 the  date  of  this  decision   nor   the   date   of   its
                 implementation is disclosed.  It appears, however, that the
                 Panorama programme was  the  stimulus  for  implementation,
                 notwithstanding that ETS "...  had not  originally  planned
                 to roll out its voice biometric technology on TOEIC at that
                 point or to use it as a retrospective fraud  identification
                 tool ...."  The precise particulars of the decision said to
                 have been taken in the wake of the Panorama  programme  are
                 unclear.


           [12]   At this stage, comprehension of the terminology  used  is
                 essential.  The "electronic files" are those which  contain
                 each person's spoken responses made during  the  course  of
                 the  test.   For  the  purpose  of  the   biometric   voice
                 recognition exercise:


                       "The electronic files generated at the testing  stage
                       required  a  two  step   audio   conversion   process
                       ..........."

                 It appears that through this conversion they  mutated  into
                 "audio files".  Continuing, Mr Millington explains that the
                 "Office of Testing Integrity" ("OTI"), an internal division
                 of ETS, were -


                       "....  provided with electronic files  and  for  each
                       test taken identified the six audio files which  were
                       most appropriate for comparison."

                 The most appropriate files were considered to be  "usually"
                 the   largest/longest;   those   providing   the   clearest
                 responses; or those where all test takers were required  to
                 read a set text.  As regards the mechanics of what occurred
                 thereafter:


                       "Tests from a test centre were batched into groups of
                       300 - 400 test takers ...


                       These audio files were then  run  through  the  voice
                       biometrics   engine.    Each   batch    would    take
                       approximately two hours to process.  The engine would
                       compare each test to all other tests  in  that  batch
                       and flag all suspicious results (those  that  were  a
                       'match') in  line  with  the  probability  thresholds
                       discussed above.  The  output  would  be  a  list  of
                       flagged cases ranked in  order  of  the  most  likely
                       match through to least likely."


                 These averments conjure up the image of a sliding scale, to
                 be  contrasted  with  the  dichotomy   of   "invalid"   and
                 "questionable" described in Ms Collings' witness statement.


           [13]   During the visit of Mr Millington and his colleagues, the
                 briefing which they received included the following:


                       "They [ETS] acknowledged  that  the  technology  they
                       used  was  imperfect  and  that  samples   could   be
                       incorrectly   flagged   as   matches   (i.e.    false
                       positives).  This could occur due  to  noise  in  the
                       background of a recording (e.g. an  air  conditioning
                       system) or the detection  of  another  noise  in  the
                       background which matches another test taker (although
                       ETS notes that test takers should not be  sitting  so
                       close to one another  that  they  can  overhear  each
                       other's responses)."


                 In recognition of the risk  of  "false  positives",  it  is
                 claimed that ETS ".... subjected each flagged  match  to  a
                 further human verification  process".   This  required  the
                 recruitment of additional staff who, it is  said,  received
                 "mandatory training in voice recognition analysis" and were
                 "initially mentored by experienced OTI analysts".   Neither
                 the date when this recruitment was undertaken nor the  date
                 when it was completed is disclosed.  Equally, there  is  no
                 disclosure of  the  period  during  which  the  supervision
                 endured.   It  is  acknowledged  that  various  numbers  of
                 redeployed staff were discarded "because they did not  have
                 the necessary aptitude for the task".  Having  engaged  the
                 necessary number of analysts, the process operated was that
                 each  "flagged  comparison"  would  be  considered  by  two
                 analysts separately.   Each  analyst  would  then  form  an
                 opinion.  The purpose of  the  exercise  was  to  establish
                 whether, in both analysts' opinion, the samples constituted
                 a "match", having been thus designated  by  the  "biometric
                 engine" initially. It would appear that  this  verification
                 exercise is a purely human one.


           [14]    Mr  Millington  then  describes  certain  demonstrations
                 provided by ETS.  Neither the duration of this exercise nor
                 the number of individual cases considered is disclosed.  He
                 makes the following claim:


                       "It was very clear to me, from the samples  I  heard,
                       that those samples were of the same person  speaking.
                       I  was  able  to  compare  tone,   accent   and   the
                       distinctive and instinctive expressions used to  fill
                       hesitations in speech."


                 One observes, inevitably, that  this  description  of  what
                 actually occurred is lean in detail and, further, as  noted
                 above,  Mr  Millington  can  lay  claim  to   no   relevant
                 credentials or expertise in the field of voice recognition.
                  The same observations apply to his ensuing averments  that
                 non-verified matches were "confidently"  identified  by  Mr
                 Millington and his  colleagues.   There  is  a  discernible
                 element of bombast in these claims.


           [15]   The novel and evolving (if not embryonic) nature  of  the
                 voice  biometric  technology  emerges  strikingly  in   the
                 following averments of Mr Millington:


                       "During the demonstration, the senior analyst advised
                       that the OTI were constantly updating their  guidance
                       and sharing information to ensure that analysts could
                       hone their skills.   For  example,  they  shared  the
                       distinctive use of  particular  idioms,  verbal  tics
                       and/or answers being structured in exactly  the  same
                       way between test takers.  We were also advised  that,
                       in  order  to  maintain   accuracy,   analysts   were
                       encouraged to take regular breaks  and  every  effort
                       was taken to avoid an analyst dealing with  the  same
                       testing centre or the same questions repetitively."


          [My emphasis.]


               There  is  an  unmistakable  self-serving  element  in   the
               averments which follow:


                       "ETS statistics bear out the  underlying  reliability
                       of the voice biometrics technology.  Of  over  33,000
                       possible matches identified by the  system  80%  were
                       confirmed  after  human  verification.   As   already
                       discussed, many of these 'non-verified matches' would
                       have been because of the presence  of  noise  in  the
                       background of  recordings.   The  analysts  adopt  an
                       approach whereby any doubt about the  validity  of  a
                       match  will  result  in  it  being  rejected.  I   am
                       confident this mitigates  significantly  against  the
                       risk of a false positive."


               [Emphasis added.]


               Given the terms in which Mr Millington's  ensuing  averments
               are  framed,   they   invite   reproduction,   rather   than
               paraphrase:


                       "ETS have identified thousands of cases where  speech
                       samples display marked similarities, leading  OTI  to
                       believe an imposter was involved and  in  such  cases
                       scores will be cancelled. Within the  tests  analysed
                       the OTI  has  identified  many  instances  where  the
                       speech sample indicates the same individual has taken
                       tests in place of numerous candidates.  Where a match
                       has been identified their approach is  to  invalidate
                       the test result ...  ETS has informed the Home Office
                       that  there  was  evidence  of  invalidity  in  those
                       cases."


               The  dichotomy  of  "invalidity"   and   "irregularity"   is
               identifiable in the immediately ensuing averments:


                       "Where a match has not been identified and  verified,
                       an individual's test result may still be  invalidated
                       on the  basis  of  test  administration  irregularity
                       including the fact that their test was taken at a  UK
                       testing centre where numerous other results have been
                       invalidated on the basis  of  a  'match'.   In  those
                       cases the individual would usually be invited to take
                       a   free   re-test.    These   cases   are    clearly
                       distinguished by ETS in its spreadsheets provided  to
                       the Home Office from tests where there is substantial
                       evidence of invalidity."


           No exhibited illustration of this distinction, even in  redacted
           form, is provided.  Finally, it is  clear  from  the  concluding
           averments in Mr Millington's witness  statement  that  the  Home
           Office invariably accepts the deception assessment  provided  by
           ETS , without more."

21. Mr Millington was a member of the Home Office delegation which met with
    ETS representatives in the United States in June  2014.   He  confirmed
    that this was the only event of its kind.  He explained that he was not
    a first choice member of the  Home  Office  delegation  to  the  United
    States.  He was enlisted only because of the unavailability of  others.
    The delegation did not include any voice recognition expert or, indeed,
    any scientist.  Mr Millington was accompanied by two colleagues  and  a
    solicitor.  The judicial review challenge in the case of  Gazi  (supra)
    was the impetus for this excursion.   The  information  obtained,  duly
    reproduced in Mr Millington's and Ms Collings' witness statements,  was
    provided in the course of a single day during interaction with some six
    ETS representatives.


22. This exercise did not entail the  provision  or  consideration  of  any
    voice recordings. Mr Millington testified that  to  his  knowledge  the
    Home Office  has  at  no  time  requested  ETS  to  provide  the  voice
    recordings in respect of any individual.  Nor, he added, has  the  Home
    Office ever asked for the software used by ETS. Mr Millington explained
    that during the one day meeting in the United States,  ETS  made  clear
    its unwillingness to disclose the software  on  the  ground  that  they
    considered it "confidential".  We were informed mid-trial that ETS  had
    communicated its unwillingness to provide any of the voice  recordings,
    absent judicial compulsion to do so.

23. In common with Ms Collings, Mr Millington professes no expertise in the
    science of voice recognition.   He  is  a  graduate  in  geography  and
    economics and obtained a post graduate diploma in human  resources  and
    training.  He has no  experience,  much  less  any  expertise,  in  the
    science of voice analysis and speech recognition.  He  became  involved
    at around  the  time  of  the  Panorama  programme  by  reason  of  his
    responsibilities in the Home Office response  and  compliance  network.
    He readily acknowledged the expertise and credentials of Dr Harrison.

24. Mr Millington indicated that the 2% error rate suggested in his witness
    statement relates to false positive results only.   He  was  unable  to
    elaborate on the "conservative thresholds" which ETS  claimed  to  have
    established in its voice biometric testing system.   He  did  not  know
    whether, as  this  testing  evolved,  the  number  of  false  positives
    actually decreased.  He confirmed that  "invalid"  and  "questionable",
    the  two  classifications  devised  by  ETS,  were  not  the  only  two
    categories operated by  the  Home  Office.   Rather,  the  Home  Office
    operated a  third category, constituted by students who did not  belong
    to  either  of  the  other  categories  but  whose  test  results  were
    considered illegitimate on the sole ground that they  emanated  from  a
    testing centre where "numerous other results" belonging  to  the  other
    two categories had been  ascertained.   (This  is  acknowledged  in  Mr
    Millington's witness statement: see the  passage  quoted  in  [20]/(15)
    above.)   Mr  Millington  was   unable   to   dilate   on   "numerous".
    Furthermore, while  averring  that  persons  belonging  to  this  third
    category were "usually" invited to undergo a fresh test, he was  unable
    to elaborate on "usually".  Nor could he say what "substantial evidence
    of invalidity", a term used in his witness statement, denotes.

25. Mr Millington was unable to provide any evidence of the error rates  in
    the ETS human verification process.  He did not  challenge  or  dissent
    from any aspect of Dr Harrison's detailed critique.  He agreed that the
    automated testing system employed by ETS could generate false  positive
    results in up to 22.5% of cases.  He further agreed that this could  be
    as high as 30% in the human verification analysis  process.   While  he
    made these concessions with reluctance, it was manifestly clear that he
    had nothing with which to counter Dr Harrison's analysis  and  opinion.
    He  was  unable  to  provide  the  date  when  ETS   introduced   human
    verification.  He agreed that "contaminants" included air  conditioning
    in the test centre room, other human voices and other sources of noise,
    inexhaustively.  Mr Millington  confirmed  that  ETS  reported  to  the
    delegation that the 2%  false  positive  rate  which  it  was  claiming
    related to the automatic voice  recognition  process  concerning  TOEFL
    (not TOEIC) English language  tests.   He  was  unable  to  address  Dr
    Harrison's observation that the comparability of the samples  used  for
    the "proof of concept" testing and the TOEIC testing  was  undisclosed.
    He could not provide any evidence relating to the security of  UK  test
    centre voice recordings prior to transition to ETS.  The witness had no
    involvement in the Home Office investigation of suspect test centres.


26. Mr Millington's evidence confirmed that the actual false positive error
    rate at the automated testing (i.e. first) stage is an incognito.   ETS
    reported that at the human verification (i.e. second) stage 20% of  the
    automated test results were rejected.  Subject to the  imponderable  of
    the fallibility of the human verification results (my qualification) he
    agreed that this could indicate a false positive error rate of  20%  at
    the former stage.

The Appellants' Case

27. We begin our consideration of the evidence adduced  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellants with the testimony of Dr Harrison, who  adopted  his  report
    dated  05  February  2015  in  full  and  amplified  its  contents   in
    questioning.   There  is  no  dispute  about   Dr   Harrison's   expert
    credentials. He  is,  fundamentally,  an  acknowledged  expert  in  the
    science of voice recognition. He describes this, in technical terms, as
    the   "authentication,   enhancement,   transcription    and    speaker
    comparison".   He  is  clearly  an  experienced  expert  witness.   The
    decision of this Tribunal in Gazi contains, at [17] - [20], a prcis of
    Dr Harrison's report which is conveniently reproduced at this juncture:




           "[17].  The  report  of  Dr  Harrison  contains  a   series   of
                 assessments,   commentaries   and   opinions   which    are
                 susceptible to the following breakdown:


                 (i)    In  criminal  proceedings  the  mechanism   commonly
                       employed is  that  of  "forensic  speaker  comparison
                       analysis" which he describes as generally  recognised
                       and employed throughout much of western  Europe.   It
                       involves:


                  "Analysing different  aspects  of  the  voice  and  speech
                       patterns found in a recording. The  profiles  of  the
                       features that are found are then compared across  the
                       recordings.   The  analysis  process  usually   takes
                       between 10 and 15  hours  for  a  comparison  of  two
                       samples."


                   ii) The editing of audio files prior to  expert  analysis
                       is standard practice.


                  iii) Segmental analysis of speech samples is  carried  out
                       in accordance with the methodology  approved  by  the
                       International Phonetic Association and is designed to
                       identify the "fine-grained nuances of speech".


                   iv) The mechanics  of  analysing  voice  quality,  pitch,
                       intonation,  rhythm  and  tempo  form  part  of   the
                       exercise.


                    v) In appropriate cases, it is also necessary to examine
                       patterns of language  and  grammar  or  to  undertake
                       acoustic-phonetic analysis or other  specified  forms
                       of analysis.


                   vi) Automatic speaker recognition systems have the  modus
                       operandi  of  "[taking]  the   recorded   voices   of
                       individuals,   [performing]   complex    mathematical
                       operations on them and [reducing] them to statistical
                       representations or models."


                  vii)  "The  results  produced  by  automatic  systems  are
                       numeric scores which reflect the degree of similarity
                       between two samples - larger  numbers  reflect  great
                       similarity and  smaller  numbers  reflect  a  greater
                       dissimilarity between samples .....


                  changing the threshold alters  the  errors  rates  of  the
                       system since results from some pairs will change from
                       a yes to a no or vice-versa .....  as  the  threshold
                       increases the false  negative  error  rate  increases
                       whilst the false positive error rate  decreases  ....
                       Therefore the  choice  of  threshold  is  crucial  in
                       determining the errors rates and performance  of  the
                       system".


                 viii) Thus under automatic speaker comparison systems  both
                       false positives and  false  negatives  are  possible,
                       with the consequence that "for a quoted error rate to
                       be meaningful, the type of error that  it  refers  to
                       must be stated". Mr  Millington's  witness  statement
                       does not provide this information.


                   ix)  The  performance  of  automatic  speaker  comparison
                       systems is affected by many  factors,  in  particular
                       the duration of samples and the quality  of  samples,
                       which embraces surrounding and background noise.


           [18]   Dr Harrison is critical of the level of  detail  provided
                 in the generic witness statements of  Ms  Collings  and  Mr
                 Millington. He describes it as insufficient.  The norm,  he
                 says, is that the analyst concerned, rather  than  a  third
                 party recipient of information,  makes  the  statement  (or
                 compiles  the  report).   He   criticises   the   lack   of
                 information concerning the initial testing.  He  highlights
                 that there  is  a  dearth  of  information  concerning  the
                 comparability of the test samples with the  TOEIC  samples.
                 There is no detail concerning either duration  or  quality.
                 Nor is there any clear description of the configuration  of
                 the automatic system which was used in these  two  separate
                 phases.  The Respondent's evidence is silent on  the  issue
                 of  manufacturer's  updates.   The  non-disclosure  of  the
                 identity of the manufacturer or the  model  of  the  system
                 erects a barrier.  There is no indication  of  whether  the
                 files selected were combined to form  a  longer  recording,
                 nor  is  the  specific   duration   of   individual   files
                 particularised.  It is possible that  short,  poor  quality
                 samples of reading may have been selected.  It  is  unclear
                 whether the selection process  was  conducted  manually  or
                 automatically.  Nor is there any indication of whether  the
                 consistency  of  the  speaker  across  the  six  files  was
                 assessed by the automatic system.


           [19]   Dr Harrison also examines, with accompanying critique and
                 commentary,  the  discrete  issues  of  factors   affecting
                 performance; the typical performance of human verification;
                 the definition of thresholds; the explicit  acknowledgement
                 of human errors; the lack of testing of the performance  of
                 analysts; the dubious touchstone of  "confidence"  (see  Mr
                 Millington's witness statement); the dearth of  information
                 about the actual analysis methodology; the lack  of  detail
                 about the experience and knowledge of  both  the  recruited
                 analysts and their supervisors;  the  indication  that  any
                 training of the newly recruited analysts was  hurried;  the
                 shortcomings  in   Mr   Millington's   speech   recognition
                 averments; and the clear acknowledgement on the part of ETS
                 that false identifications  (viz  false  positive  results)
                 have  occurred.  One  passage   relating   to   the   human
                 verification process is especially noteworthy:


                       "... although  the  analysts  only  verified  matches
                       where they had no doubt about their validity  -  i.e.
                       where they were certain about their judgments -  this
                       should not be taken as a reliable  indicator  of  the
                       accuracy of those judgments.  This approach does  not
                       remove the risk of false positive results."

                 Dr Harrison also highlights that both the automatic  system
                 and the  human  analysts  are  capable  of  false  positive
                 errors.   The  Secretary  of  State's  evidence  does   not
                 disclose either  the  percentage  or  the  volume  of  such
                 errors.


           [20]   Dr Harrison  summarises  his  opinion  in  the  following
                 terms:


                    i)      In principle, the ETS methodology constitutes "a
                       reasonable approach".  However, the specifics of  its
                       implementation are insufficiently  particularised  in
                       the Respondent's evidence, which suffers from "a lack
                       of technical information and detail".


                   ii)      The  Secretary  of  State's  evidence  fails  to
                       acknowledge that the human verification mechanism "is
                       almost certain to have  resulted  in  false  positive
                       results".


                  iii)      The fact of an unknown number of false  positive
                       results in "an unknown number of test takers who have
                       been incorrectly identified  as  having  fraudulently
                       taken the TOEIC test".


                   iv)      The accuracy and reliability of the ETS  results
                       overall cannot be gauged in the absence of sufficient
                       technical knowledge of the process.

                    v) This inadequacy could be rectified to some extent  by
                       disclosure of  the  audio  material  from  individual
                       tests, which would  facilitate  independent  auditing
                       through  the   auditory-acoustic   phonetic   testing
                       methodology."

28. In addition to adopting his report, Dr Harrison  relied  on  a  witness
    statement.  This supplemented his report in one respect  only.  Therein
    he avers that he has listened to "TOEIC test audio files"  and,  having
    done so,  his  opinion  and  conclusions  remain  unchanged.  In  cross
    examination he explained that these files contained some  five  or  six
    recordings of  the  answers  provided  by  a  single  candidate  during
    testing.  He could not recall whether there were any  interruptions  in
    the recordings. He re-affirmed that  the  quality  of  automatic  voice
    recording systems generally is  affected  by  several  well  recognised
    factors, in particular the duration of  samples,  the  quality  of  the
    samples and  "reference  population  mismatch".   Elaborating  in  this
    context, Dr Harrison gave the example of a number of speakers with very
    different language backgrounds.  He added that  there  is  no  evidence
    which would enable the comparability of the TOEFL pilot population with
    the TOEIC population to be assessed.

29. Elaborating, Dr Harrison agreed that the better the recording  quality,
    the  lower  the  error  rate  in  voice  analysis.  He  confirmed  that
    background noise detrimentally affects quality.  In  this  context,  Dr
    Harrison observed that in the Panorama programme there was quite a  lot
    of  background  sound,  generated  in  particular  by  others  speaking
    simultaneously.  He was unable to comment on whether headphones were in
    use.  The recordings to which he listened were of reasonable  -  to  be
    contrasted with good - quality.  He listened to them in their  totality
    on two separation occasions.


30. Dr Harrison described the quality of the test material used in the  ETS
    automated voice analysis process as "the main variable".  He  suggested
    that if a system  of  this  kind  is  performing  well,  the  generally
    recognised range of error will be 2% to 10%.  For the best systems  the
    error rate is typically between 1% and 3%.  In "non-ideal  conditions",
    error rates can be as high as 30%.  Such conditions would be caused  by
    very degraded recordings (for example due to background noise) and/or a
    significant voice recording file mismatch and/or differing  directions.
    He highlighted the  lack  of  technical  data  and  particulars  in  Mr
    Millington's assertion that (per  ETS)  "conservative  thresholds"  had
    been set in the  analysis  exercise,  thus  confirming  the  Tribunal's
    reservation that this is a relatively meaningless assertion.

31. Dr Harrison described the phenomenon of recommended  minimum  durations
    of voice recording files in the voice recognition industry. This is one
    of the stipulations  of  the  software  manufacturer  (BATVOX4).   This
    standard is directly linked to the accuracy and reliability of the  end
    product.  In this context he noted Mr Millington's acknowledgement that
    of the six audio files used by ETS  in  its  automated  voice  analysis
    process, only three were of the requisite minimum length.  Dr  Harrison
    further observed that Mr Millington's written statement  did  not  make
    clear whether these six  audio  files  were  tested  separately  or  in
    unison.

32. Accordingly, the ETS automated testing of the voice samples  considered
    was compliant with the bare minimum required in only  50%  of  the  six
    audio files per suspect student.  This is a minute  percentage  of  the
    total audio files relating to each of the students concerned.  In  this
    context he referred to certain published empirical evidence,  to  which
    we have referred in [11] above.  This involved  150  voice  recognition
    trials.  Each of the voice samples had a duration ranging from 3  to  5
    minutes. In this way the analysts  concerned  were  (in  Dr  Harrison's
    words) able to consider  a  "long  stretch  of  speech".   Dr  Harrison
    testified that, subject to the quality of  the  individual  recordings,
    testing of this kind would optimise the prospects of  an  accurate  and
    reliable result.  He explained  further  that  manufacturers  of  voice
    recognition software recommend minimum durations  of  speech  recording
    files to enable the analyst to gradually build up a picture and develop
    familiarity with the voice.  He described minimum durations of 3  to  5
    minutes as "common place".


33. Dr Harrison testified that human voice analysis systems when performing
    at their best can be expected to generate an error rate  of  some  20%.
    He described the subjectivity of the individual  human  tester  as  the
    main imponderable, adding other factors such as  fatigue,  distraction,
    indisposition and quality of training.  He accepted  that  since  human
    analysts were introduced by ETS in an attempt to reduce false  positive
    outcomes, the risk of false negative outcomes was thereby created.   He
    agreed that the human analysts were incapable of increasing the  number
    of false  positives.  He  criticised  the  apparent  assumption  in  Mr
    Millington's statement of an equal error rate in  false  positives  and
    false negatives, highlighting the absence  of  evidence  of  the  false
    positives rate. In this  context  Dr  Harrison  also  referred  to  the
    international workshop evidence noted in  [11]  above  which  contains,
    inter alia, the results of the analysis of human voice files  by  seven
    different systems.  Of these, the best performing system had  some  24%
    false negative results and 28%  false  positive  results.  The  average
    false negative rate was 36%.  Dr  Harrison  testified  that  this  data
    amply supported the opinion expressed in his report.


34. Dr Harrison highlighted the absence of any  evidence  relating  to  the
    duration, quality, sample matching and configuration of the  system  in
    the ETS  automated  testing  exercise.   He  contrasted  scientifically
    demonstrable accuracy in a voice identification exercise  (on  the  one
    hand) and human confidence, even to  a  high  degree  (on  the  other),
    emphasising that these are  not  synonymous.   Summarising  his  expert
    opinion, Dr Harrison testified:

    (a)  While the ETS automated voice sample analysis is in  the  abstract
         reasonable,  the  available  evidence  fails   to   demonstrate   a
         satisfactory level of reliability.

    (b)   The  significant  shortcomings  in  the   technical   information
         available mean that one cannot have confidence in  the  reliability
         and accuracy  of  either  the  automated  testing  results  or  the
         results, modified  or  otherwise,  flowing  from  the  later  human
         intervention exercise.

35. Dr Harrison's testimony  was  completed  by  his  response  to  certain
    written questions which, with the leave of the Tribunal, were addressed
    to him after his oral evidence had finished.  He confirmed that by  the
    methodology of multiplying the number  of  matches  identified  by  the
    automated testing system to be the same speaker by the  false  positive
    rate, the total number of false positives can be calculated. His answer
    to the next question confirms what we consider  to  be  the  difficulty
    posed by both the first and second questions, namely the absence of any
    definition of "false positive rate".   The remaining written  questions
    addressed to Dr Harrison sought his agreement with the proposition that
    the false positive rate was as low as 1% and invited him to accept that
    the false positive rate postulated in  his  report  is  excessive.   In
    response, Dr Harrison  maintained  firmly  that  any  dilution  of  his
    evidence on this discrete issue would be  inappropriate.   Elaborating,
    he explained, in persuasive terms, that the methodology adopted by  him
    was conservative, summarised in these terms:

         "The calculation of the number of false positives using the  method
         proposed [in the questions posed] will always result  in  a  higher
         number of false positives than the method I have used  because  the
         number of non-pairs will always be  greater  than  the  true-pairs.
         Therefore, my method is conservative in estimating  the  number  of
         false positives since this is calculated from the number  of  true-
         pairs which is always smaller."

36. In response to a  question  from  the  panel,  Dr  Harrison,  following
    reflection,  testified  that  all  of  the   shortcomings,   omissions,
    questions and reservations concerning the Secretary of State's evidence
    (viz that of Mr Millington and Ms Collings) highlighted in  his  report
    remain unexplained and unanswered.  These are contained in  the  prcis
    reproduced in [25] above and consist of the following:


    (i)  The  technical  characteristics  of  the  TOEIC  test  recordings,
         including duration and background noise levels.


     ii)  The  performance  of  the  automatic  system  when  operated  with
         recordings representative of the TOEIC samples.


    iii) The comparability of the  TOEIC  tests  materials  with  the  TOEFL
         materials used in the file of the automatic system.

     iv) The specific operation and configuration of  the  automatic  system
         including whether samples from individual tests were combined,  the
         use of appropriate reference populations and chosen thresholds.

      v) The performance of the human analysts.

     vi) The expertise, training and knowledge of the analysts.

    vii) The training given to the newly recruited ETS employees.

   viii) Details of the methods used by the human analysts.

     ix) The time spent by the human analysts on comparisons.

      x) The familiarity of the human analysts with  the  range  of  foreign
         accented English and specific knowledge of common  features  within
         those varieties.

    Most of the components of this  extensive  list  concern  gaps  in  the
    Secretary of State's written evidence which, in  the  event,  were  not
    addressed or rectified in the further evidence adduced at the hearing.

37. Finally, Dr Harrison's evidence to the Tribunal confirmed the following
    statement in his report:


         "Without this information it is not possible to provide a  detailed
         objective assessment of the overall reliability of ETSs method  and
         the likely number of false positive results, i.e.  how  many  tests
         considered as verified matches were not the result of a fraud ....


         Since there are an unknown number of false positive results,  there
         are also an unknown number of test takers who have been incorrectly
         identified as having fraudulently taken the TOEIC test. At present,
         for any specific case,  there  is  no  independent  way  to  assess
         whether the individual in question committed fraud or whether their
         result is a false positive. The only information available  is  the
         verified match result from ETS.  Since  the  performance  of  ETS's
         process is unknown it is not  possible  to  assess  the  degree  of
         confidence that can be placed in the results provided by ETS."

    This passage embodies a useful synopsis of  Dr  Harrison's  unremitting
    critique of the Secretary of State's evidence.

The First Appellant: SM

38. On 28 July 2014 an Immigration Officer,  a  servant  or  agent  of  the
    Secretary  of  State,  made  an  "at  port"  decision  concerning  this
    Appellant in the following terms:

         "You are seeking entry as a returning student and  you  were  given
         leave to remain until 08/10/2015 as a student but  I  am  satisfied
         that false representations were employed or material facts were not
         disclosed for the purpose  of  obtaining  your  previous  leave  to
         remain here as a student.  Therefore in your case the current leave
         that was granted should be cancelled.  This  is  because  you  were
         required to submit, as part of your application for leave to remain
         as a student, a valid certificate showing you had properly attended
         an English Testing Centre and taken a test is  listening,  speaking
         and writing English ......


         I am satisfied that you obtained your English Language  Certificate
         by deception and have written evidence to substantiate  this  .....
         After an investigation into the circumstances  of  how  you  obtain
         your particular  English  Certificate  it  has  been  found  to  be
         fraudulently obtained."

    The Appellant's leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  was  cancelled
    under paragraph 2A(8) of Schedule 2 to the  Immigration  Act  1971  and
    paragraph 321A(2) of the Immigration Rules accordingly.

39.  This  Appellant  challenged  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  by
    appealing to the First-tier Tribunal  (the  "FtT").   By  its  decision
    promulgated on 27 April 2015 the FtT dismissed his appeal.   A  further
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal followed.  By its decision promulgated  on
    04 January 2016, the appeal was allowed by the Upper  Tribunal  to  the
    extent of setting aside the decision of the FtT on the basis  of  error
    of law: see [1] above.


40. This Appellant is a national of Bangladesh, aged  32  years.   In  June
    2005 he  entered  the  United  Kingdom  in  accordance  with  an  entry
    clearance visa for the purpose of study.   Several  grants  of  further
    leave to remain followed.  Prior to the expiry of the penultimate  such
    grant, in November 2013, he applied for and was granted  further  leave
    to remain, valid from 15 November 2013  to  07  October  2015  for  the
    purpose of undertaking an MBA Degree.  The  impugned  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State occurred in circumstances where this  Appellant  had
    returned to his country of origin on a home visit and was attempting to
    re-enter the United Kingdom.

41. At this juncture, it is convenient to outline the evidence relating  to
    this Appellant's proficiency  in  the  English  language  and  academic
    qualifications.  In summary:

    (a)  Prior to first  entering  the  United  Kingdom  in  June  2005  he
         obtained an IELTS  (International English Language Testing  System)
         Certificate, achieving an overall  score  of  6  out  of  9.   This
         Certificate was required to facilitate  his  entry  to  the  United
         Kingdom for the purpose of study.

    (b)  Between July 2005 and February 2006 he pursued a foundation  level
         English course which he completed with distinction.

      c) He then completed with distinction intermediate and advanced  level
         English courses, in March and November 2006 respectively.


      d) On 31 August 2007 this Appellant achieved a "pass" grade in an ACCE
         Level 4 course.

      e) On 26 April 2010 he secured a Diploma in Business Studies.

      f) On 12 April 2012 he obtained a "pass" grade  in  an  ACCA  Level  5
         course.


      g) On 08 October 2013 he obtained a postgraduate diploma in  strategic
         management and leadership.

      h) On 26 March 2012 he obtained  the  TOEIC  Certificate  which  later
         became the impetus for the Secretary  of  State's  cancellation  of
         leave decision. His grade was B2.

      i) On 20 December 2013, in accordance with a university requirement to
         undertake an English course, the Appellant secured a score of 77%.


      j) Between January 2014  and  June  2015  the  Appellant  completed  a
         University MBA (Masters  in  Business  Administration),  succeeding
         with "Merit".


42. This Appellant's evidence includes an account of his  interaction  with
    UKBA officials upon his return to the United Kingdom on  28  July  2014
    following a visit to his parents in Bangladesh.   During  a  period  of
    some ten hours he was interviewed extensively by  immigration  officers
    regarding his previous history - study, work, continuing education  and
    English language qualifications.  At the conclusion of this process  he
    was handed a letter stating that his leave was being cancelled  on  the
    ground that he had obtained his TOEIC  Certificate  fraudulently.   His
    immediate response,  notably,  was  a  demand  to  see  the  supporting
    evidence.  In his witness statement he avers:

         "The immigration officers said that they are satisfied that I am  a
         genuine student and that  my  command  of  English  is  very  good.
         However they said that since I had taken a TOEIC exam, they had  no
         choice but to cancel my visa.  He also advised me to  go  to  Court
         and to prove that I did not cheat."

    The Appellant testified that he was so outraged that he demanded to see
    the Senior Immigration Officer, without success.

43. The next steps  taken  by  this  Appellant  are  also  noteworthy.   He
    notified his university of what had happened and made efforts to obtain
    advice and assistance from this quarter.  He  then  engaged  solicitors
    for the purpose of advice and mounting appeal against the  cancellation
    decision.  He took steps to secure confirmation from UKBA that he could
    remain lawfully in  the  United  Kingdom  while  pursuing  his  appeal.
    Significantly, he went to considerable lengths to contact  ETS  in  the
    United States, in an  attempt  to  obtain  verification  of  his  TOEIC
    Certificate and copies of his voice recordings.  He  contacted  several
    ETS offices in the United States and, eventually, secured  the  details
    of an ETS London office  with  which  he  then  communicated.   In  his
    witness statement he avers:

         "Someone from ETS finally assured me  that  they  would  verify  my
         certificate but would do so only if my lawyer writes to them."

    A solicitor's request to this end, coupled with a renewed  request  for
    copies of the Appellant's voice recordings, ensued.   This  elicited  a
    response from ETS Global which was rather evasive, stating that a  test
    could be invalidated for a number of reasons and suggesting  that  this
    Appellant make his case to the Secretary of  State.   The  request  for
    provision of the voice recordings was refused.

44. Leaving no stone unturned, the Appellant then turned his attentions  to
    Mr Watson of the BBC, the  investigative  journalist  involved  in  the
    "Panorama programme".  A  meeting  with  Mr  Watson  and  his  producer
    colleague materialised.  The Appellant thereby had the  opportunity  to
    demonstrate his proficiency in the English language and to produce  his
    documentary qualifications.  The upshot was a  communication  from  the
    gentleman  concerned  approximately  one  month  later,  assuring   the
    Appellant that they found him credible and the issue  of  a  letter  of
    support.

45. In his witness statement the Appellant describes, in impressive detail,
     the steps taken by him to secure a place at one of the  TOEIC  testing
    events and his success in doing so.  He  provided  particulars  of  the
    venue, the cost, his interview with the  college's  administration  and
    other administrative arrangements.   He  described  in  detail  how  he
    travelled to the centre and the events  which  unfolded  following  his
    arrival.  He detailed the various components of the test. He  described
    extensively the topography of the premises, the contents and layout  of
    the test room, the conduct of the invigilator and related matters.   He
    also recounted particulars of questions posed, answers given  and  like
    matters.

46. This Appellant's case was supported by evidence from Mr Watson, the BBC
    journalist involved in the Panorama programme. This took the form of  a
    witness statement supplemented by  the  witnesses'  responses  to  some
    brief questions in cross examination.  There was also evidence from  an
    acquaintance. The evidence of the acquaintance was adduced through  the
    medium of a witness statement and Mr Dunlop, on behalf of the Secretary
    of State, confirmed that he was not  proposing  to  cross  examine  the
    witness. Both gave essentially character  evidence  strongly  endorsing
    this Appellant's integrity.

47. There is no controversy in what is outlined in [35] - [37]  above.  The
    description of this Appellant's evidence in the succeeding  paragraphs,
    [38] - [42], is based on his written statements and a schedule  of  his
    qualifications prepared for the purpose of the hearing. At  the  outset
    of his testimony to the Tribunal, this Appellant adopted his main (i.e.
    most recent) witness statement in its entirety.  All  of  the  evidence
    from him which followed was elicited by cross examination,  questioning
    from the panel and some brief re-examination.  We  shall  revisit  this
    infra.

The Second Appellant: Ihsan Qadir

48. As we have done with the first  Appellant,  we  shall  begin  with  the
    written evidence of and pertaining to the second  Appellant.  He  is  a
    native of Pakistan, where he was born on 13 July 1979.   There,  having
    completed his higher secondary education,  he  secured  a  third  level
    qualification, namely Bachelor of Computer Science. On 10 July 2010  he
    obtained a "pass" grade in the IELTS,  a  recognised  English  language
    test, in Pakistan.  He then secured a visa permitting him to enter  the
    United Kingdom for the purpose of pursuing  accountancy  studies  as  a
    "Tier 4" student. On 17 December 2010 he  entered  the  United  Kingdom
    accordingly. One year later the Tier 4 licence of the college where  he
    was studying was  suspended.  Following  some  effort  he  successfully
    secured admission to another college to continue the same course. On 23
    January and 22 February 2012 he claims  that  he  underwent  the  TOEIC
    test.  His two TOEIC "Official Score Reports" are dated 23 January 2012
    and 22 February  2012  respectively.   Duly  equipped  with  his  TOEIC
    certificate, on 08 May 2012 he was granted further leave to remain as a
    Tier 4 student, with a scheduled expiry date of 31 December 2014.

49. At this juncture we outline this Appellant's evidence relating  to  his
    proficiency in the English language:

    (i)  On 10 July 2010, in Pakistan, he passed the IELTS English language
         test, securing a rating of 5.5 (out of a maximum of 10).

    (ii) He has resided  continuously  in  the  United  Kingdom,  with  the
         exception of  home  visits,  since  securing  his  leave  to  enter
         authorisation dated 17 December 2010.


    (iii)     The TOEIC tests which he claims to have undertaken in January
         and February 2012 are the only examinations of their kind which  he
         has undertaken in the United Kingdom.

50. Some two years later, having passed six of the  ACCA  exams  and  while
    awaiting the results of three others, he  made  a  visit  to  his  home
    country.  On 24 August 2014 he sought to re-enter the  United  Kingdom.
    He was questioned by UKBA  officials  and  arrangements  were  made  to
    interview him  on  08  September  2014.   A  17  minute  interview  was
    transacted on this date, in  English.   The  Appellant  was  questioned
    about the circumstances in which he had secured his TOEIC  certificate.
    He provided prima facie appropriate answers to all questions except one
    asking the name of the centre  in  London  where  he  claimed  to  have
    undergone the examination.  He  was,  however,  able  to  describe  its
    location in general terms ("near the Stock Exchange").

51. On 14 September 2014 the Secretary of State  made  a  "Cancellation  of
    Leave"  decision  in  respect  of  this  Appellant.   Its  essence   is
    ascertainable from the following passages:

         "I have reason to believe that you made  false  representations  in
         order to obtain your leave to remain, because I am satisfied  on  a
         balance of probability that you have fraudulently obtained your ETS
         English Language Certificate submitted as part of your  application
         for leave to remain in the United Kingdom .... your ETS Certificate
         is deemed to be invalidated ....


         The Home Office were able to confirm that the  passenger's  English
         test which he had sat in the UK on 22 February 2012 had been marked
         as 'Invalid'.  See Appendix A.  The background to the HO's decision
         are [sic] explained  in  the  witness  statements  provided  by  HO
         employees Peter Millington and Rebecca Collings (see  Appendices  B
         and C) .....


         [The Appellant] was unable to recall the name of  the  test  centre
         except that it  was  in  London  or  even  which  area  of  London.
         Furthermore he was unable to recall  the  cost  of  the  test.   He
         insisted he had taken the test in person and took it over a two day
         period."

    Two immediate observations are apposite.  First, no  specific  question
    relating to the area of London where the test centre  is  situated  was
    put to the Appellant in interview.  Second, there is no mention of  one
    of the Appellant's responses noted above.

52. This Appellant's first witness statement, though undated,  was  clearly
    made in the context of his appeal to the FtT, which was decided  on  30
    January 2015.  As recorded by the Judge, the Appellant gave evidence at
    the hearing. Around one year later, he made a second witness statement,
    date 15 January 2016, with a view  to  the  remaking  hearing  in  this
    forum. In both statements he identifies the person who drove  him  from
    Leeds to London and he also identifies the friend who was  instrumental
    in "booking" the test for him.  The most striking feature of his second
    witness statement is the considerably greater detail which it contains,
    relating to the following matters in particular: the amount he paid for
    undergoing the test; the name of the college  where  he  took  it;  the
    location of the  college  in  London;  the  name  of  the  building  in
    question; events on the date of the examination; the approximate number
    of students taking the test; the duration of the test; and the  various
    components of the examination and how these were tested.

53. In his first statement, the Appellant avers that the test  was  carried
    out "in January 2012".  In his second statement, he provides a concrete
    date, namely 23 January 2012, which coincides with the  date  specified
    in the TOEIC certificate.  The  detailed  description  of  the  testing
    which follows clearly relates to this date.  No  second  or  subsequent
    date  is  mentioned,  though  the  certificate  makes  clear  that  the
    examination was split between two dates.   On  the  first,  23  January
    2012, the skills of listening and reading were tested. On  the  second,
    22 February 2012, speaking and writing tests were undertaken.  In  this
    context, it is appropriate to highlight two  successive  paragraphs  in
    the Appellant's second witness statement:

        "I remember that the test  involved  both  speaking  and  listening
        elements.  The listening and reading tests lasted for about  140  -
        150 minutes (approx 02.30 hours) ....


        The TOEIC listening and reading test  take [sic] about  two  hours.
        It was divided in two part/sections, approximately 45  minutes  for
        listening and 75 minutes  for  reading.   The  TOEIC  speaking  and
        writing test take [sic] about 1 hour and 20 minutes.  It  was  also
        divided in two sections, namely 20 minutes  for  speaking  and  one
        hour for writing."

    It  is  common  case  that  all  TOEIC  testing  exercises  have   four
    components, namely listening and reading (examined on  the  first  test
    date) and speaking and writing (examined  on  the  second  test  date).
    This division  is  accurately  reflected  in  the  Appellant's  witness
    statement.

54. In common with the first Appellant, this Appellant, in his evidence  to
    the Tribunal, adopted his two written statements.  The remainder of his
    evidence was elicited by some very brief examination  in  chief,  cross
    examination, questioning from the panel and some brief  re-examination.
    We shall assess all of this Appellant's evidence infra.  His  case  was
    supported by an acquaintance, whom we  shall  describe  as  Mr  A,  who
    recounted transporting the Appellant by car from Leeds  to  the  London
    test centre.  Mr A was able to attend the hearing on one  of  the  five
    days only and, by  agreement,  his  evidence  was  adduced  by  witness
    statement.

Governing Legal Rules and Principles

55. Paragraph 321A of the Immigration Rules provides, insofar as material:

         "The following grounds for the cancellation of a person's leave  to
         enter or remain which is in force on his arrival in, or while he is
         outside, the United Kingdom apply:


         (1)  There has been such a change  in  the  circumstances  of  that
             person's  case  since  leave  was  given  that  it  should  be
             cancelled; or

         (2)  False  representations  were  made  or  false  documents  were
             submitted (whether or not  material  to  the  application  and
             whether or not to the holder's knowledge), or  material  facts
             were not disclosed, in relation to the application  for  leave
             ...."

    This is  the  provision  upon  which  the  impugned  decisions  of  the
    Secretary of State were made in each appeal.


56. The legal principles engaged are set forth below.  While we are content
    to proceed on this basis, we  observe  that  there  may  be  scope  for
    further argument on the correct approach in law in  some  future  case.
    We thus observe on account of two factors in  particular.   First,  the
    Secretary of State, in all of these cases, is making the positive  case
    that the student concerned dishonestly obtained  the  English  language
    qualification by the use of a proxy test taker.  Second, the  Secretary
    of State seeks to make good this allegation to the  requisite  standard
    by adducing in evidence, in addition  to  the  generic  evidence  noted
    above, a flimsy spreadsheet emanating from ETS which, in a single line,
    contains, in substance, only the name of the student concerned and  the
    categorisation of either "questionable" or "invalid".

57. Both the applicable principles and the jurisprudence were  reviewed  by
    this Tribunal in  its  recent  decision  in  Muhandiramge  (Section  S-
    LTR.1.7) [2015] UKUT 00675 (IAC), at [9] - [11]:
           "9.    Burdens and standard of  proof  have  progressively,  and
                 almost with  stealth,  become  an  established  feature  of
                 decision making in the field of immigration and asylum law.
                 Their emergence may properly be described as organic.  They
                 have featured particularly in cases where it is alleged  by
                 the Secretary of State that the applicant  has  engaged  in
                 deception  or  dishonesty  with   the   result   that   the
                 application in question should be  refused.  This  discrete
                 line of authority is not recent,  being  traceable  to  the
                 decision of the Immigration Appeal  Tribunal  in  Olufosoye
                 [1992] IMM AR 141. In tribunal jurisprudence,  the  origins
                 of this particular lineage can be traced to the decision of
                 the House of Lords in R v Secretary of State for  the  Home
                 Department, ex parte Khawaja [1984] AC 74, which  concerned
                 the inter-related issues of procuring entry to  the  United
                 Kingdom by deception and precedent fact in the Secretary of
                 State's  ensuing  decision  making  process.  It  is   well
                 established that in such cases the burden of proof rests on
                 the Secretary of State and the standard of proof belongs to
                 the higher end of the balance of probabilities spectrum.
           10.          One of the more recent reported decisions belonging
                 to this stable is that  of  Shen  (Paper  Appeals:  Proving
                 Dishonesty)  [2014]  UKUT  236  (IAC).  This  decision   is
                 illustrative of the moderately complex exercise required of
                 tribunals from time to time. Here the Upper Tribunal  held,
                 in harmony with  established  principle,  that  in  certain
                 contexts the evidential pendulum swings three times and  in
                 three different directions:
                 (a)            First, where the Secretary of  State alleges
                       that  an  applicant  has  practised   dishonesty   or
                       deception in an  application  for  leave  to  remain,
                       there is an evidential burden  on  the  Secretary  of
                       State. This  requires  that  sufficient  evidence  be
                       adduced to raise an issue as to the existence or non-
                       existence  of  a  fact  in  issue:  for  example,  by
                       producing the completed application  which  is  prima
                       facie deceitful in some material fashion.
                 (b)             The  spotlight  thereby   switches   to the
                       applicant. If he discharges the burden  -  again,  an
                       evidential one - of raising an innocent  explanation,
                       namely an account which satisfies the  minimum  level
                       of plausibility, a further transfer of the burden  of
                       proof occurs.
                 (c)             Where (b) is satisfied, the burden rests on
                       the Secretary of State to establish, on  the  balance
                       of probabilities, that the  Appellant's  prima  facie
                       innocent explanation is to be rejected.
                 A veritable burden of proof boomerang!
           11.         Shen is  preceded  by  a  lengthy  line  of Tribunal
                 jurisprudence to this effect: see  JC  (Part  9  HC  395  -
                 Burden of Proof) China [2007]  UKAIT  00027,  at  [10];  MZ
                 (Pakistan) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
                 [2009] EWCA Civ 919, at [25]; Mumu (Paragraph 320;  Article
                 8;  Scope)  [2012]  UKUT  143  (IAC);  and  Kareem   (Proxy
                 marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT  24  (IAC).  In  short,  in
                 cases of alleged deceit, the legal rules are well settled."
    In this context, we highlight what was stated at [11] of Shen:
     "At the end of the day the SSHD bears the burden of proof.  This is  a
        proposition which is uncontroversial and has been confirmed on many
        occasions."
    We record here the submission of Mr  Biggs  on  behalf  of  the  second
    Appellant, with which we agree, that, doctrinally, a  legal  burden  of
    proof does not "shift".
58. It is well established that proof of dishonesty  on  the  part  of  the
    immigrant concerned is required in order  to  establish  either  "false
    representations" or "false  documents"  under  paragraph  321A  of  the
    Rules: see AA (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    [2010] EWCA Civ  773,  at  [44]  and  [51]  especially.  Following  the
    consumption of large quantities of judicial ink, the legal  rule  which
    has emerged with unmistakable clarity  is  that  in  civil  proceedings
    there is but one standard of proof, namely  proof  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities.  One of the clearest expositions of this rule  is  found
    in the judgment of Richards LJ in R (N) v Mental Health Review Tribunal
    (Northern Region) [2006] QB 468, at [62]:

        "Although there is a single civil standard of proof on the  balance
        of probabilities, it is flexible in its application. In particular,
        the  more  serious  the  allegation  or  the   more   serious   the
        consequences if the allegation is proved, the stronger must be  the
        evidence before a court will find  the  allegation  proved  on  the
        balance of probabilities. Thus the flexibility of the standard lies
        not in any adjustment to the degree of probability required for  an
        allegation to be proved (such that a more serious allegation has to
        be proved to a higher degree of probability), but in  the  strength
        or quality of the evidence that will in practice be required for an
        allegation to be proved on the balance of probabilities."

    In short, as emphasised by Lord Carswell in Re D  [2008]  UKHL  33,  at
    [28], the fundamental judicial task is to decide whether, having regard
    to the context, the  evidence  adduced  is  of  sufficient  cogency  to
    warrant the conclusion that the burden of proof has been discharged  to
    the civil standard.


59. At this juncture we note Mr Dunlop's submission that the principles  in
    Tanveer Ahmed (Documents unreliable and forged) Pakistan  [2002]  UKIAT
    00439 are engaged. These principles  are  formulated  at  [38]  of  the
    Report in the following terms:

        "1.   In asylum and human rights  cases  it  is  for  an  individual
             claimant to show that a document on which he seeks to rely can
             be relied on,


          2. The decision maker should consider whether a document is one on
             which reliance should properly be placed after looking  at  all
             the evidence in the round.


          3. Only very rarely will there be the need to make  an  allegation
             of forgery, or evidence  strong  enough  to  support  it.   The
             allegation should not be made without such  evidence.   Failure
             to establish the allegation on the balance of probabilities  to
             the higher civil standard does not  show  that  a  document  is
             reliable.  The decision maker still needs to apply principles 1
             and 2."

    We highlight the caution  with  which  the  phrase  "the  higher  civil
    standard" is to be treated.

60. This contention was raised for the first  time  in  Mr  Dunlop's  final
    written submission.  This implies no criticism of him.  However,  as  a
    result, we have not received detailed argument on the  issue.   We  are
    mindful that as this is neither an asylum nor a human rights case there
    are strong indications  that  the  Tanveer  Ahmed  principles  have  no
    application.  Second, we consider it highly unlikely that  the  Tanveer
    Ahmed  principles  displace  or  alter  the  legal   rules   enunciated
    unambiguously in Shen, Muhandirange and their precursors, which include
    MZ (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009]  EWCA
    Civ 919, at [25].  The contention that a claimant, or appellant,  bears
    the legal burden of demonstrating that a document upon which he  relies
    is reliable in a litigation context where the legal burden  rests  upon
    the Secretary of State gives rise to an evident incongruity.  There  is
    a persuasive argument that the Tanveer Ahmed  principles  are,  as  the
    decision itself states unequivocally,  confined  to  asylum  and  human
    rights claims. Indeed, there may also be scope for  the  argument  that
    these principles may  have  no  enduring  application  in  such  cases.
    However, this issue does not fall to be determined in these appeals and
    we note that it did not arise in the recent Court of Appeal decision in
    MA (Bangladesh) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 175.

61. As these appeals are  crying  out  for  expeditious  determination  and
    finality, we decline to develop or be diverted by what we  have  mooted
    immediately above.  Rather, driven by pragmatism, we propose to proceed
    on the basis that the Secretary of State's argument on  this  issue  is
    correct, without deciding whether this is so.  On this  issue  we  make
    one further observation, namely that the submissions of Mr Dunlop  rely
    on both Shen  and  Tanveer  Ahmed.  That  this  may  give  rise  to  an
    infelicitous marriage is evident.

The Secretary of State's Evidence: Our Findings and Conclusions

62. As the onus rests  on  the  Secretary  of  State  to  prove  that  both
    Appellants were guilty of fraud in the respects alleged, we shall begin
    with our findings and conclusions in respect of the evidence adduced on
    her behalf.

63. We have considered all  of  the  evidence  adduced  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State. The evidence of Ms Collings and Mr Millington forms
    the backbone of the Secretary of State's case. We have interspersed our
    consideration  of  this  evidence  above  with  certain  comments   and
    observations, which do not require repetition.  We are  satisfied  that
    Ms Collings and Mr Millington  gave  truthful  evidence.  However  this
    neither  counterbalances  nor  diminishes  the  shortcomings  in  their
    testimony. We summarise the principal shortcomings thus:

    (i)  Neither witness has any qualifications or expertise, vocational or
        otherwise, in the  scientific  subject  matter  of  these  appeals,
        namely voice recognition technology and techniques.


     ii) In making its decisions in individual cases, the  Home  Office  was
         entirely dependent on the information provided by ETS.  At a  later
         stage viz from around June 2014 this dependency  extended  to  what
         was reported by its delegation which went to the United States.


    iii)  ETS  was  the  sole  arbiter  of  the  information  disclosed  and
         assertions made to the delegation. For its part, the  delegation  -
         unsurprisingly, given its lack  of  expertise  -  and  indeed,  the
         entirety of the Secretary of State's officials and decision  makers
         accepted uncritically everything reported by ETS.

     iv) The Home Office has at no time had advice or input from a  suitable
         expert.

      v) There was no evidence from any ETS witness -  this  notwithstanding
         the elaborate critique of Dr Harrison compiled over one year ago.

     vi) The test results of the 33,000 suspect TOEIC scores,  coupled  with
         the information disclosed and assertions made to the  Secretary  of
         State's  delegation  during  a  one  day  meeting,  constitute  the
         totality of the material provided by ETS.

    vii)  Almost  remarkably,  ETS  provided  no   evidence,   directly   or
         indirectly, to this Tribunal.   Its refusal to  provide  the  voice
         recordings  of  these  two  Appellants  in  particular  is   mildly
         astonishing.

   viii) While the judgment of this Tribunal in  Gazi,  promulgated  in  May
         2015, raised significant questions about the witness statements  of
         Ms Collings and Mr Millington, these were not addressed, much  less
         answered, in their evidence at the hearing.  See in particular Gazi
         at [9]-[15] (reproduced in [19] above).

     ix) While certain documentary  evidence,  highlighted  in  [15]  above,
         might have fortified  the  Secretary  of  State's  case,  none  was
         produced.

      x) Similarly, although requested, none of the  voice  recording  files
         pertaining  to  the  Appellants  was  provided  for  analysis   and
         consideration by Dr Harrison.

64. The frailties in the Secretary of  State's  evidence  are  thrown  into
    still sharper relief when juxtaposed with the  expert  evidence  of  Dr
    Harrison.  Until the hearing of these appeals  Dr  Harrison's  evidence
    had been considered by tribunals  in  documentary  form  only.  Perhaps
    unsurprisingly, given the factors we have highlighted above, there  was
    no challenge of substance  to  Dr  Harrison's  analyses,  opinions  and
    conclusions. We consider that his evidence was balanced,  measured  and
    truthful, containing no hint of exaggeration or conjecture. He  engaged
    impressively with the Tribunal, providing  forthright  answers  to  all
    questions. Furthermore, following  the  hearing,  he  provided  prompt,
    lucid and comprehensive answers to  the  written  questions  which  the
    Tribunal permitted to be addressed to him.

65. We refer particularly  to  those  aspects  of  Dr  Harrison's  critique
    outlined in [25]-[35] above.  Dr Harrison's report has  been  available
    to the Secretary of State for a period exceeding one  year.  It  raises
    profound questions about the witness statements  of  the  Secretary  of
    State's officials and the  information  emanating  from  ETS  rehearsed
    therein.  At this remove, the Secretary of State  has  failed  to  deal
    with the main criticisms, satisfactorily  or  at  all,  either  in  the
    evidence adduced  at  this  hearing  or  in  cross  examination  of  Dr
    Harrison.  His main criticisms continued to feature in his evidence  to
    the Tribunal.   While  it  is  essential  to  consider  each  of  these
    individually, as we have done, they are conveniently summarised in [31]
    - [34] above, culminating in the conclusion expressed by Dr Harrison in
    [35].  In  our  judgment  Dr  Harrison's  criticisms  and  reservations
    continue to hold good.  He was unshaken in  cross  examination  and  we
    have no hesitation in accepting his expert opinion and conclusions.

66. While we do not overlook the evidence of Mr Green, summarised  in  [12]
    above, it was, as we have observed already, intrinsically limited.  Nor
    do we overlook the  documentary  evidence  adduced  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of  State,  listed  in  [10]  above.   This  adds  little  of
    substance, an analysis reflected by the fact that  it  barely  featured
    during the hearing or in counsel's submissions.  Furthermore,  some  of
    it, a paradigm example being the "SELTINFO" document, is so  incomplete
    and opaque as to be virtually meaningless. Finally, we find nothing  in
    the Secretary of State's  other  documents  to  offset  our  assessment
    above.

The Appellants' Evidence: Our Findings and Conclusions

67. We begin by  asking  ourselves  whether  the  Secretary  of  State  has
    discharged the evidential burden of proving that the  Appellants  were,
    or either of them was, guilty of dishonesty in  the  respects  alleged.
    Bearing in mind that, as noted above, all of the Secretary  of  State's
    evidence was adduced first, reflecting  the  burden  of  proof,  it  is
    appropriate to record that at the stage when the Secretary  of  State's
    case closed there was no submission on behalf of either Appellant  that
    the aforementioned evidential burden had not been discharged.  We  draw
    attention, en passant, to a procedural issue which  may  be  worthy  of
    fuller consideration  in  an  appropriate  future  appeal,  namely  the
    question of whether in a case where the Secretary of  State  bears  the
    evidential burden of establishing sufficient evidence of deception and,
    at the hearing, goes first in the order of batting, the Tribunal should
    invite submissions from the parties' representatives at the stage  when
    the Secretary of State's evidence is completed.

68. As our analysis and conclusions in the  immediately  preceding  section
    make clear, we have substantial reservations  about  the  strength  and
    quality of the Secretary of State's  evidence.   Its  shortcomings  are
    manifest. On the other hand, while bearing in mind that the context  is
    one of alleged deception, we  must  be  mindful  of  the  comparatively
    modest threshold which an evidential burden entails. The calls  for  an
    evaluative assessment on the part of the  tribunal.  By  an  admittedly
    narrow margin  we  are  satisfied  that  the  Secretary  of  State  has
    discharged this burden.  The effect of this is that there is a  burden,
    again an evidential one, on  the  Appellants  of  raising  an  innocent
    explanation.

69. We turn thus to  address  the  legal  burden.  We  accept  Mr  Dunlop's
    submission that in considering an  allegation  of  dishonesty  in  this
    context the relevant factors to be weighed include (inexhaustively,  we
    would add) what the person accused has to gain  from  being  dishonest;
    what he has to lose from being  dishonest;  what  is  known  about  his
    character; and the culture or environment in  which  he  operated.   Mr
    Dunlop also highlighted the importance of three further considerations,
    namely how the Appellants performed under  cross  examination,  whether
    the Tribunal's assessment of  their  English  language  proficiency  is
    commensurate  with  their  TOEIC  scores  and  whether  their  academic
    achievements are such that it was unnecessary or illogical for them  to
    have cheated.

70. We begin with the expert  evidence  of  Dr  Harrison  upon  which  both
    Appellants rely.  We have already made our assessment of Dr  Harrison's
    evidence in the context of our evaluation of the evidence on behalf  of
    the Secretary of State: see [58] - [61] above.   There  is  nothing  of
    substance to add to this.  In short, the evidence adduced on behalf  of
    the Secretary of State  emerged  paled  and  heavily  weakened  by  the
    examination to which it was subjected.  By the stage when Dr Harrison's
    evidence was completed, the Secretary of State's evidence had paled and
    wilted.  In the sporting world a verdict of no contest would have  been
    appropriate at this juncture.  The Appellants' cases are  enhanced  and
    fortified by Dr Harrison's evidence, which we accept in its entirety.

The First Appellant: SM

71. At this juncture, we turn to consider the case of the first  Appellant,
    SM.  In his two witness statements this Appellant  makes  a  reasonably
    impressive case.  His account of what he claims to  have  done  at  the
    conclusion of the interview giving rise to the  impugned  decision  was
    unchallenged.  Nor was there any challenge to his  description  of  the
    various steps taken by him subsequently: see [41] - [42] above. We have
    no reason to doubt any aspect of this evidence,  all  of  which  points
    towards a finding of honesty rather than deceit.  However, we  must  of
    course consider this purely documentary evidence  with  all  the  other
    evidence, including this Appellant's testimony under cross examination,
    bearing on the question of deception.

72. Next we turn to the evidence of this Appellant's proficiency in English
    relating to the period preceding the date of the TOEIC Certificate,  26
    March 2012.  This evidence focuses particularly on the years  2005  and
    2006: see the summary in [39] above.  The authenticity of this evidence
    was not seriously challenged and, having considered it  critically,  we
    have no reason to doubt it.  The IELTS  Certificate  obtained  by  this
    Appellant prior to first entering the United Kingdom in  June  2005  is
    one of the recognised  qualifications  in  the  system  of  immigration
    control. The Appellant's score was impressive.

73. We find that subsequently, during a period of around  16  months,  this
    Appellant participated in  an  intensive  English  language  programme,
    securing  both   intermediate   and   advanced   qualifications,   with
    distinction (85%).  Thereafter, during a period of some four years,  he
    attended a series  of  colleges,  underwent  various  examinations  and
    obtained qualifications in  the  realms  of  accountancy  and  business
    studies.  All of these  courses  and  modules  were  conducted  in  the
    English language.  Furthermore,  throughout  these  years  he  was,  in
    essence, permanently resident in the United Kingdom.

74. While we acknowledge that certain documents were explored and probed in
    Mr Dunlop's cross examination,  this  was  undertaken  in  hopeful  and
    speculative mode.  In our judgment there was no serious suggestion that
    any of the documents was  falsified  or  forged.  Nor  was  any  direct
    evidence of such impropriety adduced.  We find, further, that there  is
    no evidence from which this could be properly inferred.  We  find  that
    they are genuine.  We elaborate on this finding below.

75. The letters and certificates relating to this Appellant  purporting  to
    emanate from Kaplan College were challenged in cross  examination.   It
    was highlighted that the various dates do not tally.  Furthermore,  the
    Appellant's suggestion that during this period he pursued a ACCA course
    at Kaplan and, simultaneously, an English language course at CITEC  was
    challenged as being implausible. It was suggested that he  was  unclear
    about the precise level of the Kaplan course and the ACCA  examinations
    he had undertaken.  Certain discrepancies  in  his  witness  statements
    were also highlighted in this context and, further, in relation to  the
    documentary evidence that he had studied  at  London  Reading  College.
    There was a similar  challenge  relating  to  his  evidence  of  having
    studied at the London School of Business and  Finance  and  the  London
    School of Management Education.

76. We consider it important to recognise that this Appellant  was  at  all
    material times a student, a person having no  reason  to  anticipate  a
    penetrating forensic dissection of the  documentation  bearing  on  his
    sojourn in the United Kingdom some ten years after it  began.  We  take
    note that various pieces of correspondence were issued in  anticipation
    of studying a course, or having been accepted provisionally to study  a
    course, or having commenced a course, or  with  a  view  to  completing
    courses to move to a further college, or  simply  for  the  purpose  of
    having  secured  a  place  at  a  college  and  using   the   college's
    documentation to obtain an extension of his student  leave  to  remain.
    Given the multiplicity and variety of letters  produced,  it  does  not
    seem plausible to us that a  package  of  this  sort  could  have  been
    concocted  or  created  to  assist  the  Appellant  in  defrauding  the
    Secretary of State during such a protracted period.  In  this  respect,
    the significant limitations in the Panorama documentary  as  persuasive
    evidence must be recognised.

77. While the cross-examination of this Appellant  and  Mr  Dunlop's  final
    submissions included a suggestion that some of the documentary evidence
    is not reliable, there was no frontal or sustainable challenge  to  its
    authenticity.  Having taken the  precaution  of  calling  for  original
    documents to be produced and having perused the same, we have no  basis
    for  questioning  their  authenticity.  In  this  context,  we   remind
    ourselves that Judges are not expert document examiners.  There was  no
    evidence,  expert  or  otherwise,  suggesting  that  the  documents  in
    question were  fabricated  and  none  from  which  such  finding  could
    properly be inferred.  We find specifically that  this  Appellant,  who
    was sufficiently proficient in English to be  admitted  to  the  United
    Kingdom for the purpose of study in 2005 and, further, demonstrated  an
    elevated level of proficiency by 2007 was, during  the  ensuing  years,
    expanding and enhancing his English language abilities via his  studies
    and daily living. The probabilities are that he was  highly  proficient
    in English by the time he underwent the TOEIC examination in 2012.   He
    had no reason  whatsoever  to  jeopardise  his  career  and  future  by
    cheating in the test.

78. The events of 2012 are of obvious significance.  The TOEIC  Certificate
    was, on its face, obtained  by  this  Appellant  after  undergoing  the
    necessary testing on two separate dates, 20  and  26  March  2012.   We
    acknowledge that,  in  the  abstract,  his  score  in  the  modules  of
    listening and reading is very high indeed, being 930 out of a  possible
    990 (circa 90%).  In the modules of speaking  and  writing  the  scores
    recorded are also high, being 160/200 in  each  instance  (circa  80%).
    Duly armed with his TOEIC Certificate, this Appellant applied for leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom.  His application was  refused,  giving
    rise to  a  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  ("FtT")  on  05
    September 2012.

79. We consider this aspect of the evidence to  be  of  some  significance.
    From the  Tribunal's  determination  one  learns  that  this  Appellant
    attended the hearing, gave evidence, was cross  examined  and  was  re-
    examined. No interpreter was required and there is no indication of the
    slightest  difficulty  in  communication  or  comprehension.   We  note
    further that during the period of  (approximately)  September  2010  to
    February 2012 this Appellant claims that he was pursuing courses at two
    colleges simultaneously, which we accept.  We  infer  from  this  fact,
    coupled with the successful outcomes, that his mastery of  English  was
    of a high and progressively improving level.

80. We consider that in appeals of this nature evidence  of  this  kind  is
    likely to be of  substantially  greater  force  and  cogency  than  the
    tribunal's  own  assessment  of   an   appellant's   English   language
    proficiency based on  performance  at  the  appeal  hearing.   This  is
    especially pertinent in the present case, given that some  three  years
    have elapsed since this Appellant claims  to  have  secured  his  TOEIC
    certificate. In some of the FtT  decisions  in  this  field  one  finds
    observations  concerning  the  appellant's  apparent  fluency  in,  and
    command of, the English language.  We consider that  Judges  should  be
    cautious in adopting this approach for at  least  three  reasons.   The
    first is the passage of time.   The  second  is  that  Judges  are  not
    language testing or linguistics experts.  The third is that,  to  date,
    there has been no expert linguistic evidence in any of these cases.

81. Our quest to determine where the truth lies (within the  parameters  of
    burdens  and  standards  of  proof)  is  further  illuminated  by   the
    documentary evidence relating  to  one  of  the  Appellant's  two  bank
    accounts.  This records the various movements in the account during the
    period early February to early April 2012.  As highlighted  above,  the
    two important events which unfolded during this period were  the  TOEIC
    tests and, at the end of the period, the  Appellant's  application  for
    further leave to remain in the United Kingdom.  Given the  requirements
    of the Immigration Rules which this latter application had to  satisfy,
    the relatively substantial credits to the Appellant's bank account  are
    readily  understandable.   Furthermore,  we  accept   the   Appellant's
    evidence that the person whose  deposit  transaction  (on  27  February
    2012) credited the account in the amount  of  4,000  is  someone  well
    known to him and his family who, on occasion, was given money  for  the
    Appellant upon her visits to Pakistan. The specific point  put  to  the
    Appellant in cross examination was that the withdrawal of  1,500  from
    the account on 27  February  2012  is  indicative  of  him  paying  the
    necessary price to secure a bogus  TOEIC  Certificate.   The  Appellant
    denied this vehemently  and,  in  general,  dealt  with  the  questions
    relating to this particular issue firmly and  persuasively.   This  was
    one of the more important passages during his evidence.

82. This Appellant was also  questioned  closely  about  his  BTEC  Edexcel
    certificate in strategic management and leadership.   Discrepancies  in
    the Appellant's written and oral  evidence  were  highlighted  in  this
    context.  His  account  was  that  he  was  asked  to  submit   certain
    documentation when seeking a visa to  study  for  his  MBA  course.  He
    claimed that he had travelled to Glasgow to attend an interview with  a
    Home Office caseworker regarding that application. He further  asserted
    that he duly submitted  documentation  from  Opal  College  and  London
    School of Technology to the caseworker.  He identified this  person  by
    name.  The Appellant claimed that several days passed, after which  the
    caseworker called and told him that she had confirmed the  accuracy  of
    his studies with the various  colleges  and  Edexcel,  the  independent
    examining  body.  That  detailed  account  was  not  rebutted  by   any
    countervailing evidence from the Secretary of State.

83. It is distinctly possible that a frontal challenge to  this  aspect  of
    this Appellant's case, supported by evidence, would, in principle, have
    been available to the Secretary of State.  However, none  materialised.
    There was no rebutting evidence and nothing concrete  was  put  to  the
    Appellant in cross  examination.   Having  considered  the  Appellant's
    account with care, we are satisfied that it is plausible.

84. In this context Mr Dunlop drew to our attention  the  decision  of  the
    Administrative Court in R (Cranford College) v SSHD  [2015]  EWHC  1090
    (Admin).  Having  juxtaposed  this  decision  with   this   Appellant's
    certificates, we consider that it provides  little  sustenance  to  the
    Secretary of State's quest to discharge her legal burden of proof.   We
    note in particular  that  while  Edexcel  certificates  were  evidently
    obtained by students at  Cranford  College,  no  aspersions  were  cast
    against the Edexcel organisation.  Moreover, the coursework and testing
    which generated the certificates awarded to students were  orchestrated
    and marked undertaken  in  a  purely  internal  context,  involving  no
    independent examiner:  see  [27]  and  [28]  especially.    This  falls
    measurably short of demonstrating that  all  Edexcel  certificates  are
    tainted irredeemably by fraud. Furthermore, we accept this  Appellant's
    evidence that the tests he  underwent  with  Opal  College  and  London
    School of Technology were exported to be marked externally, by Edexcel.
     In this context we highlight  further  the  absence  of  any  concrete
    evidence adduced by the Secretary of State, on whom the legal burden of
    proof rests. In summary, this is a paradigm illustration of the tilting
    at windmills which characterised much of the Secretary of State's case.

85. We must consider also the evidence contained in the Panorama programme.
    There is no  specific  evidence  relating  to  either  Appellant.   The
    programme focused on TOEIC  testing  centres.   It  suggested  that  an
    unspecified number of TOEIC certificates was procured by the use of so-
    called "proxies".  Furthermore, it demonstrated that such  certificates
    could be purchased (on a black  market  of  sorts)  by  payment  of  an
    appropriate sum and, further, that the commodity of an  entire  package
    of visa documents was also available for purchase. This  programme  was
    the stimulus for the evidence upon which the Secretary of State  relies
    in these appeals.  In this context it  is  appropriate  to  recall  the
    supportive evidence of Mr Watson, the journalist  concerned,  noted  in
    [46] above.

86. We now turn  to  consider  this  Appellant's  performance  when  giving
    evidence. We had  the  advantage  of  assessing  him  during  a  period
    exceeding one day. In several respects his evidence to the Tribunal was
    unsatisfactory.  Many of the  questions  put  to  him  related  to  the
    Certificates, letters and other materials emanating from the series  of
    colleges concerned and  were  of  an  intricate  and  detailed  nature.
    Comprehensive and accurate replies to all of the questions  would  have
    required a mastery of a substantial body of documents.   The  Appellant
    plainly - and understandably  enough  -  did  not  have  this  command.
    However, he rushed into answers; attempted to answer every question put
    to him; failed to acknowledge that he was  truly  not  able  to  answer
    certain questions; and also failed to state, where appropriate, that he
    simply was  not  certain  or  confident  of  the  correct  answer.   In
    addition, many of his replies, frequently  to  very  simple  questions,
    were of such  prolixity,  quite  unnecessarily,  as  to  be  difficult,
    sometimes impossible, to comprehend.  Intermittent advice and  warnings
    from  the  Tribunal  to  the  Appellant  had  little  or   no   impact.
    Furthermore, he had a clear tendency  to  attempt  to  provide  answers
    which he thought  the  Tribunal  would  like  to  hear.   All  in  all,
    therefore, this Appellant was an unsatisfactory witness.

87. The key question to be addressed is whether, taking  into  account  the
    shortcomings and frailties  listed  above,  and  bearing  in  mind  the
    burdens of proof and  standard  of  proof  in  play,  this  Appellant's
    evidence on the core issue of  whether  he  was  guilty  of  deceit  in
    procuring his TOEIC Certificate is believable.  Some measure of  credit
    is due to the Appellant for confronting every question put to him.   He
    sought to evade nothing. He also sought to engage with the panel at all
    times.  Some credit is also due  for  the  efforts  to  which  he  went
    following the first day of  his  evidence  to  search  for  and  obtain
    certain further material documents.  In addition, while  the  dates  in
    certain documents were not easily explained,  in  common  with  certain
    sequences of dates, we must bear in mind that the Appellant was not the
    author  of  any  of  the  documents  concerned.  Many  of   them   were
    bureaucratic and formulaic in  nature  and,  further,  used  codes  and
    abbreviations  which  complicated  the   task   of   assimilation   and
    comprehension.  The Appellant cannot be faulted for  his  inability  to
    deal with some of the questions relating to these  materials.  We  must
    also take into account that he has been studying in the United  Kingdom
    for a very long time, almost 11 years, throughout which period  he  has
    pursued a veritable proliferation of courses and modules.  Furthermore,
    much of the questioning  of  the  Appellant  related  to  events  which
    occurred many years ago.  Thus, to summarise, the imperfections in this
    Appellant's evidence to the Tribunal  are  tempered  and  mitigated  in
    several ways.  Ultimately, we find that he was a witness of truth.

88. Having reviewed all of  the  documentary  evidence  with  care  we  are
    satisfied that it accords  with  the  Tanveer  Ahmed  principles.   The
    specific challenge to the reliability of some  discrete  documents  has
    not been made out.  We find  that  through  his  oral  and  documentary
    evidence this Appellant has discharged the evidential burden of raising
    a satisfactory explanation for the various matters which  are  advanced
    as constituting dishonesty on his part.

89. The final question is whether the Secretary of State has discharged the
    legal burden of establishing on the balance of probabilities that  this
    Appellant procured his TOEIC certificate by deceit.  The answer to this
    question requires a balancing of all of  the  findings  and  evaluative
    assessments rehearsed above.  We are satisfied,  objectively,  that  at
    the stage when this Appellant took the tests in question there  was  no
    need for him to engage in any form of cheating.   He  would  have  been
    sufficiently  proficient   in   English   to   secure   the   necessary
    qualification   legitimately.    Furthermore,   given   his   extensive
    familiarity with the immigration system, he would have  been  aware  of
    the grave consequences of any form of deception.  To have cheated would
    have entailed engaging in a game of risk with very high stakes  indeed.
    Furthermore, having considered all the evidence, we have no  reason  to
    question the Appellant's good character generally.

90. In addition, as already highlighted, this Appellant's case is fortified
    by the unchallenged evidence of the steps which  he  took  in  his  own
    defence from the moment when the illegitimacy of his TOEIC  certificate
    was first questioned.  We  find  no  reason  to  doubt  this  evidence.
    Moreover, there was very little exploration in cross-examination of the
    Appellant's  account  of  the  tests  undertaken  and  the  surrounding
    circumstances.  Finally, we must  weigh  our  findings  concerning  the
    marked shortcomings in the Secretary of State's evidence, coupled  with
    our acceptance of the Appellants' expert evidence.

91. The non-specific and generalised nature of  the  Secretary  of  State's
    case against both Appellants  is  emphasised  by  the  four  hypotheses
    canvassed in Mr Dunlop's written submissions.  These are:-

     i) The Appellants may have bought their TOEIC certificates as part  of
        a package of false documents.


    ii) Alternatively, they may have attended a test centre with bona  fide
        intentions and then,  upon  discovering  "the  fraud",  voluntarily
        participated therein.

    (iii)     In the further alternative, even though likely to succeed  on
        their own merits,  they  opted  to  cheat  in  order  to  secure  a
        guaranteed result.

    (iv) Finally, their command of English may have  improved  between  the
        date of the tests and the hearing of their appeals.

    We observe that while we have been consistently open to all  reasonable
    possibilities, as Mr Biggs emphasised in his submissions none of  these
    theories was canvassed in any substantial or  detailed  manner  in  the
    cross examination of either Appellant.  Having regard to  our  analysis
    of all the evidence and the findings rehearsed above, we find that none
    of the first three scenarios has  been  established.   As  regards  the
    fourth, we have placed no reliance on  the  apparent  English  language
    proficiency of either Appellant as displayed in their evidence  to  the
    Tribunal.

92. Our overarching conclusion is that  the  Secretary  of  State  has  not
    discharged the legal burden of  proving  that  this  Appellant's  TOEIC
    certificate was procured by dishonesty.

    The Second Appellant: Mr Qadir

93.  It  is  unnecessary  to  rehearse  those  assessments,  findings   and
    conclusions above which apply as fully to  this  Appellant  as  to  the
    first Appellant.

94. We shall now switch our focus to the case of the second  Appellant,  Mr
    Qadir.  In  cross  examination,  this  Appellant  was   questioned   in
    particular about the following issues and topics: the contents  of  his
    two witness statements; his qualifications obtained  in  Pakistan;  his
    employment history in Pakistan; his IELTS English  language  test;  his
    primary motivation in coming to the United Kingdom;  colleges  attended
    and courses pursued since his arrival  in  late  2010;  his  places  of
    residence in England; his choice of the centre where he claims to  have
    taken the TOEIC test; the details  of  the  test  and  the  surrounding
    circumstances; his full marks  (200/200)  in  the  speaking  test;  the
    content of the four test components; the financing of his education  in
    the United Kingdom; and,  finally,  certain  answers  provided  by  him
    during interview.  As in the case of the other  Appellant,  the  issues
    canvassed with this Appellant in cross examination,  both  individually
    and collectively, sounded on his character, reliability and veracity.

95. Generally, the evidence given by this  Appellant  and  adduced  on  his
    behalf  was  simpler  and  less  voluminous  than  that  of  the  other
    Appellant.  This is, in the main,  a  reflection  of  this  Appellant's
    substantially shorter period of sojourn in the  United  Kingdom.  While
    both Appellants obviously rely on the expert evidence of  Dr  Harrison,
    this Appellant, like the other Appellant, also relies substantially  on
    his own evidence both oral and documentary. Furthermore, as in the case
    of the first  Appellant,  the  Tribunal  requested  this  Appellant  to
    produce as many original documents as  he  could  and  he  too  did  so
    overnight.

96. Addressing the main issues canvassed in Mr Dunlop's final  submissions,
    which contain an impressive forensic analysis of the evidence:

      i) Objectively, it is relatively unsurprising that, following a period
         of two years living  and  studying  in  the  United  Kingdom,  this
         Appellant's proficiency in English was  substantially  better  than
         during his second level education. Furthermore, we formed the clear
         impression that he is a serious and studious individual.  While  he
         did not undertake any English foundation course following  arrival,
         there is no evidence to suggest that  his  English  was  not  of  a
         sufficient standard to participate in and progress through  various
         third level education courses.  We take note  of  this  Appellant's
         full score (200/200) in the English  speaking  component.  However,
         the Secretary of State, on whom the legal burden rests, has adduced
         no benchmark or comparative evidence or, indeed, expert evidence to
         cast shadows over this discreet score.  There was, for instance, no
         suggestion that only a  tiny  elite  of  brilliant  students  could
         genuinely achieve this mark.


     ii) This Appellant provided impressive evidence when  questioned  about
         the substance of the various components of the TOEIC  testing.   We
         are satisfied that he was not prevaricating in his descriptions  of
         reading a passage, identifying the gist of the  passage  concerned,
         describing a picture, responding to short questions and  solving  a
         problem. Further we take judicial notice  of  the  subjectivity  of
         language examiners, a factor which is capable  of  giving  rise  to
         apparent imbalances and surprisingly high - or surprisingly  low  -
         marks.

    iii) The Appellant's evidence about why he chose to take his TOEIC  test
         at the particular centre in London, namely because of waiting lists
         and delays, was plausible.  The Secretary of State led no  evidence
         to counter it.

     iv) It was not possible for the Appellant to adduce evidence  from  the
         acquaintance  who  recommended  the  centre   concerned   whom   he
         identified, as he is no longer in the United Kingdom.

      v) Having studied the TOEIC "Official Score Reports" with care, we are
         satisfied that all of the formal entries (name, registration,  date
         of birth et al) were made by an official at the centre and not  the
         Appellant. While his first name is misspelt in  one  of  these  two
         documents, we find no basis for making an inference adverse to  the
         Appellant accordingly.

     vi) We acknowledge that this  Appellant's  witness  statements  do  not
         spell out the different dates  upon  which  the  testing  occurred.
         However,   they   clearly   identify   the   multiple   components.
         Furthermore, the Appellants first witness statement was made  in  a
         context in which the Official Score  Reports  formed  part  of  his
         documentary evidence to the FtT.  We incline to the view  that  any
         deficiency in the witness statements is to be  attributed  more  to
         the solicitor or case worker concerned than the Appellant.

    vii) We consider it unremarkable that,  given  that  he  made  only  two
         relatively brief visits to the test centre  in  London  during  the
         whole of his sojourn in  the  United  Kingdom,  the  Appellant  was
         unable to provide a precise address or name.

   viii) We find nothing adverse to this Appellant in the  "port"  interview
         record.  The questioning of him was objectively,  entirely  capable
         of eliciting the response made, namely his description of  securing
         the IELTS English language qualification. Furthermore, we  consider
         it obvious that  the  interviewer  was  adhering  strictly  to  the
         prepared, pro-forma  text,  with  the  result  that  there  was  no
         spontaneity in reacting to any of the  Appellant's  responses.   We
         further take into account that, as is recorded, the  Appellant  was
         somewhat indisposed at the time of interview.

     ix) Finally, we construe this  Appellant's  description  of  his  first
         semester of study and the later revocation of the  college  licence
         as benign, giving rise to  no  major  or  objectively  demonstrable
         discrepancy.

    In summary, we prefer the submissions of Mr Malik on these issues.

97.  We  are  satisfied  that  in  the  explanations,   illuminations   and
    elaborations provided by this Appellant in  response  to  detailed  and
    penetrating questioning no  significant  discrepancy  or  inconsistency
    emerged. Without attempting  a  comprehensive  inventory  of  how  this
    Appellant fielded the main interrogatories put to him, we are satisfied
    that he provided adequate explanations of  the  main  issues  canvassed
    with: him his English language and academic qualifications; his reasons
    for coming to the United Kingdom; the location of some  of  his  course
    examinations; the centre where he arranged to undertake the TOEIC test;
    his reasons for taking the test at this centre; the descriptions of the
    test provided in his witness statements; the spelling of  his  name  in
    the two "Official Score Reports"; his familiarity with the  area  where
    the test centre is located; his full marks in the  speaking  test;  and
    his answers during interview.

98. We take into account  the  submission  that  this  Appellant's  grammar
    appeared to be less than perfect.  Having done so, we  would  highlight
    that this contention was  advanced  through  the  medium  of  counsel's
    submissions,  rather  than  any  evidence  adduced  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State.  Furthermore,  it  is  undermined  by  our  various
    findings rehearsed above.  We further remind ourselves in this  context
    of the cautionary approach espoused in [76] and [80] above.   While  no
    tribunal will turn a blind eye to the obvious, we  find  no  basis  for
    concluding that this Appellant's apparent English language proficiency,
    based on his oral evidence, whether on its own or in  combination  with
    other factors,  contributes  to  the  Secretary  of  State's  quest  to
    discharge the legal burden of  establishing  that  his  dishonesty  was
    instrumental in procuring his TOEIC certificate.

99. Finally, our task of  evaluating  the  cogency  and  veracity  of  this
    Appellant's  evidence  in  its  totality  has  been  assisted  by   the
    opportunity which we had to study his demeanour and presentation during
    a period of some two hours when testifying to the Tribunal.   We  found
    no  indications  of  invention,  exaggeration  or  evasiveness.    This
    Appellant was attentive to all questions and provided his answers in  a
    careful, pensive fashion.  He at all times sought to  engage  with  the
    Tribunal and clearly realised the importance of telling the truth.  His
    answers to the vast majority of questions were of  appropriate  length,
    comprehensible  and  intelligible.    In   demeanour   this   Appellant
    consistently presented as a witness of truth.



Omnibus Conclusions

100. The evidence adduced on behalf of the Secretary of State  suffers  from
    the multiple frailties and  shortcomings  identified  above.  The  oral
    evidence of the first Appellant, SM, was a classic  curate's  egg.   We
    have exposed its mix of strengths and imperfections above. Having  done
    so, we have concluded that the core elements of his case are plausible.
    The oral evidence of the second Appellant, Mr Qadir, was, in  contrast,
    impressive in its entirety.  We have accepted the central thrust of his
    case  also.   The  documentary  evidence  adduced  by  both  Appellants
    contains no significant flaws.  While certain  questions  deserving  of
    consideration  and  reflection  have  been  raised  (reflected  in  our
    conclusion that the Secretary of State's  evidential  burden  has  been
    satisfied), these are insufficient to displace our  omnibus  conclusion
    that, viewing all the evidence in the round and  having  subjected  the
    Appellants' testimony to the Tribunal to critical scrutiny, the core of
    their respective cases is truthful and plausible. Finally,  the  expert
    evidence of Dr  Harrison  significantly  undermines  the  Secretary  of
    State's case, fortifies and reinforces the case of both Appellants and,
    ultimately, has emerged not merely unshaken but enhanced .

101. We have already held that the evidential burden  of  proof  resting  on
    the Secretary of State has been narrowly discharged.  For  the  reasons
    which we have  given,  we  are  satisfied  that  both  Appellants  have
    discharged their burden of raising an innocent explanation of the prima
    facie indications of deception  on  their  part  in  the  Secretary  of
    State's evidence. For the  reasons  elaborated,  we  conclude,  without
    hesitation, that the Secretary of State has failed to establish, on the
    balance of probabilities, that the  Appellants'  prima  facie  innocent
    explanations are to be rejected. The legal burden of proof  falling  on
    the Secretary of State has not  been  discharged.  The  Appellants  are
    clear winners.

102. We take this opportunity to re-emphasise that every case  belonging  to
    the ETS/TOEIC stable will invariably be fact sensitive.  To this we add
    that every appeal will be determined  on  the  basis  of  the  evidence
    adduced by the parties. Furthermore, the hearing of these  appeals  has
    demonstrated beyond peradventure that judicial review  is  an  entirely
    unsatisfactory litigation vehicle for the determination of disputes  of
    this kind: see Gazi at [36] - [37].

103. We take note of the indications in the conduct of these  appeals  that,
    in some future case, the Secretary of State may seek to adduce  further
    evidence, likely to be expert in  nature.  Should  this  eventuate  the
    evidential  framework  of  future  appeals  will  not  merely  be  fact
    sensitive but may include  an  entirely  new  ingredient.  As  we  have
    emphasised, all appeals will be decided on the basis  of  the  evidence
    actually adduced.

104. The factors which were of particular significance in  the  exercise  of
    making our findings and conclusions in these appeals are  evident  from
    what we have written in this judgment.   We  are  conscious  that  some
    future appeals may be of the "out  of  country"  species.   It  is  our
    understanding that neither the FtT nor this tribunal has experience  of
    an out of country appeal of this kind, whether through  the  medium  of
    video link or Skype or otherwise.  The question of  whether  mechanisms
    of this kind are satisfactory and, in particular, the legal question of
    whether they provide an appellant with a fair hearing will depend  upon
    the particular context and circumstances of the individual case.  This,
    predictably,  is  an  issue   which   may   require   future   judicial
    determination.

Decision

105. We re-make the decision of  the  FtT  in  each  case  by  allowing  the
    Appellants' appeals.




Postscript

106. We consider it appropriate to record that,  following  the  circulation
    of this judgment in draft in  the  usual  way,  having  considered  the
    response on behalf of the Secretary of State the author of the judgment
    took the precaution of listening  to  the  recording  of  Ms  Collings'
    evidence  in   particular.    This   was   an   arid   exercise   since
    (notwithstanding repeated judicial  exhortations)  Ms  Collings  failed
    consistently to speak sufficiently audibly to enable her evidence to be
    efficaciously recorded.

107. Finally, we take the opportunity to emphasise strongly the caution  and
    respect with which parties and  representatives  must  treat  embargoed
    judgments. All forms of unauthorised dissemination  will  be  met  with
    rigorous measures.  Any  slightest  doubt  should  be  proactively  and
    timeously raised with the Tribunal.






                                                                       [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                                                         Date: 31 March 2016

                                 APPENDIX 1

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |Ruling given orally on 05 February   |
|05 February 2016                      |2016                                 |
|                                      |.....................................|
|                                      |..                                   |

                                   Before

                  THE HON. MR JUSTICE McCLOSKEY, PRESIDENT
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI

                                   Between

                                     SM
                           (Anonymity Order made)
                                      &
                                 IHSAN QADIR
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation

First Appellant:        Mr M Biggs,  of  counsel,  instructed  by  Universal
             Solicitors
Second Appellant:  Mr Z Malik, of counsel, instructed by AWS Solicitors
Respondent:          Mr R  Dunlop,  of  counsel,  instructed  by  Government
             Legal Department

                                   RULING

 1. The following is our ruling on the Secretary of State's application for
    the admission of belatedly served  evidence.   By  'belatedly'  I  mean
    served on the Appellants' legal representatives yesterday  and  brought
    to the attention of the Tribunal for the first time this morning.

 2. The evidence consists of two basic categories.  The first  category  is
    the police materials.  This aspect of the application  is  particularly
    contentious.  The second category  is  the  remaining  materials  which
    gives rise to substantially less  controversial issues.

 3. As regards the first category, namely  the  police  reports,  the  main
    features or issues to be highlighted are, first of  all,  the  lateness
    per se and related to that the absence of any appropriate  application,
    timeous or otherwise, to the Tribunal on behalf of  the  Respondent  in
    advance of today's hearing, taking into account the specially  convened
    CMR on 17 December 2015. It is difficult to conceive of evidence  being
    served any later than this was.   Linked to this there is  the  absence
    of anything even approaching a  satisfactory  explanation.   There  is,
    indeed, a detectable element of the cavalier in approaching the hearing
    in this way.

 4. The next main issue is linked to the first and that is fairness to  the
    Appellants.  Having regard to  the  nature  of  this  evidence,  it  is
    fundamentally and manifestly unfair to expect the  Appellants  to  deal
    with it, quite irrespective of timing.  This requires no elaboration.

 5. The third and fourth points are interrelated,  as  are  the  first  and
    second.  They concern  the  content  of  the  evidence,  its  potential
    probative value and its likely prejudicial effect.  The evidence is not
    produced in any conventional  or  acceptable  form.   It  is,  properly
    analysed,  multiple  hearsay.   It  contains   mere   allegations   and
    assertions.  Its likely probative value is as  close  to  zero  as  one
    could imagine, while its potentially prejudicial effect could be  quite
    significant.  Given that, if it is to be admitted by the Tribunal  that
    can only be  for  the  purpose  of  persuading  the  Tribunal  to  make
    inferences adverse to the Appellants and indeed to simply smear them.

 6. Furthermore, it is not without  good  reason  that  in  legislating  in
    matters of this nature, Parliament has for many  decades  made  a  very
    careful distinction between criminal convictions on the  one  hand  and
    anything falling short of a criminal conviction on the other.  Evidence
    of criminal convictions can be adduced by statute in civil  proceedings
    only if certain conditions are satisfied.  We  are  not  even  at  that
    level in relation to this evidence  as  it  consists  of  mere  hearsay
    allegations, comment  and  speculation.   Even  if  there  were  formal
    charges or indictments evidence of these  too  would  be  inadmissible.
    The consideration that these are tribunal proceedings does  not  affect
    this analysis, particularly given the gravity of the misconduct, namely
    fraud, alleged by the Secretary of State against both Appellants.

 7. For this combination of reasons the application to  adduce  the  Police
    Reports falls to be refused without any hesitation whatsoever.

 8. I turn now to address the remaining materials which are,  firstly,  the
    witness statements of Mr Green and the two attachments, each in what is
    now familiar form in this sphere of litigation,  namely  a  spreadsheet
    entry.  Secondly, there is the interview of  the  second  Appellant  at
    port.  Thirdly, there is a  document  entitled  "Explanation  of  ILETS
    Scoring".  Fourthly, there is evidence relating to the SCLT Centres  in
    Leeds in January and February 2012.

 9. The various  shortcomings  and  objections  pertaining  to  the  Police
    Reports do not apply, by and large, to this other category of evidence.
     We  shall,  accordingly,  admit  Mr  Green's  witness  statements  and
    attachments.  That will, of course, be subject to any submission  which
    may properly be made concerning the timing of  this  evidence  and  the
    weight to be attached to it.   With  some  reluctance  and  subject  to
    precisely the same  qualification,  which  could  potentially  be  more
    important in this instance, we shall admit also the  document  entitled
    "Explanation  of  ILETS  Scoring".  Further,  we  can  see  sustainable
    objection to admitting the port interview of the second Appellant.

10. We have considered also the nature of the evidence provided  under  the
    rubric of "Evidence Relating to SELT Centres in Leeds  in  January  and
    February 2012".  There may, legitimately, be  substantial  reservations
    about the probative value  of  this  evidence  and  the  weight  to  be
    attached to it.  However, on balance, we take the course  of  admitting
    this evidence with that important qualification,  thereby  leaving  the
    Appellants in the following position.  As regards the admission of  the
    various components of what we have identified as the second category in
    the Secretary of State's belated bundle,  the  Appellants  will  be  at
    liberty to advance such submissions relating to  timing,  fairness  and
    probative value and weight as they see fit.

11. One further preliminary issue was raised faintly and without notice  to
    either the Tribunal or the Appellants' representatives.  An enquiry was
    made by Mr Dunlop as to whether  one  member  of  the  judicial  panel,
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini, had previously acted as an  advocate
    in any case of this kind.  As I pointed out, this was an  inappropriate
    and misconceived enquiry, for two reasons.  First, it was based on  the
    unspoken premise that, without advance notice or formality of any kind,
    it was open to a representative to direct questions of this kind  to  a
    Judge in open court.  The impropriety of such a procedure  requires  no
    elaboration.  Second, on its merits, the issue  raised  was  devoid  of
    substance.  As the leading authority on this  topic,  Locabail  -  v  -
    Bayfield Properties [1999] EWCA Civ  3004  makes  clear,  a  part  time
    Judge's previous involvement in a comparable  case  does  not,  without
    more, justify recusal.  Lord Bingham MR stated, at [25]:

         "We  cannot,  however,  conceive  of  circumstances  in  which   an
         objection could be soundly based on  ...................   previous
         receipt of instructions to act for or against any party,  solicitor
         or advocate engaged in a case before him ...."

              [My emphasis]

12. I also consider it appropriate to draw attention to the statutory  oath
    of office which must be sworn or affirmed, by all deputy judges and, in
    particular, the words "without fear or favour". Finally,  the  Locabail
    issue has arisen in a very recent decision  of  the  Court  of  Appeal,
    which considered it in extenso.  See Watts v Watts [2015] EWCA Civ 1297
    and, in particular, the following passages in [28]:


         "(i) The notional fair-minded  and  informed  observer  would  know
              about the professional  standards  applicable  to  practising
              members of the Bar and to barristers who serve  as  part-time
              deputy judges and would understand that those  standards  are
              part of  a  legal  culture  in  which  ethical  behaviour  is
              expected and high ethical standards are achieved,  reinforced
              by  fears  of  severe  criticism  by  peers   and   potential
              disciplinary action if  they  are  departed  from:  Taylor  v
              Lawrence [2001] EWCA Civ 119, [33]-[36];  Taylor  v  Lawrence
              [2002] EWCA Civ 90; [2003] QB 528, [61]-[63].  These  aspects
              of the legal culture of the Bench and legal professionals are
              not undermined by the fact that some litigation is now funded
              by means of CFAs;


          ii)    The  notional  fair-minded  and  informed  observer  would
              understand that a part-time judge's approach to the case  she
              is trying and to her relationships with  other  professionals
              will be governed by these professional standards. There is no
              reason to think that a judge  would  allow  her  professional
              training and ethics to be overridden  by  a  concern  not  to
              upset a junior counsel she is leading  in  other  litigation.
              Moreover, the judge would know that the junior counsel  would
              himself understand that she is bound by  strict  professional
              standards, and hence would have no expectation that she would
              do anything other than act in accordance with  them.  So  the
              judge would not expect any disgruntlement  or  difficulty  to
              arise in her relationship with the junior counsel even if she
              makes a decision adverse to him in the case  she  is  trying.
              Accordingly,  the  idea  that  the  judge  would  adjust  her
              behaviour as judge to avoid upsetting the junior  counsel  is
              far-fetched indeed. The  notional  fair-minded  and  informed
              observer would  not  consider  that  there  was  any  genuine
              possibility of this occurring;"

13. As it happens, Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini has indeed acted as an
    advocate  in  a  couple  of  "ETS"  cases  at   first   instance   and,
    notwithstanding the two fundamental defects identified above, this  was
    immediately broadcast by me in open court.

                                                                       [pic]

                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE McCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL



                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                                                      Date: 09 February 2016
                                 APPENDIX 2


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|                                              |Direction Promulgated        |
|                                              |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |



                                   Between

                             SM and Ihsan Qadir
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



                          Ruling / Direction of The Hon Mr Justice
McCloskey, President

 1. The Secretary of  State  brings  this  application  for  Directions  in
    circumstances where all of her evidence has been adduced, pursuant to a
    sequential framework approved by the Tribunal, and  her  case  has  now
    closed in consequence. This follows two days  of  evidence,  which  has
    included the testimony of two of the Appellants'  witnesses,  including
    their expert witness, on 05 and 06 February 2016. On the latter date, a
    necessary third day of hearing, 03 March 2016, was arranged and  agreed
    by all representatives. Only the two Appellants remain to give evidence
    and thereby complete the trial.

 2. These appeals have been in gestation for  some  considerable  time  and
    have been the subject of pre-trial management.

 3. The trial has already been disrupted and delayed by  the  Secretary  of
    State's belated quest to have new evidence admitted, on the first day.

 4. The essence of this further application is to permit new evidence,  not
    yet in existence, to be adduced from an  expert.  This  application  is
    made far too late. No satisfactory explanation  for  its  lateness  has
    been provided.  The Appellants' expert report has been  in  the  public
    and litigation arenas for over one year. To accede to  the  application
    will, as a matter of high probability, significantly disrupt and  delay
    the trial further. Having regard to [1] above, it will  also  skew  the
    trial  unacceptably.  The  overriding  objective  impels  strongly   to
    refusal.

 5. Insofar as it is suggested that the expert's report could be  ready  by
    03 March 2016, this fails to address [2] - [4]  above.  Furthermore,  I
    have grave concerns about such indecent haste, given the extensive  and
    protracted preparations and research which would, in my  judgement,  be
    required of a serious expert witness.

 6. The Secretary of State may, of course, seek to adduce such evidence  in
    some future case.

 7. For the reasons elaborated above, the application is refused.

 8. Finally, I make clear that I discern no impropriety in the  conduct  of
    the Secretary of State's legal representatives.


                                               Signed:     Bernard McCloskey

                                         PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                                                     Date:  25 February 2016


