
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

MZ (Hospital order: whether a 'foreign criminal') Pakistan [2020] UKUT
00225(IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 March 2020                              |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     MZ
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Ms Khan, instructed by Batley Law

An individual sentenced to  a  hospital  order  following  a  finding  under
section 5 (1) (b) of the Criminal Procedure (Insanity) Act 1964 that he  'is
under a disability and that he did the act  or  made  the  omission  charged
against him' is neither  subject  to  section  117C  of  the  2002  Act  (as
amended) nor  to  paragraphs  A398-399  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  He  is
excluded from the statutory provisions by section 117D(3)(a)  and  from  the
Immigration Rules concerning deportation.
[Note: The difference between OLO and Andell to which the  judge  refers  at
paras [10] to  [13]  is  now  resolved  in  SC  (paras  A398-339D:  'foreign
criminal': procedure) Albania [2020] UKUT 187 (IAC).]



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the 'respondent' and  the  respondent
    as the 'appellant', as they appeared respectively before the First-tier
    Tribunal. The appellant was born on 12  October  1996  and  is  a  male
    citizen of Pakistan. He entered the United Kingdom on 4 December  2007.
    On 30 September 2015, a jury at Sheffield Crown Court  found  that  the
    appellant had caused injury to his  cousin  by  use  of  a  knife.  The
    appellant was made subject to a  hospital  order  pursuant  to  section
    37/41 of the Mental Health Act 1983 without restriction of time.  On  9
    November 2018, he was served with a deportation  decision  and,  on  30
    November 2018, he submitted  a  human  rights  claim.  That  claim  was
    refused by the Secretary of State by a decision dated 9  January  2019.
    The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal which, in a  decision
    promulgated on 10 October 2019, allowed  the  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds (Article 8 ECHR). The Secretary  of  State  now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2.  Before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  respondent  argued  that  the
    appellant was subject to the provisions of section 117C of the 2002 Act
    (as amended):

    117C Article 8: additional considerations in  cases  involving  foreign
    criminals

    (1) The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest.

    (2) The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,  the
    greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.

    (3) In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not been  sentenced
    to a period of imprisonment of four years or more, the public  interest
    requires C's deportation unless Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies.

    (4) Exception 1 applies where-

    (a) C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most of  C's
    life,

    (b) C is socially and culturally integrated in the United Kingdom, and

    (c) there would be very significant obstacles to C's  integration  into
    the country to which C is proposed to be deported.

    (5)  Exception  2  applies  where  C  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting
    relationship with a qualifying partner, or  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with a qualifying child, and the  effect  of  C's
    deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.

    (6) In the case of a foreign criminal  who  has  been  sentenced  to  a
    period of imprisonment of at least  four  years,  the  public  interest
    requires deportation unless there are  very  compelling  circumstances,
    over and above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2.

    (7) The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to be  taken  into
    account where a court or tribunal is considering a decision to deport a
    foreign criminal only to the extent that the reason  for  the  decision
    was the offence or offences for which the criminal has been convicted.




    117D Interpretation of this Part

         In this Part-

    "Article 8" means Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights;

    "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age of 18 and who-

    (a) is a British citizen, or

    (b) has lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous  period  of  seven
    years or more;

    "qualifying partner" means a partner who-

    (a) is a British citizen, or

    (b) who is settled in the United Kingdom (within  the  meaning  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971 - see section 33(2A) of that Act).

    (2) In this Part, "foreign criminal" means a person-

    (a) who is not a British citizen,

    (b) who has been convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence, and

    (c) who-

    (i) has been sentenced to a period  of  imprisonment  of  at  least  12
    months,

    (ii) has been convicted of an offence that has caused serious harm, or

    (iii) is a persistent offender.

    (3) For the purposes of subsection (2)(b), a person subject to an order
    under-

    (a) section 5 of the Criminal Procedure (Insanity) Act  1964  (insanity
    etc),

    (b) section 57 of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995  (insanity
    etc), or

    (c) Article 50A of the Mental  Health  (Northern  Ireland)  Order  1986
    (insanity etc), has not been convicted of an offence.

    (4) In this Part, references to a person who has been  sentenced  to  a
    period of imprisonment of a certain length of time-

    (a) ...

    (b) ...

    (c) include a person who is  sentenced  to  detention,  or  ordered  or
    directed to  be  detained,  in  an  institution  other  than  a  prison
    (including, in particular, a  hospital  or  an  institution  for  young
    offenders) for that length of time; and

    (d) include a person who is sentenced to imprisonment or detention,  or
    ordered or directed  to  be  detained,  for  an  indeterminate  period,
    provided that it may last for at least that length of time.

    (5) ...

 3. There are two grounds of appeal. First, the Secretary of State  submits
    that the judge erred in law  by  concluding  (see  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision at [31]) that the appellant  was  not  to  be  regarded  as  a
    foreign criminal for the purposes of section 117 of the  2002  Act  (as
    amended) because he had not been convicted of an  offence.  The  second
    ground raises a similar challenge in respect of the Immigration  Rules.
    The judge considered that she was not bound by  the  judgement  of  the
    Court of Appeal in KE (Nigeria) [2017] EWCA Civ 1382. She held KE  only
    applied to an individual who had been convicted of an offence  and  not
    (as in the case of the appellant is this appeal) a person who had  been
    found unfit to plead.

 4. In KE, the Court of Appeal at [69] held:

    The words of section 117(4)(d), on their plain  and  ordinary  meaning,
    clearly and unambiguously include offenders who have been sentenced  to
    a hospital order. They expressly include a person  who  is  ordered  or
    directed to  be  detained  for  an  indeterminate  period.  As  I  have
    described (see paragraphs 3 and following above), a hospital  order  is
    an order for the detention of  an  offender  in  a  hospital.  Hospital
    orders are necessarily for an indeterminate period, until  a  clinician
    considers release appropriate. In the Respondent's case,  the  hospital
    order was supported by a restriction order requiring his detention  for
    an indeterminate time, until the Secretary of State  consented  to  his
    release or the First-tier Tribunal ordered it. Even if the offender  is
    conditionally released, as the Respondent has been,  he  is  liable  to
    recall: both orders run until (and authorise the  offender's  detention
    until) his absolute discharge.

 5. It is important in the present context to have regard to the  facts  of
    KE. These are summarised  at  [38-39].  Unlike  the  appellant  in  the
    instant appeal, KE had been convicted of offences:

    Between September 1999 and November 2003, the Respondent was  convicted
    of five offences of burglary, using threatening words or behaviour, and
    indecent assault. As a result of  those,  he  was  first  sentenced  to
    detention in a young offender institution, when aged about 19; and,  on
    his release, his step-mother had lost her accommodation and moved  into
    a hostel. He has not lived with her since.

    On 23 January 2004, the Respondent  was  convicted  of  two  counts  of
    affray, both of which occurred on 19 August 2003 whilst he was on  bail
    for the indecent assault. He took a machete, which, first, he waved  at
    men in the hostel in which he was living; and then he went outside with
    the weapon where he waved it  at  two  women  who  were  understandably
    terrified. On 23  April  2004,  on  each  count  concurrently,  he  was
    sentenced to a hospital order and a restriction order without limit  of
    time. We do not have  a  full  transcript  of  the  judge's  sentencing
    remarks - which, with any available pre-sentence  reports,  are  always
    likely to be helpful to a court or tribunal considering a challenge  to
    a decision to impose or not revoke a deportation order  on  grounds  of
    disproportionality - but, from the documents that we  do  have,  it  is
    clear that, at the time of the affray offences, the Respondent suffered
    from a mental disorder and that disorder caused him  to  act  with  the
    knife as he did. That was the conclusion of  the  Upper  Tribunal  (see
    paragraph 46 of their determination, quoted  at  paragraph  57  below),
    with which I agree.

 6. In  the  instant  appeal,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  required  to
    determine whether the appellant falls under the provisions  of  section
    117C. He falls within those provisions if he is a person  convicted  of
    an offence. Section 117D(3)(a) provides that a  person  subject  to  an
    order under section 5 of the Criminal Procedure (Insanity) Act 1964 has
    not been convicted  of  an  offence.  The  appellant  argued  that  his
    detention in hospital was subject to the provisions of sections 4A  and
    5 of the 1964 Act:

    4A Finding that the accused did the act or made  the  omission  charged
    against him.

    (1) This section applies where in accordance with section 4  (5)  above
    it is determined by a judge that the accused is under a disability.

    (2) The trial shall not proceed or further  proceed  but  it  shall  be
    determined by a jury-

    (a) on the evidence (if any) already given in the trial; and

    (b) on such evidence as may  be  adduced  or  further  adduced  by  the
    prosecution, or adduced by a person appointed by the court  under  this
    section to put the case for the defence, whether they are satisfied, as
    respects the count or each of the counts on which the accused was to be
    or was being tried, that he did the act or made  the  omission  charged
    against him as the offence.

    (3) If as respects that count or any  of  those  counts  the  jury  are
    satisfied as mentioned in subsection  (2)  above,  they  shall  make  a
    finding that the accused did the  act  or  made  the  omission  charged
    against him.

    (4) If as respects that count or any of those counts the jury  are  not
    so satisfied, they shall return a verdict of acquittal  as  if  on  the
    count in question the trial had proceeded to a conclusion.

    (5) Where the question of disability was determined  after  arraignment
    of the accused, the determination under subsection (2) is to be made by
    the jury by whom he was being tried.

    5. Powers to deal with persons not guilty  by  reason  of  insanity  or
    unfit to plead etc.

    (1) This section applies where-

    (a) a special verdict is returned that the accused  is  not  guilty  by
    reason of insanity; or

    (b) findings have been made that the accused is under a disability  and
    that he did the act or made the omission charged against him.

    (2) The court shall make in respect of the accused-

    (a) a hospital order (with or without a restriction order);

    (b) a supervision order; or

    (c) an order for his absolute discharge.

    (3) Where-

    (a) the offence to which the special verdict or the findings relate  is
    an offence the sentence for which is fixed by law, and

    (b) the court have power to make a hospital order, the court shall make
    a hospital order with a restriction order (whether or  not  they  would
    have power to make a restriction order apart from this subsection).

    (4) In this section-

    "hospital order" has the meaning given in  section  37  of  the  Mental
    Health Act 1983;

    "restriction order" has the meaning given to it by section 41  of  that
    Act;

    "supervision order" has the meaning given in Part 1 of Schedule  1A  to
    this Act.




 7. The appellant was not subject to a special  verdict  that  he  was  not
    guilty by reason of insanity (see section 5 (1) (a) of the  1964  Act).
    The appellant was found  to  be  unfit  to  plead.  In  his  sentencing
    remarks, Mr Recorder Wheeler stated: 'Mr Z, the jury have  reached  the
    determination that you did in fact cause the injury to Mr H by using  a
    knife which resulted in a wound of some 7  cm  in  length.  This  is  a
    finding of fact the jury have come to. It  is  not  a  conviction'  [my
    emphasis].

 8. It is apparent that the appellant was subject to section 5 (1)  (b)  of
    the  1964  Act;  findings  were  made  against  him,  a  person   under
    disability, that he had perpetrated the act with which he was  charged.
    It would have been helpful to have had sight of  the  formal  documents
    produced by the Crown Court following the making of the hospital order.
    However, from the material before me, I am satisfied that the appellant
    was a person subject to an order under section 5 of the  1964  Act.  He
    was not, therefore, a person convicted of an offence.  That  conclusion
    is consistent with the comments of the sentencing judge (see above). It
    follows that the appellant is, for the purposes of section 117C, not  a
    foreign criminal because he has not been convicted of  an  offence.  He
    does not fall within the definition of 'foreign  criminal'  in  section
    117D because, although he has  been  sentenced  to  detention  under  a
    hospital order (see  section  117D(4)(c)  and  KE),  he  has  not  been
    convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence (section 117D(2)(b)). The
    First-tier Tribunal, therefore, did not err in law by finding that  the
    appellant is not a foreign criminal for the purposes of section 117C.

 9. The remaining grounds of appeal concern the judge's assessment  of  the
    appellant's circumstances under HC 395 (as amended). I record here that
    the appellant has not claimed that he is in a relationship with another
    person or that he has any children. Paragraphs A398, 398, 399 and  399A
    provide:

    A398. These rules apply where:




    (a)  a  foreign  criminal  liable  to  deportation  claims   that   his
    deportation would be contrary to the United Kingdom's obligations under
    Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention; [my emphasis]




    (b) ...

    398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary  to
    the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the  Human  Rights  Convention,
    and




    (a) the deportation of the person from  the  UK  is  conducive  to  the
    public good and in the public interest because they have been convicted
    of an offence for which  they  have  been  sentenced  to  a  period  of
    imprisonment of at least 4 years;




    (b) the deportation of the person from  the  UK  is  conducive  to  the
    public good and in the public interest because they have been convicted
    of an offence for which  they  have  been  sentenced  to  a  period  of
    imprisonment of less than 4 years but at least 12 months; or




    (c) the deportation of the person from  the  UK  is  conducive  to  the
    public good and in the public interest because,  in  the  view  of  the
    Secretary of State, their offending has caused serious harm or they are
    a persistent offender who shows a particular disregard for the law, the
    Secretary of State  in  assessing  that  claim  will  consider  whether
    paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, the public  interest
    in deportation will only be outweighed by other factors where there are
    very  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  those  described  in
    paragraphs 399 and 399A.

    399...

    399A. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c) applies if -

    (a) the person has been lawfully resident in the UK  for  most  of  his
life; and

    (b) he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and

    (c) there would be very significant obstacles to his  integration  into
    the country to which it is proposed he is deported.

10. At [34-37], the judge discusses the conflicting decisions of the  Upper
    Tribunal in OLO (paragraph 398 - 'foreign criminal') [2016] UKUT  00056
    and Andell (foreign criminal - paragraph 398) [2018] UKUT 198. In  OLO,
    the Upper Tribunal held that the term 'foreign criminal'  in  paragraph
    A398 should be construed consistently with the  definition  in  section
    117D of the 2002 Act. In Andell, on the other hand, the Upper  Tribunal
    concluded that the words 'foreign criminal' are 'simply words  denoting
    the person is a criminal and a foreigner' [25]; the Tribunal considered
    that it was unnecessary for the definitions in the  Rules  and  in  the
    statute to be construed identically.

11. In the instant appeal, the judge held at [36-38] as follows:

    36. I accept the submission made on behalf of the  Appellant  that  OLO
    should be preferred because of the detailed analysis in the case of the
    explanatory notes to the  Immigration  Act  2004  and  the  legislative
    history, and the fact that Andell was decided without reference to OLO.

    37.  In any event, even  if  Andell  is  correct,  I  accept  that  the
    Appellant cannot be classified as a criminal because he  has  not  been
    convicted of an offence and therefore does not  fall  within  paragraph
    398 of the Immigration Rules. Even if  I  am  wrong  on  this  and  his
    behaviour can be categorised as offending, he does not come within  398
    (a) or (b) because those paragraphs expressly require convictions.  398
    (c) applies where in the view of the Secretary of State, offending  has
    caused serious harm, or the person is a persistent offender who shows a
    particular disregard for the law. The Secretary of State will  consider
    whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not,  the  public
    interest in deportation will only be outweighed by other factors  where
    there are very compelling circumstances over and above those  described
    in paragraphs 399 and 399A.

    38.  If he does come within 398C arguably his offending caused  serious
    harm. However, the incident  occurred  following  an  argument  with  a
    cousin and must be considered in the context of his mental illness. His
    health has now improved and provided he complies  with  his  medication
    the risk to the public is minimal. Whilst  in  the  UK  he  remains  on
    conditional discharge and can be recalled to hospital if his  behaviour
    leads to concerns.

12. It is clear from what the judge says at [37-39] that she  proceeded  on
    the basis that the appellant may be classified as  a  foreign  criminal
    for the application of the immigration  rules  ('..even  if  Andell  is
    correct...' 'If he  does  come  within  398C...').  Leaving  aside  the
    question as to whether it was even necessary for the judge to  consider
    whether the Immigration  Rules  had  any  relevance,  having  concluded
    (correctly) that the statutory provisions did not apply,  it  is  clear
    that the appellant, whilst he may  be  'foreign',  cannot  properly  be
    described as a 'criminal'. The jury in the appellant's trial had  found
    that he had 'done the act...charged against him'  (section  4A  of  the
    1964 Act). In other words, the jury found that the actus reus had  been
    present; however, it made no finding that the appellant  had  possessed
    the mens rea for the  offence.  Therefore,  since  there  had  been  no
    finding that the appellant  possessed  both  elements  required  for  a
    criminal act, it cannot in law  be  said  that  he  had  'committed  an
    offence', that he is an 'offender' or, indeed, that he is a 'criminal'.

13. Whilst I am inclined  to  agree  with  what  the  judge  says  at  [36]
    regarding Andell and OLO for the reasons she gives, there  is  no  need
    for me to reconcile those decisions in this appeal. That is because the
    appellant is not, for the reasons I give  at  [12]  above,  a  'foreign
    criminal' for the purposes of paragraphs A398-399  of  the  Immigration
    Rules. That conclusion stands notwithstanding that  the  appellant  may
    have been 'sentenced' to a hospital order (see KE).

14. Since the provisions as regards foreign criminals do not apply to  this
    appellant, he falls to be considered under paragraph 276ADE:

    Requirements to be met by an applicant  for  leave  to  remain  on  the
    grounds of private life

    276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an  applicant  for  leave  to
    remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at the date of
    application, the applicant:

    (i) does not fall for refusal under any of the grounds in Section S-LTR
    1.1 to S-LTR 2.2. and S-LTR.3.1. to S-LTR.4.5. in Appendix FM; and

    (ii) has made a valid application for leave to remain on the grounds of
    private life in the UK; and

    (iii)  has  lived  continuously  in  the  UK  for  at  least  20  years
    (discounting any period of imprisonment); or

    (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in the  UK
    for at least 7 years (discounting any period of  imprisonment)  and  it
    would not be reasonable to expect the applicant to leave the UK; or

    (v) is aged 18 years or above and under 25 years and has spent at least
    half of his life living continuously in the UK (discounting any  period
    of imprisonment); or

    (vi) subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years or above, has lived
    continuously in the UK for less than 20 years (discounting  any  period
    of imprisonment) but there would be very significant obstacles  to  the
    applicant's integration into the country to which he would have  to  go
    if required to leave the UK.

15. At [41], the judge wrote:

    In any event, if I am correct in my conclusion that the Appellant  does
    not fall within the definition of  foreign  criminal  I  find  that  he
    satisfies paragraph 276 ADE (1) (v) of the Immigration Rules as  he  is
    under 25 and has spent more than half of his life in the  UK.  For  the
    reasons given above I find that he  can  demonstrate  very  significant
    obstacles to integration in Pakistan.

    The problem with this part of the judge's analysis is that  she  failed
    to consider whether the appellant may  fall  for  refusal  under  those
    parts of Appendix FM referred to at sub-paragraph (i). Certainly, those
    parts of the suitability requirements which concern  foreign  criminals
    do not apply to the appellant but the more general provisions of  S-LTR
    1.6 ('...character, associations or other reasons make  it  undesirable
    to allow them to remain in the United Kingdom') may  do  so  and  those
    provisions the judge did not address.

16. That leaves  the  application  of  paragraph  276ADE  (vi).  The  judge
    addresses that provision at [39]. Although the judge  refers  to  'very
    compelling circumstances  (sic)'  I  am  satisfied  that  her  analysis
    applies equally to the words of the correct test:

    If 398C applies to the Appellant, it is conceded that  he  cannot  meet
    the requirements of 399A because he has not resided in the UK  lawfully
    for at least half his life. Nevertheless, whilst taking account of  the
    strong public  interest  in  deporting  foreign  criminals  who  commit
    serious offences, in this case I accept the  submissions  made  on  the
    Appellant's behalf that there are very compelling circumstances. He has
    lived in the UK since age 11, has no experience of  independent  living
    or  of  gainful  employment.  He  suffers  from  a  moderate   learning
    disability and schizoaffective disorder and requires 24-hour  care  and
    supervision in a supported living environment. Without that support  he
    risks relapse and would be at risk of exploitation by  others.  I  have
    found above that there  is  nobody  upon  whom  he  could  rely  on  in
    Pakistan. Furthermore, significant stigma attaches to mental illness in
    Pakistan, the Respondent's response to country  of  origin  information
    records that the "stigma against mental illness is rampant in Pakistan.
    It is sustained by popular belief in spiritual cures...  The  Pakistani
    government also plays a large role in the continued  stigmatisation  of
    mental illness. It has a lack of psychiatric hospitals or mental health
    practitioners. The Respondent's CPIN Pakistan: Medical  and  Healthcare
    Issues records that there are no truly specialised institutions for the
    treatment of mental disorders.  There  are  only  five  government  run
    psychiatric hospitals for a population of 180  million  and  there  are
    fewer than 300 qualified psychiatrists practising in  Pakistan.  Mental
    health is the most neglected field in  Pakistan  and  the  majority  of
    psychiatric patients go to  traditional  faith  healers  and  religious
    healers.

17. I find that here the judge's analysis is both concise and accurate. The
    respondent has raised no challenge to this part of the decision  and  I
    find that it is apparent from the judge's  findings  that  there  exist
    very significant obstacles to the integration in Pakistan of this young
    appellant, who has resided in the United Kingdom for  many  years,  who
    suffers from a serious schizoaffective disorder the management of which
    requires continuous treatment and monitoring  and  who  has  nobody  in
    Pakistan able or willing to assist him. The appellant is not subject to
    the Immigration Rules or statutory scheme concerning the deportation of
    foreign criminals and he satisfies the rules for a grant  of  leave  to
    remain on the basis of his private life. Accordingly, I find  that,  by
    allowing the appeal, the  judge  did  not  err  in  law  and  that  the
    Secretary of State's appeal should be dismissed.




    Notice of Decision

    The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.


    Signed                              Date 17 March 2020


    Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of his  family.   This  direction
    applies both to the appellants  and  to  the  respondent.   Failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

