








R (on the application of SN) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
(striking out - principles) IJR [2015] UKUT 00227(IAC)


                                 Upper Tribunal
                                  Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                                    Judicial Review Decision Notice





                                     SN
                                                                   Applicant

                                      v

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent





                                    On the application of the Applicant
                                for permission to apply for judicial review




      Having heard the parties' respective counsel,  instructed  by  CK  Law
      Solicitors  and  the  Government  Legal  Department  respectively,  at
      hearings at Field House, London on 06 January and 16 March 2015




           (i)        Rule 7(2) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
                 Rules 2008 empowers the Upper Tribunal to take such  action
                 as it considers just, which  may  include  striking  out  a
                 party's case under rule 8, where there has been  a  failure
                 to comply with a  requirement  of  the  rules,  a  practice
                 direction or a tribunal direction.


             ii) Under rule 8 proceedings are automatically  struck  out  in
                 the event of failure to comply with an order  or  direction
                 which  specifies  that  non-compliance  will  attract  this
                 sanction, viz an "unless" order.  In other cases the  power
                 to strike out is discretionary.

            iii) In considering whether to exercise its discretionary strike
                 out power under rule 8, the main factors  which  the  Upper
                 Tribunal will weigh are the interests of the administration
                 of justice; whether there has been a prompt application for
                 relief; whether the failure was intentional; whether  there
                 is a good explanation  for  the  failure;  the  number  and
                 importance of multiple failures; whether  the  failure  was
                 caused by the party or his  legal  representative;  whether
                 the trial date will be jeopardised by the grant of  relief;
                 the effect on every party of the relevant failure; and  the
                 effect on every party of  granting  relief.   Further,  the
                 interests of the administration of justice will be  weighed
                 and applied.

             iv)  In  addition,  the  Tribunal  will  apply  the   following
                 principles: public authorities and private litigants are to
                 be treated alike; excessive work burdens will rarely excuse
                 a defaulting solicitor; and the  mere  factor  of  a  party
                 being unrepresented does not constitute  good  reason.   In
                 asylum and humanitarian protection claims, particular  care
                 must be taken to ensure that appeals are not frustrated  by
                 a failure on the part of a party's legal representative  to
                 comply with time limits.

              v) In considering the exercise of its discretionary strike out
                 power under rule 8, the Tribunal will  be  mindful  of  the
                 draconian nature of such orders and will take into  account
                 the availability of  any  other  appropriate  and  adequate
                 sanction such as a wasted costs  order  under  rule  10(3).
                 Repeated defaults will almost invariably be considered more
                 serious than a single act of non-compliance.  In every case
                 the Tribunal will consider  the  question  of  whether  its
                 process is being misused.

             vi) In an application under rule 8(5) to reinstate a struck out
                 case, the main factors to be considered are the reason  for
                 the failure which  gave  rise  to  the  strike  out  order,
                 whether there has been any  undue  delay  in  applying  for
                 reinstatement and whether reinstatement would prejudice the
                 other party.

            vii) The values of efficiency and expedition  will  be  promoted
                 and due observance of  the  overriding  objective  will  be
                 enhanced by adherence to the principles  and  standards  of
                 pleading rehearsed in [28] - [32].

           viii) In judicial review cases, applications to amend  so  as  to
                 enable a new or later decision to  be  challenged  must  be
                 made proactively and timeously. Such applications  will  be
                 determined  on  their  merits  and  giving  effect  to  the
                 overriding objective.





              Decision of The Honourable Mr Justice McCloskey,
                       President of the Upper Tribunal




      Prologue


      This judgment addresses the following issues:


        i) The exercise of the Upper Tribunal's power to strike out a  case
           under rule 8(3) of the  Tribunals  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunals)
           Rules 2008.: [1] - [24]


       ii) The exercise of the Upper Tribunal's power under  rule  8(5)  to
           reinstate a case which has been struck out: [25] - [27]

      iii) Pleadings in judicial review proceedings: [28] - [32]


       iv) The amendment of judicial review claims: [33] - [36]


        v) The exercise of the Upper Tribunal's  power  to  make  a  wasted
           costs order: [37] - [38]

                                  ANONYMITY

      Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
      2008 (SI2008/269) the Upper Tribunal makes an Anonymity Order.  Unless
      the Upper Tribunal or competent court orders otherwise, no  report  of
      any proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall  directly  or
      indirectly identify the original Appellant. This  prohibition  applies
      to, amongst others, all parties.



      The Matrix of These Proceedings


   1. The Applicant is a national of Sri Lanka, aged 32 years.


        2. This is a  renewed  application  for  permission  to  apply  for
           judicial review.  While the history is moderately protracted,  I
           shall endeavour to reduce it to the following salient summary:


              a) The Applicant was lawfully present in the United Kingdom as
                 a Tier 4 Student from 11 April 2010.  Her leave expired  on
                 06 September 2011.


              b) She was an unlawful "overstayer" thereafter.


              c) Subsequently, the Applicant made a claim for  asylum  which
                 was the subject of an interview on 25  November  2013.  Her
                 case was  assigned  to  the  "Detained  Fast  Track"  (DFT)
                 process.


              d) On 05 December 2013 her claim for asylum was refused.


              e) On 17 December 2013, her appeal against this  decision  was
                 dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal (the "FtT").


              f) On 23 December 2013,  her  application  for  permission  to
                 appeal to the Upper Tribunal was refused.


              g) On 24 January 2014, the  Applicant's  solicitors  submitted
                 further representations on her behalf to the Respondent.

              h) On 28 January  2014,  the  Applicant  initiated  her  first
                 judicial review proceedings, challenging  the  Respondent's
                 alleged failure to consider her further representations and
                 to defer removal.


              i)  By  successive  orders  dated  29  and  31  January   2014
                 respectively, the first on paper and the  second  following
                 an oral renewal hearing, Upper Tribunal  Judges  Kekic  and
                 Gleeson refused to grant permission.

              j) On 01  February  2014,  the  Respondent  decided  that  the
                 Applicant's further representations did  not  constitute  a
                 fresh  asylum,  humanitarian  protection  or  human  rights
                 claim, applying paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules.

              k) By order of the Administrative Court of the same date,  the
                 Applicant's imminent removal from the  United  Kingdom  was
                 stayed for a period of 72 hours.

              l) This was followed by further representations on  behalf  of
                 the Applicant  and  the  maintenance  of  the  Respondent's
                 decision that the  representations  did  not  constitute  a
                 fresh claim.

              m) On 22 May 2014, the Applicant's application for  permission
                 to apply for judicial review was refused, by order of Upper
                 Tribunal Judge Warr.


              n) This was followed by a request for an oral  hearing,  dated
                 29 May 2014.


              o) The subsequent issue  of  new  removal  directions  by  the
                 Respondent stimulated still further representations,  dated
                 20 June 2014, from the Applicant's solicitors.

              p) By a further decision dated 25 June  2014,  the  Respondent
                 determined that these did not constitute a fresh claim.

              q) Undeterred, the Applicant's solicitors made further written
                 representations, dated 01 July  2014  based  on  a  witness
                 statement of the Director of  the  organisation  "Act  Now"
                 purporting to support the Applicant's claim  that  she  had
                 been the victim of sexual violence in Sri Lanka due to  her
                 association with LTTE, together with a public statement  of
                 the United Kingdom Government's Foreign  Secretary  bearing
                 on this subject generally.

              r) On 03 July 2014,  the  Applicant  submitted  still  further
                 representations to the Respondent.


              s) The application for an order staying  the  removal  of  the
                 Applicant from the United Kingdom was refused by  order  of
                 Upper Tribunal Judge King, dated 04 July 2014.


              t) The Applicant was removed from the United  Kingdom  to  Sri
                 Lanka on the same date.


        3. Accordingly, the Applicant was removed from the  United  Kingdom
           to her country of origin, Sri Lanka, some nine  months  ago.  At
           the time of her removal there remained extant  her  application,
           dated  29  May  2014,  to  renew  orally  her  application   for
           permission to apply for judicial review which had  been  refused
           by order dated 22 May  2014.  The  Applicant's  removal  to  her
           country of origin on 04 July 2014 signalled the beginning  of  a
           period which was marked by a series of substantial  defaults  on
           the part of her legal representatives.


        4. Next, the Applicant's oral renewal hearing was listed before two
           senior Upper Tribunal Judges on 20  August  2014.   This  was  a
           specially convened panel. Without prior  notice  to  either  the
           Tribunal or  the  Respondent,  the  Applicant's  representatives
           intimated their desire to amend the claim so as to challenge the
           legality of their client's removal from the  United  Kingdom  to
           Sri Lanka on 04 July 2014.  The  amended  grounds  of  challenge
           bear the date of this hearing, 20 August 2014.   The  effect  of
           this development was to cause this hearing to be  aborted.   The
           order made by the Tribunal on this date recited:

                 "Permission granted to Applicant to amend the claim form to
                 also include a challenge to the third decision letter dated
                 25 June 2014 and a  challenge  to  the  lawfulness  of  the
                 Applicant's removal to Sri Lanka.  The following directions
                 shall apply:


                 (i)   The Applicant shall  file  and  serve  fully  pleaded
                       amended grounds of claim setting out  in  detail  the
                       nature of the claim, evidence relied  upon,  relevant
                       legal principles and the relief sought no later  than
                       21 days from the date of the posting of this order to
                       her.  The pleadings shall be accompanied by a  bundle
                       containing all  documentary  evidence  the  Applicant
                       relies upon in support of the claim.


                   ii) The Respondent shall have leave to file and serve  an
                       amended Defence no later than 21 days  after  receipt
                       of the Applicant's amended  pleading  and  bundle  of
                       documents.


                  iii) The permission application shall be relisted  on  the
                       first available date after 08 September 2014."


                       [Emphasis added.]

        5. It is evident that an initial draft of the  Applicant's  amended
           grounds was before the Tribunal on 20 August 2014. As of  today,
           this draft amended pleading remains unchanged.  It contains  the
           following passages:


                 "It is submitted that the Applicant's removal to Sri  Lanka
                 on 04 July 2014 was unlawful .....


                 It is submitted  that  the  Secretary  of  State  erred  in
                 failing to treat the psychological report  ....   dated  02
                 February 2014 as  giving  rise  to  a  fresh  asylum  claim
                 pursuant to paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules ....


                 The decision to remove the Applicant was  in  breach  of  a
                 legitimate expectation that the Applicant's case  would  be
                 reviewed by the Secretary of  State  in  light  of  William
                 Hague's   publicly   stated   commitment    following    an
                 international conference on sexual violence held in the  UK
                 to reconsider the claims  of  victims  of  sexual  violence
                 facing deportation .....


                 It is submitted that the decision to refuse the fresh claim
                 and  removal  were  unlawful  in  the  light  of  .........
                 Detention Action v SSHD [2014] EWHC 2245 (Admin).  Had  the
                 Applicant not been subject to the exigencies  of  the  fast
                 track scheme she would have been  able  to  obtain  an  MLR
                 which would have had a significant impact on the assessment
                 of credibility. ........"


                            ["MLR" denotes medico-legal report.]


           The Applicant was also relying on the  grant  of  permission  to
           appeal to the Court of Appeal in PP (Sri Lanka) v  SSHD  [Appeal
           No C5/2014/0162].


        6. The order of the Tribunal dated  20  August  2014  required  the
           Applicant's legal representatives to take the following steps:


              a) To amend the Claim Form.


              b) To file and serve fully pleaded amended grounds  of  claim,
                 in the terms directed.

              c) To serve a bundle in the terms directed.


           All of the above steps were to be taken within 21 days.  None of
           these steps was taken subsequently, timeously or at all.


        7. Notwithstanding the abysmal failure  of  the  Applicant's  legal
           representatives to obey the Tribunal's order of 20  August  2014
           the Respondent's representatives, to their credit, proceeded  to
           serve and file a pleading entitled "Additional  Summary  Grounds
           of Defence".  This is dated 26 September 2014.


        8. A period of some four months then elapsed. Upon  the  re-listing
           of the oral renewal application on 06 January 2015, again before
           another  specially  convened  panel  of  two  Judges,  we   drew
           attention to the Judicial Review Claim  Form  [T480],  dated  03
           February 2014, which had two stand out features.  The first  was
           that  the  Applicant  was  still  challenging  the  Respondent's
           decision   dated   01   February   2014   that    her    further
           representations, served on 21 January 2014, did not constitute a
           fresh asylum, humanitarian protection  or  human  rights  claim.
           The second was that the remedy sought by the  Applicant  was  an
           order quashing this decision, coupled  with  a  mandatory  order
           requiring the decision to be re-made in a manner  favourable  to
           her. The Tribunal further pointed out the abject failure of  the
           Applicant's legal representatives to  comply  with  its  earlier
           order of 20 August 2014.  Furthermore, we observed that  at  the
           stage of the aborted hearing on 20 August 2014 the Applicant was
           aspiring, by amendment, to challenge three successive  decisions
           of the Respondent.

        9. On behalf of the Respondent, counsel submitted that, given  this
           failure, the Respondent remained in the dark as regards the  key
           elements of  the  Applicant's  reconfigured  challenge  and  was
           significantly prejudiced accordingly.   The  initial  submission
           of Counsel for  the  Applicant  was  that,  notwithstanding  the
           outright failure  to  obey  the  Tribunal's  earlier  order  and
           despite the Respondent's submission, the hearing should proceed.
            No explanation for ignoring the earlier order in  its  totality
           or applying for its variation was  proffered.   No  apology  was
           tendered.  The  Applicant's  stance  was  one  of  defiance.  As
           exchanges  with  Counsel  for  the  Applicant  progressed,   the
           following emerged:


              a) The Applicant wished to rely on a  judgment  given  in  the
                 Court of Appeal in mid-December 2014.   This  judgment  was
                 not available, for reasons which were  not  explained.   On
                 probing, the Tribunal  discovered  that  it  had  not  been
                 bespoken by the Applicant's representatives.


              b) The Applicant also wished to rely on a solicitor's  witness
                 statement which was not available.

              c) The Applicant  further  desired  to  rely  on  Home  Office
                 Guidance dating from August 2014  which  was  not  produced
                 until an advanced stage of the hearing.

              d) The Applicant's representatives  had  not  yet  provided  a
                 signed and dated copy of a solicitor's statement which  was
                 in the bundle and was evidently of several months vintage.

              e) The copy of the consultant  psychiatrist's  report  in  the
                 bundle was unsigned.


       10. The series of discoveries and defaults listed above emerged only
           following questions put by  the  Tribunal  to  counsel  for  the
           Applicant. The upshot was a belated and unapologetic application
           on behalf of the Applicant to adjourn the hearing.  The Tribunal
           considered this a frankly lamentable state of affairs given  the
           history of these proceedings and expressed  itself  accordingly,
           in trenchant terms.  The Tribunal further described the argument
           of counsel for the Applicant that the outright  disobedience  of
           the Tribunal's order of 20 August 2014 was a merely technical or
           procedural irregularity as sadly misconceived.


       11. The Tribunal adjourned the hearing of 06 January 2015  with  the
           greatest reluctance and made the following directions:-


              i) The Claim Form will be amended and will be  accompanied  by
                 properly particularised and clearly formulated  grounds  of
                 challenge, by 16 January 2015.


             ii)       All additional evidence on which the Applicant wishes
                 to rely will be assembled in  a  supplementary  bundle,  to
                 include properly  signed  and  dated  reports  and  witness
                 statements, to be served and lodged by the same date.


            iii)       The Applicant's skeleton argument will also be served
                 by the 16 January 2015.


             iv)       The Respondent's reply and skeleton argument will  be
                 served by 26 January 2015.


              v)       The case will be re-listed on 29 January 2015.

             vi) Costs reserved.

       12. Subsequently, none of the  steps  required  of  the  Applicant's
           legal representatives by the  aforementioned  order  was  taken,
           timeously or at all.  Outright disobedience  of  the  order,  in
           common with the earlier order of 20 August 2014, ensued.  In the
           event, the scheduled hearing on 29 January 2015 did not  proceed
           as the Tribunal was unexpectedly unavailable.  This was notified
           to both parties representatives in advance.  A new hearing  date
           of 16 March  2015  was  arranged.   This  was  notified  to  the
           parties' representatives by notices dated 04 February 2015.   As
           of 16  March  2015,  the  Applicant's  representatives  had  not
           complied with any of the provisions of  the  two  aforementioned
           orders.  Nor had they made any application to vary their  terms.
           All of this notwithstanding the windfall which had occurred with
           the vacating of the hearing date of 29 January 2015.


       13. At the outset of the hearing on (Monday) 16 March 2015,  counsel
           for the Applicant informed the Tribunal that  an  amended  claim
           form, accompanied by the requisite fee, had been  filed  in  the
           Tribunal at 16.40hrs on (Friday) 13 March 2015.  This was not on
           the Tribunal's file.  Nor had it been served on the  Respondent.
           Remarkably, counsel for the Applicant was unable  to  provide  a
           hard copy of either document.  Counsel frankly accepted personal
           responsibility for this woeful state of affairs.   It  was  also
           represented that a pro bono brief is more  difficult  to  return
           than  a  conventional  one.   When  the  Tribunal  probed   this
           representation, it emerged that no  attempt  had  been  made  to
           engage alternative counsel. Finally, there was no letter to  the
           Tribunal or witness statement from the Applicant's solicitors.

The Strike Out Application

       14. Counsel for the Respondent invited the Tribunal  to  strike  out
           the Applicant's case. This application engages rules 7 and 8  of
           the Tribunals Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  Rule  7(2)
           provides, in material part:

                 "If a party has failed to  comply  with  a  requirement  in
                 these Rules, a practice direction or a direction the  Upper
                 Tribunal may take such action as it considers  just,  which
                 may include -


                    a) waiving the requirement;


                    b) requiring the failure to be remedied;

                    c) exercising its power under rule  8  (striking  out  a
                       party's case)......"

           Under the rule 8 regime, proceedings  are  automatically  struck
           out in the event of failure to comply with an order or direction
           which specifies that non-compliance will attract  this  sanction
           viz an "unless" order: see rule 8(1).  It is further provided in
           rule 8(3):


                 "The Upper Tribunal may strike out the whole or a  part  of
                 the proceedings if -


                    a) the Appellant or Applicant has failed to comply  with
                       a  direction  which  stated  that  failure   by   the
                       Appellant or Applicant to comply with  the  direction
                       could lead to the striking out of the proceedings  or
                       part of them;


                    b) the Appellant or Applicant has failed  to  co-operate
                       with the Upper Tribunal to such an  extent  that  the
                       Upper  Tribunal  cannot  deal  with  the  proceedings
                       fairly and justly; or

                    c) in proceedings which  are  not  an  appeal  from  the
                       decision  of  another  Tribunal  or  judicial  review
                       proceedings, the Upper Tribunal considers there is no
                       reasonable  prospect  of  the  Appellant's   or   the
                       Applicant's case, or part of it, succeeding."


           By rule 8(1A), rule 8(3) does not apply to immigration or asylum
           appeals.  However, this exclusion does not extend to immigration
           or asylum judicial reviews. Rule 8(4) continues:


                 "The Upper Tribunal may not strike out the whole or a  part
                 of the proceedings under paragraph (2)  or  (3)(b)  or  (c)
                 without  first  giving  the  Appellant  or   Applicant   an
                 opportunity to make  representations  in  relation  to  the
                 proposed striking out."

            The effect of these provisions of the Rules in the present  case
           is  that  the  outright  failure  by   the   Appellant's   legal
           representatives to comply with  two  successive  orders  of  the
           Tribunal engages a discretionary power to strike out the appeal.


       15. In her submissions to the Tribunal, counsel  for  the  Applicant
           did not rely on any decided case.  On behalf of the  Respondent,
           counsel drew attention to the recent decision of  the  Court  of
           Appeal in R (Hysaj) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
           [2014] EWCA Civ 16633.  In that case there were three  conjoined
           appeals, listed together for the purpose of giving  guidance  on
           the correct approach to applications for extensions of time  for
           filing a notice of appeal. Following  its  earlier  decision  in
           Mitchell v News Group Newspapers [2013] EWCA Civ 1537, the Court
           decided that such applications should be considered in the  same
           way as applications for  relief  from  sanctions  under  CPR3.9,
           which begins with the following words:

                 "On an application for relief from any sanction imposed for
                 a failure to comply with any rule,  practice  direction  or
                 Court order ....."

           There follows an instruction that the Court  must  consider  all
           the circumstances, including a menu of  specified  factors.   At
           this juncture, I interpose the Mitchell  principles,  which  are
           fourfold:


              i) If the failure to comply with the relevant  rule,  practice
                 direction or  court  order  can  properly  be  regarded  as
                 trivial, the court will usually grant relief provided  that
                 an application is made promptly.


             ii) If the failure  is  not  trivial,  the  burden  is  on  the
                 defaulting party to persuade the Court to grant relief.

            iii) The reasons why the default occurred should be  considered.
                 Where good reason is demonstrated,  the  prospects  of  the
                 court  granting  relief   will   be   favourable.    Merely
                 overlooking a deadline is unlikely to be considered a  good
                 reason.

             iv) While all the circumstances of the case must be considered,
                 particular weight is to be given to the factors  listed  in
                 rule 3.9.


           Notably, the Court of  Appeal  emphasised  that  greater  weight
           should be given to the twin considerations that it is  necessary
           for litigation to be conducted efficiently  and  at  appropriate
           cost and for compliance with the rules to be enforced.  While  a
           debilitating accident or illness might provide a good reason for
           a default, excessive pressure of work, much less mere oversight,
           would not.


       16. I reproduce at this juncture the CPR rule 3.9 factors:


              a) The interests of the administration of justice.


              b) Whether the application for relief has been made promptly.

              c) Whether the failure to comply was intentional.

              d) Whether there is a good explanation for the failure.

              e) The extent to which the party in default has complied  with
                 other rules, practice directions and court orders  and  any
                 relevant pre-action protocol.

              f) Whether the failure to comply was caused by  the  party  or
                 his legal representative.

              g) Whether the trial date or the likely date can still be  met
                 if relief is granted.

              h) The effect which the failure to comply had on each party.

              i) The effect which the granting of relief would have on  each
                 party.

           I also draw attention to rule 3.9(2):


                 "An application for relief must be supported by evidence."


       17. The  decision  in  Mitchell  was  followed  quickly  by  another
           decision of the Court of Appeal, Denton v White [2014] EWCA  Civ
           906, which concerned an application to extend time in  the  wake
           of a failure  to  file  a  notice  of  appeal  within  the  time
           prescribed by CPR52.4(2).  In its judgment the Court stated,  at
           [24]:


                 "A judge should address  an  application  for  relief  from
                 sanctions in three stages.  The first stage is to  identify
                 and assess the seriousness and significance of the 'failure
                 to comply with any rule, practice direction or court order'
                 which engages rule 3.9(1). If the breach is neither serious
                 nor significant, the court is unlikely  to  need  to  spend
                 much time on the second and third stages.


                 The second stage is to consider why the default occurred.

                 The third stage is to evaluate 'all  the  circumstances  of
                 the case, so as to enable the court to deal justly with the
                 application including [factors (a) and (b)]'."

      In the latter part of this passage the  court  was  quoting  from  one
           element of CPR rule 3.9.

       18.  Returning  to  Hysaj,  the  most  recent  contribution  to  the
           jurisprudence on this subject, the Court of Appeal augmented its
           earlier guidance.  I distil  from  its  judgment  the  following
           principles:


           (i)   The court can properly take into account the importance of
                 the issues to  the  public  at  large,  where  appropriate.
                 Subject thereto, public  law  cases  are  no  different  in
                 principle from private law cases.


           (iI)  Public authorities are to be treated in the same manner as
                 private litigants.


           (iii) "....  In the case of a solicitor, having  too  much  work
                 will rarely be a good reason for failing to comply with the
                 rules."


                 (Reiterating what was said in Mitchell)


           (iv)  "....There are certain kinds of  public  law  proceedings,
                 for example,  appeals  concerning  claims  for  asylum  and
                 humanitarian protection, in which particular care needs  to
                 be taken to ensure that appeals are  not  frustrated  by  a
                 failure on the part of a party's legal  representatives  to
                 comply with time limits."


                 [Emphasis added.]

              v)  "...  it  cannot  be  emphasised  too  strongly  that  the
                 principle of reasonable co-operation ............... is  of
                 general application".


             vi) "....  In the modern world the inability to pay  for  legal
                 representation cannot  be  regarded  as  providing  a  good
                 reason for delay."

            vii)  The  fact  that  a  party  is  unrepresented  is   of   no
                 significance at the first stage of  the  enquiry  when  the
                 court is assessing the seriousness and significance of  the
                 failure to comply  with  the  rules.   The  more  important
                 question is whether this amounts to a good reason  for  the
                 failure which has occurred.  The court  should  not  accept
                 that the mere factor of being unrepresented provides a good
                 reason  for  not  adhering  to  the   rules:    "....    If
                 proceedings are not to become a free  for  all,  the  court
                 must insist on litigants of all kinds following the rules."



           viii) "In most cases the merits of the appeal will have little to
                 do with whether it is appropriate to grant an extension  of
                 time.  Only in those cases where the court can see  without
                 much investigation that the grounds of  appeal  are  either
                 very strong or very weak will the merits have a significant
                 part to play when it comes to balancing the various factors
                 that have to be considered at stage three of the  process."
                 In thus holding, the court  noted  the  statement  of  Lord
                 Neuberger in HRH Prince Abdulaziz v Apex Global  Management
                 [2014] UKSC 64, at [29] and [30]:

                      "In my view, the strength of a party's  case  on  the
                      ultimate  merits  of  the  proceedings  is  generally
                      irrelevant when it comes to case management issues of
                      the  sort  which  were  the  subject  matter  of  the
                      decisions of (successive High Court  judges)....  The
                      one possible exception could be where a party  has  a
                      case whose strength  would  entitle  him  to  summary
                      judgment .....


                      It would be thoroughly undesirable if every time  the
                      court was considering the imposition  or  enforcement
                      of a sanction it could be faced with the exercise  of
                      assessing the strength  of  the  parties'  respective
                      cases.  It would lead to  such  applications  costing
                      much more and taking up much  more  court  time  than
                      they  already  do.   It  would  thus  be   inherently
                      undesirable and contrary to the aim of the Woolf  and
                      Jackson reforms."

                 Lord Neuberger added that the merits of a party's claim  or
                 defence are relevant, in this context, only when  they  are
                 so strong  that  there  is  no  real  answer  to  them.  He
                 continued, at [39]:


                       "....  When it comes to case management decisions and
                       application of the CPR, just as the Court  of  Appeal
                       is  generally  reluctant  to  interfere  with   trial
                       judge's decisions so should the Supreme Court be very
                       diffident about interfering with  guidance  given  or
                       principles laid down by the Court of Appeal."

                 Finally, at [40], Lord Neuberger emphasised that nothing he
                 had written was intended to impinge  on  the  decisions  in
                 Mitchell and Denton.

       19. I consider that the principles rehearsed in the authorities  set
           out above apply fully to the exercise of  the  Upper  Tribunal's
           discretionary power to  strike  out  the  whole  or  a  part  of
           proceedings under rule 8(3) of the 2008 Rules.  I would add  the
           following.  The exercise of this power will also, in every case,
           be governed by the overriding objective enshrined in rule 2.  It
           will, further, be informed by rule 2(4) which provides:

                 "Parties must -


                    a) help the Upper Tribunal to further the overriding
                       objective; and


                    b) co-operate with the Upper Tribunal generally."

           The Tribunal will also be mindful of the draconian nature of  an
           order striking  out  an  appeal.   It  spells  the  end  of  the
           proceedings, subject only to an application to  reinstate  under
           rule 8(5). Self evidently, the  gravity  of  the  default  under
           consideration and the  consequences  thereof  will  be  relevant
           considerations. Furthermore, the extent to which the proceedings
           have been obstructed or delayed by the relevant default will  be
           taken into account. Prejudice to the other parties will also  be
           a material factor. The scope for making  a  wasted  costs  order
           under rule 10(3) and the question of whether this  would  be  an
           appropriate  and  adequate  sanction  will  also   be   weighed.
           Repeated defaults will  almost  invariably  be  considered  more
           serious than a  single  act  of  non-compliance.   Finally,  the
           Tribunal will in every case consider the question of whether its
           process is being misused.

       20.  I  turn  to  consider  briefly   the   factor   of   pro   bono
           representation.  In its written decision following  the  aborted
           hearing on 06 January 2015, this Tribunal stated:


                 "It   is   commendable   that   the    Applicant's    legal
                 representatives are providing their services  pro  bono  in
                 the present case.  They did not, properly, advance this  as
                 a justification for any of  the  defaults  which  occurred.
                 They were right  not  to  do  so.   The  same  professional
                 standards and requirements apply to all representatives."

           I consider that the  correctness  of  this  statement  has  been
           confirmed by the decision of the Court of Appeal in  Hysaj.   If
           lawyers are not willing, able and equipped to adhere  to  normal
           professional standards and requirements, their ethical  duty  is
           not to accept the client's instructions.

Strike Out: Decision

       21. Giving effect to the three stage approach espoused by the  Court
           of Appeal in Denton (supra), I consider firstly the  seriousness
           and significance  of  the  failure  to  comply  with  the  Upper
           Tribunal's orders of 20 August 2014  and  06  January  2015.   I
           consider that these failures were not less  than  egregious,  on
           account of the extensive periods during which they endured,  the
           failure to request that either order be varied, the  failure  to
           request an extension of time for compliance,  the  absolute  and
           outright nature of the disobedience of both orders,  the  abject
           lack of communication with both the Upper Tribunal and the other
           party's representatives during  the  periods  in  question,  the
           failure  to   take   advantage   of   belated   and   unexpected
           opportunities  to  comply   and,   finally,   permitting   three
           successive hearings to be arranged in  circumstances  where  the
           Applicant's representatives  were  fully  aware  that  the  pre-
           requisites to any  of  the  hearings  proceeding  had  not  been
           satisfied.  I consider that, in the events which have  occurred,
           the Applicant's representatives have misused the process of  the
           Tribunal.  The seriousness of the defaults is exacerbated by the
           gross waste of the time of senior Judges and  the  consideration
           that a special panel of two Judges was  convened  on  successive
           occasions. Furthermore, this has  impacted  adversely  on  other
           cases in the Upper Tribunal system, of which there  are  several
           thousand, awaiting a hearing date.

       22. Next, I turn to consider why these successive defaults occurred.
            No explanation of any kind has been advanced for the failure to
           comply with the first of the Tribunal's orders.  As regards  the
           second order, as I have recorded in [13] above, Counsel for  the
           Applicant asserted personal problems and represented that a  pro
           bono brief is more difficult to return than a conventional  one.
           As I have observed, no attempt to engage alternative Counsel was
           made.  As regards the Applicant's solicitors, no explanation  of
           any kind for the outright disobedience  of  the  two  successive
           orders has been provided.  I consider that the more egregious  a
           breach of a court or tribunal's order, the more  compelling  any
           explanation will have to be if it  is  to  reach  the  level  of
           acceptability.  The same  applies  to  repeated  and  successive
           breaches. I consider that nothing approaching  a  reasonable  or
           acceptable explanation has been provided.

       23. Thirdly and finally, I consider all  the  circumstances  of  the
           case.  I take into account all that is  rehearsed  in  [21]  and
           [22] above.  I also  have  regard  to  the  consideration  that,
           throughout the period December 2013 to the summer of  2014,  the
           Applicant's successive challenges were found to lack  merit  and
           substance by a total of five specialist Judges.  She has enjoyed
           access to judicial adjudication and  her  challenges  have  been
           found wanting. There is no evidence that she  has  suffered  any
           persecution or  proscribed  treatment  since  returning  to  her
           country  of  origin.   If  her  reconfigured   judicial   review
           challenge  had  been  formulated  by  her   representatives   in
           accordance with the orders made, it appears that she would  have
           sought to rely on the  decision  in  Detention  Action  (supra).
           This decision was promulgated by the Court of  Appeal  one  year
           following the dismissal of the Applicant's appeal  by  the  FtT.
           The latter  appeal  was  decided  in  accordance  with  the  law
           prevailing. It is difficult to conceive of how a later appellate
           Court  decision  could  undermine  the  legality  of  subsequent
           successive decisions by  the  Respondent  that  the  Applicant's
           further representations did not constitute a fresh human  rights
           or asylum claim.  The second ingredient is the statement of  the
           Government's Foreign Secretary  relating  to  cases  of  alleged
           sexual violence in Sri Lanka.  It is particularly  difficult  to
           envisage any Court or Tribunal holding that this had the quality
           or characteristics necessary to engender in  law  a  substantive
           legitimate expectation.  Giving effect to the  Prince  Abdulaziz
           principle, it cannot reasonably be said that the merits  of  the
           reconfigured claim which the Applicant would seek to make are so
           strong  as  to  be  unanswerable:  quite  the  reverse,  in   my
           estimation.

       24. All of the considerations rehearsed above must be considered  in
           the round, in tandem with the factors and principles outlined in
           [15] - [20] above.  The stand  out  feature  in  the  lamentable
           history  of  these  proceedings  is   the   successive   defiant
           disobedience of the Tribunal by the Applicant's representatives.
           The failure to comply with the Tribunal's  orders  is  about  as
           egregious as one  could  imagine.   There  is  no  redeeming  or
           mitigating  factor.   Time  and  cost  have  been  blithely  and
           repeatedly wasted.  Both  the  letter  and  the  spirit  of  the
           overriding objective have been  infringed.   There  has  been  a
           grave breach of the duty enshrined in  rule  2(4)  of  the  2008
           Rules to assist the Upper Tribunal  to  further  the  overriding
           objective and to co-operate with the Upper  Tribunal  generally.
           The rule of law depends upon respect for the authority of courts
           and tribunals. Sadly, the main hallmark of these proceedings  is
           that of grave disrespect for the Upper Tribunal. I consider that
           there is no other way of addressing the egregious  defaults.   A
           wasted costs order, to which I give further consideration infra,
           would be manifestly insufficient in  these  circumstances.   See
           Fairclough Homes v Summers [2012] 1 WLR 2004 at  [49]  and  [51]
           especially.  I consider the case in favour of a strike out order
           overwhelming.   Accordingly,  I  order  that   the   Applicant's
           judicial review claim be struck out under rule 8(3)(a)  and  (b)
           of the 2008 Rules.


      Reinstatement Application

       25. At the conclusion of the hearing on 16 March 2015 I gave a  very
           brief ex tempore judgment,  stating  that  my  detailed  reasons
           would follow in the written decision.  I also directed that  the
           Applicant's representatives should, within two days, show  cause
           in writing why a wasted costs order should not be  made  against
           them under rule 10(3) of the 2008 Rules. Remarkably - or,  given
           the disturbing history recited above, perhaps predictably -  the
           Applicant's solicitors have not complied  with  this  direction,
           timeously or at all.  The next  development  was  that  a  paper
           prepared by counsel for the Applicant containing a  request  for
           reinstatement of the case under rule 8(5) was received. I  shall
           assume, without deciding, that this was, procedurally, a   valid
           application.


       26. I consider that the principles enunciated by the  Privy  Council
           in Gaydamak v UBS Bahamas  Limited  [2006]  1  WLR  1097,  while
           formulated in a particular litigation context,  are  of  general
           application.  Three factors to be considered are the reason  for
           the failure which resulted in the case being struck out, whether
           there has been any undue delay in applying for reinstatement and
           whether  reinstatement  would  prejudice  the  other  party.   I
           consider it clear from the opinion of Lord Scott,  at  [14]  and
           [15] especially,   that  these  questions  are  not  exhaustive.
           Their  Lordships,  in  thus  holding,  expressly  approved   the
           approach in Grimshaw v Dunbar [1953] 1 QB 408, in which  Jenkins
           LJ stated that these are "some of the main considerations" (page
           414, my emphasis).


       27.  As  regards  the   second   and   third   considerations,   the
           reinstatement application has been made promptly and, bearing in
           mind the nature of the underlying proceedings, I  consider  that
           the Secretary of State can lay claim to  no  special  prejudice.
           This flows from the public  law  character  of  judicial  review
           proceedings,  the  absence  of  any  lis  inter-partes  and  the
           contrast between the Secretary  of  State  and  a  defendant  in
           private law litigation who has secured a strike  out  order.   I
           give effect to the exhortation of the Upper Tribunal in  Synergy
           Child Services v Ofsted [2009]  UKUT  125  (AAC),  at  [13],  to
           consider the broad justice of the case in the light of  all  the
           circumstances prevailing as of now.


       28. The reinstatement application contains no new  evidence,  raises
           no new consideration and advances  no  new  argument.   Properly
           analysed, it is simply a restatement, slightly  fuller,  of  the
           submissions made to the Tribunal on 16 March 2015.  It  contains
           no belated statement  by  the  representatives  concerned  that,
           despite all that has occurred, the  authority  of  the  Tribunal
           will be fully recognised and respected henceforth, in this  case
           and others.  It does not  articulate  any  (even  more  belated)
           suggestion that there will be full obedience of the two previous
           orders and no timetable is proposed.  It  contains  no  hint  of
           regret, much less any apology.  It fails to recognise the impact
           of the successive and serial defaults on, and  grave  disrespect
           for, the Respondent. It contains not the slightest indication of
           realisation of the damage to the rule of law which the offending
           conduct has caused.  Furthermore, I consider that  it  does  not
           identify any arguable error of law in the strike  out  decision.
           There is nothing attractive or persuasive  in  the  application.
           Bearing  in  mind  all  of  the  principles  rehearsed  in  this
           judgment, I refuse the reinstatement application.

      Pleadings In Judicial Review

       29. Having regard to events in the present case, it  is  appropriate
           to emphasise the importance  of  the  written  pleading  in  all
           judicial review cases. Further, I venture to highlight the  main
           standards and principles to be observed.


       30. Every application for judicial review consists  of  four  basic,
           interlocking elements:

           (i)   The impugned act or omission of the Respondent.

           (ii)  The public law grounds on which this is challenged by  the
                 Applicant.


           (iii) The remedy sought.


           (iv)  The asserted facts, to include  all  material  documentary
                 evidence and, where appropriate, witness statements.


           In the Judicial Review Claim Form (T480) and any attachment each
           of these elements should be formulated with appropriate  clarity
           and particularity. The  pleading  should  be  such  that  it  is
           possible to identify on a relatively quick perusal the target of
           the Applicant's challenge, the public law misdemeanour/s said to
           have been committed by the Respondent, the core elements of  the
           latter and the remedy claimed.


       31. It is good practice, in every  case,  to  list  the  public  law
           misdemeanour/s said to contaminate the target of the Applicant's
           challenge in a  single  paragraph,  divided  into  subparagraphs
           where   appropriate.    In   this   format,   the   public   law
           misdemeanour/s asserted should be succinctly stated.  Next,  the
           author should be satisfied that the grounds as a  whole  contain
           adequate particulars  and  sufficient  supporting  evidence.   A
           clear distinction must be made at all times between the  alleged
           facts  (on  the  one  hand)  and   the   asserted   public   law
           misdemeanours, duly particularised (on the  other).   The  claim
           must be formulated with the duty of candour owed  to  the  court
           foremost in the minds of the practitioners and litigant.


       32. Where, for example, it is contended that the  impugned  decision
           is unlawful by virtue  of  having  taken  into  account  certain
           immaterial considerations, these should be succinctly expressed.
            Ditto where it is contended that there was a  failure  to  take
           into account some obligatory fact or factor.  Where  the  ground
           of challenge is illegality, the relevant legal rule or rules  in
           play and the asserted  breach  or  breaches  thereof  should  be
           crisply expressed.  A bare pleading that the  impugned  decision
           is unlawful, unreasonable  and  irrational,  or  one  framed  in
           comparable terms, is never acceptable.   The  judge  should  not
           have to forage, dig and mine in order to identify the essentials
           of the Applicant's case.  The mischief of prolixity is  strongly
           discouraged.   Attention  should  be  paid  to  the   overriding
           objective from the outset of the proceedings

       33. As regards the Acknowledgement of Service and summary grounds of
           defence, the main duty imposed upon the Respondent in every case
           can be encapsulated in a sentence.  These must always be  framed
           so as to convey clearly and with  sufficient  particularity  the
           grounds upon which it is contended  that  the  Applicant's  case
           should not succeed.  Care must be taken to ensure that,  in  the
           discharge of the Respondent's duty of candour to the court,  all
           relevant documentary evidence is provided.   Increasingly,  this
           may include the paper form or manifestation of electronic or  on
           line materials which are not  routinely  generated  in  decision
           making processes or  for  hard/paper  filing  purposes  but  are
           capable of being reproduced from computer systems.

       34.  I  would  highlight  one  particular  feature  of  asylum   and
           immigration cases, familiar to all.  It is not uncommon  that  a
           decision is followed  by  a  later  decision.   This  frequently
           alters the target, as the later decision  often  supersedes  the
           first.  In  some  contexts,  there  may  be  several  successive
           decisions.  In some cases, this phenomenon occurs subsequent  to
           the  initiation  of  judicial  review  proceedings.   In   these
           circumstances, the Applicant's representatives  must  always  be
           alert  to  the  consequences  of  such  developments   and,   in
           particular, the need to seek amendment of  the  judicial  review
           application in appropriate  cases.  I  would  caution  that  the
           perpetuation of a challenge to a superseded,  historic  decision
           is rarely appropriate.

       35. Where amendment is  pursued,  it  normally  takes  the  form  of
           substituting the  later  decision  as  the  new  target  of  the
           Applicant's challenge.  Amendment of the grounds  will  also  be
           necessary, to reflect  the  advent  of  this  new  fact  and  to
           incorporate  any  appropriate  additional  facts.   Furthermore,
           there will inevitably be supplementary evidence in the  form  of
           the  new  decision  and,  possibly,  other  materials,  such  as
           correspondence and written representations bearing  on  the  new
           decision made.   The  Respondent's  consent  to  amend  and  the
           Court's permission to  amend  must  be  sought  proactively  and
           timeously in every case. It should only rarely be  necessary  to
           convene an interlocutory or case  management  hearing  for  this
           purpose.


       36. The Upper  Tribunal  recognises  that,  in  the  real  world  of
           contemporary litigation, events and developments such  as  those
           described above may render compliance with directions  difficult
           or impossible to achieve. Where this  occurs,  the  Respondent's
           consent  to  and  the  Tribunal's  authorisation  of  a  revised
           timetable should be sought proactively and  timeously.   Inertia
           will be unacceptable.

       37. It  is  appropriate  to  add  that,  whatever  the  reasons  and
           circumstances, the outcome of an application to amend a judicial
           review claim should never be taken for  granted  by  the  moving
           party.  Every such application will be considered and determined
           on its particular merits and giving  effect  to  the  overriding
           objective.   I refer to the decisions in  R  v  SSHD,  ex  parte
           Turgut [2001] 1 All ER 719, Schiemann LJ considered  that  where
           the Respondent is given permission to adduce evidence that a new
           decision has been made,  it  will  generally  be  convenient  to
           substitute  the  subsequent  decision  as  the  target  of   the
           Applicant's challenge.  However, in that case, the new  decision
           of the Respondent was based on evidence filed by the Claimant in
           the proceedings and it simply reaffirmed the original  decision.
           This issue was considered more  fully  in  Rathakrishnan  [2011]
           EWHC  1406  (Admin)  where,  following  a   successful   renewed
           application for permission, the Secretary of State withdrew  the
           decision  under challenge and made a fresh  decision  purporting
           to address the  issues  stimulating  the  grant  of  permission,
           together with some further evidence.  In refusing the Claimant's
           application to amend in order to challenge the  fresh  decision,
           Ouseley J confined the decision in Turgut, stating at [9]:


                 "It would be a wholly exceptional case in which a  Claimant
                 could postpone the effective quashing of the decision which
                 he sought to have quashed in order that he  might  at  some
                 later stage bring a different challenge  in  respect  of  a
                 different decision  based  on  different  evidence  without
                 having to go through the necessary  applications  including
                 the payment of fees for the  purpose  of  challenging  that
                 further  decision  and  should  thereby  evade  the  filter
                 mechanism  and  simply  take  his  place  on  a   seemingly
                 adjourned renewal application .............


                 It is too often that these cases have come before the Court
                 at  a  point  where  the  hearing  is  no  more   than   an
                 interruption  in   the   process   of   the   exchange   of
                 correspondence between  the  Secretary  of  State  and  the
                 Claimant.  This makes for a wholly  unsatisfactory  process
                 of litigation."

           While the Court of Appeal decision in R v SSHD, ex parte Al  Abi
           [1997] WL 11059, may suggest a more laissez-faire  approach,  my
           analysis of it is that it does not have the  status  of  binding
           precedent. Furthermore, in any event it belongs  to  an  earlier
           era, preceding the major civil justice reforms and the advent of
           the overriding objective. Finally, as the  above  passage  makes
           clear,  while  every  claimant  is  under  a  duty  to  initiate
           proceedings promptly, the improper invocation, that  is  to  say
           misuse, of the process of the Upper Tribunal must be  studiously
           avoided.

      Wasted Costs

       38. The approach to be  adopted  by  both  the  FtT  and  the  Upper
           Tribunal in exercising their respective powers to make either  a
           wasted costs order under section 29(4) of the Tribunals,  Courts
           and Enforcement Act 2007 (the "2007 Act"), or (in  the  case  of
           the Upper Tribunal) rule 10(3)(d) of the 2008 Rules has been set
           out in extenso in the  recently  reported  decision  in  Cancino
           (Costs - First-Tier Tribunal  -  New  Powers)  [2015]  UKFTT  59
           (IAC).  Wasted costs are defined as costs incurred by a party as
           a result of any  improper,  unreasonable  or  negligent  act  or
           omission on the part  of  any  legal  or  other  representative.
           Neither misconduct nor gross neglect  has  to  be  demonstrated.
           The power is discretionary and the overriding objective must  be
           considered.  It is not a disciplinary power.  It is compensatory
           rather than  punitive.   I  refer  to,  without  repeating,  the
           principles rehearsed in Cancino.


       39. I refer to the chronology in [2] - [13] above, together with the
           analysis and conclusions in [21] - [28].  Having regard  to  the
           facts, assessments and conclusions contained in those  passages,
           I consider this to be a paradigm case for the making of a wasted
           costs order against  the  Applicant's  representatives.   It  is
           difficult to conceive of a more compelling case for the exercise
           of this discretionary power. I repeat: there is no redeeming  or
           mitigating factor of any kind.  I make  no  distinction  between
           the Applicant's solicitors  and  counsel.   The  order  is  made
           against both.  It encompasses all of the  costs  wasted  by  the
           aborted hearings on 20 August 2014, 06 January 2015 and 16 March
           2015.  The Tribunal will  measure  these  costs  in  default  of
           agreement.



      ORDER

       40. Giving effect to the above conclusions:


              a) The Applicant's case is struck out under rule 8(3)  of  the
                 2008 Rules.


              b) The Applicant's reinstatement application under  rule  8(5)
                 is refused.

              c) I  make  a  wasted  costs  order  against  the  Applicant's
                 representatives, solicitors and counsel in  the  terms  set
                 out in [39] above, under section 29(4) of the 2007 Act  and
                 rule 10(3)(c) of the 2008 Rules.

              d) Giving effect to the  general  rule,  the  balance  of  the
                 Respondent's costs will be paid by the Applicant.

              e) The costs payable under (c) and (d) above will be  measured
                 by the Tribunal in default of agreement between the parties
                 within 28 days hereof.


           Epilogue


       41. The rule of law depends crucially on mutual  trust  and  respect
           between courts and tribunals (on the one hand) and litigants and
           their representatives (on the other).  The Upper  Tribunal  does
           much to foster this ethos. It is a matter of great sadness to be
           driven to the extremes of making the orders set out above.

                     Signed:
                 [pic]
           The Honourable Mr Justice McCloskey
           President of the Upper Tribunal


           Dated:   27 March 2015
