
[pic]



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

MS (Trafficking - Tribunal's Powers - Art. 4 ECHR) Pakistan [2016] UKUT
00226 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London                  |Decision Promulgated on      |
|on 08 December 2015 and 20 January 2016       |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                  The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey, President
                          Upper Tribunal Judge Blum


                                   Between

                                     MS
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation

Appellant:    Ms K Cronin and Ms B Poynor, of Counsel, instructed by ATLEU
Respondent:   Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


   i)     Having regard to the decision of the ECtHR in Rantsev v Cyprus and
      Russia [2010] 51 EHRR  1,  Article  4  ECHR,  which  outlaws  slavery,
      servitude and forced or  compulsory  labour,  encompasses  also  human
      trafficking.

  ii)     Trafficking decisions are not  immigration  decisions  within  the
      compass of the 2002 Act, with the result that judicial review provides
      the appropriate mechanism for direct challenge.

 iii)     Tribunals must take into account, where relevant, a decision  that
      an appellant has been a victim of trafficking.

  iv)     Where satisfied that a negative trafficking decision is  perverse,
      Tribunals are empowered to make  their  own  decision  on  whether  an
      appellant was a victim of trafficking.

   v)     Tribunals are also empowered to review a trafficking  decision  on
      the ground that it has been reached in  breach  of  the  Secretary  of
      State's policy guidance.

  vi)     While, in principle it seems that other public  law  misdemeanours
      can also be considered by Tribunals, this issue  does  not  arise  for
      determination in the present appeal.

 vii)     Tribunals may well be better equipped than the Competent Authority
      to make pertinent findings relating to trafficking.

viii)    The procedural obligations inherent in Article 4  ECHR  are  linked
      to those enshrined in the Trafficking Convention, Articles  10(2)  and
      18 in particular.

  ix)     Any attempt to remove a trafficking victim from the United Kingdom
      in circumstances where the said procedural obligations have  not  been
      discharged will normally be unlawful.


                                  ANONYMITY

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/2698) we make an Anonymity Order.   Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or
Court orders otherwise,  no  report  of  any  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
Appellant. This prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

   1)     The origins of this appeal are traceable to  a  decision  made  on
      behalf of the Secretary of State for the Home Department  (hereinafter
      the  "Secretary  of  State"),  dated  01  August  2013,  whereby   the
      application of the Appellant, a national of Pakistan  aged  20  years,
      for asylum, was refused.  This was followed by  a  decision  dated  02
      August 2013 to remove the Appellant from the United Kingdom.   By  its
      decision dated 03 December 2013, the First-tier Tribunal  (the  "FtT")
      dismissed the Appellant's ensuing appeal  on  both  asylum  and  human
      rights grounds.  Following a somewhat  convoluted  procedural  course,
      permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  was  granted  on  23  June
      2014.   By  its  decision  dated  20  August   2014,   this   Tribunal
      (differently constituted) held  that  the  decision  of  the  FtT  was
      vitiated by material error of law and ordered that same be  set  aside
      accordingly.  We hereby re-make such decision.

Error of Law

   2)     We draw attention to, firstly, [42] of the error of  law  decision
      of this Tribunal:

         "[The FtT] misdirected [itself], firstly  in  omitting  to  make  a
         clear finding as to whether or not the Appellant was  a  victim  of
         trafficking, secondly in  concluding  that  it  was  sufficient  to
         ascribe to  the  Appellant  a  lower  position  on  a  spectrum  of
         trafficking and in omitting clearly to evaluate the nature  of  the
         Appellant's employment in the United Kingdom and  whether  even  if
         freely chosen by him it was nonetheless exploitative."

      Fundamentally, there was a failure to make any finding on  the  issues
      of whether the Appellant was trafficked to the United  Kingdom  and/or
      re-trafficked  within  the  United  Kingdom.   In  setting  aside  the
      decision  of  the  FtT,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Goldstein   expressly
      preserved certain findings, namely  the  FtT's  "positive  credibility
      findings that related to the Appellant's circumstances in  the  United
      Kingdom ...."

     The Trafficking Decisions

   3)     Under United  Kingdom  law  decisions  on  trafficking  under  the
      Council of Europe Convention on Action Against  Trafficking  in  Human
      Beings (the "Trafficking Convention") are made by  the  soi  -  disant
      "Competent Authority" (hereinafter  "the  Authority")  under  the  so-
      called  National Referral Mechanism (the "NRM"), which operates  under
      the auspices of the Home Office and, hence, the  Secretary  of  State.
      We elaborate on this framework in [19] et seq.  On  29  November  2012
      one of the national social services agencies made a formal referral of
      the Appellant to the authority under the NRM.  On  01  February  2013,
      the Authority made a decision that the Appellant, then aged 16  years,
      was not a victim of trafficking.  While accepting  that  he  had  been
      recruited, transported, transferred to and  harboured  in  the  United
      Kingdom and had been the victim of deception, the  Authority  did  not
      accept that the Appellant had been brought to the United  Kingdom  for
      the purpose of exploitation.  The basis of this was that the Appellant
      had not made the case that he was coerced into  working  or  that  his
      freedom of movement had been curtailed.

      In its decision the Authority stated, inter alia:

         "In looking at the circumstances of your client's  passage  to  the
         United Kingdom it is accepted that he has been subject to an act of
         recruitment, transportation, transfer, harbouring or receipt as  it
         is not only accepted that his step-grandmother did accompany him to
         the United Kingdom, it is also  accepted  that  he  may  have  been
         deceived as to the true purpose of  being  brought  to  the  United
         Kingdom. Your client has clearly stated that he  was  told  by  his
         step-grandmother he was being brought  to  the  United  Kingdom  to
         study .....


         Given that he was not enrolled in any form of  study  or  education
         following his arrival  it  is  accepted  that  he  was  potentially
         deceived as to the true purpose of  being  brought  to  the  United
         Kingdom."

      The conclusion made was that there  were  no  reasonable  grounds  for
      believing that the Appellant was a victim of  trafficking  within  the
      compass of the Trafficking Convention (infra).

   4)     By a further decision dated 02 April 2014, postdating the decision
      of the FtT, the Authority notified the outcome of its  reconsideration
      of its dismissal of the Appellant's trafficking  claim.   Focusing  on
      the Appellant's life subsequent to his arrival in the United  Kingdom,
      the Authority reasoned that, as the Appellant had received  a  salary,
      was able to rent accommodation and pay his bills and had moved  around
      and worked in different jobs, he was not exploited  and  "  ....   was
      never under the control or influence of the alleged traffickers in the
      UK".  Next, the Authority adopted the finding  of  the  FtT  that  the
      Appellant had not been the victim  of  forced  labour  in  the  United
      Kingdom as there had been no threat or menace to him.  At  the  height
      of the Appellant's case he may have been  subjected  to  a  degree  of
      manipulation which did not amount to exploitation via  forced  labour.
      Rather, the Appellant worked "out of pure economic necessity".

   5)   Next, the Authority reconsidered the  Appellant's  claim  of  having
      been trafficked to the United Kingdom  by  his  step-grandmother.   It
      reasoned that even if this were accepted the Appellant was  not  under
      the control of his traffickers when first encountered by the police in
      September 2012, with the result  that  he  did  not  require  time  to
      recover  from  any  trafficking  experience.   It  is  appropriate  to
      reproduce this somewhat enigmatic passage in full:

         "It is noted that you were not under the control  of  your  alleged
         traffickers when you were encountered by the  police  in  September
         2012.  It is  therefore  not  considered  that  you  would  require
         further time to recover from your  alleged  trafficking  situation.
         Furthermore, it is considered that as you  left  the  accommodation
         that was provided to you by [WY] when you worked in the Kebab  shop
         in August 2013, the benefit of a 45 day period  of  reflection  and
         recovery would be limited in relation to the time you have  already
         had to recover.  Therefore it is not accepted that  you  require  a
         period of time to recover from the influence of your traffickers."

    The  decision  maker  then  highlighted  that  the  Appellant  was  not
    suffering from any medical condition and had not made any complaint  to
    the police, continuing:


         "In conclusion, for the reasons given above, even if  your  account
         of your alleged experiences was accepted, it is considered that you
         are still not a victim  of  trafficking  for  the  purpose  of  the
         Convention and at the present time."

The Asylum Refusal Decision

   6)     This is dated 01  August  2013.   In  the  text  the  nub  of  the
      Appellant's claim is framed thus:

           "If returned to Pakistan, you fear that your life is  in  danger
           from your step-grandmother and her son because they  have  taken
           your father's property from you, even though  this  is  in  your
           name.  You fear your grandmother's nephews as well because  they
           are criminals involved in dealing drugs and kill people."

      Continuing, the author suggests that a land dispute described  by  the
      Appellant was the reason for him leaving Pakistan and  that  the  fear
      arising out of such dispute is not based upon a fear of persecution in
      Pakistan for a Convention reason. The decision maker then  highlighted
      the inconsistent ages (eight or ten?) put  forward  by  the  Appellant
      relating to the death of  his  father  and  his  inconsistent  replies
      relating  to  siblings  (none  or  two?).    These  two  factors  were
      considered  to  damage  his  credibility.   The  decision  maker  then
      concluded, highlighting the absence of any documentary proof, that the
      Appellant's assertion of a land  dispute  with  his  step  grandmother
      could be neither accepted  nor  rejected.   Further,  the  Appellant's
      claim of fearing death at the hands of his  step-grandmother  and  her
      nephews was rejected as not worthy of belief.  In the next section  of
      the decision, the conclusion of the Authority that the  Appellant  had
      been neither trafficked to, nor trafficked in, the United Kingdom  was
      adopted.


   7)     The decision maker's conclusions were  that  the  benefit  of  the
      doubt  would  not  be   given   to   the   Appellant   regarding   the
      unsubstantiated aspects of his claim; he was not considered to  be  at
      risk upon returning to  Pakistan  because  of  the  rejection  of  his
      account of a land  dispute  with  his  step-grandmother;  further  and
      alternatively internal relocation would be reasonable and  viable  and
      there was considered to be a sufficiency of state protection available
      to him in Pakistan; he was not  considered  entitled  to  humanitarian
      protection;  he  did  not  qualify  for  leave  to  remain  under  the
      Immigration Rules; and his  return  to  Pakistan  would  not  infringe
      Article 3 or Article 8 ECHR.

Decision of the FtT

   8)     The trafficking issue features in the decision  of  the  FtT.  Its
      findings on this issue include the following:

          "[72]    It seems  to  me  that  whether  or  not  there  was  any
           intention to bring him to the UK to exploit him  as  opposed  to
           assisting him to find work and support himself in the  knowledge
           that he was not legally entitled to do so, he was a child at the
           time he was brought here and under the control of adults."


          "[73]    I find on his own evidence that he was not  subjected  to
           any physical threats or actual violence to  make  him  work  and
           that when he was not happy with his situation  he  was  able  to
           leave without attracting any adverse attention. I  do  not  find
           that this amounted to 'forced labour' but accept in  reality  he
           would have had little choice but to work on the black market  as
           he had no permission to work and needed money to survive. He was
           a child surrounded by adults from his own  country  and  at  the
           very least would have been heavily influenced by them.   Clearly
           he was vulnerable to exploitation."


      Having referred  to  the  evidence  of  an  expert  witness,  the  FtT
      continued:


     "[74] ... In her opinion the Appellant .....  would not have been able
           to facilitate his own travel  and  employment.   In  her  expert
           opinion the intermediaries arranged the jobs  and  accommodation
           and thus exploited his vulnerability as a child to  use  him  as
           cheap and illegal labour.  It was her opinion  that  victims  of
           trafficking are often accommodated at the site of  the  premises
           making them dependent on exploiters  ....   Living  and  usually
           [working] behind the scenes away from public view so  that  they
           can be controlled and isolated from the  general  public.  I  am
           satisfied that at least initially this was the position for  the
           Appellant.  However, his detailed account of events  in  the  UK
           includes reference to him deciding himself to move closer to his
           work on one occasion ....  and to his own decisions to move from
           one place to another .....  albeit with the assistance of others
           working in the industry.   He  was  not  sleeping  at  the  work
           premises.  He was not at  any  time  subjected  to  violence  or
           threats.  At the most he may have been manipulated."

          "[75]    .....  I find as a fact that he  was  assisted  by  adult
           males of Pakistani origin working in the same industry  to  move
           around the country to different jobs.  I find as a fact that  he
           was not in fear of those people but rather felt he had no choice
           but to work in these establishments in order  to  survive.   His
           experiences in the UK may well have been an improvement  to  the
           life he had been experiencing in Pakistan before he  came  here.
           It is perhaps understandable that he would regard  these  people
           as friends and not understand exploitative relationships. He may
           have been manipulated by them or alternatively they  may  simply
           have been helping him to survive as an illegal immigrant."


          "It was his view that he was paying money to people  who  arranged
           for his  jobs  and  accommodation  as  returning  a  favour.  He
           accepted long working hours and irregular payments as a fact  of
           life."


              "[77]    ...  He was to some degree exploited by adults in the
           catering industry who knew he did  not  have  legal  status  and
           permission to work and that he was under 18.  Given his apparent
           freedom to move around and choose to rent  somewhere  closer  to
           his work and the fact that he was able to chose how to spend his
           money (notwithstanding he was paid below minimum wage) if he was
           a victim of trafficking this was very much at the lower  end  of
           the spectrum.  There was no evidence that  he  was  in  any  way
           traumatised by his experiences."


         [Our emphasis.]

          "[78]    ....  It was his clear instruction to his representatives
           that he was not currently a victim of trafficking ....


          I also take into account that since his arrest by  the  police  he
           had been looked after by Social Services and having reached  the
           age of 18 was now receiving assistance from a  personal  advisor
           in the transition to independent living ...


     I find as a fact that he ceased to be in a situation which might  have
           amounted to being a victim of trafficking following  his  arrest
           in September 2012."

     [Emphasis added.]

           At  this  juncture  we  interpose  the  FtT's  positive  finding
           relating to the Appellant's credibility:


             "[75]    I found his very detailed SEF [.......]  with  regard
                  to his history in the UK to be a truthful account  of  his
                  activity up to the point  when  he  was  arrested  by  the
                  police."


           We juxtapose with this finding the absence of any finding in the
           decision of the FtT that any aspect of the Appellant's case  was
           to be disbelieved.


Framework of this appeal

   9)      A  case  management  review  was  convened  for  the  purpose  of
      clarifying and delineating the framework of  this  appeal.   This  was
      stimulated by the panel's  perception of a significant lack of clarity
      relating to the issues of fact and law to be determined. This resulted
      in the parties' joint suggested  formulation  of  the  issues  in  the
      following terms:


        i)    First, does this  Tribunal  have  jurisdiction  to  determine
           whether the Appellant is a victim of trafficking?


       ii)    If this Tribunal is so  empowered  and  proceeds  to  make  a
           finding of trafficking, what is the  impact,  if  any,  of  such
           finding on the removal decision under appeal?


      iii)     Is  there  any  distinction  in  law  between  a  victim  of
           trafficking and a victim of forced labour?


       iv)    If this Tribunal finds  the  Appellant  to  be  a  victim  of
           trafficking,  does  the  Secretary  of  State  have   continuing
           obligations to him under Articles 12 -  14  of  the  Trafficking
           Convention?  And would the removal of  the  Appellant  from  the
           United Kingdom violate Article 16 thereof?


        v)    In Refugee Convention terms, will the Appellant, in the event
           of returning to Pakistan, be at risk of persecution as a  member
           of a particular social  group  (former  victims  of  trafficking
           and/or his family) or of treatment proscribed by Article 3 ECHR?

      Following reflection, we are content to adopt this formulation of  the
      issues and the appeal shall be determined accordingly.

Factual Matrix

(10) This has three main components: the uncontentious facts, the  preserved
      findings of the FtT and our further findings  on  contentious  factual
      issues.      We interpose at this juncture the Appellant's chronology,
      which embraces both  the  factual  background  and  the  (regrettably)
      rather protracted history of this appeal:

|                                                                    |
|CHRONOLOGY                                                          |
|Date                   |Event                                       |
|2 June 1995            |A born in Attock, Pakistan, eldest child of |
|                       |3                                           |
|1999                   |Moved to Jhelum, Pakistan                   |
|2005ff                 |Father passed away                          |
|                       |                                            |
|                       |Mother re-married and took younger daughters|
|                       |with her leaving behind A with              |
|                       |step-grandmother                            |
|                       |                                            |
|                       |Step-grandmother and her family 'land grab' |
|                       |and traffick A for forced labour            |
|8 June 2011            |Application made for A for a visit visa to  |
|                       |the UK as an accompanied child              |
|20 June 2011           |Visit visa granted and valid until 20       |
|                       |December 2011                               |
|22 July 2011           |A entered UK at the age of 16 accompanied by|
|                       |KF, step-grandmother                        |
|                       |                                            |
|                       |Passport taken away. Passed to a man upon   |
|                       |arrival                                     |
|                       |                                            |
|                       |Trafficked for the purposes of labour       |
|                       |exploitation / forced labour                |
|September 2012         |A Arrested by police and referred to LB     |
|                       |Tower Hamlets                               |
|25 September 2012      |Claimed asylum                              |
|October 2012           |Referral of A to Child Abuse Investigation  |
|                       |Command SCD5 by Mohamed Obsiye, social      |
|                       |worker LB Tower Hamlets                     |
|22 October 2012        |SCD5 Information Requests x 5 by LB Tower   |
|                       |Hamlets on names given by A of those who    |
|                       |trafficked him                              |
|13 November 2012       |Substantive asylum interview takes place    |
|                       |                                            |
|                       |R refuses to refer A to the National        |
|                       |Referral Mechanism (NRM)                    |
|29 November 2012       |NRM referral by LB Tower Hamlets            |
|23 January 2013        |LB Tower Hamlets Pathway Plan indicates that|
|                       |A would benefit from counselling and notes  |
|                       |his headaches and lack of sleep             |
|1 February 2013        |NRM negative reasonable grounds decision    |
|                       |issued                                      |
|February 2013          |Pangea Support Services Bi-Monthly Report   |
|                       |notes A's headaches, lack of sleep and      |
|                       |recognises that he may require counselling  |
|15 February 2013       |Request for review of NRM negative decision |
|                       |by Fadiga & Co to UKBA                      |
|22 February 2013       |NRM negative decision maintained            |
|20 March 2013          |Letter before action in respect of NRM      |
|                       |negative decision                           |
|26 April 2013          |Judicial review proceeding issued in respect|
|                       |of NRM negative decision                    |
|8 May 2013             |Form IHP-YP completed by LB Tower Hamlets   |
|                       |indicates that A is self-harming            |
|1 August 2013          |Asylum / humanitarian protection /          |
|                       |discretionary leave to remain application   |
|                       |refused                                     |
|18 August 2013         |A gives notice of appeal against refusal of |
|                       |claim                                       |
|27 November 2013       |Appeal heard by the First-tier Tribunal     |
|10 December 2013       |Appeal dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal |
|19 December 2013       |Application for permission to appeal to the |
|                       |Upper Tribunal made to the First-tier       |
|                       |Tribunal                                    |
|13 January 2014        |Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  |
|                       |refused by the First-tier Tribunal          |
|21 January 2014        |Application for permission to appeal to the |
|                       |Upper Tribunal made to the Upper Tribunal   |
|18 February 2014       |Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  |
|                       |refused by the Upper Tribunal               |
|5 March 2014           |R agrees to reconsider NRM negative         |
|                       |reasonable grounds decision within the      |
|                       |context of the on-going judicial review     |
|                       |challenge to the NRM decision               |
|11 March 2014          |Judicial review proceedings against refusal |
|                       |of permission to appeal                     |
|2 April 2014           |Negative reconsidered NRM reasonable grounds|
|                       |decision                                    |
|23 April 2014          |Permission to judicially review granted by  |
|                       |High Court                                  |
|28 April 2014          |Judicial review proceeding against the NRM  |
|                       |negative reasonable grounds decision dated 1|
|                       |February 2013 withdrawn by consent          |
|19 May 2014            |High Court Order quashing refusal of        |
|                       |permission                                  |
|23 June 2014           |Upper Tribunal grant permission to appeal in|
|                       |light of High Court Order                   |
|14 August 2014         |Upper Tribunal finds error of law - appeal  |
|                       |to be re-heard                              |
|7 October 2014         |CMRH: Upper Tribunal designate matter to be |
|                       |guidance case                               |

      We recognise that certain aspects of this chronology are  contentious.
      We shall return to this infra.

The Appellant's family

  11)    According to the Appellant,  his  family  comprises  the  following
      relevant members:

      (i) His paternal grandfather, who died when  the  Appellant  was  aged
           around ten. The grandfather's first  wife  was  the  Appellant's
           grandmother.  Following her demise, the grandfather married  the
           Appellant's step-grandmother ("KF").


      (ii)    KF, the Appellant's step-grandmother, is  the  step-mother  of
           three children of the Appellant's  paternal  grandfather.  These
           three persons are the  Appellant's  uncles/aunts.   One  of  the
           aunts has two sons who are described consistently as  the  step-
           grandmother's nephews.


      (iii)   The Appellant's father died when he was  approximately  eleven
           or  twelve  years.   Subsequently,  KF  sponsored  the  marriage
           between the Appellant's mother and SI, a son of  KF.   For  some
           time  thereafter,  all  of  the  aforementioned  persons   lived
           together in the same household.


       iv)    SI is the Appellant's paternal uncle  and  became  his  step-
           father subsequent to his father's death.


        v)    When the Appellant was on a visit to  a  maternal  aunt,  his
           mother married SI and they and the Appellant's sisters left  the
           family home.  The Appellant claims to have had no  contact  with
           any of them subsequently.


      We shall revisit these factual issues in our findings, infra.

Preserved Findings


  12)     As noted in [2] above, in its error of law decision, this Tribunal
      preserved the FtT's "positive credibility findings that related to the
      Appellant's circumstances in the United Kingdom".   Having  considered
      the parties' submissions on this issue these,  on  analysis,  are  the
      following:

      (i) The Appellant was conveyed to  the  United  Kingdom  by  his  step
           grandmother, having been deceived by her into thinking that this
           was for the purpose of being educated.


      (ii)    The Appellant was a child at the material  time,  having  just
           attained his 16th birthday and he  was  "under  the  control  of
           adults".


      (iii)   Subsequently he was employed and went  from  job  to  job,  in
           circumstances wherein -


                  "...  He would have had little choice but to work  on  the
                  black market as he had no permission to  work  and  needed
                  money to survive."


      (iv)    "He was a child surrounded by adults from his own country  and
           at the very least would have been heavily  influenced  by  them.
           Clearly he was vulnerable to exploitation."


      (v) The Appellant was initially exploited by adults for the purpose of
           using him as "cheap and illegal labour".


      (vi)    Subsequently (at some unspecified stage) "at the most  he  may
           have been manipulated".


      (vii)   The Appellant's "SEF"  account  of  his  life  in  the  United
           Kingdom prior to arrest by the police (in  September  2012)  was
           truthful.


      (viii)  The Appellant was assisted by adult males of Pakistani  origin
           working in the same industry to move around the country from job
           to job and, in doing so, he "...  felt he had no choice  but  to
           work in these establishments in order to survive".


      (ix)    He paid a person  for  the  purpose  of  using  that  person's
           particulars in the event of the Appellant being  encountered  by
           the police.


      (x) The Appellant "...  was to some degree exploited by adults in  the
           catering industry ...."


      (xi)    Given his movements and changes of job, "....   if  he  was  a
           victim of trafficking this was very much at the lower end of the
           spectrum."


      (xii)   "I accept that he may have telephoned  his  step-grandmother's
           home shortly after arriving in the UK when he was  unhappy  with
           his situation and that he may have  been  told  that  a  lot  of
           effort had been taken [sic] to get him to the UK and  even  been
           threatened by one of his step-grandmother's nephews."


     xiii) The nature of this threat was a threat to kill him.


      xiv) (As regards the Appellant's account of events  in  Pakistan)  "I
           accept that he was a child and may not be expected  to  remember
           detail or respond in interview as an adult would be expected  to
           do."

Contentious Factual Issues: Our Findings

  13)     In KS (benefit of the doubt) [2014] UKUT 552 (IAC) and [2015]  Imm
      AR 419, the Upper Tribunal considered Article 4 of  the  Qualification
      Directive, which provides:


         "Assessment of facts and circumstances

         1. Member States may consider it  the  duty  of  the  applicant  to
         submit as soon as possible all elements needed to substantiate  the
         application for international protection. In cooperation with  the
         applicant it is the duty of the Member State to assess the relevant
         elements of the application.


         2. The elements referred to  in  of  paragraph 1  consist  of  the
         applicant's statements and  all  documentation  at  the  applicants
         disposal regarding the applicant's age, background, including  that
         of relevant relatives, identity, nationality(ies), country(ies) and
         place(s)  of  previous  residence,  previous  asylum  applications,
         travel routes, identity and travel documents and  the  reasons  for
         applying for international protection.


         3. The assessment of an application for international protection is
         to be carried out on an individual basis and includes  taking  into
         account:


           (a) all relevant facts as they relate to the country  of  origin
           at the time of taking a decision on the  application;  including
           laws and regulations of the country of origin and the manner  in
           which they are applied;


           (b) the relevant statements and documentation presented  by  the
           applicant including information on  whether  the  applicant  has
           been or may be subject to persecution or serious harm;


           (c) the individual position and personal  circumstances  of  the
           applicant, including factors such as background, gender and age,
           so as to  assess  whether,  on  the  basis  of  the  applicant's
           personal circumstances, the acts to which the applicant has been
           or could be exposed would amount to persecution or serious harm;


           (d) whether the applicant's activities since leaving the country
           of origin were engaged in  for  the  sole  or  main  purpose  of
           creating the necessary conditions for applying for international
           protection, so as to assess whether these activities will expose
           the applicant to persecution or serious harm if returned to that
           country;


           (e) whether the applicant could reasonably be expected to  avail
           himself of the protection of  another  country  where  he  could
           assert citizenship.


         4.  The  fact  that  an  applicant  has  already  been  subject  to
         persecution  or  serious  harm  or  to  direct  threats   of   such
         persecution  or  such  harm,  is  a  serious  indication   of   the
         applicant's well-founded  fear  of  persecution  or  real  risk  of
         suffering serious harm, unless there are good reasons  to  consider
         that such persecution or serious harm will not be repeated."

      It was held that  the  duty  on  the  applicant  under  Article  4  to
      substantiate his application for international protection is a limited
      one. Specifically, it is limited to the situation where aspects of the
      applicant's  statements  are  not  supported  (ie   corroborated)   by
      documentary or other evidence. In such circumstances,  the  effect  of
      Article  4(5)  is  that  the  Applicant  will  not  need  to   provide
      corroboration where the conditions enshrined therein are  cumulatively
      met: see [81] and [85].  Article 4(5) provides:


         "5.  Where Member States apply the principle according to which  it
         is the duty of the applicant to substantiate  the  application  for
         international protection  and  where  aspects  of  the  applicant's
         statements are not supported  by  documentary  or  other  evidence,
         those aspects shall  not  need  confirmation,  when  the  following
         conditions are met:


           (a)     the applicant has made a genuine effort to  substantiate
           his application;


           (b)     all relevant elements, at the applicant's disposal, have
           been submitted, and a  satisfactory  explanation  regarding  any
           lack of other relevant elements has been given;


           (c) the applicant's statements are  found  to  be  coherent  and
           plausible and do not  run  counter  to  available  specific  and
           general information relevant to the applicant's case;


           (d)     the applicant has applied for  international  protection
           at  the  earliest  possible  time,  unless  the  applicant   can
           demonstrate good reason for not having done so; and


             (e)  the  general  credibility  of  the  applicant  has   been
           established."

     We shall adopt this approach in  making  our  findings  on  contentious
      issues.  We also give effect to the  lower  standard  of  proof,  well
      established, in asylum cases.

  14)     The main contentious factual issues in the  Appellant's  case  are
      ascertainable  from  his  cross  examination.   These  are,  in  brief
      compass, the land owned by his deceased father;  the  jobs  which  the
      Appellant had before leaving Pakistan; the date of his father's death;
      his step grandmother's refusal to  have  him  educated;  his  mother's
      remarriage; the departure of his mother, sisters and  stepfather  from
      the family home;  his sojourn with  an  aunt  in  another  place;  his
      subsequent attempts to contact his mother; his relationship  with  his
      step grandmother and her two sons and, in particular, their  treatment
      of him; the authenticity of  the  two  marriage  certificates  of  his
      mother upon which he relied and the circumstances in which he acquired
      these; the date appearing on his father's death certificate;  and  his
      interaction and communications with two former friends  following  his
      departure from Pakistan. All of these issues and their offshoots  were
      probed in considerable detail at the hearing.

  15)     The Appellant's story is certainly not perfect.  The  exercise  of
      juxtaposing the accounts provided by  him  during  interview,  in  his
      witness statement and in his  testimony  to  the  Tribunal  exposes  a
      number of inconsistencies and imperfections.  The question for  us  is
      whether these defects render the  core  of  his  account  unworthy  of
      belief bearing in mind the burden and  standard  of  proof.   We  have
      considered his various accounts with care. In evaluating his story, we
      have had the  benefit  of  assessing  the  Appellant's  demeanour  and
      presentation at two separate hearings.  In this particular  case  this
      has proved to be an asset of considerable value.  While the  Appellant
      had the services of an interpreter at both hearings,  he  readily  co-
      operated with the Tribunal in its suggestion that he endeavour to give
      his evidence in English if possible.  This established that he  had  a
      good command of the English language and this,  in  turn,  facilitated
      our task of assessing his credibility.  The Appellant made no  attempt
      to take advantage of the protective shield which the interpreter would
      have provided.  We were impressed by his willingness  to  engage  with
      the Tribunal throughout his evidence.

  16)     Furthermore there was a notable spontaneity about the  Appellant's
      evidence.   On   occasions,   unprompted,   he   volunteered   further
      information.   Some  of  this  entailed   correcting,   enlarging   or
      clarifying earlier answers  provided  by  him.   This  reinforced  his
      credibility. We consider that the  inconsistencies  and  gaps  in  his
      several accounts  are  precisely  the  kind  of  imperfections  to  be
      reasonably expected, taking into  account  his  youth  and  immaturity
      during the key periods and the passage of time.  Furthermore, we  have
      identified no inconsistency of note in three of the key aspects of the
      Appellant's story, namely the circumstances in which he arrived in the
      United Kingdom,  his  life  since  arrival  here  and  his  subsequent
      communications with friends in Pakistan.

  17)   This latter issue  encompasses  one  further  issue  of  substantial
      importance, namely the authenticity of the marriage  certificates  and
      the circumstances in which the Appellant acquired  these.  As  regards
      the document purporting to be the certificate  of  the  death  of  the
      Appellant's father, we make two specific findings. First,  bearing  in
      mind that there was no frontal  challenge  to  its  authenticity,  and
      taking into account the onerous burden of proving fraud which would be
      engaged if there were,  we  are  satisfied  that  this  is  a  genuine
      document.  Further,  to  hold  otherwise  would  be  contrary  to  our
      findings about the Appellant's credibility generally.  Second,  having
      regard to this latter consideration and in particular our finding that
      the Appellant's struggle with certain dates  does  not  undermine  the
      core of his story, we find that the date appearing on the document  is
      not inconsistent with the thrust of the Appellant's case.  The  simple
      reality is that an unerringly precise and accurate chronology  of  all
      material events in the  Appellant's  story  will  never  be  feasible.
      Furthermore it is  perfectly  conceivable  that  the  certificate  was
      issued some time after the  death.   Fundamentally,  we  consider  the
      Appellant's account to be inherently plausible.

  18)     Taking all of the above  factors  into  account,  our  overarching
      finding is  that  the  core  elements  of  the  Appellant's  case  are
      believable.  We shall apply the relevant legal rules to this framework
      accordingly.

Legal Framework

  19)    The main component of the legal framework within which this  appeal
      is to be determined is the Council  of  Europe  Convention  on  Action
      Against Trafficking in Human Beings  (the  "Trafficking  Convention").
      As explained in SHL v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
      [2013] UKUT 00312  and [2013] Imm AR 875, at [31]:


         "This is a Council of Europe measure, signed by the United  Kingdom
         Government in 2007 and ratified [on 17 December] 2008.  It  entered
         into force on 1st February 2008, having received the  necessary  10
         ratifications.  It has been ratified by the vast  majority  of  the
         Council of Europe Member States."

      In  the  same  passage,  the  main  features  of  the  Convention  are
      summarised thus:

         "Where  the  relevant  authority  has  identified   a   victim   of
         trafficking, the person  concerned  may  qualify  for  a  residence
         permit  under  Article  14.   The  Convention  is  a  comprehensive
         measure, focusing particularly on  the  protection  of  victims  of
         trafficking and the safeguarding  of  their  rights.   It  is  also
         designed to prevent and deter  trafficking  and  to  prosecute  the
         perpetrators thereof.   It  embraces  all  kinds  of  exploitation,
         sexual exploitation, forced  labour  and  kindred  abuses,  whether
         national or transnational and irrespective of  whether  related  to
         organised crime. It establishes an independent monitoring mechanism
         for the purpose of securing compliance with its provisions  by  the
         Parties."

      In the United  Kingdom,  the  Secretary  of  State  is  the  competent
      authority (infra).

  20)     Following  ratification  on  17  December  2008,  the  Trafficking
      Convention was given effect in the United Kingdom from 01 April  2009.
      Unusually, it was not incorporated  in  legislation.  Rather,  it  was
      given effect through the mechanism of Government policy.  The two main
      policies, an "Action Plan" (March 2007) and an updated  "Action  Plan"
      (July 2008) have recently been  supplanted  by  the  composite  policy
      document "Victims of  Modern  Slavery:  Competent  Authority  Guidance
      (Version 2), Effective from 31 July 2015".

  21)    The two main features of the regime thus established  are  the  so-
      called  "Competent  Authority"  ("the  Authority")  and  the  National
      Referral Mechanism ("NRM").  The  former  is  the  alter  ego  of  the
      Secretary of State for the Home  Department  and  it  operates  mainly
      through the United Kingdom Human Trafficking Centre.  Various agencies
      have specific responsibilities in this discrete sphere.  These include
      in particular  the  childrens'  services  of  local  authorities,  the
      Safeguarding Children Boards, the  Refugee  Council  and  the  various
      Police Services. The NRM, in its current incarnation, is a three stage
      process which, following extension with effect from 31 July 2015,  now
      embraces victims of slavery, servitude and forced or compulsory labour
      as well as trafficking.

  22)     The Trafficking Convention is the central component of  the  legal
      framework.  Article 4 defines "trafficking" in the following terms:

         "a. "Trafficking in  human  beings"  shall  mean  the  recruitment,
         transportation, transfer, harbouring  or  receipt  of  persons,  by
         means of the threat or use of force or other forms of coercion,  of
         abduction, of fraud, of deception, of the abuse of power  or  of  a
         position of vulnerability or of the giving or receiving of payments
         or benefits to achieve the consent of a person having control  over
         another person, for the purpose of exploitation. Exploitation shall
         include, at a minimum, the  exploitation  of  the  prostitution  of
         others or other forms of  sexual  exploitation,  forced  labour  or
         services, slavery or practices similar to slavery, servitude or the
         removal of organs;


         b. The consent of a victim of "trafficking in human beings" to  the
         intended exploitation set forth in subparagraph (a) of this article
         shall  be  irrelevant  where  any  of  the  means  set   forth   in
         subparagraph (a) have been used;


         c. The recruitment, transportation, transfer, harbouring or receipt
         of a child for the purpose  of  exploitation  shall  be  considered
         "trafficking in human beings" even if this does not involve any  of
         the means set forth in subparagraph (a) of this article;


         d. "Child" shall mean any person under eighteen years of age;


         e. "Victim" shall  mean  any  natural  person  who  is  subject  to
         trafficking in human beings as defined in this article."

      In this context, it is appropriate to consider the Explanatory  Report
      relating to the Convention.  This states, at [3]:


         "Trafficking in human beings, with the entrapment of  its  victims,
         is the modern form of the old  worldwide  slave  trade.  It  treats
         human beings as a commodity to be bought and sold, and to be put to
         forced labour, usually in the sex industry but also,  for  example,
         in the agricultural sector, declared or undeclared sweatshops,  for
         a  pittance  or  nothing  at  all.  Most  identified   victims   of
         trafficking are  women  but  men  also  are  sometimes  victims  of
         trafficking in human beings. Furthermore, many of the  victims  are
         young, sometimes children. All  are  desperate  to  make  a  meagre
         living, only  to  have  their  lives  ruined  by  exploitation  and
         rapacity."

      The report continues, at [76]

         "For there to be trafficking in human beings, ingredients from each
         of the three categories (action, means, purpose)  must  be  present
         together. There is, however, an exception regarding children: under
         Article 4(c) recruitment, transportation, transfer,  harbouring  or
         receipt of a child  for  the  purpose  of  exploitation  is  to  be
         regarded as trafficking in human beings even if it does not involve
         any of the means listed in Article 4(a).  Under  Article  4(d)  the
         word "child" means any person under 18 years of age."

      The concepts of abuse and vulnerability are explained thus, at [83]:

         "By 'abuse of a position of vulnerability' is meant  abuse  of  any
         situation in which the person involved has no real  and  acceptable
         alternative to submitting to the abuse. The vulnerability may be of
         any  kind,  whether  physical,  psychological,  emotional,  family-
         related, social or economic.  The  situation  might,  for  example,
         involve insecurity or illegality  of  the  victim's  administrative
         status, economic  dependence  or  fragile  health.  In  short,  the
         situation can be any state of hardship in which a  human  being  is
         impelled  to  accept  being  exploited.  Persons  abusing  such   a
         situation  flagrantly  infringe  human  rights  and  violate  human
         dignity and integrity, which no one can validly renounce."

  23)    In the context of this appeal there are certain  other  significant
      provisions of the Trafficking Convention.  Article 10(2) provides:

         "Each Party shall adopt such legislative or other measures  as  may
         be necessary to identify victims as  appropriate  in  collaboration
         with other Parties and relevant support organisations.  Each  Party
         shall ensure that, if the  competent  authorities  have  reasonable
         grounds to believe that a person has been victim of trafficking  in
         human beings, that person shall not be removed from  its  territory
         until the identification process as victim of an  offence  provided
         for in Article 18 of this Convention  has  been  completed  by  the
         competent authorities and shall likewise ensure  that  that  person
         receives the assistance provided for in Article  12,  paragraphs  1
         and 2."

     By Article 13(1) it is provided:

         "1 Each Party shall provide in its  internal  law  a  recovery  and
         reflection period of at least 30 days, when  there  are  reasonable
         grounds to believe that the person concerned is a  victim.  Such  a
         period shall be sufficient for the person concerned to recover  and
         escape the influence of traffickers  and/or  to  take  an  informed
         decision on cooperating with the competent authorities. During this
         period it shall not be possible  to  enforce  any  expulsion  order
         against him or her. This provision  is  without  prejudice  to  the
         activities carried out by the competent authorities in  all  phases
         of the  relevant  national  proceedings,  and  in  particular  when
         investigating and prosecuting the offences concerned.  During  this
         period, the Parties shall authorise the persons concerned  to  stay
         in their territory."

     Article 14 states:

         "1. Each Party shall issue a renewable residence permit to victims,
         in one or other of the two following situations or in both:


           a.  the  competent  authority  considers  that  their  stay   is
           necessary owing to their personal situation;


           b.  the  competent  authority  considers  that  their  stay   is
           necessary  for  the  purpose  of  their  co-operation  with  the
           competent authorities in investigation or criminal proceedings.


         2. The residence permit for child victims, when legally  necessary,
         shall be issued in accordance with the best interests of the  child
         and, where appropriate, renewed under the same conditions.


         3. The non-renewal or withdrawal of a residence permit  is  subject
         to the conditions provided for by the internal law of the Party.


         4. If a victim submits an application for another kind of residence
         permit, the Party concerned shall take into account that he or  she
         holds, or has held, a residence permit in conformity with paragraph
         1.


         5. Having regard to the obligations of Parties to which Article  40
         of this Convention refers, each Party shall ensure that granting of
         a permit according to this provision shall be without prejudice  to
         the right to seek and enjoy asylum."




          Article 15 provides:

         "1 Each Party shall ensure that victims have access, as from  their
         first contact with the competent  authorities,  to  information  on
         relevant judicial and  administrative  proceedings  in  a  language
         which they can understand.


         2 Each Party shall provide, in its internal law, for the  right  to
         legal assistance and to  free  legal  aid  for  victims  under  the
         conditions provided by its internal law.


         3 Each Party shall provide, in its internal law, for the  right  of
         victims to compensation from the perpetrators.


         4 Each Party shall adopt such legislative or other measures as  may
         be necessary to guarantee compensation for  victims  in  accordance
         with the conditions under its internal law,  for  instance  through
         the establishment of a fund for victim compensation or measures  or
         programmes aimed at social assistance  and  social  integration  of
         victims, which could be funded by the  assets  resulting  from  the
         application of measures provided in Article 23."

     We shall revisit these provisions and  address  Article  18  separately
      infra.

  24)    In the growing domestic jurisprudence belonging to this  field,  it
      has been held that the  threshold  in  play,  namely  that  of  merely
      suspecting without being able to prove, is  particularly  low:  see  R
      (Minh) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015]  EWHC  1725
      (Admin).  The standard of proof applicable to this  threshold  is  the
      balance of probabilities. It was further held in Minh, at [126],  that
      the function of the Competent Authority is inquisitorial in nature.

  25)     The second element of the legal framework is Article 4 ECHR which,
      by virtue of the Human Rights Act 1998, is  a  provision  of  domestic
      law. This provides, in material part:

                  "1.  No one shall be held in slavery or servitude.


                   2.  No  one  shall  be  required  to  perform  forced  or
             compulsory labour."


      Third,  there  is  Council  Directive  2011/36/EU  on  Preventing  and
      Combating Trafficking in Human Beings and Protecting The Victims  (the
      "Trafficking  Directive").   Finally,  there  is  the  United  Nations
      Protocol to Prevent,  Suppress  and  Punish  Trafficking  in  Persons,
      Especially Women and Children  (the  "Palermo  Protocol").   Since  01
      November 2015 the domestic  law  framework  has  included  the  Modern
      Slavery Act 2015.  By section 52 of this enactment public  authorities
      are obliged to notify the Secretary of State if they  suspect  that  a
      person is a victim of slavery or human trafficking.  Various  offences
      are created.

  26)     We turn our attention to some of the leading judicial decisions in
      this field.  In Rantsev v Cyprus and Russia [2010] 51 EHRR 1,  one  of
      the main legal issues which arose was that Article  4  ECHR  does  not
      expressly encompass human trafficking.  The specific complaints before
      the ECtHR was that the Applicant's daughter had been  trafficked  from
      Russia to Cyprus and that both the  Russian  and  Cypriot  authorities
      were in breach of Article 4.  The Court acknowledged that it  had  not
      previously decided whether the proscription of slavery, servitude  and
      forced and compulsory labour enshrined in Article 4 extended to  human
      trafficking: see [272] - [273]. It drew on its  previous  decision  in
      Siliadin v France [2006] 43 EHRR 16 which had,  inter  alia,  embraced
      the definition of slavery in the Geneva Convention on  Slavery  (1926)
      which required the exercise of a genuine right  of  ownership  of  the
      victim and reduction of the status of the victim to an  "object":  see
      [122].  In [281] the Court states:

             "The Court considers that trafficking in human beings, by  its
             very nature and aim of exploitation, is based on the  exercise
             of powers attaching to the right of ownership. It treats human
             beings as commodities to be bought and sold and put to  forced
             labour, often for little or no payment,  usually  in  the  sex
             industry but also elsewhere....


             It implies close surveillance of the  activities  of  victims,
             whose movements are often circumscribed ...


             It involves the use of violence and threats  against  victims,
             who live and work under poor conditions."

      Highlighting the threat which trafficking poses to the  human  dignity
      and fundamental freedoms of its victims and its  incompatibility  with
      democratic societies and the values expounded in the ECHR,  the  Court
      concluded that it is embraced by Article 4 ECHR: [282].

  27)     Having made this landmark conclusion, the ECtHR  then  turned  its
      attention  to  the  specific  requirements  of  Article  4  ECHR.   We
      summarise [283] - [289] of its judgment thus:

      (a) Article 4 is on a par with Articles 2 and 3 as enshrining "one  of
           the basic values of  the  democratic  societies  making  up  the
           Council of Europe".  It makes no  provision  for  exceptions  or
           derogation.


      (b) The spectrum of safeguards contained in national legislation "....
           must  be  adequate  to  ensure  the  practical   and   effective
           protection of the rights of  victims  or  potential  victims  of
           trafficking".  This includes adequate criminal law measures  and
           the  need  for  appropriate  provisions   within   the   state's
           immigration rules.


      (c) Article 4 encompasses "a specific positive  obligation  on  Member
           States to penalise and prosecute effectively any  act  aimed  at
           maintaining a person in a situation  of  slavery,  servitude  or
           forced or compulsory labour".  This, however, is but one  aspect
           of the state's general undertaking to combat trafficking arising
           out of the Trafficking Convention and the Palermo Protocol.


      (d) Operational measures to protect victims or  potential  victims  of
           trafficking may arise in certain circumstances.


      (e) In common with Articles 2 and 3, Article 4  entails  a  procedural
           obligation to investigate "situations of potential trafficking",
           which is not dependent upon a complaint from the victim.

  28)    Another important member of the developing ECtHR  jurisprudence  in
      this sphere is its decision in CN v United Kingdom [2013] 56 EHRR  24,
      which involved a complaint of domestic servitude infringing Article  4
      ECHR.  In [80],  the  Court  made  the  important  pronouncement  that
      domestic servitude -

         "... involves a complex set of dynamics, involving both  overt  and
         more subtle forms of coercion, to force compliance."

      As a result, the investigation of such complaints "....   requires  an
      understanding of the many subtle ways an individual can fall under the
      control of another".  In brief compass,  the  main  criticism  of  the
      State's investigation in this case was  that  it  was  too  blunt  and
      simplistic. Notably,  the  Court  adjudged  the  International  Labour
      Organisation's indicators of forced labour as "a valuable bench mark":
      see [35].  Notably, in its consideration of the concept of  "penalty",
      the Court acknowledged that this need not necessarily take the form of
      physical violence or restraint. Rather, this can assume a more  subtle
      mantle, usually of a psychological nature, embracing conduct  such  as
      threats to denounce a victim to the police or immigration authorities:
      see [77].


  29)     In R v SK [2011] EWCA Crim 1691 [2013] QB 82, the Court of  Appeal
      highlighted that the concepts of  slavery,  servitude  and  forced  or
      compulsory labour in Article 4 ECHR share a common denominator, namely
      that "...  the victim is subject to a degree of enforced control": see
      [40].  In [41], the Court emphasised the  broad  spectrum  of  conduct
      which may be encompassed by these different concepts:

         "One person may exploit another in many different ways."

     Turning its attention to "the menace of a penalty", the  Court  stated,
      in [42]:

         "Where 'forced or compulsory labour' is concerned, the menace of  a
         penalty can be exerted in various ways.  It can be direct;  it  can
         also be indirect.  Constraint can be mental or physical. It can  be
         imposed by force of circumstances. Where it  is  alleged  that  one
         person has been compulsorily employed by another, the level of  pay
         he or she has received, if any, may have evidential importance.  It
         may point to coercion; it may bear  on  an  employee's  ability  to
         escape from his or her employer's control.  On its own, however,  a
         derisory level of wages is not tantamount to coercion."

     We shall revisit this discrete issue of compulsion infra.

  30)    As cases such as R v SK show, one of the  interesting  features  of
      the United Kingdom  jurisprudence  is  the  combination  of  decisions
      belonging to both the civil and criminal fields.  This is  illustrated
      in Attorney General's Reference Nos 37, 38 and 65 of 2010 [2010]  EWCA
      Crim 2880, in which certain restaurant owners were  convicted  of  the
      criminal offence of trafficking.  They contested  their  innocence  on
      the basis that the victims had  returned  to  Pakistan  following  the
      expiry of their work permits and had, subsequently,  returned  to  the
      United Kingdom where they resumed employment with the Defendants.  The
      Court of Appeal made the following notable observation, in [18]:

         "The unspoken but clear explanation for the  workers'  preparedness
         to return to the risk of further subjection  and  helplessness  was
         the contrast between the economic  circumstances  of  the  families
         they left behind and even the degraded expectation of a job in  the
         UK ....  The return of the workers  does  not  constitute  evidence
         that the conditions to which [they] were subjected were  acceptable
         but, in the circumstances of  the  present  case,  is  evidence  of
         further exploitation by the offenders of personal circumstances  of
         which they knew they could take advantage."

      Notably, it was further held that, having been deceived by promises of
      attractive wages and working conditions in  the  United  Kingdom,  the
      victims, all adult males -


         "...  had  been  subjected  to  conditions   of   neglect,   abuse,
         deprivation and economic exploitation ....  [and] .....


         They  were  not  prisoners  but  were   effectively   trapped   and
         controlled, being unable to work legally elsewhere ...   and  being
         unable to leave the country and return home."

     See [3] and [21].

  31)     The decision of the Court of Appeal in  R  v  Connors  and  Others
      [2013]  EWCA  Crim  324  is  especially  notable  for  the   following
      observations of the Lord Chief Justice on what he  described  as  "the
      troublesome crime of exploitation of labour", at [5]:

         "The problem has been with us for some time, and has been  growing.
         Unhappily different forms of exploitation  are  found  in  the  sex
         industry, the construction industry,  agriculture  and  residential
         care. That list is not comprehensive. Those who are  exploited  are
         always and inevitably vulnerable, and  just  because  they  are  so
         vulnerable, profoundly reluctant to report what has happened or  is
         happening to them. The Asylum and Immigration Act 2004 criminalised
         the exploitation of labour when it was connected to trafficking  in
         human beings, but not  otherwise.  Therefore  it  did  not  prevent
         vulnerable but untrafficked individuals  from  being  subjected  to
         forced or compulsory labour. The Gang Masters' Licensing  Act  2004
         established a system for licensing those who  employed  workers  in
         specified industries. Nevertheless, this legislation, too  did  not
         address the entire problem. The end result was that  many  men  and
         women continued to remain vulnerable to  exploitation  without  any
         counter-balancing protection against exploitation."

     Having noted the reform effected by section  71  of  the  Coroners  and
      Justice Act 2009, the Court drew particular attention to the  decision
      of the ECTHR in Siliadin v France and its earlier decision in SK.

  32)     In R (Atamewan) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
      [2013] EWHC 2727 (Admin)  and  [2014]  1  WLR  1959,  the  Complainant
      challenged a decision by the competent authority to  the  effect  that
      while he may have been, historically, a victim of trafficking, he  was
      no longer so, with the result that the Secretary of State had no legal
      obligations to provide protection or assistance.  The Court of  Appeal
      held that the Secretary of State's Guidance was incompatible with  the
      Trafficking Convention, due to a misinterpretation of the latter.

  33)    At this juncture we record that in developing  their  arguments  Ms
      Cronin and Ms Poynor  on  behalf  of  the  Appellants  relied  on  the
      principle enunciated in R (Ullah) v Special Adjudicator [2004] UKHL 26
      and [2004] 2 AC 323, at [20]:

         "In determining the present question,  the  House  is  required  by
         section 2(1) of the Human Rights Act 1998 to take into account  any
         relevant Strasbourg case law. While such case law is  not  strictly
         binding, it has been held that courts should,  in  the  absence  of
         some  special  circumstances,  follow  any   clear   and   constant
         jurisprudence of the Strasbourg court:  R  (Alconbury  Developments
         Ltd) v Secretary of State for the Environment,  Transport  and  the
         Regions [2001] UKHL  23,  [2003]  2  AC  295,  paragraph  26.  This
         reflects  the  fact  that  the  Convention  is   an   international
         instrument,  the   correct   interpretation   of   which   can   be
         authoritatively expounded only by the Strasbourg court.  From  this
         it follows that a national court subject to a  duty  such  as  that
         imposed by section 2 should not without  strong  reason  dilute  or
         weaken the effect of the Strasbourg case law. It is indeed unlawful
         under section 6 of the 1998 Act for a public authority, including a
         court, to act in a way which  is  incompatible  with  a  Convention
         right. It is of course open to member states to provide for  rights
         more generous than those guaranteed by  the  Convention,  but  such
         provision should not  be  the  product  of  interpretation  of  the
         Convention by national courts, since the meaning of the  Convention
         should be uniform throughout the states party to it.  The  duty  of
         national courts is to keep pace with the  Strasbourg  jurisprudence
         as it evolves over time: no more, but certainly no less."


      The further ingredient in the argument is that since the  decision  of
      the Authority is justiciable before this Tribunal, a challenge to such
      decision by judicial review is inappropriate,  having  regard  to  the
      well known exhaustion of alternative remedies principle.

Trafficking Issues in the IAC Tribunals

  34)    At the outset, we recall that the decisions  of  the  Secretary  of
      State which were challenged by appeal to the FtT were the  refusal  of
      his asylum claim and the corresponding decision to remove him from the
      United Kingdom.  Given the date of these decisions,  01  August  2013,
      the statutory appeal provisions governing the two appeals  which  have
      followed and the remaking decision in which this complete Tribunal  is
      now engaged, the relevant statutory provisions are the following:


      Section 82, 2002 Act


      (i) Section 82 of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
           (the "2002 Act")  which,  both  before  and  after  the  reforms
           effected by the  Immigration  Act  2014,  with  effect  from  20
           October 2014, made provision for a right of appeal  against  the
           refusal of a protection claim. Prior to 20 October 2014, section
           82 provided:


           "(1) Where an immigration decision  is  made  in  respect  of  a
           person he may appeal to the Tribunal.


           (2) In this Part "immigration decision" means-


             (a) refusal of leave to enter the United Kingdom,


             (b) refusal of entry clearance,


             (c) refusal of a certificate of entitlement under  section  10
             of this Act,


             (d) refusal to vary a person's leave to enter or remain in the
             United Kingdom if the result of the refusal is that the person
             has no leave to enter or remain,


             (e) variation of a person's leave to enter or  remain  in  the
             United Kingdom if when the variation takes effect  the  person
             has no leave to enter or remain,


             (f) revocation under section 76  of  this  Act  of  indefinite
             leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom,


             (g) a decision that a person is to be removed from the  United
             Kingdom by way of directions under section 10(1)(a), (b), (ba)
             or (c) of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 (c. 33) (removal
             of person unlawfully in United Kingdom),


             (h) a decision that an illegal entrant is to be  removed  from
             the United Kingdom by way of directions under paragraphs 8  to
             10 of Schedule 2 to the Immigration Act 1971 (c. 77)  (control
             of entry: removal),


             (ha) a decision that a person is to be removed from the United
             Kingdom  by  way  of  directions  under  section  47  of   the
             Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006 (removal: persons
             with statutorily extended leave),


             (i) a decision that a person is to be removed from the  United
             Kingdom by way of directions given by virtue of paragraph  10A
             of that Schedule (family),


             (ia) a decision that a person is to be removed from the United
             Kingdom by way of directions under paragraph 12(2) of Schedule
             2 to the Immigration Act 1971 (c. 77) (seamen and aircrews),


             (ib) a decision to make an order under section 2A of that  Act
             (deprivation of right of abode),


             (j) a decision to make a deportation order under section  5(1)
             of that Act, and


             (k) refusal to revoke a deportation order under  section  5(2)
             of that Act.


           (3A) Subsection (2)(j) does not apply to a decision  to  make  a
           deportation order which states that it  is  made  in  accordance
           with section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007; but-


             (a) a decision that section 32(5) applies  is  an  immigration
             decision for the purposes of this Part, and


             (b) a reference in this Part to an appeal against an automatic
             deportation order is  a  reference  to  an  appeal  against  a
             decision of the Secretary of State that section 32(5) applies.


           (4) The right of appeal under subsection (1) is subject  to  the
           exceptions and limitations specified in this Part."

     Section 84, 2002 Act

      (ii)    Section 84 of the 2002 Act which, both before  and  after  the
           aforementioned date, has made provision  for  appealing  on  the
           grounds that the  removal  of  the  Appellant  from  the  United
           Kingdom would breach the United Kingdom's obligations under  the
           Refugee Convention and/or  would  breach  the  United  Kingdom's
           obligations in relation to  persons  eligible  for  humanitarian
           protection and/or would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human
           Rights Act 1998.  Prior  to  to  20  October  2014,  section  84
           provided:

           (1)  An  appeal  under  section  82(1)  against  an  immigration
           decision must be brought on one or more of the following grounds-




             (a) that the decision is not in  accordance  with  immigration
             rules;


             (b) that the decision is unlawful by virtue of Article 20A  of
             the Race Relations (Northern Ireland) Order 1997 or by  virtue
             of section 29 of the Equality Act 2010 (discrimination in  the
             exercise of public functions etc) so far as relating  to  race
             as defined by section 9(1) of that Act;


             (c) that the decision is unlawful under section 6 of the Human
             Rights Act 1998 (c. 42) (public authority not to act  contrary
             to Human Rights Convention) as  being  incompatible  with  the
             appellant's Convention rights;


             (d) that the appellant is an EEA national or a member  of  the
             family of an  EEA  national  and  the  decision  breaches  the
             appellant's rights under the Community Treaties in respect  of
             entry to or residence in the United Kingdom;


             (e) that the decision is otherwise not in accordance with  the
             law;


             (f) that the person taking the decision should have  exercised
             differently a discretion conferred by immigration rules;


             (g) that removal of the appellant from the United  Kingdom  in
             consequence of  the  immigration  decision  would  breach  the
             United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee  Convention  or
             would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998
             as being incompatible with the appellant's Convention rights.


           (2) In subsection (1)(d) "EEA national" means a  national  of  a
           State which is a contracting  party  to  the  Agreement  on  the
           European Economic Area signed at Oporto on 2nd May 1992  (as  it
           has effect from time to time).


           (3) An appeal under section 83 must be brought  on  the  grounds
           that removal of the appellant  from  the  United  Kingdom  would
           breach  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations  under  the  Refugee
           Convention.


           (4) An appeal under section 83A must be brought on  the  grounds
           that removal of the appellant  from  the  United  Kingdom  would
           breach  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations  under  the  Refugee
           Convention.


  35)    The Trafficking Convention features in the decision  of  the  Upper
      Tribunal in SHL (supra). One feature of the matrix of  the  appeal  to
      the Upper Tribunal in SHL was that the Authority  had  made  a  formal
      decision that the Appellant was not  a  victim  of  trafficking.   The
      Secretary of State,  on  the  same  date,  made  a  separate  decision
      rejecting the Appellant's claim  for  asylum.   This  was  challenged,
      unsuccessfully, by appeal to the FtT.  In deciding  the  appeal,  this
      Tribunal stated, at [33]:

         "......  there is no right of appeal to this Tribunal  against  the
         Respondent's trafficking decision: see Part (v) of the Nationality,
         Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.   Secondly,  the   Trafficking
         Convention cannot be invoked as a free standing source  of  rights,
         obligations and legal effects and consequences in domestic law,  as
         it is an unincorporated international treaty."


    The decision continues:


         "A corollary of this principle  is  that  a  failure  by  a  public
         authority to take into account the provisions of an  unincorporated
         international treaty is not of itself a ground  for  impugning  the
         exercise of a discretionary power: R v   Ministry  of  Defence,  ex
         parte Smith [1996] QB 517, page 558 (per Sir  Thomas  Bingham  MR).
         It is, of course,  established  that  unincorporated  international
         instruments have a role in certain  contexts,  a  paradigm  example
         being the presumption that Parliament does not intend to  legislate
         contrary to the United Kingdom's international obligations ....


         Furthermore, a decision may be impugned where  a  public  authority
         purports to apply an unincorporated international treaty  provision
         but errs in doing so."

    The Tribunal decided that none of these principles was of any avail  to
    the Appellant, noting that it would have been open to him to  challenge
    the Secretary of State's trafficking decision by  judicial  review  and
    stating, at [34]:


         "We are of the opinion that back  door  challenges  to  trafficking
         decisions made by the Respondent under the  Trafficking  Convention
         are not permissible in appeals  of  the  present  kind.   They  lie
         outwith the competence of the First-tier and Upper Tribunals."


     The essence of the decision was that the jurisdiction of this Tribunal
      is statutory and does not encompass a direct challenge of this kind.

  36)     The decision in SHL was the subject of comment  by  the  Court  of
      Appeal  in  AS  (Afghanistan)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department [2013] EWCA Civ 1469 and [2014] Imm AR 513. Before  turning
      to consider this decision in a little detail,  it  is  appropriate  to
      highlight two features of SHL.  First, the Appellant was attempting to
      mount a direct, frontal challenge to the negative trafficking decision
      of the Authority.  Second, the Secretary of  State's  policy  guidance
      did not feature in the matrix of the appeal.  The Tribunal  considered
      that this was not legally possible.


  37)     In AS (Afghanistan),  Longmore  LJ  formulated  the  issue  to  be
      addressed in the following terms, at [1]:

        "The question in this appeal is the extent to  which  (if  at  all)
        Judges of the Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber  should  regard  as
        conclusive decisions of the 'Competent Authority' determining  that
        an  appellant  before  them  has  or  has  not  been  a  victim  of
        trafficking."

     There were two decisions in the matrix.  The first  was  the  Secretary
      of State's decision  rejecting  the  Appellant's  asylum  claim.   The
      second was the decision of the Authority that the  Appellant  was  not
      the victim of human trafficking.  The Appellant challenged the  asylum
      refusal decision by appeal to the FtT.  The appeal was dismissed.   On
      further appeal to the Upper Tribunal, the question arose  whether  the
      FtT had erred in law by failing to make a finding on  the  trafficking
      issue.  It was held that the FtT "....had no  jurisdiction  to  review
      the trafficking decision of the UKBA": see [9].  No error of  law  was
      demonstrated and the appeal was dismissed.

  38)    At [11], Longmore LJ records his  acceptance  of  the  Respondent's
      submission that a decision of the  Authority  is  not  an  immigration
      decision (within the meaning of the applicable legislation): ".... and
      the only remedy ...  was by way of  judicial  review".   However,  the
      Court ruled that in immigration appeals the Tribunal is  competent  to
      take into account a positive trafficking decision  where  relevant  to
      the decision under appeal (normally a removal decision).  Longmore  LJ
      continues, at [14]:

         "If the First tier Tribunal is entitled  to  take  into  account  a
         decision that an appellant is (or has been) a victim of trafficking
         it seems odd that, if a perverse decision has been reached that  an
         appellant has not been a victim of trafficking, the Tribunal cannot
         consider whether the facts of the case do, in fact, show  that  the
         appellant was a victim of trafficking."


      (our emphasis)

      In thus holding, the Court reasoned that the decision in Secretary  of
      State for the Home Department v Abdi [1996] Imm AR  148  is  authority
      for the proposition that a failure by the Secretary of State to  apply
      her own policy is an error of law. The Court further held  that  there
      is no obligation on the appellant to challenge a negative  trafficking
      decision by judicial review, stating at [14]:


         "The FTT Judge should consider the matter for himself."


      The Court expressed its conclusion in the following terms, at [17]:


         ".....  First  tier  Tribunal  judges  are  competent  to  consider
         whether the Secretary of State has  complied  with  her  policy  in
         relation to trafficking.  If asked to consider that question,  they
         should then decide whether she has in fact complied with her policy
         since that is (or may be) relevant to her removal decision.


         [18] ......  No doubt, if a conclusive decision has been reached by
             the Competent Authority, First Tier Tribunals will  be  astute
             (save perhaps in rare circumstances) to allow an appellant  to
             re-run a case already decided against him on the  facts.   But
             where, as here, it is arguable that, on  the  facts  found  or
             accepted, the Competent Authority has reached a decision which
             was not open to it, that argument should be  heard  and  taken
             into account."

  39)     We are satisfied that in the final part of this passage the  Court
      is  referring  to  the   standard   of   perversity   (or   Wednesbury
      irrationality) mentioned twice in earlier passages.    The  effect  of
      the decision in AS (Afghanistan) is that  in  appeal  proceedings  the
      Appellant may, in certain circumstances, mount an  indirect  challenge
      to a negative trafficking decision of the Authority. We are  satisfied
      that a challenge of this  kind  is  not  confined  to  perversity  (or
      irrationality) grounds. Rather, it is clear from  a  consideration  of
      [12] - [18] as a whole that where a removal decision has been preceded
      by a negative trafficking decision made in breach of the Secretary  of
      State's policy guidance, the removal decision will be erroneous in law
      and, therefore, embraced by the  "not  in  accordance  with  the  law"
      ground of appeal in section 82 of the 2002 Act  (supra).   We  further
      consider that, in principle, there is no  reason  why  the  Tribunal's
      consideration of negative trafficking decisions should not  encompass,
      in cases where appropriate, other recognised public law  misdemeanours
      such as the intrusion of immaterial considerations,  leaving  material
      evidence or considerations out of account, procedural  unfairness  and
      bad faith.

  40)     We give effect to the approach formulated immediately above in the
      following way.  On behalf of the Appellant it is  submitted  that  the
      issue of whether the Appellant is a trafficking victim is relevant  to
      the immigration decision under appeal, namely the Secretary of State's
      removal decision. The specific argument advanced is that this Tribunal
      should determine that the Appellant's removal  would  be  contrary  to
      section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 if either (a) he is at risk  of
      retrafficking in Pakistan or (b) he has been denied the  benefits  and
      protections which would have flowed from a  decision  that  he  was  a
      child trafficking victim and a lawful investigation of his claim to be
      such a victim.

  41)     In their able submissions, Ms Cronin and Ms Poynor, on  behalf  of
      the Appellant, developed this argument  in  the  following  way.  They
      submitted that  trafficking  and  the  positive  duties  enshrined  in
      Articles 12, 13, 14 and 15 of  the  Trafficking  Convention  have  the
      status of positive obligations under Article 4  ECHR.  To  remove  the
      Appellant would infringe Article 4 and, by virtue of section 6 of  the
      Human Rights Act, would therefore not be in accordance with  the  law,
      thereby impelling that his appeal be allowed.  Article  4  establishes
      rights which are absolute, unqualified and fundamental,  described  as
      the "basic values  of  a  democratic  society"  in  Rantsev,  at  [62]
      (supra). It is acknowledged, for the reasons given by this Tribunal in
      SHL, the obligations contained in Articles 12 - 14 of  the  Convention
      are not justiciable per se.  This, however, it is contended,  presents
      no barrier in light of the protections afforded by  the  Human  Rights
      Act and the decision in Rantsev that it is not necessary  to  identify
      whether the offending conduct constitutes slavery, servitude or forced
      labour and that trafficking is embraced by Article 4 ECHR.   As  noted
      in [29] above, counsels' submissions further  drew  attention  to  the
      decision of the House of Lords in  (Ullah)  where  it  was  held  that
      United  Kingdom  Courts  should,  in  the  absence  of  some   special
      circumstance, follow any  clear  and  constant  jurisprudence  of  the
      Strasbourg Court: see [20].

  42)     It is convenient to reproduce the following passage in the written
      submission of Mr Wilding on behalf of the Secretary of State:

         "The Respondent accepts that the  Tribunal  (be  it  First-tier  or
         Upper) generally can consider whether a person has been  trafficked
         for the purpose of assessing the factual matrix of a  case  leading
         to any assessment of risk on return. The starting  point  for  such
         consideration will of course  be  the  decision  of  the  Competent
         Authority on  whether  the  Appellant  has  been  trafficked.   The
         Respondent agrees that the issue as [to] whether someone  has  been
         trafficked or not can go towards the question of risk on return; in
         fact in many cases  it  may  well  be  an  important  fact  finding
         exercise going to the very heart of risk on return."

    Next, attention is drawn to the status of the Trafficking Convention as
    an  unincorporated  international  treaty.  This  is  followed  by  the
    passage:


         "Therefore, as  the  present  appeal  is  one  against  the  SSHD's
         decision to remove the Appellant to Pakistan, the only relevance of
         the [Trafficking Convention] is  whether  the  Appellant  has  been
         trafficked as part of his narrative as to why  he  is  at  risk  on
         return to Pakistan.  Nothing therefore  turns  on  the  trafficking
         issue if he is not at risk on return .....   The  [Upper  Tribunal]
         cannot consider the  provisions  of  [the  Trafficking  Convention]
         which do not go to the question of whether the Appellant  has  been
         trafficked."


      The specific provisions of the Convention highlighted in this context
      are Articles 12 - 16.


  43)     While the  Respondent's  submissions  also  highlighted  that  the
      Appellant did not challenge either of  the  trafficking  decisions  by
      judicial review, there was no suggestion - correctly  in  our  view  -
      that this was  in  some  way  fatal.   While  both  parties  drew  our
      attention to the  decision  in  Nguyen  (Anti-Trafficking  Convention:
      respondent's duties) [2015] UKUT 00170 (IAC) and [2015] Imm AR 886, we
      consider this to be an illustration of the Upper Tribunal's  alertness
      to the need to give effect to the "not in  accordance  with  the  law"
      dimension of the decision of the Court of Appeal in AS  (Afghanistan):
      see especially [41] -  [42].   The  Respondent's  submissions  further
      sought to confine  the  decision  in  Rantsev,  contending  that  (our
      summary) the essence of the violation  of  Article  4  found  was  the
      failure of Cyprus to establish a  national  law  framework  to  combat
      trafficking, to provide protective measures  for  trafficking  victims
      and to investigate trafficking allegations.  It was submitted that the
      Secretary of State has  acquitted  this  duty  via  the  criminal  law
      legislation and the creation of the NRM.


  44)     Giving effect to the binding decision of the Court of Appeal in AS
      (Afghanistan), we conceive our duty to be  to  determine  whether  the
      immigration decision  under  challenge  in  this  appeal,  namely  the
      decision to remove the Appellant from the United  Kingdom  and  return
      him to Pakistan in the wake of the anterior refusals of his asylum and
      trafficking claims, is vitiated by any material error of  law  in  the
      negative trafficking decisions.  In proceeding thus we  are  conscious
      of the error of law decision of this Tribunal outlined in  [2]  above.
      The factual substratum of our decision is set forth  in  [10]  -  [17]
      above.  It was further acknowledged that the Tribunal is empowered  to
      make findings of fact bearing on the Appellant's case that  he  was  a
      victim of trafficking.


  45)     Article 4 ECHR is justiciable before this Tribunal as it is one of
      the Convention Rights protected by the Human  Rights  Act  and  having
      regard to the provisions of  section  82  of  the  2002  Act  (supra).
      Bearing in mind the decision of the House of Lords in  Ullah,  we  can
      conceive of no reason not to give full effect to the decision  of  the
      ECtHR  in  Rantsev.   In  this  case  the  Strasbourg  Court   decided
      unambiguously that human  trafficking  falls  within  the  embrace  of
      Article 4 ECHR.  Bearing in mind that we are remaking the decision  of
      the FtT, the question for this Tribunal is whether the  Appellant  has
      demonstrated that to remove him from the United Kingdom  would  be  in
      breach of  the  prohibition  against  slavery,  servitude,  forced  or
      compulsory  labour  and   human   trafficking   and,   therefore,   in
      contravention of Article 4 ECHR.   This,  in  the  evolution  of  this
      appeal, has emerged as the crucial question.

  46)     We agree with Ms Cronin that this Tribunal is better equipped than
      the Authority to  make  pertinent  findings.   The  decisions  of  the
      Authority were the product of a  paper  exercise,  entailing  no  live
      evidence.  In contrast, we have the distinct advantage of having heard
      the Appellant's viva voce evidence  and,  further,  we  have  received
      evidence not available  to  the  Authority.  Linked  to  this  is  the
      Secretary of State's  submission,  with  which  we  concur,  that  the
      Appellant's credibility is central to the disposal of this appeal.

  47)     The factual matrix to which we apply the relevant legal rules  and
      principles is set forth in  [10]  -  [17]  above.   We  have  made  an
      overarching finding that the core elements of the Appellant's case are
      believable.  The Appellant's life  is  divisible  into  three  phases.
      Prior to his father's death,  when  he  was  aged  around  11/12,  the
      Appellant  evidently  had  a  relatively  normal,  stable  and   happy
      childhood.  His father's death was a watershed.  During the  following
      four years approximately, prior to his departure  from  Pakistan,  the
      Appellant's life was shaped by forced labour, neglect,  isolation  and
      physical abuse at the hands of his cousins. His mother  was  weak  and
      under the influence of others.  Ultimately she abandoned  him  in  his
      early teenage  years.  This  second  phase  of  the  Appellant's  life
      culminated in his departure for the  United  Kingdom.  At  this  stage
      there was no parent or parental figure in his life and, given his  age
      and  events  during  the  previous  four  years,  he   was   obviously
      vulnerable.

  48)   At this juncture we conduct the exercise of making  certain  further
      findings.  We find that the Appellant's journey to the United  Kingdom
      was arranged by his step grandmother, he was accompanied  by  her  and
      the arrangements which materialised upon his arrival were made by her.
       At this time he was heavily influenced by and dependent upon his step
      grandmother.  She deceived the Appellant into travelling to the United
      Kingdom.  He was not acting voluntarily.  He was,  rather,  under  the
      control of a significantly older person whom he viewed as having  been
      instrumental in attempts to disinherit him.  We consider this to be  a
      classic case of subtle, psychological compulsion.

  49)     His arrival in the United Kingdom heralded the  beginning  of  the
      third phase in the  Appellant's  life.   He  had  been  deceived  into
      believing that he had been brought to the  United  Kingdom  to  be  in
      education. The contrast between  the  vision  which  this  would  have
      engendered  and  the  ensuing  reality  was  acute.  This  would  have
      exacerbated his vulnerability. We readily infer that the labour  which
      followed had been arranged by his grandmother and  that  she  profited
      financially from the transaction.   This  was  a  callous  arrangement
      motivated bilaterally by financial gain.

  50)     Contrary to the promises made the Appellant's life did not  entail
      attending  an  educational  institution  and  mixing,   socially   and
      otherwise, with his peers. Rather, he was plunged into an adult  world
      of work, business and profits.  He  became  an  object  of  cheap  and
      illegal labour. He was ruthlessly exploited by those who employed him.
      He found himself alone in a foreign country with an alien language and
      culture. He was bereft of parental and family support and his life was
      devoid of any parental figure.  We consider that he was exploited from
      the moment of his departure to the United Kingdom, within days of  his
      16th birthday until his encounter  with  the  police  some  15  months
      later.  We find that, during the initial phase, the Appellant received
      no pay for his work.  The stamp of compulsion applied to  his  labour,
      where he worked, the hours he worked, his accommodation and those with
      whom he shared accommodation and associated.   The  Appellant  had  no
      true freedom of choice at any stage.

  51)     We take account of the fact that the  Appellant  did  not  have  a
      single, fixed employment during the period under scrutiny. However, as
      appears from the preserved  findings  rehearsed  in  [12]  above,  his
      "mobility" was limited, it was confined to the Asian food industry; it
      was facilitated by  fellow  adult  employees;  and,  finally,  it  was
      plainly motivated by a nave and probably desperate hope of finding  a
      better way of living. Moreover, as the preserved findings make  clear,
      he was, properly analysed, acting under compulsion and manipulation at
      all times. He was not truly free in any real sense. He was, rather,  a
      desperate, frightened and coerced teenager.  Accordingly  the  factors
      of mobility and more than one employment do not alter  our  assessment
      above.

  52)     To borrow the phraseology of Rantsev, the  Appellant  was  at  the
      material time a commodity who had been bought  and  sold  and  put  to
      forced labour for  little  payment,  living  and  working  under  poor
      conditions: see [281].   Servitude  and  compulsory  labour  were  the
      hallmarks of his existence.  In Article 4 terms, his human dignity was
      relentlessly violated and he was denied a fundamental freedom.

  53)     It is necessary to evaluate the outworkings of the assessment  and
      conclusions above.  In the context of these proceedings, arguably  the
      most important feature of the Rantsev  decision  is  the  Strasbourg's
      Court assessment  of  the  procedural,  or  adjectival,  dimension  of
      Article 4. Ms Cronin was right to  press  this  discrete  point.   The
      obligations on the State are to ensure  the  practical  and  effective
      protection of the rights of trafficking victims, actual or  potential,
      and  to  penalise  and  prosecute  effectively  any  acts   aimed   at
      maintaining a person in a situation of slavery, servitude or forced or
      compulsory labour: see [283] -[289] of Rantsev.  The nexus  here  with
      the  Trafficking  Convention,  the  Palermo  Protocol   and   the   EU
      Trafficking Directive is evident. Furthermore,  there  is  a  specific
      procedural  obligation  to   investigate   situations   of   potential
      trafficking which are not dependent upon a complaint from the victim.

  54)     In the Appellant's case, the first opportunity which the State had
      to discharge its aforementioned obligations arose at the time  of  his
      encounter with the police.  The Appellant's case, unchallenged on this
      issue, is that he has at all times been co-operative with  the  police
      and, indeed, he remains willing to  co-operate  fully  with  them.  We
      consider that the most elementary of enquiries at this stage viz  late
      2012  would  have  elicited  from  him  an   account   including   the
      circumstances of his arrival in the  United  Kingdom  and  details  of
      subsequent employers and work conditions.  This should, in  principle,
      have resulted in prosecutions for  offences  under,  inter  alia,  the
      Slavery Act  2015,  subject  of  course  to  the  application  of  the
      established criteria for prosecution.  However, on the evidence before
      us, there is no indication of  even  the  most  elementary  of  police
      enquiries.

  55)     The second opportunity presented to the  State  to  discharge  its
      procedural obligations under Article 4 arose when the Authority became
      seized  of  the  Appellant's  trafficking   complaint.   Yet   another
      opportunity arose when  the  Authority  was  required  to  review  its
      initial negative decision. We refer to our summary of these  decisions
      in [3] - [5] above.  Given our assessments and  findings  above,  both
      decisions of the Authority are  manifestly  unsustainable.   They  are
      infected by a  failure  to  conduct  proper  enquiries  and  to  amass
      relevant and available evidence. They  are  further  undermined  by  a
      failure  to  properly  examine  and  assess  the  realities   of   the
      Appellant's life during the period  of  some  four  years  before  his
      departure from Pakistan. Further, the  Authority  failed  to  properly
      analyse the factors of the Appellant's pay, accommodation and mobility
      and failed to identify the elements of fear and coercion in  his  work
      circumstances.

  56)   In addition, in its assessment that  the  Appellant  worked  due  to
      economic necessity, the Authority failed to recognise  that  this  was
      not inconsistent with continuing exploitation, manipulation and forced
      labour. Further, the Authority placed disproportional  weight  on  the
      failure of this frightened, isolated mid-teenager recently exposed  to
      the culture and  language  of  an  alien  country  to  make  a  formal
      complaint to the police. Finally, we consider that its approach to the
      issue of respite  and  recovery  was  hopelessly  inadequate.  In  our
      judgment, these inadequate and cursory decisions  would  plainly  have
      been vulnerable to successful challenge by judicial review.

  57)     As the decision in AS (Afghanistan) makes  clear,  the  Wednesbury
      principle is of continuing relevance at this stage.  The effect of our
      foregoing analysis and conclusions  is  that  both  decisions  of  the
      Authority are unsustainable by reference to the  three  limbs  of  the
      Wednesbury principle, that is to say they are infected by  failing  to
      take into account material  facts  and  evidence,  together  with  the
      intrusion  of  distorted  factors  and  assessments  and,  ultimately,
      irrationality,  which  is  the  synonym  of   the   AS   (Afghanistan)
      terminology of  "perversity".

  58)     At this  juncture  we  must  consider  the  effect  of  our  above
      conclusions.  We remind ourselves of the  essential  elements  of  the
      framework of the appeal before us, which are: the Secretary  of  State
      has refused the Appellant's application for asylum  and,  having  done
      so, is proposing to remove him to Pakistan and the Competent Authority
      (effectively the Secretary  of  State)  has  refused  the  Appellant's
      application to be recognised as a victim of trafficking.  We have held
      that this latter  decision  is  unsustainable  in  law  in  the  sense
      outlined above. We have also identified a breach of Article 4 ECHR.

  59)     If the Authority had made a lawful decision  the  Appellant  would
      have been recognised as a victim  of  trafficking.   This  would  have
      entitled him to a "recovery and reflection  period"  of  at  least  30
      days, per Article  13(1)  of  the  Trafficking  Convention.   At  this
      remove, the loss of this benefit is irreparable.  The Appellant  would
      have qualified for a renewal residence permit under Article 14 if  the
      Authority had considered his stay necessary "owing to  [his]  personal
      situation".  We consider it highly probable that the  Authority,  duly
      armed with all appropriate information, directing itself  properly  in
      law and acting rationally  would  have  found  this  condition  to  be
      satisfied. In accordance with Article 14(4), the grant of a  residence
      permit  would  have  been  a  material  consideration  in   subsequent
      applications  by  the  Appellant  for  leave  to   remain.   He   has,
      accordingly, been deprived of a valuable benefit.

  60)     Furthermore, the decision to remove him from the United Kingdom is
      not in accordance with the law for the discrete reason  that  none  of
      these factors was taken into account.  This was due  to  the  unlawful
      decisions of the Authority.  We note that our analysis and conclusions
      on the Trafficking Convention  issues  mirror  closely  those  of  the
      Administrative  Court  in   Amatewan   (supra)    As   this   decision
      demonstrates, the effect of our  analysis  and  conclusions  above  is
      that, in substance, the Appellant now has the  status  of  trafficking
      victim.  In this particular case, this is  very  much  a  current  and
      enduring status.

  61)     The unlawful decisions of  the  Authority  give  rise  to  another
      significant  consequence.   By  Article  10(2)  of   the   Trafficking
      Convention, victims of trafficking  shall  not  be  removed  from  the
      territory of the  state  concerned  until  the  process  enshrined  in
      Article 18  has  been  completed  and  the  victim  has  received  the
      assistance provided for in Article 12(1) and (2).  In accordance  with
      the latter  provisions,  a  lawful  trafficking  decision  would  have
      entitled the Appellant to a range of services and  benefits  including
      appropriate  accommodation,  psychological  support,  counselling  and
      legal advice.  Recognition of and provision for his  specific  "safety
      and protection needs" would also have been required.

  62)     Further, Article 18 of the Convention would have  been  triggered.
      This provides, under the rubric  "Criminalisation  of  Trafficking  in
      Human Beings":

         "Each Party shall adopt such legislative and other measures as  may
         be  necessary  to  establish  as  criminal  offences  the   conduct
         contained  in  Article  4  of  this  Convention,   when   committed
         intentionally."

      Article 10(2), in somewhat infelicitous language, describes this as an
      "identification process as victim of an offence".  We construe this as
      a clear reference to the universally recognised criminal law processes
      of investigation, prosecution and punishment. We would  add  that,  in
      this respect, a distinction is  to  be  made  between  the  status  of
      trafficking victim and the status of victim of a criminal offence.

  63)     Accordingly, by virtue of Article 10(2) of the  Convention,  there
      exists, by reason of our condemnation in law of the decisions  of  the
      Authority, a prohibition  against  removing  the  Appellant  from  the
      United Kingdom at this  point  in  time.   The  Secretary  of  State's
      removal decision is, in consequence, unlawful.  Notably,  in  Atamewan
      (supra) the Court identified  the  UK  Border  Agency  as  the  public
      authority which was under a positive duty  to  initiate  an  effective
      investigation by the police. This duty was considered to be unaffected
      by the circumstance that the victim  had  made  no  complaint  to  the
      police and the absence of continuing police investigations.

  64)     The same conclusion is reached by the different route provided  by
      Article 4 ECHR. The Appellant is not simply the historical  victim  of
      treatment proscribed by this provision.  He is, rather, the continuing
      victim of an enduring breach by the State  of  its  investigative  and
      procedural obligations identified in [27] above.  Within the framework
      of section 6 of the Human Rights Act, the public authorities  who,  to
      date, have  failed  to  discharge  these  obligations  are  UKBA,  the
      Authority and the police service.  Furthermore,  it  is  inconceivable
      that an effective police investigation  and  any  ensuing  prosecution
      could be conducted without the full assistance and co-operation of the
      Appellant. Realistically, this will not be feasible if he  is  removed
      to Pakistan.  Accordingly, to remove him to Pakistan would  contravene
      Article 4 ECHR.  The Secretary of State's removal decision is unlawful
      on this further ground.

  65)     Accordingly, on the grounds and for the reasons elaborated  above,
      the Secretary of State's decision to remove  the  Appellant  from  the
      United Kingdom is not in accordance with the law and  is  contrary  to
      section 6 of the Human Rights Act, within  the  framework  of  section
      84(1)(c) and (e) of the 2002 Act.

  66)     One discrete aspect of the Appellant's  case  is  that  if  he  is
      removed to Pakistan this will expose him to a risk of  re-trafficking.
      In our judgment the evidential foundation necessary  for  making  this
      finding is lacking.  Having regard to his age (now 19), his  increased
      maturity and the positive aspects of his experiences during  the  last
      four years, which are likely to have fortified him  as  a  person  and
      will equip him to identify and  avoid  risks  of  this  kind,  we  are
      satisfied that this  case  is  not  made  out.   Furthermore,  on  the
      hypothesis of his return  to  Pakistan,  we  are  confident  that  the
      Appellant will be able to locate and re-establish himself in a  manner
      which will  distance  himself  sufficiently  from  the  three  persons
      concerned, his step-grandmother and her two nephews, to  efficaciously
      eliminate such risk of re-trafficking as may arise. There  is  nothing
      in the evidence,  including  the  experts'  reports  (of  which  more,
      infra),warranting a different assessment.

  67)     We turn to examine the protection  dimension  of  the  Appellant's
      case.  It is  common  case  that  the  Appellant  is  a  member  of  a
      particular social group, namely his family.  It is also agreed, having
      regard to our findings,  that  the  Appellant  would  be  at  risk  of
      persecution for a Refugee Convention reason at the hands of the  three
      persons concerned. However, we discern no basis upon which to conclude
      that it would be either unreasonable or impractical for the  Appellant
      to locate and re-establish himself in Pakistan in the manner suggested
      immediately above. In  particular,  we  take  into  account  that  the
      Appellant has no enduring links with his direct and  immediate  family
      in his home area; he has no enduring relationships with any  relatives
      there; he has no employment or education to return to  there;  he  has
      only one enduring friendship in the area; and,  finally,  if  it  were
      necessary for him to resort to litigation and he were minded to do so,
      in relation to the inheritance of his deceased father's  lands,  there
      is no evidence that he must permanently re-establish  himself  in  the
      area of his former home for this purpose.  In short, the  availability
      of  safe  internal  relocation  undermines  the   Appellant's   asylum
      application fatally.

  68)     Finally, one of the features  of  the  Appellant's  case  was  his
      reliance  upon  four  expert  reports.   These  were   generated   by,
      respectively, an expert in anthropology, an  expert  in  the  laws  of
      Pakistan, an expert in  child  trafficking  and  exploitation  and  an
      expert in labour exploitation.  On behalf of the Secretary  of  State,
      Mr Wilding criticised some of this evidence.  He suggested that it was
      mere advocacy and that there were passages in the reports more akin to
      skeleton arguments than expert  commentary  and  opinion.  He  further
      highlighted that none of the experts had interviewed the Appellant.

  69)     As a perusal of this judgment  will  confirm,  we  have  made  our
      findings and conclusions favourable to the Appellant without reference
      to any of the expert evidence.  The reason for this is that we did not
      consider it necessary to do so. However, while  declining  to  descend
      into superfluous detail, we consider that there is some force  in  the
      criticisms levelled. Had it been necessary to do  so,  we  would  have
      examined  them  in  appropriate  detail.   In  the  circumstances,  it
      suffices to highlight the detailed treatment of the duties  of  expert
      witnesses in the decision of this Tribunal in MOJ and  Others  (Return
      to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC), at [23] - [27].   We
      have reproduced these passages in an appendix to  this  judgment.   We
      consider that, henceforth, those engaging expert witnesses should,  in
      every case, ensure that the expert is provided with  a  copy  of  this
      section of the MOJ decision, as a matter of  course,  at  the  initial
      stage of receiving instructions.   Each  expert's  report  should,  in
      turn, make clear that these passages have been received  and  read  by
      the mechanism of a simple declaration to this effect.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

  70)     We summarise our conclusions thus:

      (a) Having regard to the decision of the ECTHR in Rantsev,  Article  4
           ECHR, which outlaws slavery, servitude and forced or  compulsory
           labour, encompasses also human trafficking.


      (b) Trafficking decisions are not  immigration  decisions  within  the
           compass of the 2002 Act, with the result  that  judicial  review
           provides the appropriate mechanism for direct challenge.


      (c) Tribunals must take into account, where relevant, a decision  that
           an appellant has been a victim of trafficking.


        d)    Where satisfied  that  a  negative  trafficking  decision  is
           perverse, Tribunals are empowered to make their own decision  on
           whether an appellant was a victim of trafficking.


        e)    Tribunals are also empowered to review a trafficking decision
           on the ground  that  it  has  been  reached  in  breach  of  the
           Secretary of State's policy guidance.


        f)     While,  in  principle  it  seems  that  other   public   law
           misdemeanours can also be considered by  Tribunals,  this  issue
           does not arise for determination in the present appeal.


        g)    Tribunals may well be  better  equipped  than  the  Competent
           Authority to make pertinent findings relating to trafficking.


        h)    The procedural obligations inherent in  Article  4  ECHR  are
           linked  to  those  enshrined  in  the  Trafficking   Convention,
           Articles 10(2) and 18 in particular.


        i)    Any attempt to remove a trafficking victim  from  the  United
           Kingdom in circumstances where the said  procedural  obligations
           have not been discharged will normally be unlawful.


  71)     Mindful of recent legislative changes we  add  the  following.  By
      virtue of the amendments to sections 82 and 84  of   the  Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  by  the  Immigration  Act  2014,   an
      appellant will no longer be able to rely on a 'not in accordance  with
      the law'  ground when challenging the refusal of a protection or human
      rights claim. Recourse will, however, still be available, via the  new
      section 84(2), to advancing an appeal on the  basis  that  a  decision
      that breaches the trafficking elements  of  Article  4  ECHR  will  be
      unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

DECISION

  72)     We re-make the decision of the FtT by allowing  the  appeal  under
      section 84(1)(c) and (e) of the 2002 Act.



                                            Bernard  McCloskey




                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

          PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                                                   Date:    15 February 2016



                              APPENDIX


MOJ and Others (Returns to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC),
[23] - [27]


[23] We consider it appropriate to draw attention  to  this  subject,  given
      the prevalence and importance of expert evidence in  Country  Guidance
      cases. Mindful that substantial quantities of judicial ink  have  been
      spilled on this subject, we  confine  ourselves  to  highlighting  and
      emphasising what appear  to  us  to  be  amongst  the  most  important
      considerations.  The  general  principles  are  of  some  vintage.  In
      National Justice CIA Naviera SA v Prudential Assurance Company Limited
      [1993] 2 Lloyds Reports 68, Cresswell J stated, at pp 81 - 82:

      "The duties and responsibilities of expert witnesses in civil cases
      include the following:


      1.   Expert evidence presented to the court should be, and  should  be
           seen to be, the independent product of the  expert  uninfluenced
           as to form or content by the exigencies of litigation ....


      2.   An expert witness should provide independent  assistance  to  the
           Court by way  of  objective  unbiased  opinion  in  relation  to
           matters within his expertise .... An expert witness in the  High
           Court should never assume the role of an advocate ...


      3.   An expert witness should state the facts or assumption upon which
           his opinion is based. He should not omit  to  consider  material
           facts which could detract from his concluded opinion. ....


      4.   An expert witness should make it clear when a particular question
           or issue falls outside his expertise.


      5.  If an expert's opinion  is  not  properly  researched  because  he
           considers that insufficient data is available, then this must be
           stated with an indication that the opinion is  no  more  than  a
           provisional one. In  cases  where  an  expert  witness  who  has
           prepared a report could not assert that the report contained the
           truth, the whole truth and nothing but the  truth  without  some
           qualification, that qualification should be stated in the report
           ....


      6.   If, after exchange of reports, an expert witness changes his view
           on a material matter  having  read  the  other  side's  expert's
           report, or for any other reason, such change of view  should  be
           communicated (through legal representatives) to the  other  side
           without delay and when appropriate to the Court."


      This code was duly approved by the  Court  of  Appeal:  see  [1995]  1
      Lloyds Reports 455, at p496. It has been considered  in  a  series  of
      subsequent report cases: see, for example,  Vernon  v  Bosley  (No  2)
      [1997] 1 All ER 577, at page 601. In the latter case, Evans LJ stated,
      at page 603:


           ".... Expert witnesses are armed with the court's  readiness  to
           receive the expert evidence which it needs in order to  reach  a
           fully informed decision, whatever the nature of  the  topic  may
           be. But their evidence ceases to be useful, and  it  may  become
           counter-productive, when it is not marshalled  by  reference  to
           the issues in the particular case and kept within the limits  so
           fixed."

      Judicial condemnation  of  an  expert  who  does  not  appreciate  his
      responsibilities is far from uncommon: see,  for  example,  Stevens  v
      Gullis [2000] 1 All ER 527, where Lord Woolf MR at  pp.532-533  stated
      that the expert in question had:

           "... demonstrated by his conduct that he had  no  conception  of
           the requirements placed upon an expert under the  CPR  .....  19
           It is now clear from the rules that, in  addition  to  the  duty
           which an expert owes to a party, he is also under a duty to  the
           court."

24.  The requirements of CPR 31 also featured in Lucas v  Barking  Hospitals
      NHS Trust [2003] EWCA Civ 1102, where the emphasis was on CPR  31  and
      CPR 35. These provide (inter alia) that:

        i) a party may apply for an order for inspection  of  any  document
           mentioned in an expert's  report  which  has  not  already  been
           disclosed,


       ii) every expert's report must state the substance of  all  material
           instructions, whether written or oral, on the basis of which the
           report was written, and

      iii) such instructions are not privileged against disclosure.

      Laws LJ made the following noteworthy observation:


           "[42] As it seems to me  the  key  to  this  case  ....  is  the
           imperative of transparency, a general theme of the CPR but  here
           specifically applied to the deployment of experts' reports. Thus
           the aim of rule 35.10(3) and (4) is broadly to ensure  that  the
           factual basis on which the expert has  prepared  his  report  is
           patent."

25.  Thus in the  contemporary  era  the  subject  of  expert  evidence  and
      experts' reports is  heavily  regulated.  The  principles,  rules  and
      criteria highlighted above are of general application. They  apply  to
      experts giving evidence at every tier of  the  legal  system.  In  the
      specific  sphere  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  (Immigration  and   Asylum
      Chamber), these standards apply fully, without any qualification. They
      are reflected in the  Senior  President's  Practice  Direction  No  10
      (2010) which, in paragraph 10, lays particular emphasis on a series of
      duties. We summarise these duties thus:

        i) to  provide  information  and  express  opinions  independently,
           uninfluenced by the litigation;


       ii) to consider all material  facts,  including  those  which  might
           detract from the expert witness' opinion;

      (iii)   to be objective and unbiased;


      (iv)    to avoid trespass into the prohibited territory  of  advocacy;
           20


       iv) to be fully informed;


      (vi)    to act within the confines of the witness's area of expertise;
           and


      (vii)   to modify, or abandon one's view, where appropriate.


26.  In the realm of expert testimony, important duties are also imposed  on
      legal practitioners. These too feature in the aforementioned  Practice
      Direction. These duties may be summarised thus:

      (i)     to ensure that  the  expert  is  equipped  with  all  relevant
           information and materials, which will  include  information  and
           materials adverse to the client's case;


      (ii)    to vouchsafe that the expert is fully  versed  in  the  duties
           rehearsed above;


      iii) to  communicate,  promptly,  any  alterations  in  the  expert's
           opinion to the other parties and the Tribunal, and


        v) to ensure  full  compliance  with  the  aforementioned  Practice
           Statement, any other relevant Practice Statement,  any  relevant
           Guidance Note, all material requirements of the  Rules  and  all
           case management directions and orders of the Tribunal.


      These duties, also unqualified in nature, are a reflection of the bond
      between Bench and Representatives which features throughout the common
      law world.

27.  The interface between the role of the expert witness and  the  duty  of
      the Court or  Tribunal  features  in  the  following  passage  in  the
      judgment of Wilson J in Mibanga v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department [2005], EWHC 367:

           "[24] It seems to me to be axiomatic that a fact finder must not
           reach
           his or her conclusion before surveying all the evidence relevant
           thereto....


           The  Secretary  of  State  argues  that  decisions  as  to   the
           credibility of an account are to be taken by the  judicial  fact
           finder and that, in their reports, experts, whether in  relation
           to medical matters or in relation to  in-country  circumstances,
           cannot  usurp  the   fact   finder's   function   in   assessing
           credibility. I agree. What, however, they can offer is a factual
           context in which it may be necessary  for  the  fact  finder  to
           survey the allegations placed before him; and such  context  may
           prove a crucial aid to the
           decision whether or not to accept the truth of them. ......


           It seems to me that  a  proper  fact  finding  enquiry  involves
           explanation as to  the  reason  for  which  an  expert  view  is
           rejected and indeed placed beyond the spectrum  of  views  which
           could reasonably be held."

    To this we would add that,  as  the  hearing  of  the  present  appeals
    demonstrated, this Tribunal will always  pay  close  attention  to  the
    expert's  research;  the  availability  of  empirical  data  or   other
    information bearing on the expert's views; the quality and  reliability
    of such material; whether the  expert  has  taken  such  material  into
    account; the expert's willingness to modify or withdraw  certain  views
    or conclusions where other evidence, or expert opinion,  suggests  that
    this is appropriate; and the attitude of the expert, which will include
    his willingness to engage with the Tribunal. This is not designed to be
    an exhaustive list. No enduring links with  his  direct  and  immediate
    family in his home area.




