

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

JO (qualified person - hospital order - effect) Slovakia [2012] UKUT
00237(IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated   |
|On 23 May 2012                           |                            |
|                                         |............................|
|                                         |...........                 |

                                   Before

                           LORD JUSTICE McFARLANE
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                  Appellant


                                     and

                                     JO
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Grigg, Counsel, instructed by J M Wilson & Co.

An EEA national does not cease to be a  qualified  person  as  a  result  of
being detained in a hospital pursuant to an order of  the  court  under  the
Mental Health Act 1983, having not been convicted of any criminal offence.

                           � CROWN COPYRIGHT 2012
                              DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a determination
        of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Andrew and  Mr  FT  Jamieson  JP)
        promulgated on 12 December 2011 in which the  appeal  of  JO  ('the
        Respondent') was allowed.


     2. The Respondent is a citizen of Slovakia who was born on 6  December
        1979. He claims to have entered the United Kingdom  on  21  January
        2005 in the exercise of his Treaty rights as  a  European  Economic
        Area National. The single event which has determined the course  of
        JO's life, and is the focus of these proceedings, took  place  some
        18 months  after  his  arrival.  On  2  July  2006  the  Respondent
        committed an horrific attack upon a pensioner  in  Hereford  during
        which one of the victim's thumbs was bitten off.


     3. The Respondent was arrested on  the  day  of  the  attack  and  was
        charged with attempted murder.  He  was  not,  however,  convicted,
        having been found not guilty by reason  of  insanity,  following  a
        diagnosis of paranoid schizophrenia. On 4  April  2007  a  Hospital
        Order was made under the Mental Health  Act  1983,  s  37  and  the
        Respondent was made subject to the special restrictions set out  in
        s 41 of that Act.

     4. On 27  April  2011  the  Secretary  of  State  decided  to  make  a
        deportation order against  the  Respondent  under  the  Immigration
        (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ("the 2006  Regulations")
        on the basis that she was satisfied that he would pose  a  genuine,
        present and sufficiently serious threat to the interests of  public
        policy if he were allowed to remain in the United Kingdom and  that
        his deportation is justified under reg. 21 of those Regulations.


     5. By notice dated 11 May 2011, the Respondent sought  to  appeal  the
        deportation  decision.  The   First-tier   Tribunal   allowed   the
        Respondent's appeal and it is against that determination  that  the
        Secretary of State now appeals, permission to  appeal  having  been
        granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge V P McDade on 25 January 2012.

     6. The point at the centre of the appeal is whether  the  period  that
        the Respondent spent in a secure mental health unit pursuant to the
        Hospital Order can be calculated as part of a period  of  permanent
        residence as a worker in the UK under the 2006 Regulations.


     7. We heard the appeal on 23 May 2012 and, at the  conclusion  of  the
        hearing, announced our decision which was to  dismiss  the  appeal.
        This judgment sets out our reasons for that decision.


        The legal context


     8. The 2006 Regulations, reg. 14 (1) provides that "a qualified person
        is entitled to reside in the  UK  for  so  long  as  he  remains  a
        qualified person".


     9. The 2006 Regulations,  reg.  6  defines  a  "qualified  person"  as
        including "a jobseeker" or "a worker".


    10. The 2006 Regulations, reg. 15(1)(a) provides that "an EEA  national
        who has resided in the UK in accordance with these regulations  for
        a continuous period of five years"  shall  "acquire  the  right  to
        reside in the UK permanently".


    11. The 2006 Regulations, reg. 5 provides for a worker or self-employed
        person who has ceased activity. It is the  Respondent's  submission
        that his circumstances come within reg. 5(7)(b):


           "Regulation 5(7)
           Subject  to  regulation  7A(3),  for  the   purposes   of   this
           regulation:
              a) ...
              b) Periods of inactivity due to illness or accident
              c) ....
                 shall be treated as periods of activity as a worker or self-
                 employed person, as the case may be."


    12. The following provisions of the European Union Directive 2004/38/EC
        ('The Citizens Directive') are relevant:


        Recital 23:


           "Expulsion of Union citizens and their family members on grounds
           of public policy or  public  security  is  a  measure  that  can
           seriously harm persons who, having  availed  themselves  of  the
           rights and freedoms conferred on them by the Treaty, have become
           genuinely integrated into the host Member State. The  scope  for
           such measures should therefore be limited in accordance with the
           principle of proportionality to take account of  the  degree  of
           integration of  the  persons  concerned,  the  length  of  their
           residence in the host Member State, their age, state of  health,
           family and economic situation and the links with  their  country
           of origin."


        Recital 24:
           "Accordingly, the greater the degree  of  integration  of  Union
           citizens and their family members in the host Member State,  the
           greater the degree of protection against  expulsion  should  be.
           ...."


        Article 7(3):


           " ... a Union citizen who is no longer a worker or self-employed
           person shall retain the status of worker or self-employed person
           in the following circumstances:
           (b) he/she is temporarily unable to work as  the  result  of  an
           illness or accident."


The issues in the case


    13. The decision to deport the Respondent was taken on 27  April  2011,
        which was over five years after he had arrived to work in  the  UK.
        By reg. 15(1)(a) of the 2006 regulations, if the Respondent's  time
        in the UK had been "in accordance with"  the  regulations  then  he
        would have obtained a right to reside here permanently. It  is  the
        Respondent's case that he worked as a joiner, and therefore  as  "a
        worker" within the 2006 Regulations,  in  the  period  between  his
        arrival in the UK and the horrific assault in July 2006. He  argues
        that the effect of reg. 5(7)(b) is that the  subsequent  period  of
        his incarceration on remand and then subject to the Hospital  Order
        was "inactivity due to illness" and is therefore to be  treated  as
        "a period of activity as a worker", thereby maintaining his  status
        within the 2006 Regulations and entitling him to claim a  permanent
        right to reside in the UK at the conclusion of a five-year period.


    14. The Secretary of State disputes the Respondent's claim on the basis
        that a period of time spent in a secure mental health unit does not
        count towards the acquisition of permanent residence.  Further,  in
        reliance on the importance  given  to  a  person's  integration  in
        recitals 23 and 24 of the Citizens Directive, it is submitted  that
        it is very difficult for  the  Respondent  to  demonstrate  genuine
        integration in the UK given that much of his  time  here  has  been
        spent in a secure unit. Finally, on the  facts,  the  Secretary  of
        State disputes the  Respondent's  assertion  that  he  was  legally
        exercising his Treaty rights by working in the period prior to  his
        arrest.

    15. These respective cases were developed in  argument  before  us.  Mr
        Melvin, for the Secretary of State, made the following  substantive
        points:

        a) It is settled law that a person who is serving a prison sentence
           cannot claim to be  exercising  his  Treaty  rights  during  the
           period of incarceration (see Carvalho v Secretary of  State  for
           the Home Department [2010] EWCA Civ 1406  and  SO  (imprisonment
           breaks continuity of residence) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 164 (IAC));


        b) Although Mr Melvin accepted that the two contexts  are  not  the
           same, by implication a period of compulsory  detention  under  a
           Hospital Order made under the Mental Health Act  by  a  criminal
           court should be approached  in  the  same  manner  as  a  prison
           sentence;

        c) There is a  clear  difference  between  an  EEA  National  being
           temporarily incapacitated by reason of an  ordinary  illness  or
           accident and incapacity due to  long-term  mental  illness;  the
           former falls within the 2006 Regulations  but  the  latter  does
           not. In consequence there is no jurisdiction to  hold  that  the
           Respondent comes within the 2006 Regulations;

        d) The 2006 Regulations have to be read in the light of the Treaty.
           Recitals 23 and 24 of the Citizens Directive emphasise that  the
           greater the degree of genuine integration a Union citizen has in
           the host member state, the  greater  should  be  the  degree  of
           protection against expulsion. Mr Melvin submits that the  impact
           of this factor is two-fold: firstly, the  respondent  can  claim
           very little protection from expulsion as he  can  not  establish
           any genuine integration in the UK; secondly, irrespective of the
           2006 Regulations, there is a freestanding need under the  Treaty
           for an individual to establish genuine integration in  the  host
           state in order to avoid expulsion;


        e) The Respondent never registered as an Accession State Worker and
           therefore cannot be said to  have  been  exercising  his  Treaty
           rights in any event.


    16. For the Respondent, Mr Grigg made the following submissions:


        a) It is accepted  that  the  authorities  clearly  establish  that
           prisoners serving a sentence are not resident for  the  purposes
           of the 2006 Regulations during their time in custody;


        b) There is no legal foundation for the proposition that time spent
           in detention as a result of mental illness is to be  treated  in
           the same manner as time spent in prison following conviction for
           a criminal offence;

        c) There is a plain difference between a criminal who  deliberately
           commits a criminal act and a person who acts in the same manner,
           but does so involuntarily as a consequence of mental illness;

        d) The Respondent comes clearly within the 2006  Regulations  (regs
           5(7)(b), 14(1) and 15(1)(a)) together with Article 7(3)  of  the
           Citizens Directive, which in  plain  terms  make  provision  for
           discounting a period of inactivity due  to  illness.  The  Crown
           Court finding when making the Hospital Order  under  the  Mental
           Health Act 1983, s. 37 that the Respondent  was  suffering  from
           mental disorder is binding;

        e) Mental disorder is a form of illness and  it  is  therefore  the
           inescapable factual conclusion that the Respondent, who has been
           prevented from working as a result of the  Hospital  Order,  has
           been prevented from working as a result of illness;

        f) Those drafting the 2006 Regulations could have chosen,  but  did
           not choose,  to  insert  words  of  qualification  to  the  word
           'illness' which might limit its scope to a  specific  period  of
           time or specific types of illness;

        g) The Secretary of State's submissions  as  to  'integration'  are
           misplaced. Integration only arises as a factor where there is  a
           discretion and the need to act proportionately is engaged.  Here
           the Regulations are plain and no question of discretion arises;

        h) Permission was not given to appeal the findings of  fact  as  to
           the Respondent's work status. In any event the bar is  set  high
           for  appeals  against  findings  of  fact.  In  the  absence  of
           completely inadequate reasoning or perversity, the finding  must
           stand.


Discussion


    17. We are grateful to both Mr Melvin and Mr Grigg for their clear  and
        helpful submissions. The debate,  whilst  important,  is  within  a
        narrow compass and it is possible to consider  the  various  points
        and state our conclusions in short terms.


    18. A plain reading of the 2006 Regulations, as set out at paragraphs 8
        to 11  above,  establishes  that  periods  of  inactivity  'due  to
        illness' are nevertheless treated as  'periods  of  activity  as  a
        worker' for the purposes of determining whether an individual is  a
        'worker' and therefore 'a qualified person' and for the purpose  of
        establishing  residence  in  the  UK  'in  accordance  with   these
        Regulations for a continuous period of  five  years'  in  order  to
        'acquire the right to reside in the UK permanently'.

    19. The Respondent's circumstances will  only  fall  outside  the  2006
        Regulations if one or both of  the  following  submissions  by  the
        Secretary of State is established:

              i. 'illness'  under  reg.  5(7)(b)  does  not  include  mental
                 illness and/or is limited  to  temporary  indisposition  or
                 illness for a short period of time;
             ii. Detention in a secure mental health unit under a compulsory
                 Hospital Order made by a criminal court, albeit as a result
                 of a diagnosis of mental disorder, is to be treated in  the
                 same manner as detention during a prison sentence with  the
                 result that the individual concerned is  not  a  'qualified
                 person' during the period of detention.


    20. Dealing with these two issues in turn, we see no basis for  holding
        that the term 'illness' as used in the 2006 Regulations  should  be
        given a narrow or restricted meaning, either in terms of  the  type
        of illness or the period of incapacity.


    21. The 2006 Regulations, which could have been drafted  to  target  or
        restrict the provision  are  entirely  without  qualification.  The
        phrase 'temporarily unable to work as a result of an illness' is to
        be found  in  Article  7(3)  of  the  Citizens  Directive.  The  UK
        Regulations, which were made two years later in  2006,  could  have
        adopted the word 'temporarily' from Article 7(3) but  did  not.  In
        the same manner, there is no restriction on the type  of  'illness'
        to which the provision applies and no ground  established  by  case
        law, guidance or practice for holding that mental illness is to  be
        excluded. Indeed, we consider that any attempt to exclude those who
        are incapacitated by mental ill health from these provisions  might
        well be  contrary  to  public  policy,  statute  and  human  rights
        legislation on the ground of discrimination.

    22. We therefore reject the first  of  the  Secretary  of  State's  two
        principal submissions.

    23. It is common ground that time spent serving a prison sentence  does
        not count towards the qualifying  period  for  permanent  residence
        under reg. 15(1)(a)  of  the  2006  Regulations.  It  is,  however,
        instructive to look at the approach of the courts to this issue.

    24. In Bulale v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008]  EWCA
        Civ 806, Buxton LJ said, obiter (at paragraph 9):

           'It is difficult to think that the process  of  integration  can
           take place while a person is living outside  normal  society  in
           the host state, not because of illness or accident, but  because
           he has chosen to breach the societal norms of that state.'

    25. In HR (Portugal) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
        [2009] EWCA Civ 371, Elias LJ (at paragraph 39) emphasised that the
        factor which isolated from the 2006 Regulations those  incarcerated
        in prison following conviction was that 'they  have  by  their  own
        conduct placed themselves where they cannot avail themselves of the
        rights of EU citizens'.


    26. The authorities make it plain that the exclusion of time  spent  in
        prison applies to any prison sentence of whatever length  following
        conviction. The question is left open whether time spent on  remand
        prior to an  acquittal,  or  which  is  eventually  followed  by  a
        successful  appeal   against   conviction,   falls   for   separate
        consideration (see HR (Portugal) above).

    27. A distinction is therefore expressly drawn between  those  who  are
        serving a prison sentence  following  conviction  as  a  result  of
        'their own conduct' and those who are unable  to  work  because  of
        illness or accident. The fact that  the  questions  of  remands  in
        custody and of cases where there is a subsequent successful  appeal
        are potentially to be distinguished, indicates that the  limits  of
        this line of  authority  are  delineated  around  prison  sentences
        following conviction and go no further.

    28. Other than the bare assertion  that  detention  in  a  secure  unit
        should be treated in like manner to  a  prison  sentence  following
        conviction, the Secretary of State's  argument  is  unsupported  by
        authority. In our view there is a fundamental  distinction  between
        these two forms of disposal, each of which may follow precisely the
        same behaviour (in  the  present  case  the  appalling  assault  in
        Hereford in 2006).  The  distinction  is  that  a  prison  sentence
        follows the choice of an individual to act in  a  criminal  manner,
        whereas a Hospital Order results from a finding that the individual
        suffers from a mental disorder  and  is  not  therefore  criminally
        responsible for their otherwise  culpable  behaviour.  We  consider
        that this distinction places those who are  detained  in  a  secure
        mental health unit in  a  completely  different  category,  in  the
        context  of  these  Regulations,  from  those  who  are  imprisoned
        following conviction. That is our conclusion without  reference  to
        the express reference to 'illness' in the  2006  Regulations;  once
        the reference to 'illness' is taken into account,  the  distinction
        between the two contexts is all the more stark. We therefore reject
        the Secretary of  State's  submissions  on  this  second  principal
        ground.


    29. The two remaining points,  namely  'integration'  and  the  factual
        background, can be dealt with  succinctly.  We  accept  Mr  Grigg's
        submission that the question of whether or not the  Respondent  has
        become genuinely integrated in the UK during his time here does not
        arise  where  the  circumstances  are  the   subject   of   express
        regulation, rather than one for administrative discretion.

    30. The relevant findings of fact made by the First-tier  Tribunal  are
        at paragraph 15 of its determination:

          "(a)    The Appellant came to the UK to work as a joiner  on  21st
                 January 2005. We have no reason to doubt this assertion  of
                 the Appellant. The Respondent has no records to  show  when
                 the Appellant entered the UK.
              b) The Appellant would have been required to  register  as  an
                 Accession State Worker requiring registration. We  have  no
                 evidence before us to show that he did, in fact, register.
              c) However, an EEA national can never be an  illegal  entrant.
                 (See section 7(1) of the Immigration Act  1988).  A  person
                 who does not require leave to enter  can  never  enter  the
                 United Kingdom illegally.
              d) The Appellant would have benefited from the  initial  right
                 of residence. After three months of his arrival, if he  did
                 not register, he would  no  longer  be  exercising  his  EU
                 rights, but this would have little impact on his status  in
                 United Kingdom law.
              e) Further, the worker registration scheme  for,  inter  alia,
                 Slovakia, came to an end on 30th April 2011. From that date
                 the Appellant became a Union citizen with  full  and  equal
                 rights of free movement and residence.
              f) We are further satisfied that the  Appellant  retained  his
                 status as worker in  accordance  with  Article  7(3)(a)  of
                 Directive  2004/38/EC.  It  is  apparent  to  us  that  the
                 Appellant was temporarily unable to work as a result of his
                 illness. However, we have no evidence  before  us  to  show
                 that he would be unable to return to work now.
              g) We are satisfied that the Appellant worked as a  joiner  in
                 the Hereford area up until the date of his  arrest  on  2nd
                 July 2006."


    31. In her Grounds of Appeal, the Secretary of State submits  that  the
        Respondent has produced no documentary evidence to support his oral
        testimony regarding his work history, and the  First-tier  Tribunal
        fail to give reasons  for  their  conclusions.   No  point  on  the
        failure to register is raised in  the  grounds  and  permission  to
        appeal was not granted for any point based upon non-registration.


    32. In our view the fact that the oral testimony of the  Respondent  as
        to his work record was not supported by documents did  not  prevent
        the First-tier Tribunal from making the findings  that  were  made.
        The approach of the Tribunal to these  factual  matters,  including
        the absence of positive evidence  of  registration,  was  sensible,
        pragmatic and one which was  entirely  open  to  them.  Other  than
        asserting the case against the findings, the Secretary of State has
        filed no further contrary evidence  and  has,  in  our  view,  done
        nothing to discharge the substantial burden that an appellant faces
        when seeking to overturn factual findings. The  criticisms  of  the
        First-tier Tribunal's determination in this  regard  are  therefore
        not sustained.

Conclusion


    33. As a result of our adverse  conclusions  on  each  of  the  matters
        raised by the Secretary of State, the appeal must be dismissed.


Signed

Lord Justice McFarlane









