
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Ciceri (deprivation of citizenship appeals: principles) [2021] UKUT 00238
(IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 June 2021                               |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |

                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT

                                   Between

                                 GURI CICERI
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the appellant:     Ms Helen Foot, instructed by BHT Sussex
For the respondent:    Mr Steven Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

Following KV (Sri Lanka) v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
[2018] EWCA Civ 2483, Aziz v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
[2018] EWCA Civ 1884, Hysaj (deprivation of citizenship: delay) [2020]  UKUT
00128 (IAC), R (Begum) v Special Immigration Appeals Commission [2021]  UKSC
7 and Laci v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2021] EWCA Civ  769
the legal principles regarding appeals under  section  40A  of  the  British
Nationality Act 1981 against  decisions  to  deprive  a  person  of  British
citizenship are as follows:
    (1)  The Tribunal must first establish whether the  relevant  condition
         precedent  specified  in  section  40(2)  or  (3)  of  the  British
         Nationality Act 1981 exists for  the  exercise  of  the  discretion
         whether to deprive the appellant  of  British  citizenship.   In  a
         section 40(3) case, this requires the Tribunal to establish whether
         citizenship was obtained by one or more of the means  specified  in
         that subsection.  In answering the  condition  precedent  question,
         the Tribunal must adopt the approach set out in paragraph 71 of the
         judgment in Begum, which is to consider whether  the  Secretary  of
         State has made findings  of  fact  which  are  unsupported  by  any
         evidence or are based on a view of  the  evidence  that  could  not
         reasonably be held.
    (2)  If the relevant condition precedent is established,  the  Tribunal
         must determine whether the rights of the  appellant  or  any  other
         relevant person under the ECHR are engaged  (usually  ECHR  Article
         8). If they are,  the  Tribunal  must  decide  for  itself  whether
         depriving the appellant of British citizenship would  constitute  a
         violation of those rights, contrary to the obligation under section
         6 of the Human Rights Act  1998  not  to  act  in  a  way  that  is
         incompatible with the ECHR.
    (3)  In so doing:
         (a)   the  Tribunal  must  determine  the  reasonably   foreseeable
             consequences of deprivation; but it will not be  necessary  or
             appropriate for the Tribunal (at least in the usual  case)  to
             conduct a  proleptic  assessment  of  the  likelihood  of  the
             appellant being lawfully removed from the United Kingdom; and
         (b)  any relevant assessment of proportionality is for the Tribunal
             to make, on the evidence before it (which may not be the  same
             as the evidence considered by the Secretary of State).
    (4)  In determining proportionality, the Tribunal must pay  due  regard
         to the inherent weight that will normally lie on the  Secretary  of
         State's side of the scales in the  Article  8  balancing  exercise,
         given the  importance  of  maintaining  the  integrity  of  British
         nationality law in the face of attempts by individuals  to  subvert
         it by fraudulent conduct.
    (5)  Any delay by the Secretary of State in  making  a  decision  under
         section 40(2) or (3) may be relevant to  the  question  of  whether
         that decision  constitutes  a  disproportionate  interference  with
         Article 8, applying the judgment of Lord Bingham in EB  (Kosovo)  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2009]  AC  1159.   Any
         period during  which  the  Secretary  of  State  was  adopting  the
         (mistaken) stance that the grant of citizenship  to  the  appellant
         was a nullity will, however, not normally be relevant in  assessing
         the effects of delay by reference to the second and third  of  Lord
         Bingham's points in paragraphs 13 to 16 of EB (Kosovo)[1].
    (6)  If deprivation would not amount to a breach of section  6  of  the
         1998 Act, the Tribunal may allow the appeal only  if  it  concludes
         that the Secretary of  State  has  acted  in  a  way  in  which  no
         reasonable Secretary of State could  have  acted;  has  taken  into
         account some irrelevant matter;  has  disregarded  something  which
         should have been given weight; has been guilty of  some  procedural
         impropriety; or has not complied with section 40(4) (which prevents
         the Secretary of State from making an order to deprive  if  she  is
         satisfied that the order would make a person stateless).
    (7)  In reaching its conclusions under (6)  above,  the  Tribunal  must
         have regard to the nature of the  discretionary  power  in  section
         40(2) or (3)  and  the  Secretary  of  State's  responsibility  for
         deciding whether deprivation of citizenship  is  conducive  to  the
         public good.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

A.   INTRODUCTION

 1. The appellant appeals under section 40A(1) of the  British  Nationality
    Act 1981 against the respondent's  decision  of  6  September  2018  to
    deprive him of his British citizenship, pursuant to  section  40(3)  of
    that Act.  The  appellant  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  1996,
    claiming to come from Kosovo, using a false name.   In  May  1999,  the
    appellant was granted refugee status on  those  false  details.   On  4
    November 2003, he became a British  citizen,  in  the  false  name  and
    Kosovan identity.

 2. In 2005, the appellant  returned  to  Albania  in  order  to  marry  an
    Albanian citizen, who subsequently applied for entry clearance to  join
    the appellant in the United Kingdom.  In November 2005, the appellant's
    wife was interviewed at the British  Embassy  in  Tirana,  subsequently
    being given entry clearance to join the appellant, who was still  known
    by his false name.

 3. In 2007, the appellant's wife was granted indefinite leave  to  remain.
    In order  to  support  his  wife's  application  for  such  leave,  the
    appellant submitted to the respondent his Albanian  birth  certificate,
    marriage certificate and Albanian family certificate, showing  that  he
    was an Albanian national.

 4. In July 2008, the appellant changed his name  by  deed  poll  from  his
    false name to his real name and a passport was re-issued  in  his  real
    name, though the appellant's place  of  birth  was  still  recorded  as
    Pristina, Kosovo.

 5. In October 2008, the appellant sponsored the  entry  clearance  of  his
    mother to the United Kingdom, using the 2008 British passport, with the
    place of birth recorded as  Pristina,  Kosovo.   His  mother,  however,
    provided evidence in  the  form  of  an  Albanian  family  certificate,
    showing that the appellant was born in Durres, Albania.  At this point,
    the British Embassy in Tirana alerted the respondent to the problematic
    state of affairs.

 6. In February 2009, the appellant's wife became a British  citizen.   The
    previous year, she had borne the appellant a son, who is also a British
    citizen.

 7. On 14 March 2013, the appellant was issued by  the  respondent  with  a
    "nullity decision" on the basis that he had falsified elements  of  his
    identity when he applied for British citizenship.  Acting on the  basis
    of the law as it was understood to be at that  time,  the  respondent's
    stance was that, because of the appellant's deceit, the grant to him of
    British citizenship had been of no effect.

 8. In Hysaj and Others v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017]
    UKSC 82; [2018] Imm AR 699, the Supreme Court held that  the  scope  of
    the "nullity" principle was narrower than the respondent considered  it
    to be.  Accordingly, in February 2018, the appellant was advised by the
    respondent that the latter was considering depriving the  appellant  of
    his British citizenship, as a result of fraud, false representation  or
    concealment of a material fact.  On 6 September  2018,  the  respondent
    decided to deprive the appellant of his British citizenship.




B.   THE APPEAL

 9. The appellant's appeal against that decision was heard at Taylor  House
    on 13 May 2019 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Rai.  In a  decision  dated
    18 July 2019, Judge Rai dismissed the appellant's  appeal.   Permission
    to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was refused by the First-tier  Tribunal
    and, following renewal, by the Upper Tribunal.   The  Upper  Tribunal's
    refusal of permission  was,  however,  quashed,  following  a  judicial
    review in the High Court.  Permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
    was granted by the Vice President on 4 March 2021.

10. Although the hearing on 30 June 2021 was notified  to  the  parties  as
    being "for mention" only, both Ms Foot and Mr Walker had  framed  their
    written and oral submissions by reference to the issue of whether there
    was an error of law in the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Rai,
    such that the decision should be set aside. Both parties  were  content
    for the Upper Tribunal to proceed  on  that  basis.  Accordingly,  what
    follows is our decision on that issue.

11. At the time of the judicial review proceedings in the High  Court,  the
    decision of the Upper Tribunal in Hysaj  (deprivation  of  citizenship:
    delay) [2020] UKUT 00128 (IAC); [2020] Imm AR 1044 was the subject of a
    renewed application for permission to appeal to the  Court  of  Appeal.
    Subsequently, however, that renewed application was  dismissed  by  the
    Court of Appeal.

12. As a result, the present  appellant  no  longer  seeks  to  pursue  his
    argument that First-tier Tribunal  Rai  erred  in  law  in  effectively
    discounting the delay occasioned by the respondent's decision to  treat
    the grant of British citizenship to the appellant as a  nullity,  as  a
    result of which delay the appellant lost  the  opportunity  to  benefit
    from the respondent's previous policy whereby she  would  not  normally
    impugn the grant of British  citizenship  to  a  person  who  had  been
    resident in the United Kingdom for at least fourteen years.

13. The appellant, nevertheless, submits  that,  even  accounting  for  the
    respondent's reliance on her nullity decision of  14  March  2013,  she
    still failed to act on the appellant's fraud  for  almost  eight  years
    after first being put on notice of it in 2005, as a result of the entry
    clearance application of the appellant's wife.  This delay is  said  to
    reduce the public interest in  deprivation,  when  considering  if  the
    decision to deprive  would  be  a  disproportionate  interference  with
    Article 8 ECHR.  Had  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Rai  approached  the
    matter in this way, the appellant's appeal could have been  allowed  on
    Article 8 grounds.

14. Before we embark upon our analysis of this submission, it is  necessary
    to establish the overarching law regarding deprivation of citizenship.




C.   THE LAW REGARDING DEPRIVATION OF CITIZENSHIP

15. In KV (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2018]
    EWCA  Civ  2483,  Leggatt  LJ  set  out  the  following  principles  as
    applicable in an appeal under section 40A of the 1981 Act:-

         "6.  Pursuant to section 40A(1), a  person  who  is  given  such  a
             notice may appeal  against  the  decision  to  the  First-tier
             Tribunal.  The task of the tribunal on such an appeal has been
             considered by  the  Upper  Tribunal  (Immigration  and  Asylum
             Chamber) in a number of cases  including  Deliallisi  (British
             Citizen: deprivation appeal; Scope) [2013] UKUT 439 (IAC) and,
             more recently, BA (deprivation of citizenship: Appeals) [2018]
             UKUT 85 (IAC).  I would endorse the following principles which
             are articulated  in  those  decisions  and  which  I  did  not
             understand to be in dispute on this appeal:
             (1)  Like an appeal  under  section  82  of  the  Nationality,
                  Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, an appeal  under  section
                  40A of the 1981 Act is not a review of  the  Secretary  of
                  State's  decision  but  a  full  reconsideration  of   the
                  decision whether  to  deprive  the  appellant  of  British
                  citizenship.
             (2)  It is thus for the tribunal to find the relevant facts on
                  the basis of the evidence adduced to the tribunal, whether
                  or not that evidence was before  the  Secretary  of  State
                  when deciding to make a deprivation order.
             (3)  The tribunal must first establish  whether  the  relevant
                  condition precedent specified  in  section  40(2)  or  (3)
                  exists for the  exercise  of  the  discretion  whether  to
                  deprive  the  appellant  of  British  citizenship.   In  a
                  section  40(3)  case,  this  requires  the   tribunal   to
                  establish whether citizenship was obtained by one or  more
                  of the means specified in that subsection.
             (4)  If the condition precedent is established,  the  tribunal
                  has  then  to  ask  whether  the  Secretary   of   State's
                  discretion to deprive the appellant of British citizenship
                  should be exercised differently.  For  this  purpose,  the
                  tribunal must first determine the  reasonably  foreseeable
                  consequences of deprivation.
             (5)  If the rights of the  appellant  or  any  other  relevant
                  person under article 8 of the European Convention on Human
                  Rights are engaged,  the  tribunal  will  have  to  decide
                  whether depriving the  appellant  of  British  citizenship
                  would  constitute  a  disproportionate  interference  with
                  those rights.  But even if article 8 is not  engaged,  the
                  tribunal must still consider whether the discretion should
                  be exercised differently."  (Our emphasises)

16. As Underhill LJ observed in Laci v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2021] EWCA Civ 769, the second  sentence  in  sub-paragraph
    (4) of paragraph 6 of KV must be read as subject to the judgment of the
    Court of Appeal in Aziz v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    [2018] EWCA Civ 1884; [2019] Imm AR 264.  In Aziz, Sales LJ  held  that
    "at least in the usual case" it was "neither necessary nor  appropriate
    for a tribunal  considering  the  deprivation  question  to  conduct  a
    'proleptic  assessment'  of  the  likelihood  of  a   lawful   removal"
    (paragraph 26).  To this extent, therefore, the  determination  of  the
    reasonably  foreseeable  consequences  of  deprivation  must,  usually,
    exclude the issue of removal.

17.  In  addition  and  more  fundamentally,  Leggatt  LJ's  statement   of
    principles must now be read in the light of the judgment of  Lord  Reed
    in R (Begum) v Special Immigration Appeals Commission  [2021]  UKSC  7;
    [2021] Imm AR 879.  Although Lord Reed was considering the nature of an
    appeal to the Commission under section 2B of  the  Special  Immigration
    Appeals Commission Act  1997,  that  provision  is  the  equivalent  of
    section  40A  and  we  see  no  reason  to  distinguish  between  those
    provisions for present purposes.

18. The essence of Lord Reed's conclusions  on  this  issue  was  helpfully
    synthesised by Underhill LJ in paragraph 40 of Laci.  Where  Article  8
    of the ECHR is engaged, the Tribunal must "determine for itself whether
    the decision was compatible with the obligations of the  decision-maker
    under the Human Rights Act 1998".  In so doing, the Tribunal  must  pay
    due regard to the  inherent  weight  that  will  normally  lie  on  the
    respondent's side of the scales in the Article  8  balancing  exercise,
    given  the  importance  of  maintaining  the   integrity   of   British
    nationality law in the face of attempts by individuals to subvert it by
    fraudulent conduct.

19. Irrespective of whether Article 8(1) is engaged, the Tribunal must also
    determine whether the respondent's discretionary decision under section
    40(2)  or  (3)  to  deprive  the  individual  of  his  or  her  British
    citizenship was exercised correctly.  Here, however, Lord Reed has held
    that the correct approach is not to undertake a "balancing" exercise in
    which one set  of  scales  will  normally  carry  an  inherent  weight.
    Rather, the Tribunal must approach its task by reference  to  what  are
    "essentially Wednesbury principles".  The  importance  of  Lord  Reed's
    judgment is such that the following passages from it merit citation  in
    full:
         68.  ... appellate courts and tribunals cannot generally decide how
             a statutory discretion conferred upon  the  primary  decision-
             maker ought to have been exercised, or exercise the discretion
             themselves,  in  the  absence  of  any   statutory   provision
             authorising them to do so (such as  existed,  in  relation  to
             appeals under section 2 of the 1997 Act, under section 4(1) of
             the 1997 Act as originally enacted, and under  sections  84-86
             of the 2002 Act prior to their amendment in 2014: see paras 34
             and 36 above).  They are in general restricted to  considering
             whether the decision-maker has acted in  a  way  in  which  no
             reasonable decision-maker could have acted, or whether he  has
             taken into account some irrelevant matter or  has  disregarded
             something to which he should have given weight, or  has  erred
             on  a  point  of  law:  an   issue   which   encompasses   the
             consideration of factual questions, as appears, in the context
             of statutory appeals, from  Edwards  (Inspector  of  Taxes)  v
             Bairstow  [1956]  AC  14.   They  must  also   determine   for
             themselves  the  compatibility  of  the  decision   with   the
             obligations of the decision-maker under the Human Rights  Act,
             where such a question arises.
         69.  For the reasons I have explained, that appears to me to be  an
             apt description of the role of SIAC in  an  appeal  against  a
             decision taken under section 40(2).  That is not to  say  that
             SIAC's jurisdiction is supervisory rather than appellate.  Its
             jurisdiction is appellate, and  references  to  a  supervisory
             jurisdiction in this context are capable of being a source  of
             confusion.    Nevertheless,   the   characterisation   of    a
             jurisdiction as appellate does not determine the principles of
             law which the  appellate  body  is  to  apply.   As  has  been
             explained, they depend upon the nature of the  decision  under
             appeal  and  the  relevant  statutory  provisions.   Different
             principles may even apply to the same decision, where it has a
             number of aspects giving rise to different considerations,  or
             where different statutory provisions are applicable.  So,  for
             example, in appeals under section 2B of the 1997  Act  against
             decisions made under  section  40(2)  of  the  1981  Act,  the
             principles to be applied by SIAC in reviewing the Secretary of
             State's exercise of his discretion are  largely  the  same  as
             those applicable in administrative law, as I  have  explained.
             But if a question arises as to whether the Secretary of  State
             has acted incompatibly with the appellant's Convention rights,
             contrary to section 6 of the Human Rights  Act,  SIAC  has  to
             determine that matter objectively on  the  basis  of  its  own
             assessment.
         70.  In considering whether the Secretary of State has acted  in  a
             way in which no  reasonable  Secretary  of  State  could  have
             acted, or has taken into account some  irrelevant  matter,  or
             has disregarded  something  to  which  he  should  have  given
             weight,  SIAC  must  have  regard  to  the   nature   of   the
             discretionary power in question, and the Secretary of  State's
             statutory responsibility for deciding whether the  deprivation
             of citizenship is conducive to the public good.  The  exercise
             of the power conferred by section 40(2)  must  depend  heavily
             upon  a  consideration  of  relevant  aspects  of  the  public
             interest,  which  may  include  considerations   of   national
             security and public safety, as  in  the  present  case.   Some
             aspects of the Secretary of  State's  assessment  may  not  be
             justiciable, as Lord Hoffmann  explained  in  Rehman.   Others
             will depend, in many if  not  most  cases,  on  an  evaluative
             judgment of matters, such as the level and nature of the  risk
             posed  by  the  appellant,  the  effectiveness  of  the  means
             available to address it, and the acceptability or otherwise of
             the consequent danger,  which  are  incapable  of  objectively
             verifiable assessment, as Lord Hoffmann pointed out in  Rehman
             and Lord Bingham of Cornhill reiterated in A, para  29.   SIAC
             has to bear in mind, in relation to matters of this kind, that
             the  Secretary  of  State's  assessment  should  be   accorded
             appropriate  respect,  for  reasons  both   of   institutional
             capacity (notwithstanding the experience of members  of  SIAC)
             and democratic accountability, as Lord Hoffmann  explained  in
             Rehman and Lord Bingham reiterated in A, para 29.
         71.  Nevertheless, SIAC has a  number  of  important  functions  to
             perform on an appeal against a decision under  section  40(2).
             First, it can assess whether the Secretary of State has  acted
             in a way in which no reasonable Secretary of State could  have
             acted, or has taken into account some  irrelevant  matter,  or
             has disregarded  something  to  which  he  should  have  given
             weight, or has been guilty of some procedural impropriety.  In
             doing so, SIAC has to bear in mind the  serious  nature  of  a
             deprivation  of  citizenship,  and   the   severity   of   the
             consequences which can flow from such a  decision.   Secondly,
             it can consider whether the Secretary of State  has  erred  in
             law, including whether he has made findings of fact which  are
             unsupported by any evidence or are based upon a  view  of  the
             evidence which could not reasonably be held.  Thirdly, it  can
             determine whether the Secretary of  State  has  complied  with
             section 40(4), which provides that the Secretary of State  may
             not make an order under section 40(2) "if he is satisfied that
             the order would make a person stateless".   Fourthly,  it  can
             consider whether the Secretary of State has acted in breach of
             any other legal principles applicable to his decision, such as
             the obligation arising in appropriate cases under section 6 of
             the Human Rights Act.  In carrying out those  functions,  SIAC
             may well have to consider relevant evidence. It has to bear in
             mind that some decisions may involve considerations which  are
             not justiciable, and that due weight has to be  given  to  the
             findings, evaluations and policies of the Secretary of  State,
             as  Lord  Hoffmann  explained  in  Rehman  and  Lord   Bingham
             reiterated in A.   In  reviewing  compliance  with  the  Human
             Rights Act, it has to make its own independent assessment.

20. Since the judgment of Lord Bingham in EB (Kosovo) v Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department [2009] AC 1159; [2008] Imm AR 713, it has  been
    recognised that delay on the part  of  the  respondent  in  reaching  a
    decision in an individual's case can affect the outcome  of  an  appeal
    brought by the individual on the  ground  that  removal  would  violate
    Article 8. It can  do  so  in  one  or  more  of  the  following  ways,
    articulated by Lord Bingham at paragraphs 13 to 16:

    (1)  The longer an applicant remains in the  country  the  more  likely
         they are to develop close personal and social  ties  and  put  down
         roots of a kind which deserve protection under Article 8;




    (2)  The more time goes by without any steps being taken to  remove  an
         applicant, the more the sense  of  impermanence  which  will  imbue
         relationships formed earlier in  the  period  will  fade  "and  the
         expectation will grow that  if  the  authorities  had  intended  to
         remove the applicant they would have taken steps to do  so",  which
         may affect the proportionality of removal.




    (3)  Delay may "reduce the weight  otherwise  to  be  accorded  to  the
         requirements of firm and fair immigration control, if the delay  is
         shown to be the result  of  a  dysfunctional  system  which  yields
         unpredictable, inconsistent and unfair outcomes".

21. Laci is an example of how the  respondent's  delay  may  result  in  an
    individual succeeding in their section 40A appeal on Article 8 grounds.
     The relevant facts were set out by Underhill LJ as follows:-

         "5.  On 16 May 2005 the Appellant applied for British  nationality,
             which was granted on 22 August 2005.  In his application  (and
             in the previous application for ILR) he again  gave  the  same
             false date of birth and details of his nationality that he had
             given when he applied for asylum.  He also gave false  details
             about his parents' nationality. His evidence to  the  FTT  was
             that  he  felt  locked  in  to  the  lies  that  he  had  told
             originally.  He says in his witness statement that he was very
             ignorant and na�ve at the time but that he now understands the
             seriousness of his deception and that there is no  excuse  for
             it.

         6.   On 17  February  2009  the  UK  Border  Agency  wrote  to  the
             Appellant saying that the Secretary of  State  had  reason  to
             believe that he had obtained his status as a  British  citizen
             by fraud and that she was considering  whether  he  should  be
             deprived of his nationality under section 40 (3) of  the  1981
             Act.  It asked him to provide any evidence that he was in fact
             born in Kosovo and any  other  matters  which  he  wished  the
             Secretary of State to take into account in  reaching  a  final
             decision.  UKBA's letter does  not  state  the  basis  of  its
             (correct)  belief  that  the  Appellant   had   obtained   his
             naturalisation by fraud, but it  was  common  ground  that  it
             derived, albeit rather late,  from  information  supplied  two
             years previously by his mother in support  of  an  application
             (which was granted) for entry clearance to visit  him  in  the
             UK.  His evidence in the  FTT,  which  appears  to  have  been
             accepted (see para. 43 below), was that both he and his family
             had been unhappy about his having given false details in order
             to claim asylum and thereafter, but that he did not  know  how
             to go about disclosing the  truth;  and  that  he  accordingly
             agreed that his mother should supply his correct details  with
             her application "and then we would see  what  happens".   That
             falls a long way  short  of  making  a  clean  breast  of  his
             deception, but the fact remains that he  was  responsible  for
             providing the information that led to it being discovered.


         7.   The Appellant's then solicitors replied to UKBA  on  17  March
             2009.  They  admitted  what  he  had  done  but  advanced  the
             arguably mitigating circumstances noted above,  together  with
             other reasons why the Secretary of State ought not to  deprive
             the  Appellant  of   his   citizenship   notwithstanding   the
             deception.


         8.   Remarkably, the Appellant heard nothing further from the  Home
             Office for nine years, and he got on  with  his  life  on  the
             basis that a decision had been taken not to pursue the matter.
              As he put it in his witness statement in the FTT, "months and
             years went by and I believed the Home Office  was  not  taking
             any further action". He had since 2006 worked for  the  London
             Borough of Islington as a payroll  officer.  He  continued  in
             that  role  (as  he  does  to  this  day)   and   obtained   a
             qualification from the Association of Accountancy Technicians.
              In due course he became a  senior  payroll  officer,  and  an
             excellent reference from the Deputy  Payroll  Manager  was  in
             evidence before the FTT.  In April 2014 he bought  a  flat  in
             London.  In 2016 he applied for and  was  issued  with  a  new
             British passport following the expiry of his original one.


          9.  In June 2013 the Appellant married an  Albanian  national  who
             was studying in  the  UK.   In  March  2018  she  was  granted
             indefinite leave to remain, following an application in  which
             she gave the Appellant's correct  date  and  place  of  birth.
             Also in March 2018 they had a son.  He is a  British  national
             by virtue of the  Appellant's  nationality.   (I  mention  for
             completeness that they have recently had  another  child,  but
             that is not relevant to the issues before us.)


         10.  On 28 February 2018, the Home Office wrote to  the  Appellant,
             out of the blue, again notifying him  that  the  Secretary  of
             State was considering depriving him of his British citizenship
             on the basis that it had been obtained by fraud and asking him
             for any further information that he wished her  to  take  into
             account in reaching a final decision.  It makes  no  reference
             to UKBA's letter of 17 February 2009  or  to  his  solicitors'
             then reply.  (It also contains a paragraph stating that if  he
             was deprived of his British nationality he would not  be  able
             to  resume  his  previous  refugee   status;   but   that   is
             misconceived since he had been refused asylum.)


         11.  The Appellant's (new) solicitors  replied  on  21  March  2018
             advancing   arguments   against   the   deprivation   of   his
             citizenship.


         12.  On 9 April 2018 the Home Office wrote the Appellant a  further
             letter in mostly the same terms as the letter of 28  February,
             to which, and to his solicitors' reply, strangely it makes  no
             reference.   The  letter   does,   however,   refer   to   the
             correspondence  in  2009.   It  says  that   the   Appellant's
             solicitors' letter of 17 March 2009 would be  considered,  but
             that an opportunity was being given to him to provide  further
             information because of the passage of time.  In  that  context
             it refers to the fact that the "finalisation" of decisions  in
             cases under section 40 (3) had been "impacted" by the need  to
             monitor a number of appeals in other such cases which had been
             lodged in October 2009 and had only been finally determined in
             the Supreme Court in December 2017.  This is  a  reference  to
             the Hysaj group of cases to which I will refer  later  and  is
             evidently intended as an explanation of the delay.





         13.  On 22 June 2018 UK Visas and Immigration ("UKVI") wrote to the
             Appellant giving formal notice, pursuant to section 40 (5)  of
             the 1981 Act, of the Secretary of State's decision to  deprive
             him of his British citizenship under section 40  (3).   It  is
             against that decision that the Appellant appealed to the FTT."

22. The First-tier Tribunal Judge in Laci found that the delay in that case
    meant "the public interest in depriving the appellant of citizenship is
    significantly reduced" (paragraph 20 of the  decision).   Underhill  LJ
    dealt with the matter as follows:-

         "49. The Judge referred to the  delay  as  "unexplained".   In  one
             sense that is not quite accurate, because  the  Home  Office's
             letter of 9 April 2018 does refer, albeit in opaque terms,  to
             the uncertainties caused by the Hysaj litigation (see para. 19
             above).  However he was no doubt referring to  the  fact  that
             neither that nor any other  explanation  was  offered  to  the
             Appellant at any time during the nine-year  period.   That  is
             important: the impact of the delay would evidently  have  been
             different if the Appellant had been told when the Hysaj  issue
             first emerged that the Secretary  of  State  was  deferring  a
             decision in his case until it was resolved.  Having said that,
             it does not necessarily follow that the delay would have  been
             excusable. The Judge records Mr Jafar's submission that  there
             had  been  no  reason  to  await  the  outcome  of  the  Hysaj
             proceedings because the Secretary of  State  had  not  in  the
             Appellant's case sought to treat the  naturalisation  decision
             as a nullity.  Mr Malik told us,  on  instructions,  that  the
             Secretary of State's approach had been to defer a decision  in
             all  cases  in  which,  until  the  law  was  clarified,   the
             Appellant's naturalisation might have been a nullity.  Whether
             that was a legitimate approach was not explored before us, but
             it does not appear from the Reasons that that explanation  was
             offered to the FTT, in which case the delay not only  was  not
             explained to the Appellant  at  the  time  but  was  also  not
             explained to the Judge.





         50.  I turn to the factors  weighing  against  deprivation.   Those
             which the Judge appears to have  taken  into  account  are  as
             follows: I have enumerated them separately, in  the  order  in
             which they appear, though there may be a degree of overlap.




         51.  The Secretary of State's inaction.  This is the point made  in
             the first half of para. 17. It is important to appreciate that
             this is not simply a case where the Secretary of  State  could
             have taken action but did not do so.  Rather,  it  is  a  case
             where she started to take action and invited  representations,
             but then, having received those representations,  did  nothing
             for over nine years.  Indeed it goes beyond mere inaction:  as
             the Judge expressly notes,  she  took  the  positive  step  of
             renewing the Appellant's passport in 2016.  During that period
             the  Appellant  had  accordingly  come  to  believe  that  the
             Secretary of State had decided not to proceed  with  depriving
             him of his citizenship: the Judge does not say this in  terms,
             but that had  been  the  Appellant's  evidence  (see  para.  8
             above), and it  was  common  ground  that  he  was  an  honest
             witness.  That understanding, on the part of a layperson,  was
             hardly unreasonable and would have been further  confirmed  by
             the renewal of his passport.  There  is  arguably  an  overlap
             between this factor and the Judge's identification of delay as
             a reason going to diminish the public  interest  in  depriving
             the Appellant of his citizenship, but that is unobjectionable:
             it is often a matter of choice whether to treat  a  factor  as
             adding to the weight on one side of the balance or as reducing
             it on the other.  (It was not suggested that any such  overlap
             here led to the Judge's reasoning being  vitiated  by  double-
             counting.)"

23. At paragraph  76,  Underhill  LJ  examined  the  delay  in  making  the
    deprivation decision in Mr Laci's case by reference to the three points
    made by Lord Bingham in EB (Kosovo) (paragraph 20 above).  Having found
    that the first point did not apply and that  the  second  did  so  only
    faintly, he continued:

         "Lord Bingham's third point does potentially apply, because it goes
         to reduce the weight of the public interest involved; and  that  is
         consistent with how the FTT treated the delay in this case.   I  do
         not think it is necessary to treat his reference to the delay being
         "the result of a dysfunctional system which  yields  unpredictable,
         inconsistent and unfair outcomes" as definitive  of  the  kinds  of
         case in which delay may be relevant: he clearly  had  in  mind  the
         facts of  EB  (Kosovo)  itself.   Lady  Hale  put  it  rather  more
         generally: the delay in  this  case  was,  in  Lady  Hale's  words,
         prolonged  and  (on  the  case  as  presented   before   the   FTT)
         inexcusable."

24. At paragraph 78, Underhill LJ distinguished between delay of  the  kind
    discussed by the Upper Tribunal in Hysaj; that is to say,  delay  which
    arose from the respondent's decision to  pursue  the  "nullity"  route,
    until the Supreme Court judgment and, on the other  hand,  delay  that,
    upon analysis, cannot properly be attributed to the issue of nullity:-

         "78. I should note that the UT in Hysaj rejected an argument  based
             on delay: see paras. 46-63 of its Reasons. But the facts  were
             very different.  Although there was a delay of much  the  same
             length as in  this  case  between  the  Secretary  of  State's
             original notification that she was considering  depriving  the
             appellant  of  his  British  citizenship  and   her   eventual
             decision,  much  of  that  period  was  spent   pursuing   the
             ultimately unsuccessful nullity  alternative.   There  was  no
             suggestion that the appellant (who was also for  part  of  the
             period serving a prison sentence)  ever  understood  that  the
             Secretary of State was not pursuing any  further  action,  let
             alone anything equivalent to the period of nine years' silence
             in this case (and the renewal of  the  Appellant's  passport).
             Rather, the issue in the UT was whether the Secretary of State
             was disentitled to pursue deprivation  under  section  40  (3)
             because of her wrong-headed pursuit of the nullity option."

25. So far as concerns disruption to day-to-day  life  caused  by  loss  of
    citizenship, Underhill LJ at paragraph 80 approved the finding  of  the
    Upper Tribunal in paragraph 110 of Hysaj, which reads:-

         "There is a heavy weight to be placed upon the public  interest  in
         maintaining the integrity of the system by which foreign  nationals
         are naturalised and permitted to  enjoy  the  benefits  of  British
         citizenship.  That deprivation will cause disruption in  day-to-day
         life is a consequence of the appellant's own  actions  and  without
         more, such  as  the  loss  of  rights  previously  enjoyed,  cannot
         possibly tip the proportionality balance in favour of his retaining
         the benefits of citizenship that he fraudulently secured."

26. In approving that  passage,  Underhill  LJ  pointed  out  that  it  was
    "important to note the 'without more'" in paragraph 110 of  Hysaj.   He
    held that "where there is something more (as, here,  the  Secretary  of
    State's prolonged and unexplained delay/inaction),  the  problems  that
    may arise in the limbo period may properly carry weight in the  overall
    assessment".

27.  All  of  this  caused  Underhill  LJ,  on  balance  "and  not  without
    hesitation" to accept that the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  entitled  to
    regard the respondent's inaction "wholly unexplained at  the  time  and
    for so extraordinary a period as sufficiently  compelling,  when  taken
    with all the other circumstances of the case,  to  justify  a  decision
    that the appellant should not be deprived of his citizenship".   In  so
    saying, Underhill LJ recognised that:-

         "not every tribunal would have reached the same conclusion  as  the
         FTT in this case.  However, that is not the test.  We are concerned
         with the exercise of a judicial discretion, and  it  is  inevitable
         that different judges will sometimes reach different conclusions on
         similar facts." (paragraph 8).

28. Whether or not one considers the proportionality balancing exercise  in
    Article 8(2) as involving the exercise of judicial discretion, it is  a
    mixed question of fact and  law  leading  to  the  making  of  a  value
    judgment.  As  such,  different  judges  can  validly  reach  different
    conclusions by reference to the same or similar facts.



D.   THE LEGAL PRINCIPLES REGARDING APPEALS AGAINST DECISIONS TO  DEPRIVE  A
    PERSON OF BRITISH CITIZENSHIP

29. Before returning to the present case, we shall attempt  to  reformulate
    the principles articulated by Leggatt LJ in KV (Sri  Lanka)  in  a  way
    which  takes  account  of  Aziz,  R  (Begum),  Hysaj  (deprivation   of
    citizenship: delay) and Laci. In the light of Lord Reed's  judgment  in
    Begum, the reformulation needs to highlight the fact that, in practice,
    where there is no issue regarding the conditions precedent mentioned in
    Leggatt LJ's  original principle (3), the Tribunal's starting point  is
    highly likely to be the ECHR and the compatibility of the Secretary  of
    State's deprivation decision with her obligation under section 6 of the
    Human Rights Act 1998 not to act in a way that is incompatible  with  a
    Convention right.  If  that  issue  is  determined  in  favour  of  the
    appellant, then the appeal must be allowed.   Otherwise,  the  Tribunal
    will consider whether to allow the appeal, according to the  principles
    set out in paragraphs 68 to 71 of the judgment of Lord Reed in Begum.

30. Our reformulation is as follows.
    (1)  The Tribunal must first establish whether the  relevant  condition
         precedent specified in section 40(2) or (3) of the 1981 Act  exists
         for the exercise of the discretion whether to deprive the appellant
         of British citizenship.  In a section 40(3) case, this requires the
         Tribunal to establish whether citizenship was obtained  by  one  or
         more of the means specified in that subsection.  In  answering  the
         condition precedent question, the Tribunal must adopt the  approach
         set out in paragraph 71 of the  judgment  in  Begum,  which  is  to
         consider whether the Secretary of State has made findings  of  fact
         which are unsupported by any evidence or are based on a view of the
         evidence that could not reasonably be held.
    (2)  If the relevant condition precedent is established,  the  Tribunal
         must determine whether the rights of the  appellant  or  any  other
         relevant person under the ECHR are engaged (usually Article 8).  If
         they are, the Tribunal must decide for itself whether depriving the
         appellant of British citizenship would constitute  a  violation  of
         those rights, contrary to the obligation under  section  6  of  the
         Human Rights Act 1998 not to act in a way that is incompatible with
         the ECHR.
    (3)  In so doing:
         (a)   the  Tribunal  must  determine  the  reasonably   foreseeable
             consequences of deprivation; but it will not be  necessary  or
             appropriate for the Tribunal (at least in the usual  case)  to
             conduct a  proleptic  assessment  of  the  likelihood  of  the
             appellant being lawfully removed from the United Kingdom; and
         (b)  any relevant assessment of proportionality is for the Tribunal
             to make, on the evidence before it (which may not be the  same
             as the evidence considered by the Secretary of State).
    (4)  In determining proportionality, the Tribunal must pay  due  regard
         to the inherent weight that will normally lie on the  Secretary  of
         State's side of the scales in the  Article  8  balancing  exercise,
         given the  importance  of  maintaining  the  integrity  of  British
         nationality law in the face of attempts by individuals  to  subvert
         it by fraudulent conduct.
    (5)  Any delay by the Secretary of State in  making  a  decision  under
         section 40(2) or (3) may be relevant to  the  question  of  whether
         that decision  constitutes  a  disproportionate  interference  with
         Article 8, applying the judgment of Lord Bingham  in  EB  (Kosovo).
         Any period during which the Secretary of  State  was  adopting  the
         (mistaken) stance that the grant of citizenship  to  the  appellant
         was a nullity will, however, not normally be relevant in  assessing
         the effects of delay by reference to the second and third  of  Lord
         Bingham's points in EB (Kosovo) (see paragraph 20 above).
    (6)  If deprivation would not amount to a breach of section  6  of  the
         1998 Act, the Tribunal may allow the appeal only  if  it  concludes
         that the Secretary of  State  has  acted  in  a  way  in  which  no
         reasonable Secretary of State could  have  acted;  has  taken  into
         account some irrelevant matter;  has  disregarded  something  which
         should have been given weight; has been guilty of  some  procedural
         impropriety; or has not complied with section 40(4) (which prevents
         the Secretary of State from making an order to deprive  if  she  is
         satisfied that the order would make a person stateless).
    (7)  In reaching its conclusions under (6)  above,  the  Tribunal  must
         have regard to the nature of the  discretionary  power  in  section
         40(2) or (3)  and  the  Secretary  of  State's  responsibility  for
         deciding whether deprivation of citizenship  is  conducive  to  the
         public good.

E.   THE DECISION OF THE FIRST-TIER TRIBUNAL

31. In the present case, First-tier Tribunal Judge  Rai  made  findings  on
    delay that were adverse to the appellant:

         "37. A relevant issue submitted by Ms Foot for me to  consider  was
             whether the delay by the respondent in addressing  deprivation
             meant the appellant could not benefit  from  the  respondent's
             policy in force between February 2009 and  August  2014.   The
             policy stated those who had been resident in  the  UK  for  14
             years were not normally deprived of their citizenship.   I  do
             not agree with this submission.  The respondent first wrote to
             the appellant stating his intention to consider depriving  him
             of his citizenship in 2009.  At that time, he  identified  the
             fraud and went on to make a nullity  decision  in  2013.   The
             appellant did not seek to judicially review  the  decision  at
             the time, which he states he did not receive as his solicitors
             had gone into administration.  The appellant did  not  contact
             the respondent to find out any further information.  The delay
             thereafter  was  caused,  partly  by  a  change  in  the  law,
             resulting in the respondent withdrawing the  nullity  decision
             and replacing it with a deprivation of  citizenship  decision.
             Throughout, the respondent made clear his intention, that as a
             result of fraud committed by the  appellant,  he  intended  to
             take action."

32. The reference in paragraph 37 to a "change in the law" needs to be read
    with caution. The law did not change as a result of the judgment of the
    Supreme Court in Hysaj. Rather, in accordance  with  established  legal
    principles, the Supreme Court identified an error in the way  in  which
    the Secretary of State had understood the law. Nothing  material  turns
    on this, however.

33. At paragraph 37, Judge  Rai  was  considering  whether  the  respondent
    should  have  exercised  her   discretionary   power   of   deprivation
    differently.  Compatibly with the principles set out  in  paragraph  30
    above, this means that the judge must have concluded that the delay  in
    the present case was not such as to diminish the weight to be given  to
    the factors weighing  in  the  Secretary  of  State's  favour  for  the
    purposes of Article 8(2) of the ECHR. Having regard to the latest  case
    law, paragraph 37 contains an approach  to  delay  that  was  perfectly
    legitimate.

34. There is, in any event, a clear difference between  the  delay  in  the
    present case and that in Laci.  Despite Ms Foot's able submissions,  we
    find that Judge Rai was entitled to place  no  significant  weight,  in
    favour of the appellant, upon the period between  November  2005,  when
    the appellant's wife was interviewed by the British Embassy in  Tirana,
    and 2013, when the appellant was  issued  with  the  nullity  decision.
    There is no indication that the British Embassy drew  the  respondent's
    attention  to  anything  untoward  arising  from  the  entry  clearance
    interview with the appellant's wife.  In 2007,  it  is  true  that  the
    appellant submitted his Albanian birth certificate, in support  of  his
    wife's application for indefinite leave to remain.  The appellant  was,
    however, still operating under his false name.  Furthermore,  when  the
    appellant was re-issued with his British passport, in 2008,  his  place
    of birth was still recorded as Kosovo,  even  though  he  had  by  then
    reverted to his real name.

35. In short, during this period the true facts were still being materially
    obscured by the appellant.  The position can be said  to  have  changed
    only in  October  2008,  when  the  appellant  sponsored  his  mother's
    application for entry clearance.  This resulted in  her  providing  the
    British Embassy with her Albanian family  certificate,  which  led  the
    Embassy to alert the respondent.  At most, only some  four  years  five
    months elapsed between this alert and the decision  in  March  2013  to
    issue the appellant with a nullity decision.

36. Bearing in  mind  what  Underhill  LJ  said  in  Laci,  Judge  Rai  was
    undoubtedly entitled to  find  that  any  delay  on  the  part  of  the
    respondent in the present case did not have the effect  of  diminishing
    the respondent's reliance upon the public interest;  or  in  increasing
    the weight to be given to the appellant's  case,  such  as,  in  either
    event, to entitle the appellant to succeed under Article 8.




F.   DECISION

37. We accordingly find that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  does
    not contain an error of law, such as to make it appropriate to set  the
    decision aside.  The appellant's appeal is, accordingly, dismissed.








                               Signed


                               Mr Justice Lane




                               The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                               President of the Upper Tribunal
                               Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                               6 September 2021

                           -----------------------
[1]  (2) The more time goes by without any steps being taken  to  remove  an
    applicant,  the  more  the  sense  of  impermanence  which  will  imbue
    relationships  formed  earlier  in  the  period  will  fade  "and   the
    expectation will grow that if the authorities had  intended  to  remove
    the applicant they would have taken steps to do so", which  may  affect
    the proportionality of removal.


 (3) Delay  may  "reduce  the  weight  otherwise  to  be  accorded  to  the
    requirements of firm and fair immigration  control,  if  the  delay  is
    shown  to  be  the  result  of  a  dysfunctional  system  which  yields
    unpredictable, inconsistent and unfair outcomes".

