
                                    [pic]
|Upper Tribunal                  |                                |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)|                                |
|                                                                 |
|EP (Albania) & Ors (rule 34 decisions; setting aside) [2021] UKUT|
|00233 (IAC)                                                      |

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 10-11 June and 29 June 2021   |                                 |
|                                 |.................................|
|                                 |......                           |

                                   Before

                              MR JUSTICE SWIFT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL

                                   Between

                              (1) EP (albania)
                        (2) mohammed karim chowdhury
                               (3) FMR (iraq)
                             (4) iq (palestine)
                              (5) cee (nigeria)
                              (6) sr (jamaica)
                            (7) TO & Bo (nigeria)
                               (8) gs (india)
                         (9) olajide james olatunde
                            (10) ramanathan annes
                              (11) golam kibrea
                               (12) RF (ghana)
                               (13) RSS (iraq)
                             (14) wajid hussain
                       (15) morenike tolulope onayemi
                           (16) SS, As & SS (iran)
                             (17) danyal jannat
                              (18) MB (eritrea)
                                                                  Applicants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


 1.  The  Upper  Tribunal  considered  applications  under  rule  43   made
    consequent on the judgment in R (JCWI) v President of UT  (IAC)  [2020]
    EWHC 3103 (Admin)  ("the  JCWI  judgment")  which  had  concluded  that
    guidance set out in a Presidential Guidance Note dated 23 March 2020 on
    the determination of  error  of  law  appeals  without  a  hearing  was
    unlawful.

2.   A rule 43 application can be made notwithstanding that  an  appeal  has
    been retained for remaking in the Upper Tribunal but has not  yet  been
    remade. The fact that an application for permission to appeal has  been
    made and/or determined, whether by the Upper Tribunal or the  Court  of
    Appeal does not give rise to  any  jurisdictional  bar  to  a  rule  43
    application.

3.   Subject to any matters arising from the circumstances of  a  particular
    case, an Upper Tribunal Judge may determine an application  under  rule
    43 to set aside her own decision without  offending  the  rule  against
    apparent bias.

4.   The Upper Tribunal rejected the submission that the consequence of  the
    JCWI judgment was that every rule 34  decision  to  proceed  without  a
    hearing taken following the issue of  the  Presidential  Guidance  Note
    amounted to a procedural irregularity. A decision made under rule 34 to
    determine an error of law appeal without a hearing would  amount  to  a
    procedural irregularity for the purposes of rule  43  if  the  rule  34
    decision rested on  an  error  of  law.   Whether  or  not  a  relevant
    procedural irregularity occurred must depend on scrutiny of  each  rule
    34 decision, and the reasons given for it. The question is whether  the
    decision that it would be fair to determine the appeal in issue without
    a hearing was wrong in law.

5.   The Upper Tribunal gave guidance on matters likely to  be  relevant  or
    irrelevant to the decision on any rule 43 application  made  consequent
    on the JCWI judgment.

6.   Where a  procedural  irregularity  is  established,  it  is  necessary,
    pursuant to rule 43, to  consider  whether  the  interests  of  justice
    require the decision to be set aside. In cases such as the present ones
    where the conclusion is that the rule 34 decision rested on an error of
    law, the interests of justice  will  require  that  the  error  of  law
    decision be set aside save where it is beyond argument that the outcome
    would be the same if the error of law appeal were to be reheard.


Representation:

For the Applicants:

 1) Lawrence Youssefian, instructed by Prime Solicitors
 2) Lawrence Youssefian, instructed by Hubers Law
 3) Rory O'Ryan, instructed by Barnes, Harrild & Dyer Solicitors
 4) Tassadat Hussain, instructed by Halliday Reeves Solicitors
 5) Chowdhury Sultan, instructed by Quintessence Solicitors
 6) Emma Rutherford, instructed by TRP Solicitors
 7) Rajiv Sharva, instructed by A Seelhoff Solicitors
 8) Emma Rutherford, instructed by Cartwright King Solicitors
 9) Pierre Georget, instructed by Perera & Co Solicitors
10) Frances Allen, instructed by Paul John & Co Solicitors
11) Chowdhury Sultan, instructed by Wildan Legal Solicitors
12) Charlotte Kilroy QC and Alasdair Mackenzie,  instructed  by  the  Joint
    Council for the Welfare of Immigrants
13) Amarjit Seehra, instructed by Barnes, Harrild & Dyer Solicitors
14) Glen Hodgetts, instructed  by  Clyde  Solicitors  (written  submissions
    only)
15) Charlotte Kilroy QC and Alasdair Mackenzie,  instructed  by  the  Joint
    Council for the Welfare of Immigrants
16) Lawrence Youssefian, instructed by Simman Solicitors
17) Alasdair Henderson, instructed by Fadiga & Co Solicitors
18) Tassadat Hussain, instructed by Fountain Solicitors (Walsall)

For the Respondent:    Peter Deller, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

A.   Introduction

   1. This is the decision of both members of the Tribunal. On  20  November
      2020 Mr Justice Fordham handed down his judgment in JCWI  v  President
      Upper Tribunal (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  [2020]  EWHC  3103
      (Admin) ([2021] PTSR 800, "the JCWI case").  The judgment concerned  a
      challenge to the legality of a Presidential  Guidance  Note  dated  23
      March 2020 ("the Guidance Note") issued by Mr Justice Lane,  President
      of the Upper Tribunal Immigration and Asylum Chamber  ("UTIAC").   The
      Guidance Note took its lead from a Practice Direction  issued  by  Sir
      Ernest Ryder, then Senior President of Tribunals,  on  19  March  2020
      (the Pilot Practice Direction: Contingency Arrangements in the  First-
      tier Tribunal and the Upper  Tribunal  -  "the  Practice  Direction").
      Both the Practice Direction and the Guidance Note were issued  in  the
      face of the first wave of the Covid-19 pandemic: on 16 March 2020  the
      Secretary of State for Health and Social Care had stated in the  House
      of Commons that all unnecessary social contact  should  cease;  on  23
      March 2020 the Prime Minister had made a  public  address  instructing
      the public to stay at home;  on  25  March  2020  section  55  of  the
      Coronavirus Act 2020 came into force making provision  for  court  and
      tribunal hearings to be conducted remotely by video; on 26 March  2020
      the Health Protection (Coronavirus, Restrictions) England  Regulations
      2020 came into force - the Regulations that gave legal  force  to  the
      Prime Minister's "stay at home" instruction.

   2. Paragraph 4 of the Practice Direction stated:

           "Where a Chamber's procedure rules allow decisions  to  be  made
           without a hearing, decisions should usually be made in this way,
           provided this is in accordance with  the  overriding  objective,
           the parties' ECHR rights and the Chamber's procedure rules about
           notice and consent."

   3. The Guidance Note was issued "pursuant to the Practice Direction"  and
      was intended  to  remain  in  force  only  so  long  as  the  Practice
      Direction: see paragraph 2.  It set out a narrative that explained how
      appeals to UTIAC from the First-tier Tribunal (Immigration and  Asylum
      Chamber), brought pursuant to section 12 of the Tribunals, Courts  and
      Enforcement Act 2007 ("the 2007  Act")  could  be  decided  without  a
      hearing, using the power at rule 34 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
      Tribunal) Rules ("the Upper Tribunal Rules").  By section  12  of  the
      2007 Act an appeal lies from the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal but only if the decision of the First-tier Tribunal was wrong
      in law; these appeals are commonly  referred  to  as  "error  of  law"
      hearings or appeals. If the error of law appeal  succeeds,  the  Upper
      Tribunal may then either  send  the  matter  back  to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal to be decided again ("remitted hearing") or retain the matter
      and re-make the original decision itself  ("retained  hearing").   The
      Guidance Note said very little about how remitted or retained hearings
      should be conducted, and nothing that is material for our purposes.

   4. The challenge to  the  Guidance  Note  before  Fordham  J  focused  on
      paragraphs 9 to 17 of the Note.  (The JCWI case as originally pleaded,
      also  included  a  challenge  to  the  Practice  Direction,  but  that
      challenge was dismissed at the permission stage.)  Fordham J concluded
      that paragraphs 9 - 17 of  the  Guidance  Note  were  unlawful.   This
      conclusion rested on his application of the principle referred  to  in
      R(Letts) v Lord Chancellor [2015] 1 WLR 4497. He  concluded  that  the
      content of the Guidance Note was materially in error on  a  matter  of
      law in that it conveyed what he termed an "overall paper norm" meaning
      that it promoted the use of no-hearing determinations as the usual  or
      general way in which error of law appeals should  be  decided  without
      reference to the provisos at paragraph 4 of the Practice  Direction  -
      i.e., the references to the overriding objective (rule 2 of the  Upper
      Tribunal Rules) and fair hearing rights arising at common law or under
      the ECHR.

   5. The Order made by Fordham  J  consequent  on  his  judgment  in  JCWI,
      declared that paragraphs 9 - 17 of the Guidance Note were unlawful[1].
       The Order also recorded an undertaking given by the President to  use
      reasonable endeavours to  bring  the  judgment  to  the  attention  of
      claimants in cases that had been determined without a hearing  and  in
      which the Home Secretary had succeeded.  That undertaking is, at least
      in part, the cause of the hearing before us.  Following publication of
      the judgment in the JCWI case, the Upper Tribunal contacted  some  285
      claimants to bring Fordham J's judgment to their attention.   Some  80
      applications under rule 43 of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Rules  have  been
      received by UTIAC from parties who lost appeals that  were  determined
      without a  hearing.  Whilst  such  applications  would  ordinarily  be
      considered on the papers, we have heard 18 such applications with  the
      intention both of determining each rule 43  application  and  deciding
      various issues common to these applications and which  are  likely  to
      inform the outcome in other rule 43 applications which, for now,  have
      been stayed.

   6. The applications were initially due to be heard on 10-11 June 2021, at
      which  time  social  distancing  and  capacity  constraints  were   in
      operation in hearing rooms at Field House.  For that reason,  half  of
      the cases were listed to be heard on 10 June 2021 with the other  half
      listed to be heard on 11 June 2021. The  intention  was  that  general
      submissions on the law would be made by Ms Kilroy QC on 10  June  2021
      and that each of the representatives would then have an opportunity to
      make  any  additional  submissions  on  the  law,  followed   by   the
      submissions which were specific to their individual cases. Mr  Deller,
      the Senior Home Office Presenting Officer instructed by the  Secretary
      of State for the purposes of these applications was then  to  respond,
      and the rule 43 applicants would then have the opportunity  to  reply.
      Provision was made for the proceedings  to  be  viewed  remotely  (via
      Microsoft Teams) so that any advocate or applicant who  could  not  be
      physically present in the hearing room could nevertheless see and hear
      all the submissions made.

   7. In the event, Ms Kilroy's general submissions on the law occupied  the
      whole of 10 June 2021; some (but not all) counsel who had been due  to
      make their submissions on that  day  were  unable  to  return  on  the
      following day; and it was necessary to list a third day (29 June 2021)
      on which we heard their submissions,  Mr  Deller's  response  and  any
      replies.  Only one objection was raised (by Mr Sharma for TO & BO)  to
      the procedure followed and we should state - as we did  on  the  final
      day - that we are satisfied that no applicant has  been  disadvantaged
      in any way by the course taken.

   8. Each of the rule 43 applications before us seeks to have set aside the
      Upper Tribunal's substantive decision on the error of  law  appeal  on
      the basis that that decision was reached by  reason  of  a  procedural
      irregularity.  Rule  43  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Rules  permits  the
      Tribunal to set aside its own decision which disposes  of  proceedings
      and remake the decision if  (a)  any  of  four  prescribed  conditions
      concerning procedural irregularity is  met,  and  (b)  it  is  in  the
      interests of justice to set  the  decision  aside.   In  each  of  the
      applications before us the procedural irregularity relied  on  is  the
      Upper Tribunal's decision under rule 34 to  determine  the  appeal  on
      consideration of written representations alone and without a  hearing.
      Our premise when  considering  each  of  these  applications  is  that
      Fordham J's  conclusion  that  the  Guidance  Note  was  unlawful  was
      correct. The Secretary of State did not seek to argue otherwise.   One
      issue for us (both generically and on the facts  of  each  application
      now before  us)  has  been  to  determine  the  significance  of  that
      conclusion.   Fordham J's judgment  in  the  JCWI  case  does  not  go
      further than the  conclusion  that  part  of  the  Guidance  Note  was
      unlawful; none of the appeals in which rule 43 applications  have  now
      been made was before Fordham J; and he reached no  conclusion  in  his
      judgment as to whether in any specific appeal, the decision under rule
      34 to proceed without a hearing was lawful.

B.   Relevant Provisions

   9. The Guidance Note was directed to the application of rule 34(1) -  (2)
      of the Upper Tribunal Rules, which is as follows:


           "34. - Decision with or without a hearing
           (1)    Subject to paragraphs (2) and (3), the Upper Tribunal may
           make any decision without a hearing.


           (2)    The Upper Tribunal must have regard to any view expressed
           by a party when deciding whether to hold a hearing  to  consider
           any matter, and the form of any such hearing."


  10. The material part of the Guidance Note, paragraphs 9 to 17, said  this
      (footnotes omitted):


           "Making Certain Appeal Decisions Without A Hearing

           9.     Rule 34 gives  the  UTIAC  power  to  make  decisions  in
           appeals without a hearing. Provided it has regard to any view of
           a party or parties, the UTIAC may do  so  without  the  parties'
           consent. Paragraph 4 of the Practice  Direction  provides  that,
           during the pandemic, decisions should usually be  made  in  this
           way.

           10.    In view of this,  a  UTIAC  judge  will  examine  on  the
           papers, any case where permission has  been  granted  to  appeal
           against a decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  and  where  a
           hearing has not yet taken place  in  UTIAC.  This  will  happen,
           irrespective of whether an adjournment of the hearing  has  been
           sought.

           11.    The judge will consider whether, in all the circumstances
           known to the judge, his or her provisional view is that it would
           be appropriate for  UTIAC  to  decide  the  following  questions
           without a hearing:

                 (a)   whether  the  making  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
                 decision involved the making of an error on a point of law;
                 and, if so

                 (b)  whether the First-tier Tribunal's decision  should  be
                 set aside.

           12.    Where the judge reaches that provisional view, he or  she
           will give directions to the parties, including  a  direction  to
           the party who has  been  given  permission  to  appeal  to  make
           further submissions on the error of law and set aside issues;  a
           direction for the other party to file and serve any  submissions
           in response; and (where there is such a response), directions to
           the appellant to file and serve a reply.

           13.    The process just described will include  a  direction  to
           enable the parties, within  a  stated  time,  to  express  their
           respective views, if any, on whether there should be  a  hearing
           to decide the questions in paragraph 11(a) and (b) above, giving
           reasons for any such views. The judge will have  regard  to  any
           such views, pursuant to rule 34(2).

           14.    In formulating the process, the UTIAC is drawing  on  its
           expertise since 2010  in  making  error  of  law  decisions  and
           decisions on whether, in the light of finding an error  of  law,
           the First-tier Tribunal's decision should be set  aside.  It  is
           unusual for the questions in paragraph 11(a) and  (b)  above  to
           require oral evidence and/or findings of fact by UTIAC; but,  if
           that is  the  position,  the  judge  may  decide  a  hearing  is
           necessary.   The   presence   of   particularly    complex    or
           novel/important issues of law may also be such as to necessitate
           a hearing.

           15.    The judge can also be expected to have regard to  whether
           a party is unrepresented,  in  deciding  whether  a  hearing  is
           necessary to decide the questions in paragraph 11(a) and (b). It
           is  important  to  appreciate  that  the   fact   a   party   is
           unrepresented will not necessarily lead the judge to conclude  a
           hearing is necessary. On the  contrary,  a  person  with  no  or
           limited English language ability may  find  it  easier  to  make
           their submissions in writing, with the assistance of a relative,
           friend or other third party, rather than to  address  the  UTIAC
           orally, through an interpreter, on what are legal issues.  Here,
           as elsewhere,  the  judge  will  have  regard  to  all  relevant
           circumstances.

           16.    In deciding whether it is necessary to  hold  a  hearing,
           the judge can be expected to have regard to paragraph 4  of  the
           Practice Direction and rule 2 of the UT Rules. The fact that the
           outcome of the appeal is of importance to a  party  (or  another
           person) will not, without more, constitute a reason to convene a
           hearing to decide the relevant questions. Almost all appeals  in
           the immigration jurisdiction are important  to  the  individuals
           affected; and to the Secretary of State, in the discharge of her
           statutory responsibilities.  In  particular,  human  rights  and
           protection  appeals  necessarily  involve  the  prospect  of  an
           individual being removed from the United Kingdom.

           17.    It is important to emphasise the  limited  scope  of  the
           process described in this Part of the Guidance. It  is  confined
           to whether the First-tier Tribunal's decision should  stand.  If
           the decision reached is that the First-tier Tribunal's  decision
           should be set aside, the  UTIAC  will  then  need  to  determine
           whether to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal or  re-make
           the decision. In reaching its determination on that  issue,  the
           UTIAC will require the parties'  submissions,  if  it  does  not
           already have them. If the outcome is that the appeal  should  be
           re-made in the  UTIAC,  then,  again,  the  parties  can  expect
           further directions. In the event that oral evidence needs to  be
           given and findings of fact made, in order to re-make, the  UTIAC
           is more likely to proceed by way of a hearing; but where some or
           all of this  evidence  is  uncontroversial,  UT  rule  15(1)(e),
           permitting evidence to be given by witness statement, may be  of
           assistance."




     Fordham J's criticisms of  the  Guidance  Note  were  directed  to  the
      passage at paragraph 9 and from paragraphs 14 - 16 (see  his  judgment
      at paragraphs 4.5 and 4.9 - 4.13).

  11. Paragraphs 10 to 13 of the Guidance Note described a process  intended
      to ensure that the requirement in rule 34(2) was met.   As  Fordham  J
      noted, these paragraphs in the Guidance Note led each Tribunal to give
      directions to the parties to make representations before any  rule  34
      decision was made.  At paragraph 4.17 he referred to one such  set  of
      directions, and commented as follows:


           "4.17  I was shown a template Standard Directions document which
           falls into that category: it was a document  provided  to  UTIAC
           Judges after the PGN was issued. It states:


                "1.  I have reviewed the file in this case. In the light  of
                the present need to take precautions against the  spread  of
                Covid-19, and the  overriding  objective  expressed  in  the
                Procedure Rules [fn. The overriding objective is  to  enable
                the Upper Tribunal to deal with  cases  fairly  and  justly:
                rule 2(1) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
                2008; see also  rule  2(2)  to  (4)],  I  have  reached  the
                provisional view that it would in this case  be  appropriate
                to determine the following questions without a hearing:  (a)
                whether the making of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
                involved the making of an error  of  law,  and,  if  so  (b)
                whether that decision should be set aside.  2.  I  therefore
                make the following DIRECTIONS ..."


           This document is consistent with the message that there  was  to
           be an 'overall paper norm'.  But  I  do  not  accept  that  this
           document materially assists the exercise  in  interpretation  of
           the PGN. It  is  the  PGN  which  communicates  the  'guidance'.
           These Standard Directions could  have  been  issued  alongside
           guidance which communicated an overall paper norm, or an overall
           hearing norm, or no overall norm. Ms Kilroy QC, rightly, did not
           place any real weight on the Standard Directions."

     What this makes  clear  is  that  Fordham  J  did  not  consider  these
      procedural matters said anything one way or the other as to the merits
      of the substantive provisions in the Guidance Note. In submissions  to
      us, various of the applicants did maintain that the  directions  given
      were material when deciding whether the relevant rule 34 decision  had
      given rise to a procedural irregularity for rule 43 purposes.

  12. As we have already said, the  applications  before  us  were  advanced
      primarily under rule 43  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Rules  -  i.e.,  as
      applications to set aside  the  decisions  in  error  of  law  appeals
      determined without a hearing in exercise of the power under  rule  34.
      At the hearing, some of the applicants suggested other  provisions  in
      the Rules and in the 2007 Act that might be used to address any  error
      arising from the rule 34 decisions.  For the reasons set out below  we
      do not consider that resort to any power other than rule 43 is  either
      necessary or appropriate. That being so, in this part of the  judgment
      we need only to set out the material part of rule 43.


           "43. -  Setting aside a decision which disposes of proceedings


           (1)    The  Upper  Tribunal  may  set  aside  a  decision  which
           disposes of proceedings, or part of such a decision, and re-make
           the decision or the relevant part of it, if-


                (a)  the  Upper  Tribunal  considers  that  it  is  in  the
                interests of justice to do so; and
                (b)  one or more of the conditions  in  paragraph  (2)  are
                satisfied.


           (2)  The conditions are-


                (a)  a document relating to the proceedings was not sent to,
                or was not received at an appropriate time by, a party or  a
                party's representative;
                (b)  a document relating to the proceedings was not sent to
                the Upper Tribunal at an appropriate time;
                (c)  a party, or a party's representative, was not  present
                at a hearing related to the proceedings; or
                (d)  there has been some other procedural  irregularity  in
                the proceedings.


           (3)    Except where paragraph (4) applies, a party applying  for
           a decision, or part  of  a  decision,  to  be  set  aside  under
           paragraph (1) must make  a  written  application  to  the  Upper
           Tribunal so that it is received no later than 1 month after  the
           date on which the Upper Tribunal sent notice of the decision to
           the party.


           (4)    In an asylum case or an  immigration  case,  the  written
           application referred  to  in  paragraph  (3)  must  be  sent  or
           delivered so that it is received by the Upper Tribunal-


                (a)  where  the  person  who  appealed  to  the  First-tier
                Tribunal is in the United  Kingdom  at  the  time  that  the
                application is made, no later than  twelve  days  after  the
                date on which the Upper Tribunal or, as the case may  be  in
                an  asylum  case,  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
                Department, sent notice of the decision to the party  making
                the application; or
                (b)  where  the  person  who  appealed  to  the  First-tier
                Tribunal is outside the United Kingdom at the time that  the
                application is made, no later than thirty-eight  days  after
                the date on which the Upper  Tribunal  sent  notice  of  the
                decision to the party making the application.


           (5)    Where a notice of  decision  is  sent  electronically  or
           delivered personally, the time limits in paragraph (4)  are  ten
           working days."


  13. Thus, the Tribunal may set aside its own decision if any  one  of  the
      specific conditions is met and a decision  to  set  aside  is  in  the
      interests of justice.  In the  applications  before  us  the  relevant
      condition relied on has been the one at rule 43(1)(d), namely that the
      rule 34 decision was "some other  procedural  irregularity"  occurring
      during the error of law appeal.

C.   Decision: generic issues

(1)  The Tribunal's power to set aside its own decisions

  14. In the course  of  submissions  an  issue  arose  as  to  whether  any
      limitation within rule 43 might mean that  some  of  the  applications
      before us fell outside the scope of the rule.

  15. The eighteen cases before us had been  selected  to  ensure  we  could
      explore any such jurisdictional issues.  In cases  (1)  and  (2),  the
      Upper Tribunal had allowed an appeal by the Secretary of State and had
      remitted the appeals to the First-tier Tribunal.  In cases (3) -  (6),
      the Upper Tribunal had allowed an appeal by the Secretary of State and
      had retained the appeal for remaking.  In cases (7) - (11), the  Upper
      Tribunal had dismissed an appeal brought by the  applicant  and  there
      had been no application for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  relevant
      appellate court.  In  cases  (12)  -  (14),  the  Upper  Tribunal  had
      dismissed appeals brought by the  applicant  and  an  application  for
      permission to appeal was pending against that decision.  In cases (15)
      - (16), the applicant's  appeals  had  been  dismissed  by  the  Upper
      Tribunal and applications for permission to  appeal  to  the  relevant
      appellate court had been refused.   Amongst  these  classes  of  case,
      there was scope for concern that rule  43  could  not  apply,  whether
      because the Upper Tribunal was no  longer  seized  of  the  appeal  or
      because its determination of the appeal was not complete.

  16. In the event, it was largely uncontroversial between the parties  that
      the Upper Tribunal had power to set aside its own decision  regardless
      of the stage the statutory  appeal  had  reached.   There  can  be  no
      dispute that the Upper Tribunal can apply rule 43  to  a  decision  in
      which it has set aside the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
      remitted the appeal to that Tribunal for redetermination.  Nor can  it
      be controversial that rule 43 is available when  an  appeal  has  been
      dismissed and there has been either no application for  permission  to
      appeal or no decision on such an application.   It  is  in  the  other
      classes of case in which it might be said that rule 43 cannot apply.

  17. The first class of applications it was said  might  fall  outside  the
      scope of a rule 43 application were those where the Upper Tribunal had
      allowed the error of law appeal but decided (as permitted  by  section
      12(2)(b)(ii) of the 2007 Act) to remake  the  decision  itself  rather
      than remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal for re-determination.
       This submission rested on case law which had considered the point  at
      which a right of appeal arises from the Upper Tribunal to the Court of
      Appeal.  In Terzaghi v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
      [2019] EWCA Civ 2017, the Court of Appeal considered a  submission  to
      the effect that an appeal against the Upper Tribunal's decision on  an
      error of law appeal had  been  brought  out  of  time  because  before
      appealing, the appellant had waited for the Upper Tribunal to complete
      its further consideration of the case remaking  the  decision  of  the
      First-tier Tribunal.  The Court of Appeal  rejected  this  submission.
      It noted that by reason of section 13(1) of the 2007 Act  and  article
      3(m) of the Appeals (Excluded  Decisions)  Order  2009,  no  right  of
      appeal to the Court of Appeal arose in  respect  of  any  "procedural,
      ancillary or preliminary decision...".  It then concluded by reference
      to earlier case law of the Upper Tribunal,  that  where  following  an
      error or  law  determination,  the  Upper  Tribunal  retained  further
      consideration of  the  appeal  to  itself  to  remake  the  First-tier
      Tribunal's decision, the error of law decision was  an  "intermediate"
      decision which did not become an appealable decision until  the  Upper
      Tribunal had re-made the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
      finally disposed of the appeal.

  18. Based on this conclusion, the submission made to  us  was  that  where
      following the error of law decision the Upper  Tribunal  retained  re-
      making of the First-tier Tribunal's decision to itself, there  was  no
      "decision which disposes of proceedings or part of  such  a  decision"
      that could be the subject of rule 43 application. We do not agree with
      this submission. At rule 1 of the Upper Tribunal  Rules  "disposal  of
      proceedings" is defined as including "... unless indicated  otherwise,
      disposing of a part of the proceedings".  We see no reason why rule 43
      should not be read by reference to this definition. Thus,  a  rule  43
      application can be made in respect of a  decision  which  disposes  of
      part of the proceedings.

  19. One possible reading of  the  judgment  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in
      Terzaghi is that where the Upper Tribunal retains a final decision  to
      itself the proceedings are not complete until the Tribunal has  remade
      the decision originally taken by the First-tier Tribunal:  until  that
      time, to the use the language of rule 43, there is no "decision  which
      disposes of proceedings". However, even on that premise, reading  rule
      43 together with the definition at rule 1 permits  the  power  to  set
      aside  to  be  applied  to  a  decision  that  disposes  of  part   of
      proceedings. We can see no reason why the error of law decision cannot
      be regarded as a  decision  that  disposes  of  part  of  proceedings.
      Applying rule 43 in this way will not give rise to any difficulty: the
      decision to which each rule 43 application is  directed  is  logically
      and practically distinct from the  further  decision  that  the  Upper
      Tribunal is yet to take under section  12(2)(b)(ii).   Nor  does  this
      approach to rule 43 present procedural or  practical  difficulty.  One
      consideration that lay behind  the  Court  of  Appeal's  reasoning  in
      Terzaghi was that appeal rights should not be  balkanised  since  that
      risked undue complexity and increased expense and  unnecessary  appeal
      proceedings (see the judgment of Dingemans LJ at paragraph  42).   The
      position is not the same in the context of rule 43.   This  permits  a
      decision to be set aside if (put very generally) it is  consequent  on
      significant procedural  error.   In  that  context,  the  reasons  for
      limiting applications until after the  final  disposal  of  the  whole
      proceedings  is  significantly  less  compelling.  Where   the   Upper
      Tribunal, following an error of law hearing,  retains  to  itself  the
      decision on the merits of the immigration proceedings, there is  sense
      in treating each decision as  a  distinct  part  of  the  proceedings;
      permitting the application of rule 43 to each part does not give  rise
      to the potential difficulties that informed the conclusion reached  by
      the Court of Appeal in Terzaghi.


  20. Mr Deller submitted (paragraph 7 of  his  skeleton  argument)  that  a
      decision to find an error of law and to retain the appeal in the Upper
      Tribunal  for  remaking  is  an  excluded  decision   which   is   not
      'susceptible' to rule 43.  It  is  undoubtedly  correct  that  such  a
      decision is an excluded decision against which  an  appeal  cannot  be
      brought.  So much is clear from Terzaghi v SSHD and its endorsement of
      VOM (Error of law - when appealable) Nigeria [2016]  UKUT  410  (IAC).
      The fact that a decision of that type is  an  excluded  decision  also
      precludes the possibility of it being reviewed under section 10 of the
      2007 Act.  But the  Upper  Tribunal's  jurisdiction  to  set  aside  a
      decision under rule 43 is not conferred by section 10 of the 2007 Act.
       Rule 43 was made in the exercise  of  specific  powers  derived  from
      section 22 of the 2007 Act and set out in paragraph 15 of  Schedule  5
      to the 2007 Act, and the power conferred is available whether  or  not
      the decision is an excluded decision which may not be the  subject  of
      an appeal or a review.


  21. For these reasons we conclude that rule 43  applications  directed  to
      the  Upper  Tribunal's  error  of  law  decision  are   available   in
      circumstances where the Upper Tribunal has retained  determination  of
      the merits of the immigration proceedings to itself but  has  not  yet
      completed the retained hearing.

  22. The other class of case where it was thought  a  rule  43  application
      might not be possible was  where  an  application  for  permission  to
      appeal to the Court of Appeal had been made under section  13  of  the
      2007 Act, either to the Upper Tribunal or where  such  an  application
      had been made and refused, directly  to  the  Court  of  Appeal.   The
      premise for this  submission  was  that  by  the  time  of  the  Upper
      Tribunal's refusal of permission to appeal or of the  application  for
      permission to appeal made to the Court of Appeal, the  Upper  Tribunal
      would  be  functus  officio  with  the  consequence  that  it   lacked
      jurisdiction to entertain a rule 43 application.

  23. We do not consider that either refusal by the  Upper  Tribunal  of  an
      application for permission to appeal under section 13 of the 2007  Act
      or the filing of an application for  permission  to  appeal  with  the
      Court of Appeal prevents resort to rule  43.    Where,  as  here,  the
      Tribunal's jurisdiction is defined  by  statute,  applying  the  label
      functus officio is no more than a conclusion on  construction  of  the
      relevant statutory provisions that identify the scope  and  extent  of
      the Tribunal's jurisdiction.  For present purposes,  the  question  is
      whether as a matter of construction, any limits have  been  placed  on
      the power under rule 43 of the Upper  Tribunal  Rules  for  the  Upper
      Tribunal to set aside  its  decisions,  by  reference  to  whether  an
      application for permission to appeal to Court of Appeal has been made.

  24. There is nothing directly on point in the provisions of the 2007  Act.
      The Upper Tribunal is established by section 3  of  the  2007  Act  to
      exercise such functions as are conferred on it under that Act  or  any
      other statute.  This of course, includes hearing of appeals  from  the
      First-tier Tribunal made pursuant to section 11 of the 2007  Act.   We
      cannot see anything in section 11 (or in section  13,  which  provides
      for the right of appeal from  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  the  Court  of
      Appeal) that says anything material to the availability of the rule 43
      power. As to the Upper Tribunal Rules, Part  7  contains  a  range  of
      provisions which permit the Tribunal to take further action in respect
      of its own decisions.  There is a power to correct minor errors  (rule
      42); the rule 43 power to set aside decisions; the power under rule 44
      to entertain and determine applications for permission to appeal;  the
      power under rule 46  to  review  a  decision  if  an  application  for
      permission to appeal has been made to the Upper Tribunal in respect of
      that decision; and finally, rule 48  which  permits  the  Tribunal  to
      treat an application made under any of these powers as an  application
      to exercise any other of the Part 7 powers.  Putting rule 43 itself to
      one side, we see nothing in any of the other rules that tends to limit
      when a rule 43 application can be  made.  For  example,  there  is  no
      suggestion that making  an  application  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  for
      permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal excludes  the  possibility
      of an application under rule 43. Rule 43 does  contain  specific  time
      limits within which applications to set aside must be made:  see  rule
      43(3) to (5).  However, those time limits apply subject to  the  Upper
      Tribunal's power under rule 5(3)(a) to extend time.

  25.  Drawing  all  this  together,  we  do  not  consider  there  is   any
      jurisdictional cut-off point, beyond which a rule 43  application  may
      not be made. There is a requirement to make any  rule  43  application
      within the time permitted by rule 43(3) - (5); but that time limit can
      be extended if the Upper Tribunal considers it appropriate. Thus while
      there may be a practical restriction on how long after a  decision  an
      application under rule 43 might successfully be raised  (because  good
      cause would always be needed before any extension  of  time  would  be
      granted), there  is  no  relevant  jurisdictional  cut-off  point;  an
      application under rule 43 can be  made  even  if  an  application  for
      permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal has been made to the Upper
      Tribunal, and even if that application for permission  to  appeal  has
      been determined. Nor, if the application for permission to  appeal  is
      refused by the Upper Tribunal, is there any jurisdictional  bar  to  a
      rule 43 application if the rule 43 applicant then applies directly  to
      the Court of Appeal for permission to appeal.  If such an  application
      for  permission  to  appeal  has  been  made,  a  subsequent  rule  43
      application might encounter difficulties, for example  on  grounds  of
      lateness, or perhaps even on  the  ground  that  pursuing  a  rule  43
      application in parallel with the application to the  Court  of  Appeal
      might be some form of abuse of process. But the success or failure  of
      any such objection to a  rule  43  application  would  depend  on  the
      circumstances  in  which  the  application  had  been  made,  not  any
      jurisdictional barrier.

  26. In these circumstances, we are satisfied that we can determine each of
      the rule 43 applications before us on its merits.  That being  so,  we
      need not say much about the other provisions to which we were referred
      as possible bases to reconsider the rule 34  decision  if  a  rule  43
      application was not available.  We were referred  to  section  10  and
      section 22 of the 2007 Act, and to paragraph 15 of Schedule 5  to  the
      Act.  None of these provisions provides  any  basis  for  entertaining
      complaints about Tribunal decisions based  on  procedural  error  that
      goes beyond the scope of rule 43.

  27. Section 22 is the general enabling power that includes power  to  make
      procedural rules for proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.  We cannot see
      that resort to it, per se, would assist to plug any gap  left  by  the
      Rules, as made. Section 22 is an enabling  provision;  litigants  gain
      nothing from its simple existence, only from the product once  it  has
      been used. Schedule 5 to the 2007 Act contains  various  more  closely
      formulated powers to make rules for specific purposes; paragraph 15 is
      the specific power that lies behind  rule  43.   Here  too,  there  is
      nothing to which litigants might have resort save to the  extent  that
      the power has been exercised. Section 10 of the 2007 Act contains  the
      Upper Tribunal's power to review its own decisions. It is a  provision
      that is then shaped by rules 46 and 45 of the  Upper  Tribunal  Rules.
      We do not consider that direct resort to section 10 could provide  any
      basis for the Upper Tribunal to entertain an application to set  aside
      a decision on grounds of procedural error or failure that fell  beyond
      the range of rule 43.

  28. Lastly on this matter, we were referred to section 25 of the 2007 Act.
      Headed "Supplementary powers of the Upper Tribunal", section 25 states
      that in respect of  matters  specified  at  section  25(2)  the  Upper
      Tribunal "... has in England and Wales ...  the  same  powers,  rights
      privileges and authority as the High  Court".  The  specified  matters
      are: (a) attendance and examination of witnesses; (b)  the  production
      and inspection of documents; and (c) all other matters  incidental  to
      the Upper Tribunal's functions.  Reliance was placed on  (c).  Had  we
      concluded that any of the rule 43 applications before us fell  outside
      the scope of rule 43,  we  doubt  that  section  25(2)(c)  would  have
      helped.  We accept that rule 43 identifies one of the functions of the
      Upper Tribunal.  However, we doubt that an application  to  set  aside
      that for one reason or another falls outside the scope of rule 43, may
      properly be regarded  as  a  matter  "incidental"  to  the  Tribunal's
      exercise of its rule 43 function.

  29. In this context, incidental is not synonymous with something that is a
      "near miss" to any of the Upper Tribunal's express functions;  rather,
      it is something sufficiently closely connected to the exercise  of  an
      express  function,  which  the  Tribunal  does  for  the  purpose   of
      exercising that express function. In support of the submission made by
      reference to section 25 we were referred to the judgments of the Court
      of Appeal in Forcelux Limited v Binnie [2010] HLR 20, and  R(Singh)  v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2019] EWCA Civ  1014.   In
      the former case, the Court of  Appeal  considered  the  power  of  the
      County Court to make a possession order at a hearing where the  tenant
      was not present. When making the order, at a hearing that  took  place
      pursuant to the provisions of CPR 55.8, the District Judge had  relied
      on the power at CPR 39.3 to proceed with a trial in the absence  of  a
      party.  The Court of Appeal decided that a hearing under CPR 55.8  was
      not a trial for the  purposes  of  CPR  39.3:  see  per  Warren  J  at
      paragraph 36 to paragraph 49.  The court concluded that  the  District
      Judge's decision to go ahead in the absence of the defendant had  been
      permissible as a step taken "for the purpose of managing the case  and
      furthering the overriding objective" as permitted  by  CPR  3.1(2)(m):
      see per Warren J at paragraph 56.

  30. The submission made to us was to the effect that by reason of  section
      25(2)(c) of the 2007 Act, the  power  at  CPR  3.1(2)(m)  or  a  power
      equivalent to it is  available  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.  We  do  not
      consider this submission accurately captures the meaning and effect of
      section 25(2)(c).  Section 25(2)(c)  is  undoubtedly  broadly  framed.
      However, it does not simply give the Upper  Tribunal  all  the  powers
      etc. of the High Court. Rather it permits  such  power  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal only to the extent that resort  to  it  is  necessary  to  do
      something incidental to any one or more of the  Upper  Tribunal's  own
      functions. Thus, in this instance, the issue is whether determining an
      application that would otherwise fall outside the scope of rule 43 can
      be a matter incidental to the rule 43 function.  For  the  reasons  we
      have already given, we do not think that it can.

  31. The other case cited -  Singh  -  is  entirely  consistent  with  this
      conclusion.  In Singh the questions concerned the procedures available
      to the Upper Tribunal under Part 4 of the Upper Tribunal Rules for the
      purposes of deciding applications for judicial  review.  The  specific
      issue was whether the Upper Tribunal had the  power  to  set  aside  a
      decision granting permission to apply for judicial  review  which  had
      been taken at a hearing held pursuant to rule 30 on  the  ground  that
      one of the parties had not attended the hearing.  The  Rules  made  no
      provision one way or  the  other.  (Rule  43  has  no  application  to
      judicial review claims before the Upper Tribunal.) The Court of Appeal
      noted that had the application for judicial review been  in  the  High
      Court a relevant power to set aside would have  been  available  under
      CPR 23.11(2). It then concluded that by reason of section 25(2)(c)  of
      the 2007 Act, the Upper Tribunal should be regarded as having the same
      power because it was a power incidental to the Tribunal's function  of
      determining applications for  judicial  review.  That  application  of
      section 25(2)(c) was, with respect, both entirely  orthodox  and  some
      way distant from the  section  25  submission  made  to  us  in  these
      applications.

(2)  Rule 34 Decisions and rule 43 "procedural irregularity"

  32. Rule 34(1) of the Upper Tribunal Rules permits the Upper  Tribunal  to
      "make any decision without  a  hearing".   Before  reaching  any  such
      decision the Upper Tribunal "must have regard to any view expressed by
      a party when deciding whether to hold a hearing to consider any matter
      and the form of any such hearing" (rule 34(2)).   The  first  question
      for us is whether, if a decision under rule 34 to  proceed  without  a
      hearing is wrongly taken,  that  decision  is  capable  of  being  the
      subject of a rule 43 application.  Putting the matter in the  language
      of rule 43, can a decision under rule 34 to proceed without a  hearing
      be a "procedural irregularity"? We consider that such  a  decision  is
      capable of giving rise to a relevant procedural irregularity for  rule
      43 purposes, but only if the rule 34 decision was in error of  law  in
      the sense contemplated in SH(Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for the
      Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ 1284 (i.e., that  the  consequence  of
      the  decision to proceed without a hearing was unlawful as a breach of
      the requirement to act  fairly  when  determining  the  error  of  law
      appeal).

  33. We accept that no similar requirement will attach  when  the  rule  43
      application is made based on any of the conditions at rule 43(2)(a) to
      (c). Where those provisions are relied on, the rule 43  Tribunal  need
      only be satisfied that the relevant factual condition is met, and when
      it is so satisfied it moves to consider whether setting  the  decision
      aside for that reason  is  in  the  interests  of  justice.  The  same
      approach will also apply on an application made in  reliance  on  rule
      43(2)(d) if the irregularity claimed is a  factual  irregularity.  The
      difference of approach so far as concerns the cases before us, is that
      the irregularity alleged is that the Tribunal's rule 34  decision  was
      wrong in law (whether because of  the  Guidance  Note  or  otherwise).
      Thus, the issue for us in these applications is whether  the  rule  34
      decision rested on some error of legal principle or was  one  that  no
      Tribunal properly directing itself on  the  law  could  have  reached.
      However, if any of the applicants before us succeeds in  demonstrating
      the rule 34 decision rested on an error of law it is likely to  follow
      directly that it will be in the interests of justice for the  rule  34
      decision to be set aside.   The  scope  for  argument  over  what  the
      interests of justice require  will  be  much  more  limited  in  these
      applications than, for example,  in  applications  where  the  initial
      condition is one of the factual matters listed at any of rule 43(2)(a)
      - (c).  As we see it, the only scenario in which it might  not  be  in
      the interests of justice to set aside a rule 34 decision  that  rested
      on an error of law would be where for some  reason  or  other,  it  is
      beyond argument that were the error of law appeal to  be  reheard  the
      outcome would be the same.


  34. We do not accept the submission - made  by  reference  to  authorities
      including General  Medical  Council  v  Spackman  [1943]  AC  627  and
      R(Pathan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2020] UKSC 41;
      [2020] 1 WLR 4506 - that the decision must be set aside if there is  a
      procedural irregularity.  Rule 43 requires that it must also be in the
      interests of justice to set the decision aside and those interests are
      plainly not served by ordering a hearing  when  the  outcome  of  that
      hearing would be a certainty.  Nothing said in  Pathan  or  any  other
      authority causes us  to  doubt  the  correctness  of  that  statement,
      expressed in John v Rees [1970] Ch 345 and applied in SH (Afghanistan)
      v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ 1284.

  35. These matters set the approach we shall  apply  when  considering  the
      rule 43 applications before us when they are directed only to the rule
      34 decision itself.

  36. There is one further point to make at this stage. A rule  34  decision
      to  decide  an  error  of  law  appeal  without  a  hearing  will  not
      necessarily be a self-contained event.  Any decision  that  an  appeal
      can be determined without a hearing  will  usually  entail  directions
      setting out the steps to  be  taken  in  place  of  the  hearing.  For
      example, in each of the  applications  before  us  the  Tribunal  gave
      directions on the  submissions  to  be  filed  and  then  reached  its
      decision taking those  submissions  into  account  together  with  the
      pleadings already served pursuant to rules  23  to  25  of  the  Upper
      Tribunal  Rules.  Any  Tribunal   that   embarks   on   a   no-hearing
      determination will need to keep under review whether the directions it
      has given for the purposes of reaching its determination on the appeal
      continue to work fairly or whether events require additional steps  to
      be taken to ensure  the  fairness  of  the  no-hearing  determination.
      Where necessary, the Tribunal must be  prepared  to  act,  by  way  of
      further directions or otherwise, to ensure a fair process is followed.
      For example, where one  party  has  raised  a  point  in  its  written
      submissions that the other  party  has  not  had  the  opportunity  to
      address and ought as a matter of  fairness  to  have  that  chance.  A
      failure to give further appropriate directions could itself amount  to
      a "procedural irregularity" for the purposes of rule 43 if the failure
      went to the fairness of the proceedings.

  37. However, the subsequent event must be one that goes to the fairness of
      the proceedings. Such errors are distinguishable from  one  submission
      made by all advocates for the applicants in the rule  43  applications
      before us. That submission was to the  effect  that,  looking  at  the
      reasons given by the Tribunal for its decision on  the  error  of  law
      appeal (not its decision on the rule 34 issue), there were points that
      could have been made had there been  an  oral  hearing,  which  either
      might or would have meant that the error of law appeal would have been
      decided differently. Although the outcome of every rule 43 application
      must depend on its own circumstances, submissions on these  lines  are
      unlikely  to  succeed.   This  type  of  submission  depends  both  on
      speculation and hindsight.   The  starting  point  is  the  Tribunal's
      written reasons; the next step is the submission that if the  rule  43
      applicant (the losing party in the error of law appeal)  had  realised
      that a point relied on by the Tribunal would or might  be  significant
      (or more significant than anticipated when the skeleton  argument  was
      drafted), there was something the applicant could have  said  on  that
      point, had there been a hearing, which might or would have meant  that
      the error of law appeal would have been decided differently.

  38. We do not consider that a submission along these lines  is  likely  to
      make good the existence of any  procedural  irregularity.  Whenever  a
      hearing takes place, it is always possible that, in the ebb  and  flow
      of the hearing, some point (either not in the skeleton argument at all
      or, if in the skeleton, not set out prominently) might  be  made  that
      turns out to be decisive. That is in the nature  of  a  hearing.  This
      point is one that is relevant to the rule 34 decision itself. It  will
      be well-known to any judge who has ever conducted a hearing; and  will
      weigh in the balance against a decision that there  should  be  a  no-
      hearing determination. However, simply being able, after the event, to
      point to a matter that might have been said, does not of itself  point
      to procedural irregularity for the purposes of a rule 43  application.
      Whether or not a rule 34 decision amounts  to  a  rule  43  procedural
      irregularity depends on whether the  decision  to  proceed  without  a
      hearing rested on legal error. The submission  that  starts  from  the
      premise that the Tribunal's decision on the appeal  should  have  been
      different (for example because a matter was overlooked), will  not  of
      itself demonstrate that the rule 34 decision was wrong, save  for  the
      situation where the  difference  in  outcome  is  the  consequence  of
      procedural error in the course of the no-hearing  determination  which
      goes to the fairness of the proceedings. Put another way, an  argument
      that an error of law decision made without a hearing was  wrong  might
      form the basis for an appeal, but of itself will say  little  that  is
      likely to be relevant to whether there  was  procedural  irregularity.
      The benchmark for a legally permissible rule 34 decision is  not  that
      the subsequent decision on the  error  of  law  appeal  is  free  from
      substantive error.  It is both  speculative  and  contrary  to  common
      experience to contend that a decision on an error of law  appeal  that
      follows a hearing will always be error-free.  Where applying  rule  43
      the Tribunal should be astute to ensure that any decision in favour of
      an applicant rests on genuine procedural irregularity, not  simply  on
      its scrutiny of the merits of the decision on the error of law  appeal
      (which if undertaken at all will properly fall within the scope  of  a
      review pursuant to rule 45).

(3)  The Secretary of State's submission

  39. The Secretary of State's submission as to  when  the  Tribunal  should
      exercise  its  power  to  set  aside  substantive  decisions   reached
      following a rule 34 no-hearing determination was set out at paragraphs
      5 to 6 of her Skeleton Argument (emphasis in the original):


           "5.    The Secretary of State considers that the Tribunal  would
           only not exercise that power [to set the decision aside] if  the
           parties are wholly content with  the  outcome  of  the  rule  34
           decision or, exceptionally, if it  is  clear  that  a  different
           decision would not have been reached if there had there been  an
           oral hearing.  The Secretary of State considers that the  latter
           would be highly unusual given that it would  lead  to  satellite
           litigation and would be contrary to finality of  litigation  and
           the overriding objective.


           6.           The  Secretary  of  State  raises  no  point  about
           acquiescence by the lack of objection,  either  explicit  or  by
           silence, as the terms of  the  Administrative  Court's  decision
           make it clear that facing an appellant with the presumption that
           there not be an oral hearing was  an  unlawful  and  unnecessary
           step contrary to the rule of common  law  fairness  and  to  the
           overriding objective".


  40. At the outset of the hearing, we informed the parties that  the  legal
      basis for this submission was not clear to us. We  invited  any  party
      wishing to support  these  submissions  to  make  further  submissions
      accordingly.


  41. Ms Kilroy objected to that course.  She submitted that  the  Secretary
      of State had effectively conceded that each of the decisions should be
      set aside. However, there was no such acceptance on the  part  of  the
      Secretary of State; there was no consent order under rule  39  of  the
      Upper Tribunal Rules.   Ms  Kilroy  also  submitted  that  these  were
      adversarial proceedings and that it was not for the Upper Tribunal  to
      disagree with the stance adopted in the Secretary of State's  skeleton
      argument.  We cannot accept that submission either. Proceedings before
      UTIAC are adversarial but it must be for the Tribunal  to  decide  for
      itself whether or not to set aside a decision already made by it in an
      appeal.

  42. Having now considered the matter more fully our view remains that  the
      submission at  paragraph  5  of  the  Secretary  of  State's  skeleton
      argument is wrong. The premise of the submission is that the  Tribunal
      must, in exercise of its rule 43 power set aside any rule 34  decision
      to determine an appeal without a hearing unless both: (a) at the  time
      the rule 34 decision was made; and (b) after the event (i.e., in light
      of the decision on the error of law appeal), both parties  agree  that
      the rule 34 decision was correct. This premise does not fit with  rule
      34, as made. The rule requires the Tribunal to have regard to (and  by
      inference to seek out) the views of the parties. But the rule does not
      give the parties a veto either at  the  time  the  rule  34  power  is
      exercised or later when the Tribunal's  substantive  decision  on  the
      error of law appeal is known.

  43. Even though paragraph 6 of the Secretary of State's written submission
      claims to be based on conclusions reached by Fordham J in his judgment
      in the JCWI case, we are unable to find any part of that judgment that
      corresponds to this proposition.  In our view the submission  confuses
      two distinct matters.  Although Fordham J concluded that the  Guidance
      Note was unlawful because it established an "overall paper norm", that
      conclusion says nothing necessarily determinative of whether  a  party
      may consent to a no-hearing  determination,  or  whether  if  a  party
      either consented or did not object to the Tribunal's proposal that  an
      error of law appeal be determined without a hearing, that  consent  or
      lack of objection is relevant to a rule 43 application  to  set  aside
      the error of law decision.  In this regard we note that Fordham J went
      out of his way to emphasise that the  directions  given  by  Tribunals
      seeking representations from the parties for the purposes of  deciding
      whether to apply rule 34 were not themselves  objectionable:  see  per
      Fordham J at paragraph 4.17.

  44. All this  being  so,  we  do  not  accept  the  Secretary  of  State's
      submission provides a proper basis on which the rule  43  applications
      before us can be decided.

(4)  The significance of the Guidance Note, per se

  45. Does it necessarily follow from the existence  of  the  Guidance  Note
      that any decision to determine  an  error  of  law  appeal  without  a
      hearing made between 23 March 2020 (when the Guidance Note was issued)
      and 20 November 2020 (when  Fordham  J's  judgment  was  handed  down)
      rested on an error of law?

  46. This question is not answered by Fordham  J's  judgment  in  the  JCWI
      case.  His judgment focused on the objective meaning of  paragraphs  9
      to 16 of the Guidance Note, and in particular, paragraphs 14 to 16  of
      that document.  He concluded that the Guidance  Note  established  "an
      overall paper norm" which  promoted  determination  of  error  of  law
      appeals without a hearing as "usual" and determination of  them  at  a
      hearing as "exceptional".  The Guidance Note was  legally  objectional
      on the Letts principle because it gave advice that was  wrong  in  law
      and which would tend to encourage unlawful decisions.  What was  wrong
      with the Guidance Note was that it did  not  make  sufficiently  clear
      that any decision to determine  an  error  of  law  appeal  without  a
      hearing  had  to  be  consistent  with  principles  of  fairness.  See
      generally, per Fordham J at paragraphs 2.13, 2.5, and 7.11.   In  this
      regard the distinction Fordham J drew between the (unlawful)  Guidance
      Note and the (lawful) Practice Direction is telling. At paragraph  3.7
      of his judgment Fordham J said this.


           "3.7   ... What the [Senior President of Tribunals] did in  [the
           Practice Direction] was to promote paper  determination,  during
           the pandemic, wherever it  is  consistent  with  the  overriding
           objective, the  Human  Rights  Act  1998  (ECHR  rights),  basic
           requirements of common  law  procedural  fairness,  the  natural
           justice principle, the open justice principle and the  principle
           of legality. That course promoted the use of a power  to  decide
           cases on papers, but only where it was fair to do so.  It  meant
           no unfair paper determinations. That was promoting the  e?ective
           and ongoing operation of the machinery  of  justice,  during  an
           international pandemic, using resources in a proportionate  way.
           It was fully consistent with the statutory duties applicable  to
           the SPT  when  exercising  statutory  functions,  including  the
           function  of  making  a  practice   direction.   The   SPT   was
           communicating a change in practice (a new, contingent  norm)  in
           the exercise of an originating function (para 2.4(1) above), not
           a descriptive one (para 2.4(2) above).


  47. All this helps to identify Fordham  J's  reasons  for  concluding  the
      Guidance Note  was  unlawful.   His  conclusion,  based  only  on  the
      principle stated in Letts, did not require consideration of whether in
      any case the existence of the Guidance Note had  led  to  an  unlawful
      exercise of the rule 34 power.  Thus, his judgment did not attempt  to
      scrutinise the decision taken in any individual error of  law  appeal.
      The conclusion that Fordham J did reach does not prescribe the further
      conclusion that every exercise of the rule 34 power in favour of a no-
      hearing determination was unlawful.

  48. This point is underlined by the status of the Guidance Note under  the
      provisions of the 2007 Act. The Act draws a clear distinction  between
      the Practice Directions  which  may  be  made  either  by  the  Senior
      President of Tribunals (ordinarily requiring the approval of the  Lord
      Chancellor) or a Chamber President (ordinarily with  the  approval  of
      both the Senior President of Tribunals and the Lord  Chancellor),  and
      guidance such as that in the Guidance  Note.  The  Guidance  Note  was
      issued by Lane J in  exercise  of  the  power  under  paragraph  7  of
      Schedule 4 to the 2007 Act given to Chamber Presidents  "...  to  make
      arrangements for the issuing of guidance on changes  in  the  law  and
      practise as they relate to the functions allocated  to  the  chamber".
      Guidance issued in exercise of  this  power  is  no  more  than  that.
      Chamber Presidents have the power to issue guidance; but when guidance
      is issued there is no corresponding obligation on Tribunal judges that
      attaches to it.  The judges are not required to follow  the  guidance;
      there is nothing in the 2007 Act even requiring regard to  be  had  to
      such guidance. In law, guidance issued in exercise of the power  under
      paragraph 7 of Schedule 4 has  no  express  status.  This  is  not  to
      detract from a practical reality that guidance  issued  by  a  Chamber
      President will come to the attention of the judges  in  that  chamber,
      and no doubt will be  carefully  considered.   But  that  practice  is
      grounded only in judicial comity. It does not support  the  conclusion
      that the  existence  of  the  Guidance  Note,  per  se,  requires  the
      conclusion that rule 34 decisions were taken unlawfully. Instead, each
      decision must be assessed on its own terms.

  49. A final point that is said to be relevant to the significance  of  the
      simple existence of the Guidance Note, is that after the Guidance Note
      was issued the proportion of error of law appeals determined without a
      hearing increased dramatically (see Fordham J in  JCWI  at  paragraphs
      4.21 to 4.23).  We do not accept this necessarily says anything as  to
      whether any specific decision taken pursuant to rule 34 was lawful  or
      unlawful.  That  question  will  not   be   accurately   answered   by
      generalisation, only by consideration of each decision.

(5)  The significance of reference (or lack of reference)  to  the  Guidance
      Note or other matters.


  50. Various submissions were made by the applicants  on  the  significance
      attaching to reference or lack of reference to specific documents. The
      point most often made was  that  if  a  Tribunal  judge's  reasons  in
      support of a conclusion to determine an error or law appeal without  a
      hearing referred to the Guidance Note, the judge must  be  assumed  to
      have followed the Guidance Note, applied Fordham  J's  "overall  paper
      norm", failed  to  attach  weight  or  sufficient  weight  to  general
      considerations of fairness, and have decided unlawfully  to  determine
      the error of law appeal on the basis of written representations rather
      than at a hearing.  Related submissions  were  made  by  reference  to
      whether the reasons for one or other decision  did  or  did  not  make
      express  reference  to  the  Practice  Direction,  or  the  overriding
      objective, or leading authority on the common law duty to act  fairly,
      or some or all the "key themes from the common law principles"  listed
      by Fordham J at Part 6 of his judgment in the JCWI case.  (A  specific
      variant of this latter submission was made in the application made  by
      SR (Jamaica) (HU/8693/2017), which could also be applied to all  other
      applications; we address this below at paragraph 83.)

  51. We reject the logic that lies behind these  submissions:  they  either
      prove too little or prove too much.  Determining  the  legality  of  a
      decision under rule 34 to decide an error  of  law  appeal  without  a
      hearing requires overall assessment  of  the  reasons  given,  not  an
      exercise in the nature of  playing  bingo.  Simple  reference  to  the
      Guidance Note cannot invalidate a rule 34 decision. The error  in  the
      Guidance  Note  identified  by  Fordham  J  was  that  it  failed   to
      communicate what he referred to as the proviso to paragraph 4  of  the
      Practice  Direction:  i.e.,  the  need  to  consider  the   overriding
      objective (rule 2 of the Upper Tribunal Rules) and fairness at  common
      law and under ECHR. Reference to the Guidance Note does not prove such
      matters have been left out of account.  The reasons must be considered
      in the round. Conversely, reasons for a rule 34 decision that  do  not
      refer to  the  Guidance  Note  are  not,  by  reason  of  that  alone,
      impregnable. Any such conclusion would be blinkered  to  the  obvious.
      Even if in a particular appeal a particular judge does not mention the
      Guidance Note, it would be entirely unrealistic to assume  this  meant
      that judge was unaware of the Guidance Note.

  52. The same general point applies  to  the  submission  that  a  rule  34
      decision is wrong in law if the judge has not, each  in  turn,  listed
      and addressed all the "key themes" set out at Part 6  of  Fordham  J's
      judgment in JCWI.  As we understand that part of his judgment  it  was
      not intended as being some form of rule 34 checklist.  Rather  it  was
      part of the judge's explanation of why an  "overall  paper  norm"  was
      unlawful on application of the principles stated in Letts.   A  lawful
      decision in exercise of rule 34 to determine an error  of  law  appeal
      without a hearing does not depend on rote consideration of the generic
      merits of using hearings to decide appeals.  Instead, the focus  needs
      to be on whether the appeal in hand can be fairly determined without a
      hearing.

  53. For these reasons, and for the purposes of the  rule  34  applications
      before us, we do not consider that particular significance attaches in
      the abstract either to the presence or the absence of reference to the
      Guidance Note. We reach the same conclusion on an  allied  submission:
      that given the existence of the Guidance  Note  and  given  also  that
      Upper Tribunal judges must plainly have been aware of it,  a  rule  34
      decision will be unlawful unless the reasons for it expressly  disavow
      the contents of the Guidance Note.  Given the status of  the  Guidance
      Note (there was no obligation to apply it) and given the principle  of
      judicial independence, the suggestion that disavowal might be required
      is artificial.

(6)  The significance of directions given by the Tribunal:  pre-judgment  of
      the rule 34 decision.

  54. Paragraphs 11 - 13 of the Guidance Note set out steps  that  could  be
      taken to decide whether to determine an error of law appeal without  a
      hearing.  First, the Note stated the judge should form  a  provisional
      view on whether  a  no-hearing  determination  might  be  appropriate.
      Second, if the provisional view was that it might,  the  judge  should
      give directions to the parties. Paragraphs 12 and 13 read as follows:


              "12.     Where the judge reaches that provisional view, he or
           she will give directions to the parties, including  a  direction
           to the party who has been given permission  to  appeal  to  make
           further submissions on the error of law and set aside issues;  a
           direction for the other party to ?le and serve  any  submissions
           in response; and (where there is such a response), directions to
           the appellant to ?le and serve a reply.


           "13.   The process just described will include  a  direction  to
           enable the parties, within  a  stated  time,  to  express  their
           respective views, if any, on whether there should be  a  hearing
           to decide the questions in paragraph 11(a) and (b) above, giving
           reasons for any such views. The judge will have  regard  to  any
           such views, pursuant to rule 34(2)."


      These paragraphs ensured that any decision to determine  an  error  of
      law appeal without a hearing met the requirement at rule 34(2) to have
      regard to the views of the parties.


  55. In all the applications before us the Tribunal adopted  the  procedure
      sketched in the Guidance Note. By way of example, Judge Kekic gave the
      following directions on 9 June  2020  in  the  appeal  of  FMR  (Iraq)
      (PA/09206/2019) (underlining and bold type as in the original)


         "1.      I have reviewed the file in this case. In  the  light  of
           the present need to take precautions against the spread of COVID-
           19, and the overriding  objective  expressed  in  the  Procedure
           Rules, I have reached the provisional view that it would in this
           case be appropriate to determine the following questions without
           a hearing:


                 (a)   Whether  the  making  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
                 decision involved the making of an error of law, and, if so


                 (b)   Whether that decision should be set aside.


     2.       I therefore make the following DIRECTIONS:


                 (i)   The party who sought permission to appeal must submit
                 further submissions in support of the assertion of an error
                 of  law,  and  on  the  question  whether  the   First-tier
                 Tribunal's decision should be set aside if error of law  is
                 to be found to be filed and served on all other parties  no
                 later than 14 days after this notice is sent out (the  date
                 of sending is on the covering letter or covering email);


                 (ii)  Any other party must file and  serve  submissions  in
                 response, no later than 21 one days after  this  notice  is
                 sent out;


                 (iii)      If  submissions  are  made  in  accordance  with
                 paragraph (ii) above the party  who  sought  permission  to
                 appeal must file and serve a reply no later  than  28  days
                 after this notice is sent out.


                 (iv)   All  submissions  that  rely  on  any  document  not
                 previously provided to all parties in electronic form  must
                 be accompanied by electronic copies of any such document.


           3.      Any  party  who  considers  that  despite  the  forgoing
           directions a hearing is necessary to consider the  question  set
           out in paragraph 1 (or either of them) above must submit reasons
           for that view no later than 21 days after this  notice  is  sent
           out and they will be taken into account  by  the  Tribunal.  The
           directions in paragraph 2 above must be complied with  in  every
           case.


           4.     If this Tribunal decides to set aside the decision of the
           First-tier Tribunal for error of law,  further  directions  will
           accompany the notice of that decision ..."


  56. One overarching submission made to us was that the  existence  in  all
      cases of directions to this effect, following the  course  plotted  at
      paragraphs 11 - 13 of the Guidance Note, was proof that  the  relevant
      judge had applied the Guidance Note including the part of it described
      by Fordham J as the "overall paper norm" and thereby erred in law when
      applying rule 34.

  57. We do not accept this submission. As we have already noted,  this  was
      not a submission that found favour with Fordham J: see his judgment in
      JCWI at paragraph 4.17.  No decision to apply rule 34 could  be  taken
      without some form of direction to explain what  would  happen  in  the
      event of a no-hearing determination.  We can see  no  problem  arising
      from the practice of making and communicating the provisional view  on
      the application of rule 34. Any consideration of  whether  to  proceed
      under that rule must start somewhere. A Tribunal does not need to wait
      until one or the other of the parties suggests the course  of  action;
      it can initiate the process itself.  From  these  premises,  there  is
      nothing in the  directions  that  requires  the  conclusion  that  the
      subsequent  decision  in  favour  of  no-hearing   determination   was
      unlawful. The request for the parties' views (paragraph 3) stems  from
      the requirement at rule 34(2).  The direction for written  submissions
      on the error of law appeal  is  necessary  so  that  the  parties  can
      comment on the suggestion that the appeal should be determined without
      a hearing: that response needed to be  informed  by  the  arrangements
      that the Tribunal purposed to adopt in place of a hearing.

  58. Nor do we think  any  significance  attaches  to  the  fact  that  the
      directions provided that the submissions on the error  of  law  appeal
      should be filed at the same time as any submission in response to  the
      provisional decision on the use of rule 34. The applicants submit that
      the fact that the  directions  at  paragraphs  2  and  3  operated  in
      parallel rather than sequentially showed that the provisional rule  34
      decision was not provisional at  all  but  was  final.   We  disagree.
      Rather, the directions assume that before taking  the  final  rule  34
      decision the Tribunal judge should have the benefit of considering the
      submissions on the error of law appeal together  with  representations
      on the provisional rule 34 decision and in that way  will  be  better-
      placed to decide whether a no-hearing determination of  the  error  of
      law appeal would be fair.  This assumption is reflected in each of the
      decisions before us that is the subject of a rule 43  application.  In
      each the reasons for the rule 34 decision and for the determination of
      the error of law appeal are part of a single determination.

  59. Overall, therefore we do not accept the  overarching  submission  that
      the  directions  demonstrate  that  the  Tribunal  either  reached  an
      unlawful rule 34 decision or proposed to reach a rule 34 decision that
      would be unlawful.

  60. In addition, further submissions were advanced. One was to the  effect
      that these directions were inconsistent with the requirement  at  rule
      34(2) to have regard to the views expressed by the parties before  any
      decision to go ahead with a no-hearing determination. This  submission
      rested on two matters. First, the way in  which  paragraph  3  of  the
      directions was formulated; it was contended this gave  the  impression
      of pre-judgment or at the least that there was a presumption in favour
      of a no-hearing determination and  a  requirement  to  rebut  it.  The
      second concerned the direction at paragraph 2 to file  submissions  on
      the error of law appeal.  It was submitted that the  timing  of  these
      directions  (working  in  parallel  with  the  direction  seeking  the
      parties' views on a no-hearing determination) showed that  so  far  as
      concerned  the  rule  34  decision,  the  die  had  been  cast.   This
      submission is a variation on the overarching submission we  have  just
      considered.  The reasons we have given on that submission  apply  here
      too.  In addition, it is important  to  consider  the  effect  of  the
      directions, objectively. They state that the Tribunal judge has formed
      "a provisional view". There is no reason not to take  those  words  at
      face value; any suspicion that the provisional view was  in  fact  the
      final decision would be entirely without foundation.

  61. The other submission was directed to the timetable at paragraph  2  of
      the directions and was to the effect that this was too compressed  and
      put an unreasonable burden on the parties. We do not regard this as  a
      point of any substance.  The timetable is not unreasonable of  itself;
      the time given for each step reflects an approach commonly adopted. If
      that timetable was not achievable in a particular case,  for  whatever
      reason, it was open to any party to apply to vary the  directions  and
      explain the reasons why variation was necessary.  It is certainly  not
      unreasonable to expect litigants (in particular,  legally  represented
      litigants like all the applicants before us) to  participate  in  this
      sort of case management process: this is no less than is expected  and
      required by rule 2(4) of the Upper Tribunal Rules.

(7)  Consent; failure to comply with the direction permitting submission  in
      opposition to the provisional view.

  62. Rule 34(2) requires the Tribunal to have regard to the  views  of  the
      parties before deciding to make any decision without  a  hearing.   We
      consider that where parties consent  to  a  no-hearing  determination,
      that will ordinarily provide strong support for  the  conclusion  that
      the decision to proceed without a hearing was  lawful.   Although  the
      rule 34 decision is for the Tribunal not for the parties, the  parties
      to an error of law  appeal  will  usually  be  well-placed  to  assess
      whether and if so, why a determination  without  a  hearing  would  or
      might be unfair. Each party will know the nature of its own case; each
      party will be able to assess from its  own  perspective  the  relative
      advantages and disadvantages of a no-hearing  determination.   In  the
      circumstances of the appeals which have resulted in  the  applications
      that we are now considering we have in mind both that the  possibility
      of no-hearing determinations arose only in the respect of the error of
      law appeal (and would not apply to any subsequent  redetermination  of
      the appeal, whether retained by the Upper Tribunal or remitted to  the
      First-tier Tribunal), and also that as of March 2020  parties  to  any
      error of law appeal faced, in consequence of the  pandemic,  a  choice
      between an earlier no-hearing  determination  of  that  appeal,  or  a
      later, delayed hearing (either remote or in person).  Either of  these
      considerations  might  have  been  significant  to  the  parties  when
      deciding whether to consent to a no-hearing determination of the error
      of law appeal. Each reflects a  different  aspect  of  the  rule  2(1)
      overriding objective, for example that  cases  should  be  dealt  with
      proportionately and that so far as possible delay should  be  avoided.
      Either can provide an explanation of why consent was  given.  We  draw
      attention to these matters only for the purpose of explaining that the
      fact that a party might consent to a  no-hearing  determination  would
      not, of itself, be out of the ordinary.

  63. The applicants submitted that for the purpose of  deciding  whether  a
      procedural irregularity has occurred, little or no  weight  should  be
      attached to a party's consent to a no-hearing determination because of
      the context provided by the Guidance Note. The submission was that  no
      genuine consent could be given  when  the  Guidance  Note  so  clearly
      pointed in favour of no-hearing determinations. We do not  agree  with
      this submission. All applicants before us were legally represented  at
      the relevant time. Those legal representatives must have realised  (or
      if they did not, they ought to  have  realised)  that  the  directions
      issued by the Tribunal genuinely sought their views and the  views  of
      their clients on whether there should be a no-hearing determination.

  64. Another scenario to consider is that in which a party did not take the
      opportunity to make representations provided by  paragraph  3  of  the
      Directions. Paragraph 3 permitted each party to  make  submissions  on
      the provisional rule 34 decision but did not require "a  nil  return".
      Therefore, all other matters being equal, it  would  be  open  to  the
      Tribunal when taking the rule 34 decision to assume that  no  response
      under paragraph 3 of the Directions was tacit consent to a  no-hearing
      determination, the party concerned having considered the pros and cons
      of that course of action in  the  context  of  its  own  appeal.  That
      inference would be particularly strong where  the  parties  had  filed
      submissions in response to paragraph 2 of the Directions on the merits
      of the error of law appeal. It is of course possible that there  might
      be good reason why no submissions were filed in response to  direction
      3: for example, if the Directions had not been  received.  But  absent
      such circumstances, we do not think it is consistent with rule 2(4) of
      the Upper Tribunal Rules (the parties'  duty  to  cooperate  with  the
      Tribunal and help the Tribunal to further the overriding objective) to
      assert that a failure to file submissions in response to  direction  3
      should be regarded as irrelevant.

(8)  Appearance of bias

  65. Two submissions were made in this regard. The first concerned  whether
      an appearance of bias would arise if the same Tribunal judge took both
      the provisional view  on  the  application  of  rule  34  (and  issued
      directions as set out above), and the final view that there should  be
      a no-hearing determination. This was what happened in one of the cases
      before us as a rule 43 application.  We do not consider this  scenario
      to be problematic. Two linked questions are relevant:  are  there  any
      matters which could be identified giving  rise  to  an  appearance  of
      bias; if there are such  matters,  would  they,  considered  alone  or
      together, cause a fair-minded and informed observer to conclude  there
      was a real possibility or danger of bias? The scenario  in  which  the
      same Tribunal judge both forms the provisional view on the application
      of rule 34 and then takes the final decision  on  the  application  of
      that rule  does  not  give  rise  to  any  appearance  of  bias.   The
      expression of a  provisional  view  and  then  a  final  view  on  the
      application of rule 34 is part  of  regular  case  management.  It  is
      neither unusual for one judge to have  responsibility  for  successive
      case management decisions, nor is it unusual in  the  course  of  case
      management for a judge to propose steps of her own motion and then, in
      light of representations made by the  parties,  decide  whether  those
      steps should be taken. In the premises, any fair-minded  and  informed
      observer would recognise this scenario as an ordinary part of judicial
      case management.

  66. The other scenario arises in the case of Annes  (HU/11949/2019).   One
      of us (Judge Blundell), took the rule 34 decision and the decision  on
      the error of law appeal.  Is it objectionable that Judge  Blundell  is
      one of the judges now hearing the rule 43 application in that  appeal?
      By reference to the standard of the fair-minded and informed  observer
      we do not consider it is. Various provisions in Part 7  of  the  Upper
      Tribunal Rules (the part that includes rule 43) provide for the  Upper
      Tribunal to revisit its  own  decisions.  The  Rules  do  not  specify
      whether any such exercise (whether it be  review  under  rule  45,  an
      application to set aside pursuant to rule 43, or otherwise)  be  taken
      by the same Upper Tribunal judge or a different judge. We suspect that
      practice will vary in this regard and will take  account  of  judicial
      deployment.  In many situations the judge who has heard the  error  or
      law  appeal  will  be  well-placed  to  determine   any   post-hearing
      application. For example, this will be so in the case of many rule  43
      applications where the application arises out of some  issue  of  fact
      going to the conduct of the proceedings.  The present situation  is  a
      little different in that the submission is that it is the judge's rule
      34 decision that is the procedural irregularity  giving  rise  to  the
      rule 43 application,  and  that  application  requires  the  judge  to
      revisit his own decision.  Whether or not this is significant in terms
      of giving rise to a real possibility of danger or bias will depend  on
      context. At the level of principle, we do  not  consider  there  is  a
      problem; it is not uncommon  for  judges  to  have  to  revisit  their
      decisions for one or other purpose (the most common example being when
      considering applications for permission to appeal).  Undertaking  such
      exercises objectively and candidly is part and parcel of the  judicial
      function. This would be recognised by  any  fair-minded  and  informed
      observer. We accept, however, that matters arising from  a  particular
      context may suggest a different conclusion in a  particular  case.  To
      this extent, each such situation must be considered on its own terms.

(9)  Final observations on generic matters

  67. Our overall conclusion is that there is no single, one size fits  all,
      answer to the rule 43 applications  made  consequent  on  Fordham  J's
      judgment in the JCWI case.  We do not accept the submission  that  the
      judgment in JCWI requires all error of law appeals determined  without
      a hearing after the Guidance Note was issued  in  March  2020  be  set
      aside.  This  is  not  to  negate  Fordham  J's  judgment,  rather  it
      recognises the scope of the issue before him. The JCWI  judgment  only
      concerned the legality of the Guidance Note when assessed against  the
      Letts principle i.e., whether the Note contained a statement that  was
      wrong in law or permitted or encouraged unlawful acts.  On application
      of that principle, the JCWI judgment concluded that the Guidance  Note
      was unlawful to the extent that it did not include  or  refer  to  the
      proviso to paragraph 4 of the Practice Direction that any decision  in
      favour of no-hearing determination had to be in  accordance  with  the
      overriding objective and fairness rights.

  68. The  JCWI  litigation  did  not  concern  the  "what  happened  next?"
      question. It did not address the merits of any rule 34 decision  taken
      after the Guidance Note was published.  It is not possible to conclude
      that simply because the Guidance  Note  had  been  issued  and  simply
      because the Administrative Court concluded that the note as formulated
      did not comply with the Letts principle, it  must  follow  that  every
      subsequent rule 34 decision was unlawful.  That  would  overlook  that
      each subsequent decision was in exercise of a  judicial  function  and
      the product of consideration by a judge of the Upper  Tribunal,  well-
      used to conducting error of law hearings on a regular (if  not  daily)
      basis and exercising their functions in accordance with the overriding
      objective and well-known principles of fairness.

  69. Moreover, each rule 34 decision is a reasoned decision.  The merits of
      the rule 43 applications must be determined on  consideration  of  the
      reasons given in each case. If those reasons whether expressly  or  by
      inference point to a conclusion reached without consideration  of  the
      principles  that  make  up  the  overriding  objective,   or   without
      consideration of whether determination of  the  error  of  law  appeal
      without a hearing would be consistent with the principles of fairness,
      or a conclusion reached on application of  an  "overall  paper  norm",
      then the rule 34 decision should be set aside because it proceeded  on
      incorrect premises.  As we have said already, the  conclusion  reached
      on any subsequent rule 43 application is unlikely to depend simply  on
      whether in the case in hand, certain matters are or are not  expressly
      mentioned (for example the Guidance Note itself).  The reasons must be
      considered in the round to see what inferences  and  what  conclusions
      may properly be drawn.  It was submitted that  this  approach  was  at
      odds with conclusions stated at paragraphs 4.19 - 4.20 of the judgment
      in JCWI. We do not agree. The point considered by Fordham  J  at  that
      point in his judgment was (and can only have been) a generic one:  was
      the  Guidance  Note  not  Letts  unlawful  (i.e.,  not  guidance  that
      permitted or encouraged unlawful acts) because of  the  way  it  would
      necessarily be understood and applied by Tribunal  judges?  Fordham  J
      answered that question in the negative  but  could  only  address  the
      matter at the generic or in-principle level. By contrast, the rule  43
      applications require us to consider and assess the  legality  of  each
      rule 34 decision, on its own terms.

D.   Decisions on the rule 43 applications before us

Applying the rule 43(3) time limit; applications for an extension of time


  70. Rule 43(3) requires that any application to set aside a decision  must
      be received by the Tribunal "no later than one month after the date on
      which the Upper Tribunal sent notice of the decision  to  the  party".
      By rule 5(3), case management powers permit  the  Tribunal  to  extend
      time for complying with any rule.  The overwhelming majority  of  rule
      43  applications  received  by  the  Tribunal  following  Fordham  J's
      judgment in the JCWI case were received later than one month following
      notice of error of law decisions. Fordham J's judgment was handed down
      on  20  November  2020.   The  Order  made  recorded  the  President's
      undertaking to take such steps as were necessary to bring the judgment
      to the attention of all individuals who had lost error of law  appeals
      on or after 23 March 2020.  We have been told that a  so-called  "JCWI
      pack" containing Fordham J's judgment  and  order   was  sent  to  all
      relevant parties on 4 December 2020.  A further copy, also  containing
      an information note from the JCWI was sent on 11 December 2020.  These
      packs were sent by email to represented parties and by post  to  those
      without representation.  Most of the parties before us refer to having
      received the pack at some time in the first half of December.  Each of
      the applicants before us was legally represented at the material  time
      and the packs were sent to those representatives.  Given the  need  on
      receipt of the JCWI packs for the legal representatives  to  seek  and
      obtain instructions on whether to make any further application to  the
      Tribunal, and given also the Christmas and New  Year  period  and  the
      disruption at that time caused by the  second  COVID-19  lockdown,  we
      accept, without need for specific explanation, that  an  extension  of
      time should be granted in respect of any application received  by  the
      Tribunal by or before Monday  18  January  2021.   Where  applications
      presently before us were received after that  date  we  will  consider
      whether to grant an extension of time on the  facts  of  the  case  in
      hand.

(1)  EP(Albania) (HU/18412/2019)

  71. This rule 43 application was made by letter of 16  December  2020  and
      was further particularised on 22 March 2021.  EP was the respondent to
      the error of law appeal. The Upper Tribunal allowed the  Secretary  of
      State's appeal, set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  and
      remitted the matter to the First-tier Tribunal for redetermination.

  72. The rule 34 decision was taken following directions  in  the  standard
      form given on 26 June 2020 and sent to the parties in  July  2020.  EP
      did not file representations on the rule 34 issue or on the merits  of
      the error of law appeal.  Mr Ayodele Modupe, the solicitor acting  for
      EP, has made a statement explaining that it was only 11 June 2021 that
      he became aware of the directions that had been sent by  the  Tribunal
      in July 2020. The statement explains that he found the  email  in  the
      deleted items file.  He says that in July 2020 his offices were closed
      because  of  the  pandemic.  However,  the  firm  was   receiving   an
      unprecedented amount of email.  At that time the  firm  did  not  have
      email addresses for each fee-earner. Rather there was a  single  email
      address and a shared inbox.  Mr Modupe says that he  can  only  assume
      that the email was received in July 2020 but deleted in error.  He did
      not see the email at that time (he only saw  it  in  June  2021);  the
      email was not marked for his attention and had no title save  for  the
      case number.

  73. We  have  considered  whether  these  facts  disclose  any  procedural
      irregularity falling within any of the categories at rule 43(2)(a)  to
      (d).  We do not think  they  do.  The  directions  were  sent  by  the
      Tribunal and were received  by  EP's  representatives  but  were  then
      misfiled in error and not acted on.

  74. Turning to the rule 34 determination itself, the reasons given by  the
      Judge (Upper Tribunal Judge Lane) are brief.  This is  not  surprising
      given that neither party had made representations in response  to  the
      Tribunal's provisional view.  The decision makes no express  reference
      to  the  Guidance  Note,  the  Practice  Direction,   the   overriding
      objective, or any case law concerning  the  requirements  of  fairness
      either at  common  law  or  under  the  ECHR.   Nevertheless,  we  are
      satisfied that the conclusion on rule 34 was not  the  result  of  any
      error in principle.  It is clear from paragraph 2 of the decision that
      the Judge recognised that a no-hearing determination was a significant
      departure from usual practice. He made no assumption of  any  "overall
      paper norm".  He also, quite properly, considered the  nature  of  the
      issues in the appeal.  He regarded the First-tier Tribunal decision as
      "so deeply flawed by legal error that it cannot stand" and  took  that
      into account when deciding that the appeal could properly  be  decided
      without a hearing. We consider this was a conclusion he  was  entitled
      to reach. There is nothing in this decision that is inconsistent  with
      application rule 34 in accordance with the  overriding  objective  and
      the requirement of fairness.  There  was  no  procedural  irregularity
      which engages rule 43(2)(d).

  75. Had we reached the contrary conclusion  on  the  decision  to  proceed
      without a hearing, we would nevertheless have declined  to  set  aside
      the decision.  To do so would not be in the interests of justice.  The
      decision of the First-tier Tribunal was described  by  Upper  Tribunal
      Judge Lane as "so deeply flawed by legal error that it cannot  stand".
      We agree; there is no possibility that a  different  result  might  be
      reached if the appeal were considered at a hearing.  The judge in  the
      First-tier Tribunal concluded that section 117B(6) of the Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 applied, but  that  provision  clearly
      did not apply on the facts of this case because the applicant is not a
      parent. The judge further concluded that  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)  of
      the Immigration Rules  applied,  but  that  provision  did  not  apply
      either; the applicant had not (and still has not) been in  the  United
      Kingdom for seven years.


  76. There were also factual irregularities in the reasoning which  suggest
      the decision was directed to a different case. At paragraph 23 of  her
      decision, the judge referred  to  the  applicant's  wife,  but  he  is
      unmarried.  At paragraph 24, she stated that she was allowing  appeals
      brought by "the first, second and fourth  appellants"  but  there  was
      only one appellant before her.


  77. Mr Youssefian, for EP, acknowledged these points  but  submitted  that
      the first five pages of the seven-page  decision  contained  a  lawful
      disposal of the appeal and that what followed was merely  a  "bad  cut
      and paste job" which did not undermine the analysis which preceded it.
       We cannot agree.  The decision is to be read as a  whole  and  it  is
      quite clear that the Judge's article  8  ECHR  analysis  cannot  stand
      given the errors described above.  If the Judge had in mind  that  the
      applicant was able to succeed on article 8  grounds  by  reference  to
      determinative provisions of the 2002 Act or the Immigration Rules, her
      approach was so badly flawed that no Upper  Tribunal  Judge,  properly
      directing herself to the law and the facts, could  conclude  that  the
      decision of the First-tier Tribunal should stand.   The  interests  of
      justice are not served by this applicant having a further  opportunity
      to defend an indefensible  decision.   This  rule  43  application  is
      refused.

(2)  Mohammed Karim Chowdhury (HU/11561/2019)

  78. This rule 43 application was received  on  15  January  2021,  and  an
      extension of time for the application was granted by the  Tribunal  on
      26 January 2021.

  79. This appeal was allowed by the First-tier Tribunal and  the  Secretary
      of State was granted permission to appeal.  The  Upper  Tribunal  gave
      directions on 23 June  2020.   Mr  Chowdhury's  representatives  filed
      written submissions in response on 16 July  2020.   Those  submissions
      set out detailed reasons objecting to a no-hearing determination.  The
      Tribunal decided to proceed under rule 34 and set out its  reasons  at
      paragraphs 10 - 15 of its  decision.   Looking  at  those  reasons  in
      isolation we would have concluded against setting aside  the  rule  34
      decision.  The Judge did have regard to the overriding  objective;  he
      considered whether a no-hearing  determination  could  take  place  by
      reference to the nature of the issues in the appeal and  the  parties'
      respective positions on them: see the decision at paragraphs 14 -  15.
      Read as a whole, the decision shows  the  Judge  neither  assumed  nor
      applied an "overall paper norm".

  80. However, during the submissions on this application it became apparent
      that a different procedural irregularity had occurred. The  Tribunal's
      reasons at paragraphs 24 and  25,  the  primary  basis  on  which  the
      Tribunal concluded that the First-tier Tribunal's decision  should  be
      set aside, rest on a point that did not form part of the Secretary  of
      State's Grounds of Appeal or her further written  submission  made  in
      response to the Tribunal's Directions.  The point  was  therefore  not
      one  that  Mr  Chowdhury's  representatives  had  the  opportunity  to
      address.  We say  nothing  about  the  merits  of  the  conclusion  at
      paragraphs 24 to 25 of the Upper Tribunal's decision.  Suffice  it  to
      say that before relying on those matters the  Tribunal  should,  as  a
      matter of fairness,  have  given  further  directions  to  permit  the
      parties the opportunity to address the matter.   As  stated  above  at
      paragraph 36,  if  a  Tribunal  decides  in  favour  of  a  no-hearing
      determination hearing and gives directions to that end, it  must  keep
      those directions under review to ensure they remain sufficient for the
      purposes of a fair determination of the appeal. In this instance,  the
      failure to do this resulted in a procedural irregularity:  the  appeal
      was decided based on a submission which had been neither  advanced  by
      the appellant nor addressed by the respondent.  In the premises, it is
      in the interests of  justice  to  set  aside  the  decision  dated  14
      September 2020 on the error of law appeal.

(3)  FMR (Iraq) (PA/09206/2019)

  81. FMR was the respondent to the error of law appeal. The  Tribunal  gave
      directions on 9 June 2020.  His written  submissions  (dated  16  June
      2020) responded to the Secretary of State's  grounds  of  appeal.  The
      final paragraph of those submissions (paragraph 39) requested an  oral
      hearing but provided no observations in support of that request.   The
      failure to give reasons amounted to a failure to comply with paragraph
      3 of the Tribunal's directions.  No explanation  has  been  given  for
      that failure.

  82. Judge Kekic's decision on the rule 34  issue  and  the  error  of  law
      appeal was promulgated on 15 September 2020. The reasons for the  rule
      34 decision are at paragraphs 6 - 9 of the decision. It  appears  that
      in reaching her conclusion to determine the appeal without a  hearing,
      Judge Kekic overlooked the request for a hearing at  paragraph  39  of
      FMR's submissions.  At paragraph 9  of  her  decision  she  said  that
      neither party had raised objection to the matter being decided without
      a hearing. (Strictly speaking, it could be said this is  correct.  FMR
      had not  stated  any  reasoned  objection;  but  he  had  requested  a
      hearing.)  However, we do not consider this error to be  a  matter  of
      substance. The judge did not make her rule 34 decision simply  because
      the parties had not objected. We  are  satisfied  by  the  reasons  at
      paragraph 8 and 9 of the decision that the judge had the  requirements
      of fairness well in mind.

  83. The submission made to us was that because the reasons  refer  to  the
      Guidance Note that made it inevitable that  the  overriding  objective
      was not applied and that the Judge did fall into error.  We  disagree.
      Looking at the reasons in the  round,  the  Judge  did  not  apply  an
      "overall paper norm"; there was no presumption  in  favour  of  a  no-
      hearing  determination.  The  Judge  considered  the  requirements  of
      fairness taking account of the nature of the  issues  in  the  appeal.
      Her reasons show no error of principle, and the conclusion she reached
      was a conclusion open to her.

  84. The further submission made by counsel for FMR was that the Judge  had
      been wrong to conclude (at paragraph 28 of the decision) that  at  the
      remitted hearing there was no article 3 ECHR issue that would need  to
      be  decided.   We  consider  that  submission  may  well  be  correct.
      However, it is not a matter that demonstrates any procedural error  on
      the part of the Tribunal. Whether or not the  article  3  issue  would
      remain to be determined at the remitted hearing was a matter canvassed
      in the written submissions (see FMR's  written  submissions  dated  16
      June 2020 paragraph 29).  As we have explained above at paragraph  38,
      whether the Tribunal determined the error of law appeal  correctly  is
      not a benchmark for existence of procedural irregularity.

  85. For all these reasons, this rule 43 application is refused.

(4)  IQ (Palestine) (PA/4768/2019)

  86. In this case too, the Secretary of State  was  the  appellant  in  the
      error of law proceedings.  The Tribunal gave directions on 7 May  2020
      in the form we have set out above at paragraph 55.  The  Secretary  of
      State responded, late, on 5 June 2020 stating only that  she  intended
      to rely on the matters set out in her Notice of Appeal.   IQ  did  not
      respond to the request for submissions  on  the  rule  34  issue.  The
      submission to us was that IQ "received a clear view that a provisional
      view had been taken".   That  was  entirely  correct;  the  directions
      stated the Tribunal's provisional view.  But that was no reason not to
      comply with direction 3 if there was an objection to be made.  It  was
      also submitted that the directions put IQ under pressure of  time.  If
      that was why the submissions  invited by direction 3 could not be made
      the proper course would have been to request an extension of time.

  87. The reasons for the rule 34 decision are at paragraphs 3 -  9  of  the
      Tribunal's decision promulgated on 28 July 2020.  The  conclusion  was
      reached by reference to consideration of the overriding objective  and
      the assessment that a no-hearing determination of the  issues  in  the
      appeal would not prejudice the parties: see the decision at  paragraph
      9. We do not consider this conclusion rested on  any  incorrect  legal
      premise or any incorrect application of the relevant legal principles.

  88. The submission made to us was that the reasons did not  refer  to  the
      judgment of the Supreme Court in R(Osborn) v Parole  Board  [2014]  AC
      1115 (an authority which considered the  Parole  Board's  practice  of
      taking decisions on whether to release  tariff-expired  life  sentence
      prisoners without a hearing), and that the Tribunal's  decision  could
      have "benefitted from oral advocacy".  We do not  consider  either  of
      these matters carries weight.  The Parole Board  function  scrutinised
      by the Supreme Court in Osborn is very different to  the  function  of
      the Upper Tribunal when determining error of law appeals.  Failure  to
      refer to the Osborn judgment, of itself, says little as to  whether  a
      Tribunal has directed itself properly when taking a rule 34  decision.
      The submission that the Upper Tribunal may have been assisted by  oral
      advocacy is directed to the Tribunal's reasons on the article  3  ECHR
      issue in the appeal: see paragraphs 27 - 31.  We do not consider there
      is anything inherently wrong with the  Tribunal's  reasoning  on  this
      issue.  It addresses matters that had been canvassed in the pleadings.
      The submission to the effect that had there been a  hearing  something
      might have been said on behalf of IQ that might  have  influenced  the
      Tribunal is speculative and more importantly does  not  point  to  the
      existence of procedural irregularity.

  89. The one specific point advanced  was  that  at  paragraph  69  of  its
      decision the  First-tier  Tribunal  recorded  that,  in  her  decision
      letter, the Secretary of State had not sought to advance any  internal
      relocation argument. That is correct. The decision letter did not rely
      on the possibility of internal relocation, only the conclusion that on
      the facts  IQ  was  not  at  risk  of  article  3  ill-treatment.  The
      submission is to the effect that,  at  paragraphs  24  to  25  of  its
      decision, the Upper Tribunal appears to have allowed the Secretary  of
      State to submit that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in  failing  to
      consider the  possibility  that  IQ  should  relocate.   This,  it  is
      submitted, was wrong. We tend to agree. However, these matters do  not
      reveal procedural irregularity. Notwithstanding  the  reasons  in  the
      decision letter,  the  internal  relocation  issue  was  part  of  the
      Secretary of State's Grounds of Appeal (Notice of  Appeal,  Ground  1,
      second paragraph); it was therefore  a  matter  of  which  IQ  was  on
      notice, and which he did  have  the  opportunity  to  address  in  his
      submissions on the error of law appeal.  In any event,  this  point  -
      that any attempt now by the Secretary of State  to  rely  on  internal
      relocation is inconsistent with her decision letter - is one  that  IQ
      will be at liberty to raise when the Upper Tribunal  comes  to  remake
      the decision on the appeal on its merits (this having been retained by
      the Upper Tribunal and not remitted to the First-tier Tribunal).

  90. For these reasons the rule 43 application in this case is refused.

(5)  CEE (Nigeria)  (DA/00715/2018)

  91. CEE was the respondent to the error of law appeal, having succeeded in
      his appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.  Directions were issued  on
      15 July 2020.  Both parties filed submissions; each  agreed  expressly
      with the Upper Tribunal's proposal  to  determine  the  error  of  law
      appeal without a hearing.  The Tribunal promulgated its decision on  2
      November 2020.

  92. The Judge noted at paragraph 6 of her decision that  the  parties  had
      agreed to the error of law issue being determined on the papers.   She
      observed correctly that she was required by rule 34 to have regard  to
      their views. She considered the  overriding  objective,  the  Practice
      Direction and the Guidance Note  and  she  assessed  whether  fairness
      demanded that there should be a hearing  in  order  to  determine  the
      error of law appeal.  She concluded that it did not.

  93. Before us, it was submitted for CEE that consent that the error of law
      appeal be determined without a  hearing  was  not  determinative.   We
      agree it was not determinative but, for the reasons we  have  set  out
      above, it was highly relevant.  The Judge did not treat the consent as
      determinative.  She had regard to all material considerations, and she
      was entitled to proceed without a hearing, for the reasons  she  gave.
      Her decision to do so disclosed no procedural irregularity - there was
      no breach of the obligation to act fairly. The application under  rule
      43 is refused.


(6)  SR (Jamaica) (HU/8693/2017)

  94. The Secretary of State was the appellant in these proceedings.   Judge
      O'Connor gave directions which were sent to  the  parties  on  26  May
      2020. Written submissions were filed on behalf of SR on 4  June  2020,
      and supplementary written submissions were filed on 16 June 2020.   SR
      did not object to the proposal that the error of law appeal should  be
      determined without a hearing.

  95. The submissions made in support of the rule 43 application were to the
      effect: (a) that lack of objection to a  no-hearing  determination  is
      not conclusive because the requirement to act fairly gives rise to  an
      obligation that error of law appeals must be decided at hearings;  (b)
      that there is no requirement on a rule 43 application  to  demonstrate
      its specific prejudice; and  (c)  in  any  event,  in  this  case  the
      Tribunal would have benefited from oral argument at a hearing.

  96. We do not accept the first of these submissions (that appeals must  be
      decided at hearings). Put very  shortly,  the  submission  proves  too
      much. If correct it would negate the existence of rule 34.  There  has
      been no challenge to the legality of rule 34, and it was  no  part  of
      Fordham J's conclusions in the JCWI case that rule  34  was  unlawful.
      Applicants (SR and others) have submitted that the application of rule
      34 is not limited to decisions taken  by  UTIAC  (it  applies  to  all
      chambers of the Upper Tribunal) and even within  UTIAC's  jurisdiction
      it does not apply only to  decisions  on  error  of  law  appeals  (it
      applies  to  any  decision  which  the  Tribunal  may  take,   whether
      interlocutory or final). It follows from this, so the submission goes,
      that by reason of the "Key Themes  from  the  Common  Law  Principles"
      listed at Part 6 of Fordham J's judgment, an error of  law  appeal  in
      UTIAC cannot be determined other  than  at  a  hearing  -  effectively
      disapplying rule 34 from this class of appeal. We can see no reason in
      principle which singles out error of law appeals in UTIAC as  a  class
      of decision that is in principle unsuited to the application  of  rule
      34.

  97. The point on prejudice (the second submission) has also been addressed
      already. We accept that if the Tribunal misapplies rule 34 by reaching
      a conclusion without regard to relevant legal principle or by reaching
      a conclusion unsupportable in the circumstance of the  case  at  hand,
      that would be a procedural irregularity that would require an error of
      law decision to be set aside, save where a convincing "no  difference"
      submission could be made.  However, on the facts of  this  case,  this
      point leads nowhere.  The  rule  34  decision  was  contained  in  the
      decision of Judge Keith, promulgated on 16 July  2020.   The  material
      passage in the decision is at paragraph 16.


           "I have considered the matter a  fresh  and  endorse  the  Upper
           Tribunal Judge O'Connor's view that  the  determination  of  the
           error of law and whether the FtT's decision should be set  aside
           can be resolved without a hearing. The reason for this  is  that
           the scope of the issues is clearly outlined, limited to  whether
           the FtT had  correctly  applied  and  adequately  explained  the
           application of Section 117 of the 2002 Act, with defined grounds
           of appeal and  a  response  from  the  claimant.   There  is  no
           suggestion that there are further submissions which  could  only
           be made at a hearing,  which  had  not  been  addressed  in  the
           appeal. I therefore conclude that it is in  accordance  with  of
           the overriding objective that I reach a decision on the error of
           law and whether the FtT's decision should be set aside,  on  the
           papers".


  98. There is no error in that approach. The Judge considered the  specific
      issues in the appeal and recognised the significance of the overriding
      objective. There is no basis on which to infer  or  conclude  that  he
      applied any presumption in favour of a  no-hearing  determination,  or
      that his rule 34 decision rested on any other error of principle.


  99. The third submission for SR is directed to the  Tribunal's  conclusion
      on Grounds of Appeal 3 - 5. The  submission  is  to  the  effect  that
      considering the Tribunal's reasons  there  were  further  points  that
      could have been made and might have been said at a hearing which would
      have  caused  the  Tribunal  to  decide  these   grounds   of   appeal
      differently. We do not agree that this submission - even assuming that
      it is good at the level of principle - identifies the existence of any
      procedural irregularity on the facts of this case.

 100. As to the merits of the point at the level of principle, see above  at
      paragraphs 37 - 38. The advantages of determining  cases  at  hearings
      are well-known to all experienced judges and advocates.  The  ebb  and
      flow at a hearing will sometimes bring points to the fore  that  might
      have otherwise been overlooked or undervalued. However, to  decide  in
      favour or a no-hearing determination, a Tribunal judge does  not  need
      to be satisfied that would be the best  way  of  taking  the  decision
      concerned; only that it would be a fair way of taking  that  decision.
      In assessing  fairness,  any  judge  will  have  the  advantages  that
      hearings can bring well in mind (for example for those listed at  Part
      6 of Fordham J's judgment in  JCWI)  but  those  matters  may  not  be
      determinative in every case.

 101. On the facts of SR's' case the arguments on each side on Grounds 3 - 5
      were properly addressed in the written  submissions.  It  is  apparent
      that the Tribunal properly understood the submissions made and reached
      its decision taking  them  into  account.   There  was  no  procedural
      irregularity affecting the rule 34 decision.

 102. For these reasons, this rule 43 application is refused.

(7)  TO & BO (Nigeria) (HU/04826/2019 & HU/04831/2019)

 103. The applicants' human rights appeals were dismissed by the  First-tier
      Tribunal, and they secured permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.
       Directions were given by Judge Reeds on 10 June 2020.  The  Secretary
      of State did not object to the error of law appeal  being  decided  on
      the  papers  (see  written  submissions  dated  16  June  2020).   The
      applicants' solicitors made additional submissions on  30  June  2020;
      the covering email stated that the applicants were  "content  for  the
      matter to now be considered on the papers".

 104. The Judge  considered  whether  to  proceed  without  a  hearing:  see
      paragraph 8 of her decision. She noted what had been  stated  by  both
      parties.  She noted (correctly) that the issues  in  the  appeal  were
      limited. She decided to determine the appeal without a hearing stating
      that 'no unfairness arises from doing so'.  The reasoning  in  respect
      of rule 34 is certainly compressed but that is to be seen in  context.
      The applicants (who were legally represented) had expressly  consented
      to a no-hearing determination.  The Judge was entitled to  treat  that
      view as militating strongly in favour of a conclusion that it was fair
      to proceed without a hearing.

 105. In support of the application to set aside the Judge's  decision,  the
      applicants' solicitor filed a statement for the purposes of  the  rule
      43 application in which he states that consent to paper  consideration
      had only been given because the sponsor "could not afford a procedural
      challenge" (of the sort made in the JCWI litigation). But this is  not
      to the point. All that needed to be done in response to the Tribunal's
      directions was to set out the reasons why the  provisional  view  that
      the appeal could be fairly determined without a  hearing,  was  wrong.
      Further, we do not accept the submission made by Mr  Sharma  that  the
      consent which was given was not given freely or in full  knowledge  of
      the fact that Judge Reeds'  directions  made  provision  for  an  oral
      hearing to be requested. As we have explained  above,  the  directions
      given cannot fairly be seen as any form of  pre-determination  of  the
      application of rule 34; they set out a view that was  provisional  and
      invited the parties' representations in response.

 106. Mr Sharma's remaining submissions went to  the  merits  of  the  Upper
      Tribunal's decision and are irrelevant to the question of whether  the
      decision was marred by procedural irregularity. The mere existence  of
      the Guidance Note did not render the rule 34 decision wrong.

 107. This application under rule 43 is refused.

(8)  GS(India) (HU/4735/2019)

 108. GS made submissions in response to  the  Tribunal's  provisional  view
      that the error of law appeal could be determined  without  a  hearing.
      GS's preference was for a remote hearing, either  by  phone  or  video
      (see submissions dated 15 April 2020 at paragraph 3). GS's submissions
      pointed out that a determination based  only  on  written  submissions
      would remove the possibility of interaction between the advocates  and
      the Tribunal; it would not provide as good a way of deciding the error
      of law appeal.

 109. These matters were directly addressed by the Tribunal at paragraphs 10
      - 11 of its decision.  The Tribunal was satisfied that the  issues  in
      the appeal  could  be  fairly  determined  on  the  basis  of  written
      submissions; see in particular at paragraph 11. It is also clear  from
      paragraph 10 of the decision that the Tribunal took  account  of  both
      the requirements of fairness at common law  and  the  principles  that
      underlay the overriding objective.

 110. The submissions made to us focused on generic issues  (the  advantages
      of  hearings  generally)  and  pointed  to  certain  matters  in   the
      Tribunal's  decision  which  it  is  said  were  examples  of  factual
      inaccuracy.  We do not agree that these matters warrant setting  aside
      the Tribunal's error of law decision.  We have already  addressed  the
      generic issues. The matters said to be factually  inaccurate  are  not
      material and, as we have explained already, simply being able to point
      to respects in which the Tribunal  was  in  error  will  not,  in  the
      overwhelming majority of instances, make good the submission that  the
      no-hearing determination was  unfair.  This  rule  43  application  is
      therefore refused.

(9)  Olajide James Olatunde (HU/10003/2019)

 111. The applicant's appeal against the Secretary of State's refusal of his
      human  rights  claim  was  dismissed  by  the   First-tier   Tribunal.
      Directions in the appeal were given by  Judge  Frances  on  12  August
      2020.  The submissions made in response to the directions  included  a
      request for an oral hearing of  the  error  of  law  appeal  (see  the
      submissions at section E of the written submissions).

 112. The Tribunal's decision was promulgated on  30  November  2020,  after
      Fordham J's judgment in the JCWI case.  The decision on rule 34 is  at
      paragraphs 2 to 4 of the decision.  The  Judge  noted  the  objections
      raised by the applicant but concluded the appeal could  be  determined
      fairly without a hearing.  Full written submissions  had  been  lodged
      which failed to identify any respect in which oral argument  would  be
      'helpful or necessary'.  The  Judge's  reasons  take  account  of  the
      Practice Direction, the JCWI judgment ("including the benefits  of  an
      oral hearing  and  requirements  of  procedural  fairness"),  and  the
      overriding objective.

 113. The submission  in  support  of  the  rule  43  application  was  that
      notwithstanding her consideration of Fordham J's judgment in the  JCWI
      case, the Judge had applied the "overall  paper  norm".  There  is  no
      sustainable basis for that submission.  It is clear from  the  Judge's
      decision  that  the  Judge  applied  rule  34  having  regard  to  the
      shortcomings of the Guidance Note identified in Fordham J's  judgment.
      Her decision was  that  it  was  in  accordance  with  the  overriding
      objective to determine the appeal without a hearing. There is no error
      of law in the decision to proceed  as  she  did.   That  decision  was
      certainly not tainted - as Mr  Georget  sought  to  submit  -  by  the
      provisional  view  expressed  by  Judge  Frances.   We  have   already
      explained  our  reasons  for  rejecting  the   submission   that   the
      provisional view stated in the directions amounted to some form of pre-
      determination.

 114. Mr Georget also submitted that the Judge's decision to proceed without
      the hearing had deprived the applicant of an opportunity to  make  the
      submission that there was unlikely to be any cogent public interest in
      requiring him to leave the United Kingdom because an  application  for
      entry clearance (as the spouse of a settled person)  would  inevitably
      succeed.  The difficulty with that submission is that it overlooks the
      content of the grounds of appeal, the grant of  permission  to  appeal
      and the additional submissions  made  by  counsel.   There  is  not  a
      glimmer of any such argument (or any of the relevant  authorities)  in
      those documents.  We therefore reject Mr Georget's submission that the
      Upper  Tribunal's  decision  to  proceed  without  a  hearing  somehow
      deprived the applicant of an argument which would otherwise have  been
      available.  That argument had  never  been  identified  in  this  case
      before Mr Georget settled his skeleton argument on 27 May 2021.  It is
      not possible to demonstrate any form  of  procedural  irregularity  by
      developing an argument which  was  altogether  missed  by  those  with
      conduct of the matter at an earlier stage.

 115. In the circumstances, we do not find that  there  was  any  procedural
      irregularity in the Tribunal's decision and the application to set the
      decision aside is refused.

(10)     Ramanathan Annes  (HU/11949/2019)

 116. The applicant was the appellant in the error  of  law  appeal.   Judge
      Kamara  issued  directions  on  30  April  2020  which  included   the
      provisional view that the  error  of  law  appeal  could  properly  be
      determined without a hearing.   Responses  to  those  directions  were
      filed by both parties.  The applicant's response relied on the grounds
      of appeal and stated that there were no further submissions  to  make.
      There was no response to the suggestion  that  the  appeal  should  be
      determined without a hearing.

 117. One of us (Judge Blundell) was the judge who determined the  error  of
      law appeal and took the rule 34 decision. He noted there had  been  no
      response to Judge Kamara's provisional view on the application of rule
      34. He referred to the provisions of rule 34 and to the fact that  the
      lack of response to the directions objecting to determination  of  the
      appeal without a hearing  was  relevant  but  not  determinative.   He
      considered  the  overriding  objective  and  what  had  been  said  in
      R(Osborn) v Parole Board [2014] 1 AC 1115.  He noted that  there  were
      no live issues of fact.  His conclusion was that it was fair and  just
      to determine the appeal without a hearing.  The reasons in support  of
      his  substantive  decision  on  the  appeal  were  set  out  in   four
      comparatively short paragraphs, which began with an  observation  that
      the grounds of appeal were misconceived.

 118. Ms Allen, for the applicant, sought the removal of this case from  the
      cohort of test cases because Judge  Blundell  is  one  of  the  judges
      hearing these rule 43 applications.  We see no proper reason to remove
      the case from the cohort so that it might be  considered  by  a  judge
      other than Judge Blundell. We have set out the generic position  above
      - at paragraph 66. There is nothing in the specific  circumstances  of
      this case which  displaces  those  general  considerations.  There  is
      nothing that might lead  any  informed  and  fair-minded  observer  to
      conclude that there was any risk of bias in the determination  of  the
      rule 43 application.


 119. Ms Allen next submitted that the lack of  reference  in  the  rule  34
      decision to the Guidance Note placed the Tribunal and the advocates in
      an invidious position because it was  not  possible  to  know  whether
      Judge Blundell was aware of the Guidance Note when he  considered  the
      appeal.  There is nothing in this point. As explained above,  we  have
      approached all the rule 43 applications before us  on  the  assumption
      that all UTIAC judges were aware of the Guidance Note.

 120. Ms Allen's further submissions relied on generic  arguments  (a)  that
      the simple existence  of  the  Guidance  Note  rendered  the  rule  34
      decision  unlawful;  and  (b)  that  the  lack  of  objection  to  the
      provisional decision to determine the appeal without a  hearing  could
      not be determinative. We do not agree with the former submission,  for
      the reasons we have already set out. The latter submission is correct,
      but does not, in this case, mean either the rule 34 decision was wrong
      or the decision on the error of law appeal  must  be  set  aside  (see
      Judge Blundell's reasons at paragraphs 13 - 15).

 121. Ms Allen next submitted that the First-tier  Tribunal  had  failed  to
      engage with the possible application of section 117B of the  2002  Act
      to the  facts  of  this  case.  This  does  not  assist  the  rule  43
      application because the point was not raised either in the grounds  of
      appeal to the Upper Tribunal or even in the written  submissions  made
      in response to the Tribunal's directions. As such, the fact  that  the
      Upper Tribunal did not deal with this  point  does  not  indicate  the
      existence of any procedural irregularity.  The  submission  that,  had
      there been a hearing, the point might have been raised is no more than
      speculation. Finally, Ms Allen made submissions by  reference  to  the
      substantive merits of the Tribunal's decision to dismiss the error  of
      law appeal. However, if there is any substance to these matters,  they
      are points for an appeal, not for an application under rule 43.

 122. Overall, the reasons for the rule 34 decision  in  this  case  do  not
      disclose  any  error  of  principle  (the  relevant  principles   were
      demonstrably borne in mind), or any conclusion that was  in  error  of
      law. In the premises, the  rule  43  application  in  this  appeal  is
      refused.

(11) Golam Kibrea (HU/17892/2019)

 123. The applicant was the appellant in the error of law appeal. On 30 June
      2020 Judge Gill issued directions in the form we have set  out  above,
      stating her provisional view that the appeal could be determined under
      rule 34 without a hearing, and seeking the parties' representations on
      that view, and on the substantive merits of the appeal.  The Secretary
      of State agreed with Judge Gill's provisional view on the  application
      of rule 34.  The written submissions settled by  leading  counsel  for
      the applicant said nothing on the application of rule 34 but addressed
      the substantive merits of the error of law appeal.

 124. The main point taken for the hearing of the  rule  43  application  is
      that the Judge was improperly influenced by  the  Guidance  Note  such
      that the rule 34 decision was wrong and the decision on the  error  of
      law appeal was vitiated by procedural irregularity.  That is not borne
      out by consideration of the reasons  at  paragraphs  4  to  8  of  the
      Judge's decision which give no indication that he was influenced by an
      "overall paper norm". He observed that the parties had agreed that the
      error of law consideration could  properly  be  undertaken  without  a
      hearing. He considered the  overriding  objective  and  the  care  and
      effort which  had  been  taken  in  the  preparation  of  the  written
      submissions. He concluded that it was  appropriate  to  proceed  under
      rule 34.  The Judge clearly had in mind the  relevant  considerations,
      even if he did not set out every principle and every  authority.   His
      conclusion that this was a case in which the error of law appeal could
      be determined without  a  hearing  does  not  rest  on  any  error  of
      principle or error of law.

 125. There are various arguments in the applicant's  skeleton  argument  on
      the merits of the decision on the error of  law  appeal.   If  any  of
      these has merit, it is a matter for an appeal, not for an  application
      under rule 43.

(12) RF (Ghana) (HU/13583/2019)

 126. The applicant's appeal to the First-tier Tribunal rested on an article
      8 ECHR ground. Judge Buckwell dismissed the  appeal,  concluding  that
      the applicant did not have a genuine and subsisting relationship  with
      his son, who was two years old at the time.  Permission to appeal  was
      granted by the Upper Tribunal (Upper Tribunal Judge Gill).  Directions
      were given on the same date in the form we have set out above.

 127. The submissions in response to Judge Gill's directions were silent  on
      the question of whether the error of law appeal should  be  determined
      without a hearing.  There was a request that "where an error of law is
      found in the First-tier Tribunal's decision, the decision be set aside
      and re-made in the Upper Tribunal".  In  deciding  under  rule  34  to
      proceed without a hearing, the Judge noted the absence of objection to
      Judge Gill's provisional view.  She also referred to the  judgment  in
      Osborn v Parole Board, the Practice Direction, the Guidance  Note  and
      the overriding objective.  She concluded that  the  parties  had  been
      able to participate fully and that it was fair and just  to  determine
      the appeal without a hearing.

 128. It was submitted on behalf of the applicant that the Judge's  decision
      to determine the appeal without a hearing  was  marred  by  procedural
      irregularity and unfairness.  To the extent the contentions relied  on
      are generic, we have  considered  those  submissions  above.  We  have
      already explained why neither the existence of the Guidance  Note  per
      se, nor simple reference to it in a  decision  suffices  to  establish
      procedural irregularity that engages rule 43.


 129. It was also submitted that the Judge had failed to engage in a  "case-
      specific" analysis of the propriety of proceeding without  a  hearing.
      We do not agree. The Judge plainly had well  in  mind  that  the  case
      concerned the best interests of the applicant's son,  since  she  made
      reference to that in paragraph 8 of her decision; in this respect  she
      clearly had the importance of the proceedings to the applicant well in
      mind. It was also submitted that the Judge failed  to  appreciate  the
      complexity of the case and that this level of complexity militated  in
      favour of determination of the appeal at a hearing. We  do  not  agree
      that the case was complex or, as Ms Kilroy submitted that  it  was  an
      appeal "crying out" for an  oral  hearing.  As  the  Judge's  analysis
      shows, the case essentially involved an assessment of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal's conclusion that the applicant did not have  a  genuine  and
      subsisting relationship with his  son,  and  a  consideration  of  the
      application to adduce further evidence said to bear on that question.


 130. The submissions next criticised the Judge's reliance (for the purposes
      of  the  rule  34  decision)  on  the  need  to  avoid  delay  in  the
      determination of the error of  law  appeal.  We  do  not  accept  that
      criticism.  Avoidance  of  delay  in  UTIAC  proceedings  (so  far  as
      compatible with proper consideration of the issues) is  recognised  at
      rule 2(1)(e) of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Rules,  as  one  facet  of  the
      overriding objective. The Judge was entitled to place weight  on  this
      matter.


 131. Submissions were also made on the substantive merits of  the  decision
      on the error of law appeal. In particular,  the  submission  was  made
      that certain issues had been missed,  or  misunderstood,  or  examined
      with insufficient scrutiny.  These points do  not  begin  to  bear  on
      whether the Judge's decision to determine the appeal without a hearing
      gave rise to any procedural irregularity in the disposal of the  error
      of law appeal.


 132. In the premises, none of the matters relied on in support of the  rule
      43 application demonstrates that the rule 34 decision  was  wrong,  or
      that any other procedural  irregularity  affected  the  error  of  law
      appeal. The rule 43 application is therefore refused.

(13)     RSS (Iraq) (PA/11981/2019)

 133. In the course of submissions on this application  it  became  apparent
      that there had been  a  significant  procedural  irregularity  in  the
      course of the no-hearing determination of the error of law appeal.

 134. The First-tier Tribunal hearing took place in February 2020. The  case
      was argued and decided on the basis of the Iraq country guidance  then
      in force.  RSS's  Grounds  of  Appeal  were  formulated  on  the  same
      premise, as was the Secretary of  State's  response  and  the  written
      submissions of the parties (made pursuant to directions given  by  the
      Upper Tribunal  on  29  July  2020).  However,  the  Upper  Tribunal's
      determination of the error of law appeal (decision promulgated  on  12
      October 2020) was reasoned by reference to information  in  a  Country
      Policy and Information Note published by the Secretary of State on  30
      June 2020.  The parties had not been given the opportunity to  address
      the contents of this document.   The  parties  should  have  had  that
      opportunity; the Tribunal should have  given  further  directions  for
      that purpose. This rule 43 application is granted, and the  Tribunal's
      decision of 12 October 2020 is set aside.

(14)     Wajid Hussain (HU/01731/2019)

 135. We heard no oral submissions in support of Mr Hussain's application to
      set aside the Upper Tribunal's decision on the error of law appeal.  A
      skeleton argument, settled by Mr Hodgetts of counsel, had  been  filed
      in compliance with directions, but the applicant's solicitors wrote in
      advance of the hearing stating that he would not be represented at the
      hearing.

 136. The applicant's appeal was dismissed on human rights  grounds  by  the
      First-tier Tribunal, which concluded that although he had not  cheated
      in an English language test, his removal from the United Kingdom would
      not be in breach of his article 8 rights.  Permission  to  appeal  was
      granted by the First-tier Tribunal.

 137. The Tribunal gave directions proposing that the error of law appeal be
      determined without a hearing. The applicant filed written  submissions
      in compliance with those directions and requested that the  appeal  be
      determined at a remote hearing, submitting that an oral hearing of the
      appeal would be fairer, that a remote hearing was feasible, and that a
      paper determination was not consistent with the highest  standards  of
      fairness, which were to be observed given  that  the  outcome  of  the
      appeal would affect the applicant's  relationship  with  his  wife  (a
      British national).  The remainder of  the  submissions  concerned  the
      merits of the error of law appeal, in particular the adequacy  of  the
      First-tier Tribunal's conclusion that  there  were  no  insurmountable
      obstacles to continuation of family life in Pakistan.

 138. The Judge decided to determine  the  appeal  without  a  hearing.  The
      reasons for that conclusion are set out in  the  decision,  which  was
      promulgated on 8 October 2020, which also dismissed the error  of  law
      appeal on its merits. In deciding to proceed under rule 34, the  Judge
      noted the reasons relied on in support  of  the  contention  that  the
      appeal should be determined at  a  hearing.  At  paragraph  4  of  his
      reasons, the Judge explained that for  the  purpose  of  his  rule  34
      decision he had taken account of  the  overriding  objective  and  had
      regard to the narrow focus of the grounds of appeal and  to  the  full
      written submissions which had been made.  He considered it appropriate
      "in light of the covid-19 pandemic" to  determine  the  error  of  law
      appeal without a hearing.

 139. The applicant's criticisms of  the  rule  34  decision  are  based  in
      substance on the general points made orally and in writing by  leading
      counsel in RF and Onayemi.  We have considered those  points  in  some
      detail above and have rejected them. In this case we are satisfied the
      Judge took account of the overriding objective and the nature  of  the
      case  before  him.  He  reached  a  reasoned  decision  that  it   was
      appropriate in all the circumstances to  proceed  without  a  hearing.
      This application under rule 43 is accordingly refused.

(15)     Morenike Tolulope Onayemi (HU/13731/2019)

 140. The applicant was the appellant  in  the  error  of  law  proceedings.
      Directions were given by Judge  Mandalia  on  2  July  2020.   Written
      submissions consequent on those directions were filed on 10 July 2020,
      directed to the merits of the  appeal;  nothing  was  said  about  the
      provisional view that  the  appeal  should  be  determined  without  a
      hearing.

 141. In her decision  dismissing  the  appeal,  the  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
      referred to the absence of objection  to  a  paper  determination  and
      continued as follows:

         "In circumstances where no objections were made to the issues being
         determined without a hearing  and  where  the  appellant  has  made
         written  submissions  and  nothing  further  is  needed  from   the
         respondent; it is  in  the  interests  of  justice  to  proceed  to
         determine the error of law issues on the papers  in  light  of  the
         written submission available and the full appeal file."

      It was submitted to us that this represented inadequate  consideration
      of whether  to  determine  the  appeal  without  a  hearing.   Counsel
      highlighted the existence of the Guidance  Note  and  the  comparative
      brevity of the Judge's reasons for the rule 34 decision.


 142. Considering the nature of the issues before her and the absence of any
      objection to the provisional view expressed by Judge Mandalia,  we  do
      not consider that anything  more  was  required.   The  applicant  had
      professional representation and detailed written submissions had  been
      settled by counsel.  We accept that  the  absence  of  submissions  in
      response to the provisional view to determine  the  appeal  without  a
      hearing was  not  determinative;  the  judge  was  still  required  to
      consider whether it was fair to proceed to determine the error of  law
      appeal without a hearing.  However, her reference to the interests  of
      justice at the end of paragraph 2 of her decision shows that  she  had
      the correct considerations in mind.  We see nothing in  error  in  her
      decision to proceed without a hearing.

 143. Extensive submissions were made orally and in writing about the merits
      of the applicant's article 8 ECHR case  (rejected  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal) and the  Upper  Tribunal's  resolution  of  the  substantive
      issues in the appeal.  It was  submitted  there  were  various  issues
      which had not received the scrutiny they deserved or were points  that
      should have been clarified by  the  Secretary  of  State.  We  do  not
      consider these points establish any  procedural  irregularity  in  the
      Tribunal's consideration of the appeal.  If it is to be submitted that
      the  Upper  Tribunal  failed  to  provide  adequate  reasons  for  its
      conclusions or that it failed to take material matters  into  account,
      that is an argument for an appeal.

 144. For these reasons, we decline to set aside the Tribunal's decision  of
      30 August 2020.

(16)  SS(Iran)  (PA/06833/2019);  AS(Iran)  (PA/06105/2019);   and   S(Iran)
      (PA/06106/2019)

 145. In this appeal the applicants made written submissions  in  opposition
      to the provisional view  that  rule  34  should  be  applied  (written
      submissions dated 14 May 2020 at paragraphs 4 -  13).  The  applicants
      emphasised the well-established  and  well-known  advantages  of  oral
      hearings. The submissions identified that  one  issue  in  the  appeal
      concerned  a  challenge  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  approach  to
      assessing  the  applicants'  credibility  and  contended  this  was  a
      "nuanced" matter that needed exposition at a hearing.  They  suggested
      that a hearing could take place by phone or by video.

 146. These points were  carefully  considered  by  the  Tribunal:  see  the
      decision at paragraphs 3 - 8.  At paragraph 8,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
      Macleman concluded as follows:


           "I accept that oral  arguments  are  sometimes  "game-changing".
           However, fair resolution  of  issues  such  as  the  present  on
           written materials is common in this and in other  jurisdictions,
           and well within professional and judicial competence, in  asylum
           as well as other cases.  The appellants' citations are not  good
           authority for never  deciding  error  of  law  without  an  oral
           hearing, a course available to the Tribunal  within  its  rules.
           Contrary to their submission, the  facts  which  the  appellants
           sought to establish, and  their  supporting  evidence,  are  not
           complex. The claim is straight forward.  The evidence  has  been
           led.  Parties  have  had  ample  opportunity  to  explain  their
           positions on it.  The appellants have done so at length  and  in
           detail.  I find no feature of this case such that it cannot  now
           fairly be resolved without an oral hearing".


 147. In submissions to us, this paragraph  was  criticised  as  failing  to
      refer to the importance of the case  to  the  applicants,  failing  to
      refer to the careful scrutiny that determination of the  appeal  would
      require, and failing to refer to the overriding objective.  We do  not
      consider there is force in any of these points.  Although there is  no
      express reference to the overriding  objective,  paragraph  8  of  the
      decision explains the Judge's conclusion by referring to the substance
      of  the  overriding  objective.   Judge  Macleman  does  make  express
      reference to the paragraphs in the applicants' submissions which refer
      to the importance of the outcome  of  the  appeal  and  the  need  for
      careful consideration of the issues in  it.  We  do  not  consider  it
      material that these matters  are  not  themselves  written-in  to  the
      decision.  It is important to consider written reasons fairly, and in-
      the-round, and not to nit-pick one's way through them.

 148. Overall, our conclusion is that in this case the rule 43 decision  was
      taken by reference to relevant principle; the specific features raised
      in the appeal  were  carefully  considered  from  the  perspective  of
      whether a decision taken on the basis of written representations would
      be fair; and no presumption in favour of a  no-hearing  determination,
      no  "overall  paper  norm"  was  applied.   We  have  also   carefully
      considered the Tribunal's treatment of the issues in this appeal. This
      does not reveal any procedural irregularity.  For these reasons,  this
      rule 43 application is refused.

(17)     Danyal Jannat (PA/1481/2017)

 149. The Tribunal gave directions in this appeal  on  30  April  2020  both
      parties  consented  to  a  no-hearing  determination.    The   written
      submissions for Mr Jannat dated 12 May 2020 included the following:


     "2. ... The Appellant is content for the appeal to be  dealt  with  on
          the papers, given the current  COVID-19  situation,  and  does  no
          (sic) request a hearing ..."


 150. The submission made to us was that this agreement was "reluctant"  and
      only given because  the  alternative  was  a  delayed  decision;  that
      paragraph 3 of the Directions suggested that the provisional  decision
      on the application of rule 34 was final,  not  provisional;  and  that
      oral argument at a hearing may have assisted the Tribunal. The  latter
      two submissions are essentially generic. We  have  addressed  them  in
      Section C of this judgment.  There is nothing in the circumstances  of
      this case which gives any significance to either of them.   We  reject
      the first submission on the  nature  of  the  consent  given.  At  the
      material time Mr Jannat was represented  by  solicitors  and  counsel.
      The written submission on this point was clear and unconditional.  The
      gloss that Mr Jannat's representatives (the same as instructed by  him
      in May 2020) now seek to put on the matter is opportunistic. This rule
      43 application is therefore refused.

(18) MB (Eritrea) (PA/05994/2019)

 151. The Tribunal gave directions in this appeal  on  7  April  2020.   The
      Secretary of State (the respondent to the appeal) consented to  a  no-
      hearing determination. MB's representatives filed written  submissions
      in support of his error of law appeal under cover of a letter dated  5
      May 2020.  The covering letter included the following:


           "It is contended that any re hearing of the Appellant's case  be
           it   as a resumed hearing before the Upper  Tribunal  or  before
           the FTT, it is requested that such a hearing be  dealt  with  by
           way of an oral hearing.  It is contended that  on  such  resumed
           hearing the Upper Tribunal or the FTT will be  invited  to  make
           findings on issues of credibility which we respectively  contend
           will require oral evidence from the Appellant."


     The effect of this was noted  by  the  judge  at  paragraph  7  of  his
      decision. There was an issue before us as to whether this amounted  to
      any form of consent or agreement that the error of law appeal could be
      determined on the basis  of  the  Tribunal's  directions  for  written
      submissions. It was also submitted that the  Tribunal's  decision  had
      failed to address some parts of the grounds of appeal.

 152. We do not consider there is any substance to  the  latter  point.  The
      Tribunal identified the Grounds of  Appeal  at  paragraph  18  of  the
      decision,  and  then  addressed  each  in  turn.   As  to  the  former
      submission, we consider, in context, the passage in  the  5  May  2020
      letter set out above is consent to a no-hearing determination.  It  is
      notable that the letter distinguishes  between  the  decision  on  the
      error of law appeal and the decision on  any  subsequent  retained  or
      remitted hearing by reference to the nature  of  the  issues  at  each
      stage respectively.  By inference, this recognises that the issues  in
      the error of law appeal could be fairly determined  on  the  basis  of
      written submissions.  As we have pointed out in the  previous  section
      of this judgment, a conclusion that the issues raised in an  error  of
      law appeal could be fairly  addressed  in  this  way  is  not  at  all
      surprising.  As we have  also  said  above,  in  the  context  of  any
      specific error of law appeal, the parties  to  the  appeal  are  well-
      placed to assess what fairness  requires.   All  this  being  so,  the
      Tribunal was entitled to attach significant weight to the view set out
      in the 5 May 2020 letter.

 153. Apart from this it is fair to observe that the Tribunal's reasons  for
      its rule 34 decision are brief.  Nevertheless,  it  is  apparent  from
      paragraph 5 of the decision that the Tribunal  did  not  approach  the
      matter  on  any  basis  of  presumption  in  favour  of  a  no-hearing
      determination; the significance of the common law duty of fairness was
      well-recognised. This rule 43 application is therefore refused.


E.   Disposal

 154. For the reasons above the rule 43 applications in  Mohammed  Chowdhury
      (HU/11561/2019), and RSS (Iraq) (PA/11981/2019) are granted. In  these
      cases, the error of law decisions of the Tribunal are set  aside,  and
      the error of law appeals will need to be reheard. The  remaining  rule
      43 applications are refused.


155. In the cases in which applications for  permission  to  appeal  to  the
      Court of Appeal remain pending, separate decisions will be  issued  on
      those applications in due course.



                                                            Mr Justice Swift

                                    Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
                                                     -----------------------
[1]
      [pic][2]123456xyz}~f"...+?>?~####~viYYMChBQh6&5?CJhBQhE5
      ?>*[pic]CJhBQhE5?>*[pic]B*[pic]CJphhBQhEB*[pic]CJph
      hBQh6V)CJPJ^J[3]nH        tH        hBQh,      |DCJPJ^J[4]nH      tH
      hBQhJACJPJ^J[5]nH                                                 tH
      hBQh6V)CJhBQh6V)B*[pic]CJphhBQhGhCJhBQhGhB*[pic]CJphhBQhGh5?B*[pic]
      CJphhBQh${  A declaration to  this  effect  was  at  paragraph  2  of
      Fordham J's Order. Strictly speaking, it was probably unnecessary  for
      the declaration to apply to paragraph 17 of the Guidance Note as  that
      paragraph said nothing as to the conduct of  error  of  law  hearings.
      However, nothing material turns on this point.

