
                                    [pic]

|Upper Tribunal                  |                                |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)|                                |
|                                |                                |
|Kakarash (revocation of HP; respondent's policy) [2021] UKUT     |
|00236 (IAC)                                                      |


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House (via Teams) |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 17 June 2021                  |                                 |
|                                 |.................................|
|                                 |......                           |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            REKAN SHWAN KAKARASH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Deller, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Radford, instructed by Turpin Miller LLP

 1. When a court or tribunal is considering whether the revocation  of  P's
    protection status breaches the UK's obligations in relation to  persons
    eligible for a grant of Humanitarian Protection, the first question  is
    whether P is eligible for a grant of Humanitarian Protection.

 2. P is not eligible for a grant  of  Humanitarian  Protection  if  he  is
    excluded from eligibility for any  one  of  the  reasons  in  paragraph
    339GB(i)-(v) of the Immigration Rules (which transposed  Article  17(1)
    of the Qualification Directive), including his commission of a  serious
    crime or the fact that he constitutes a  danger  to  the  community  or
    security of the UK.

 3. The Secretary of State's guidance on Humanitarian  Protection  (version
    5, 7 March 2017) does not disclose an intention to adopt standards more
    favourable to P as regards exclusion from Humanitarian Protection.   In
    particular, that guidance  does  not  require  that,  in  order  to  be
    excluded from Humanitarian Protection, an individual who has  committed
    a serious crime must also represent a danger to the UK.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. At 9 o'clock in the morning on 22 June  2018,  there  was  an  argument
    between two customers at a Subway sandwich shop  in  Peterborough.  The
    argument began because one customer, Mr Kakarash, felt that  he  should
    not have to queue to buy a cookie.  The other customer  suggested  that
    he should wait his turn.  The argument escalated to the point that  the
    other customer was  headbutted  and  stabbed  in  the  shoulder  by  Mr
    Kakarash.


 2. The Secretary of State took the view that  this  was  a  serious  crime
    which  justified  the  revocation   of   Mr   Kakarash's   humanitarian
    protection.  On appeal against that decision, the  First-tier  Tribunal
    accepted that the crime was a serious one  which  justified  revocation
    under the Qualification Directive and the Immigration Rules but allowed
    the appeal nevertheless.  This appeal concerns the correctness of  that
    decision.

 3. To avoid confusion, we will refer to the parties as  they  were  before
    the FtT: Mr Kakarash as the appellant, the Secretary of  State  as  the
    respondent.

Background

 4. The appellant is an Iraqi national who was born on 18  April  1997.  He
    entered the UK unlawfully, as an  unaccompanied  asylum-seeking  child,
    and claimed asylum on 10 November 2014.  He claimed to be a Kurd from a
    contested area  which  had  been  attacked  by  ISIS.   The  respondent
    accepted that he could not return to that area but  concluded  that  he
    could safely and reasonably relocate to the Independent Kurdish Region.




 5. On appeal to the First-tier Tribunal, Judge John Jones  QC  noted  that
    the appellant (who was, by that stage, an adult) did not  rely  on  the
    Refugee Convention.  The judge considered and rejected the points  made
    by the respondent about the truthfulness of  the  appellant's  account.
    He accepted the core of that account, that the appellant 'is  an  Iraqi
    Kurd who fled his village when it was attacked by ISIS and that  it  is
    not now safe for him to return to  his  home  area'.   The  judge  also
    accepted that the appellant's father was killed in the attack and  that
    the appellant had been unable to trace any of his other family members.
     Applying AA (Article 15(c) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544  (IAC),  the  judge
    found that the appellant could not return to his home  area  (of  Gwer,
    near Erbil) and that his relocation to the IKR would be  unduly  harsh.
    So it was that the appeal was allowed on  Humanitarian  Protection  and
    Article 3 ECHR grounds.


 6. Judge Jones QC's decision was issued on 9 December 2015. There  was  an
    appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  and,  although  we  have  not  seen  the
    resulting decision, it is not in dispute that the decision of  the  FtT
    stood undisturbed.  The appellant was granted  Humanitarian  Protection
    on 10 April 2016, valid until 9 April 2021.

 7. The stabbing occurred on 22 June 2018.  The appellant was  arrested  at
    the scene.  On 14 December  2018,  at  a  Plea  and  Trial  Preparation
    Hearing before the Crown Court at Cambridge, he pleaded guilty  to  two
    offences: unlawful wounding and having a bladed  article  in  a  public
    place.  That plea was offered on a basis of excessive self-defence  but
    that basis was ultimately abandoned by the appellant.   On  31  January
    2019, the appellant was sentenced by HHJ Bridge to a total  of  fifteen
    months' imprisonment.

 8. The respondent wrote to the appellant on 16 February 2019, seeking  any
    reasons why he should not be deported as a foreign criminal, as defined
    in the UK Borders Act 2007.  She stated, amongst other things, that she
    would be considering whether to take  any  action  in  respect  of  the
    appellant's Humanitarian Protection status.  She invited  him  to  make
    representations on that and other matters within 20 days,  after  which
    she would consider 'whether you  continue  to  qualify  for  protection
    status and, if not, whether you should be deported'.

 9. The appellant responded to the respondent's letter on  10  April  2019.
    He had produced the response himself  with  the  assistance  of  fellow
    prisoners.  He stated that he was married to a British citizen and that
    he had a child.  He had no problems related  to  substance  abuse;  the
    index offence  was  his  first;  and  there  was  no  prospect  of  its
    repetition.  In all the circumstances,  it  would  be  disproportionate
    under Article  8  ECHR  to  deport  the  appellant.   This  letter  was
    supported by evidence in support of the appellant's private and  family
    life in the UK.

10. On 23  July  2019,  the  respondent  wrote  to  the  appellant  at  HMP
    Huntercombe.  She refused  his  human  rights  claim  and  revoked  his
    Humanitarian  Protection.   For  reasons  which  will  shortly   become
    apparent, we need not mention  the  basis  upon  which  the  respondent
    reached the former conclusion.  The latter conclusion was based on  the
    respondent's conclusions that the appellant  had  committed  a  serious
    crime or, alternatively, that he constituted a danger to the community.
     She cited paragraphs 339GB(iii) and (iv) of the Immigration  Rules  as
    applying to the appellant.  The  respondent  also  concluded,  applying
    paragraph 339GA of the Immigration Rules, that the circumstances  which
    led to the grant of humanitarian protection had ceased to exist or  had
    changed to such a degree that such protection was no longer required.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

11. The appellant appealed to the FtT on 2 August 2019.   He  had  by  this
    stage instructed his current solicitors and the IAFT-5 was prepared  by
    them.  Of the eight boxes  which  may  be  completed  to  indicate  the
    grounds of appeal, three were completed.  It was submitted in the first
    that removal of the  appellant  would  be  in  breach  of  the  Refugee
    Convention.  In the second,  it  was  submitted  that  the  appellant's
    removal to Iraq would expose him to inhuman and degrading treatment and
    he was said to be  'eligible  for  humanitarian  protection'.   In  the
    third, there was reference to Articles 3 and 8 ECHR and reliance on the
    appellant's relationships with his partner and child in  the  UK.   The
    fourth and fifth boxes - which invited submissions in relation  to  the
    decision to revoke the appellant's protection status - were left blank.



12. Before the appeal could be heard by the FtT,  there  were  two  further
    events of note.  On  18  May  2020,  the  appellant  was  convicted  of
    detaining a child without lawful authority  and  given  a  twelve-month
    conditional discharge by Cambridgeshire Magistrates' Court.   Secondly,
    on 8 June 2020, the respondent stated in writing that she had withdrawn
    the decision to deport the appellant. She nevertheless  maintained  the
    decision to revoke his  humanitarian  protection.   She  indicated  her
    intention to grant the appellant twelve months' discretionary leave  to
    remain.

13. The appeal came before a panel of the FtT comprising Judges Brannan and
    Singer on 8 October 2020.  The appellant was represented by Ms Radford,
    the respondent by a Presenting Officer (not Mr Deller).  Ms Radford had
    produced a skeleton  argument,  in  which  she  argued  only  that  the
    decision to revoke  the  appellant's  protection  status  breached  the
    United Kingdom's obligations in relation  to  persons  eligible  for  a
    grant of humanitarian protection, under s84(3)(b) of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act").

14. Mr Radford's argument before the FtT might be summarised quite shortly.
     She submitted that the  only  issue  was  whether  the  appellant  was
    excluded from Humanitarian Protection because he was a  danger  to  the
    community or had committed a serious  offence:  [2].   Having  set  out
    paragraphs 339GB(iii) and (iv) of the  Immigration  Rules,  Ms  Radford
    made  reference  to  the  respondent's  policy  entitled   Humanitarian
    Protection, dated 7 March 2017.  She did so  in  order  to  assist  the
    Tribunal in considering whether the crimes committed by  the  appellant
    were serious crimes.  She submitted that the index offence was not such
    an offence: [9].  At [10]-[18], she submitted,  with  reference  to  an
    array of relevant authority, that the appellant  did  not  represent  a
    danger to the community.  Ms Radford therefore submitted  that  neither
    paragraph 339GB(iii) nor 339GB(iv) applied to the  appellant  and  that
    his appeal against the revocation of his humanitarian protection should
    be allowed accordingly.

15. The FtT did not accept Ms Radford's argument that the index offence was
    not a serious  one.   It  found,  in  fact,  that  the  offence  was  a
    'particularly serious' one: [27].  It did not accept that the appellant
    represented a danger to the community: [31].  It found, in terms,  that
    the appellant's Humanitarian Protection would fall for revocation under
    the Immigration Rules because he had committed a serious crime: [53].

16. The basis upon which the FtT allowed the appeal was not one  which  had
    been advanced by Ms Radford, although it took  as  its  foundation  the
    respondent's Humanitarian Protection policy she had adduced in  support
    of the argument  we  have  summarised  above.   The  FtT  reasoned,  in
    summary,  that  the  respondent's  policy  amalgamated  what  were  two
    separate grounds for revocation in  the  Qualification  Directive.   It
    based that conclusion on a section of the policy which we will set  out
    more fully below.  For present purposes, it suffices to note  that  the
    sentence upon which the FtT seized was:

         Paragraphs 339D(iii) and (iv) reflect Article 17(i)(d) and  (b)  of
         the QD and apply where there are reasonable grounds  for  regarding
         an individual as a danger to the  security  of  the  UK,  including
         those who exhibit extremist behaviours, or to those who  have  been
         convicted of a particularly serious crime such that they are deemed
         to be a danger to the community.


         [the emphasis is ours]

17. The FtT considered, at [19], that the respondent had imposed a  'higher
    threshold' in this policy  than  was  required  by  the  Rules  or  the
    Qualification Directive, both of which 'require either a serious  crime
    or being a danger to the community'.  Having found  in  the  subsequent
    paragraphs that the appellant had committed a  serious  crime  but  not
    that he was a danger to  the  community,  the  FtT  then  asked  itself
    whether  the  appellant  had  'a  legitimate   expectation   that   his
    Humanitarian Protection will not be revoked based on  the  Respondent's
    policy'.


18. The  FtT  cited  domestic  authority  on  the  doctrine  of  legitimate
    expectation at [36]-[38]. At [40], it  reiterated  its  view  that  the
    respondent's policy went further and  placed  a  higher  threshold  for
    revocation than the Directive or the Immigration Rules.  It  considered
    that this was a 'sufficiently clear and unambiguous  statement  of  the
    practice [the respondent] intends to follow when considering  exclusion
    from or revocation of Humanitarian Protection'.

19. At [41], the FtT noted that the Directive allowed the Member States  to
    set standards which give greater protection than the Directive  itself,
    citing paragraph 8 of the Recitals in support of statement.   At  [42],
    the FtT noted that there was no  such  discretion  in  the  Immigration
    Rules, citing the mandatory terms of paragraph 339G.  At [43]-[46], the
    FtT explained why it considered that Humanitarian  Protection  was  not
    declaratory of an underlying status.  This meant,  the  FtT  stated  at
    [47], that granting Humanitarian  Protection  was  'a  grant  of  leave
    rather than a recognition of status'.  The respondent therefore granted
    leave, it concluded outside the Immigration Rules.  At  [48],  the  FtT
    stated:


         The appellant is therefore the beneficiary of a  policy  which  the
         respondent has lawfully adopted meaning  that  he  can  retain  his
         Humanitarian  Protection  outside  the  Immigration  Rules  despite
         having committed a serious crime.  In the present proceedings,  the
         respondent wishes to go against this policy.

20. Under a sub-heading "What should the Tribunal  do?",  the  FtT's  final
    reasons for allowing the appeal were as follows.  They noted  that  the
    respondent had not 'articulated any reason why she should  depart  from
    her policy:' and that there were public  policy  reasons  (good  public
    administration and treating revocation of Humanitarian  Protection  and
    refugee status similarly) in favour of the policy being applied:  [50].
    The decision concluded as follows:


         [52] In the circumstances we consider that the respondent's  policy
         should be applied.  As we have found that the respondent has failed
         to prove that the appellant is a danger to the community,  he  does
         not qualify under the  Respondent's  policy  for  his  Humanitarian
         Protection to be revoked.   The  appeal  therefore  succeeds  under
         s84(3)(b)  because  we  find  that  the  decision  to  revoke   the
         appellant's  protection  status  breached  the   United   Kingdom's
         obligations  in  relation  to  persons  eligible  for  a  grant  of
         humanitarian protection.


         [53] We reiterate that, in the absence of the respondent's  policy,
         the appellant would qualify to  have  his  Humanitarian  Protection
         revoked under the Immigration Rules.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

21. In grounds of appeal settled by Mr Deller, the respondent advances  two
    arguments which might be summarised as follows.  Firstly, that the  FtT
    exceeded its statutory jurisdiction in allowing the appellant's  appeal
    with reference to the respondent's policy, since to do so was to  allow
    the appeal on the basis that the decision was 'not in  accordance  with
    the law', which ground of appeal had long since been removed  from  the
    2002 Act.  Secondly, that the policy had been misapplied  by  the  FtT.
    It was not sufficiently unambiguous to warrant a general departure from
    the Directive and the Rules and it was not, in any event, for  the  FtT
    to impose its own view when the policy had not been considered  by  the
    respondent.

22. Permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley on 15  December
    2020.  She considered that the  first  ground  was  stronger  than  the
    second but gave permission on both.

23. The appeal came before Upper Tribunal Judge Blundell on 22 April  2021.
    Ms Radford's instructing solicitors filed a short reply to the  grounds
    of appeal at 0728 that morning.  In it, Ms Radford  sought  to  support
    the reasoning of the FtT.  In the event that the Upper  Tribunal  found
    for the Secretary of State in relation to Humanitarian  Protection,  Ms
    Radford sought to 'revive' the original asylum grounds of appeal and to
    argue that the appellant would be at risk on return to Baghdad on three
    of the grounds recognised in Article 1A(2) of the Refugee Convention.

24. Two hours or so before the hearing on 22 April was due to be called on,
    Ms  Radford's  instructing  solicitors  filed  and  served  a  skeleton
    argument in which she sought  to  develop  her  defence  of  the  FtT's
    decision.  In this skeleton, Ms Radford submitted, inter alia, that the
    respondent owed an obligation of good administration to  the  appellant
    and that it had accordingly  been  proper  for  the  FtT  to  hold  the
    respondent to her policy.  She cited  Article  41  of  the  Charter  of
    Fundamental Rights of the European Union and a raft of  authority  from
    the CJEU, including Schindler Holding Ltd  v  European  Commission  (Re
    Elevators and Escalators Cartel) (Case T-138/07) [2013] 4  CMLR  39  in
    support of this  submission.   The  late  submission  of  the  rule  24
    response and, in particular, the skeleton argument placed  Mr  Whitwell
    (who then represented the respondent) at a disadvantage and the  appeal
    was adjourned to enable the respondent to consider and respond to these
    new points.

25. On 28 May 2021, Mr Deller's skeleton argument was filed with the  Upper
    Tribunal.  He submitted that the FtT had erred as to the limits of  its
    statutory jurisdiction under Part 5 of the 2002 Act; that it had  erred
    in holding that a policy could extend the ambit of the  Directive;  and
    that it had also erred  in  directly  applying  that  policy  when  the
    outcome was not certain.  In response to Ms  Radford's  submissions  in
    relation to Article 41 of the Charter, Mr Deller submitted that such an
    approach would be more arbitrary than the Tribunal staying  within  its
    statutory limitations.

26. At our request, Ms Radford made her submissions on a procedural  matter
    first.  She stated that the decision under appeal to the FtT  had  been
    the refusal of a human rights claim and the  revocation  of  protection
    but the former decision had been withdrawn in advance of  the  hearing.
    The respondent  had  initially  raised  the  ground  of  revocation  in
    paragraph 339GA but that too had been withdrawn.   Ms Radford  accepted
    that the notice of appeal to the FtT had raised no grounds against  the
    revocation of protection, but she submitted that the grounds of  appeal
    had been impliedly varied during the course of the  appeal.   The  sole
    ground of  appeal  was  therefore  whether  the  respondent's  decision
    breached the UK's obligations in relation to a person who was  eligible
    for a grant of humanitarian protection.  She had not sought to pursue a
    submission before the FtT in relation to the  Refugee  Convention,  but
    she would seek to do so in  the  event  that  the  Secretary  of  State
    prevailed in relation to humanitarian protection.

27. Mr Deller noted that there had clearly been some confusion  before  the
    FtT.   The  respondent  had  raised  two  reasons  for   revoking   the
    appellant's status and she had issued three different decisions.   With
    his customary fairness, he did not invite the Upper Tribunal to take  a
    narrow view of what had been in issue before the FtT.

28. As to the merits of the respondent's appeal, Mr Deller was  essentially
    content to adopt his grounds of appeal and his skeleton argument.   The
    statutory jurisdiction of the FtT had been  radically  altered  by  the
    Immigration Act 2014.  The authorities cited  by  the  FtT  and  by  Ms
    Radford all related to the previous version of Part 5 of the 2002  Act,
    which included the ground of  appeal  that  the  decision  was  not  in
    accordance  with  the  law.   AG  and   others   (Policies;   executive
    discretions; Tribunal's powers) Kosovo [2007] UKAIT 00082 was one  such
    case under the old regime.    In  contrast,  this  appellant  only  had
    available to him  two  grounds  of  appeal,  relating  to  the  Refugee
    Convention and Humanitarian Protection.  The appellant plainly met  the
    criteria for exclusion under Article 17 of the Directive.  The FtT  had
    found as much.  Even if, as the FtT had found, the policy conflated the
    two tests (commission of a serious crime and danger to the  community),
    section 84(3)(b) of the 2002 Act  did  not  permit  the  FtT  to  apply
    criteria which were over and above the Directive.

29. Ms Radford submitted that there were difficulties with the respondent's
    construction of the ground of  appeal  upon  which  the  appellant  had
    relied  before  the  FtT.   By  s113  of  the  2002  Act,  humanitarian
    protection has the meaning given in s82(2).   By  s82(2),  humanitarian
    protection was to be  construed  in  accordance  with  the  Immigration
    Rules.  By  paragraph  6.2  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  'humanitarian
    protection' means 'leave granted pursuant to paragraph 339C  and  which
    had not been revoked pursuant to paragraph 339G to  339H.   Ms  Radford
    submitted, by reference to this  definition,  that  a  person  who  had
    already been granted HP must be a person who was  'eligible'  for  that
    status, to whom the UK owed a range of obligations, including those  in
    Article 41 of the Charter.  It would be neither fair nor appropriate to
    require an individual to prove their eligibility for HP time and again.
     The Refugee Convention gave the individual a degree of  protection  in
    such circumstances and the same approach should be adopted in  relation
    to the revocation of HP.  A person was to be treated as eligible for HP
    unless and until it was lawfully revoked.

30. Ms Radford did not accept that s84(3)(b) required the FtT  to  consider
    first whether the appellant was eligible for a grant of HP. The  burden
    was instead on the respondent to show that the appellant was ineligible
    and the policy was to be applied or considered at  that  stage  of  the
    enquiry.  The respondent had made a policy - as she was entitled to  do
    under the Directive - about how she would apply that Directive and  her
    own Rules.   That  policy  was  demonstrably  more  favourable  to  the
    appellant than the minimum standards in  the  Directive  and  the  UK's
    obligations to him included holding the respondent to that policy.

31. Ms Radford took us to the salient parts of the policy, which  had  been
    helpfully reproduced in an agreed bundle of authorities.  She  accepted
    that there were parts of the  policy  which  accurately  reflected  the
    Directive but she submitted that it was clear that the  respondent  had
    committed herself to a more restrictive approach than was  required  in
    the Rules or the Directive.   Ms Radford accepted that the respondent's
    policy was 'a little bit  odd'  if  read  in  the  way  for  which  she
    contended but she maintained that it was  sufficiently  clear  for  the
    respondent to be held to it.

32. Mr Deller had no response and was  content  to  rely  on  his  previous
    submissions.

33. We noted that Ms Radford had not relied on the asylum ground of  appeal
    which had been available before the FtT.  We noted that she  wished  to
    raise it in the event that we were  with  the  Secretary  of  State  in
    respect of HP.  We expressed some disquiet at the possibility that  the
    respondent might have available to her, in a subsequent  decision,  the
    certification power which appears in s96 of the 2002  Act.   Mr  Deller
    did not feel able, in response to that observation, to tie the hands of
    a future decision maker.  He did note, however, that  the  progress  of
    this appeal had been rather complicated and that it would  probably  be
    inappropriate to certify a future asylum claim on that basis.

34. Ms Radford confirmed that she would provide  us  with  a  copy  of  her
    skeleton argument before the FtT, which had not been  retained  on  the
    file.  She also confirmed that  there  would  be  nothing  within  that
    skeleton which was relevant to the policy point taken by the FtT.   She
    had not developed any argument in that respect and  neither  party  had
    been called upon to make submissions on the part of  the  policy  which
    was held to be determinative of the appeal.

35. We reserved our decision.

Legal Framework

36. It is necessary to set out a number of provisions in order  to  explain
    our decision.  We begin with the salient parts of the 2002 Act.


    82 - Right of appeal to the Tribunal
      1) A person ("P") may appeal to the Tribunal where -
         a) [...]
         b) [...]
         c) The Secretary of State has decided  to  revoke  P's  protection
            status

      2) For the purposes of this Part -
         a) [...]
         b) [...]
         c) A person has 'protection status' if the person has been granted
            leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom as a refugee  or
            as a person eligible for a grant of humanitarian protection
         d) 'humanitarian protection' is to be construed in accordance with
            the immigration rules.
         e) ...
      3) ...


    84 - Grounds of appeal
      1) An appeal under section 82(1)(a) refusal of protection claim)  must
         be brought on one or more of the following grounds -
         a) that removal of the appellant  from  the  United  Kingdom  would
            breach  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations  under  the  Refugee
            Convention;
         b) that removal of the appellant  from  the  United  Kingdom  would
            breach the United Kingdom's obligations in relation  to  persons
            eligible for a grant of humanitarian protection;
         c) that removal of the appellant from the United Kingdom  would  be
            unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights  Act  1998  (public
            authority not to act contrary to Human Rights Convention)


      2) An appeal under section 82(1)(b) (refusal of  human  rights  claim)
         must be brought on the ground that the decision is  unlawful  under
         section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.


    (3)  An appeal under section 82(1)(c) (revocation of protection status)
         must be brought on one or more of the following grounds-
         (a)  that the decision to revoke the appellant's protection  status
            breaches the United Kingdom's  obligations  under  the  Refugee
            Convention;
         (b)  that the decision to revoke the appellant's protection  status
            breaches  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations  in  relation  to
            persons eligible for a grant of humanitarian protection

37. Council Directive 2004/83/EC ("the Qualification  Directive"  or  "QD")
    provides for minimum standards for  the  qualification  and  status  of
    refugees or as person who otherwise need international protection.


38.  The  QD  has  forty  paragraphs  of  Recitals.   Only  (8)  was  drawn
    specifically to our attention, although we also  note  (14),  (24)  and
    (25):


    (8)  It is in the very nature of minimum standards that  Member  States
         should have the power to  introduce  or  maintain  more  favourable
         provisions for third country nationals  or  stateless  persons  who
         request international protection from a Member State, where such  a
         request is  understood  to  be  on  the  grounds  that  the  person
         concerned is either a refugee within the meaning of Article 1(a) of
         the  Geneva  Convention,  or   a   person   who   otherwise   needs
         international protection


    [...]


    (14) The recognition of refugee status is a declaratory act.


    [...]


    (24)     Minimum standards for the definition and content of subsidiary
         protection status should also be laid down.  Subsidiary  protection
         should be complementary and additional to  the  refugee  protection
         enshrined in the Geneva Convention.


    [...]


    (25)     It is necessary to introduce criteria on the  basis  of  which
         applicants for international protection are  to  be  recognised  as
         eligible for subsidiary protection.  Those criteria should be drawn
         from international obligations under human rights  instruments  and
         practices existing in Member States.

39. Amongst the definitions in Article 2 of the Qualification Directive, we
    find the following:


    (e)  'but in respect of whom substantial grounds have  been  shown  for
         believing that the person concerned, if  returned  to  his  or  her
         country of origin, or in the case of a stateless person, to his  or
         her country of former habitual residence, would face a real risk of
         suffering serious harm as  defined  in  Article  15,  and  to  whom
         Article 17(1) and (2) do not apply, and is  unable,  or,  owing  to
         such risk, unwilling to avail himself or herself of the  protection
         of that country;


      f) 'subsidiary protection status' means the recognition  by  a  Member
         State of a third country national or a stateless person as a person
         eligible for subsidiary protection;

40. Article 3 provides as follows:


    Member States may introduce or retain  more  favourable  standards  for
    determining who qualifies as a refugee or  as  a  person  eligible  for
    subsidiary protection, and for determining the content of international
    protection, in so far as  those  standards  are  compatible  with  this
    Directive.

41. Chapter 2 of the Directive makes  provision  about  the  assessment  of
    applications for international protection.  Chapters 3  and  4  concern
    the  'Qualification  for  Being  a  Refugee'   and   'Refugee   Status'
    respectively.  Chapter 5  is  entitled  'Qualification  for  Subsidiary
    Protection' and contains Articles 15, 16 and 17.


42. Article 15 contains three definitions of the types  of  'serious  harm'
    from  which  an  individual  might  be  protected.   Article  16  makes
    provision for the cessation of eligibility  for  subsidiary  protection
    when the circumstances which led to the  granting  of  that  protection
    have ceased to exist or have changed to such an extent that  protection
    is no longer required.

43. Article 17, entitled 'Exclusion' concerns the circumstances in which an
    individual is excluded from being eligible for subsidiary protection:

    (1)  A third country national or a stateless person  is  excluded  from
         being eligible for subsidiary protection where  there  are  serious
         reasons for considering that:
         (a)  he or she has committed a crime against peace, a war crime, or
            a crime against  humanity,  as  defined  in  the  international
            instruments drawn up to  make  provision  in  respect  of  such
            crimes;


         (b)  he or she has committed a serious crime;


         (c)  he or she has been guilty of acts contrary to the purposes and
            principles of the United Nations as set out in the Preamble and
            Articles 1 and 2 of the Charter of the United Nations;


         (d)  he or she constitutes a danger to  the  community  or  to  the
            security of the Member State in which he or she is present.


    (2)   Paragraph 1  applies  to  persons  who  instigate  or  otherwise
         participate in the commission  of  the  crimes  or  acts  mentioned
         therein.


    (3)  [...]


44. It is Chapter Six of the Qualification  Directive  with  which  we  are
    principally concerned.  Article 18 provides that  Member  States  shall
    grant subsidiary protection status to a person who is eligible  for  it
    in accordance with Chapters  Two  and  Five.  Article  19  provides  as
    follows:

    Revocation of, ending of or  refusal  to  renew  subsidiary  protection
status


      1) Concerning applications for international  protection  filed  after
         the entry into force of this Directive, Member States shall revoke,
         end or refuse to renew the subsidiary protection status of a  third
         country national or a stateless person granted by  a  governmental,
         administrative, judicial or quasi-judicial body, if he or  she  has
         ceased to be eligible for subsidiary protection in accordance  with
         Article 16.


      2) Member States may revoke, end or refuse  to  renew  the  subsidiary
         protection status of a third country national or a stateless person
         granted by  a  governmental,  administrative,  judicial  or  quasi-
         judicial body, if after having been granted  subsidiary  protection
         status, he or she should have been excluded from being eligible for
         subsidiary protection in accordance with Article 17(3).

      3) Member States shall revoke, end or refuse to renew  the  subsidiary
         protection status of  a  third  country  national  or  a  stateless
         person, if:
         a) he or she, after  having  been  granted  subsidiary  protection
            status, should have been or is excluded from being eligible for
            subsidiary protection in accordance with Article 17(1) and (2);


         b) his or her misrepresentation or omission  of  facts,  including
            the use of false documents, were decisive for the  granting  of
            subsidiary protection status


      4) Without prejudice to the duty of  the  third  country  national  or
         stateless person in accordance with Article 4(1) to  disclose  all
         relevant facts and provide all relevant  documentation  at  his/her
         disposal, the  Member  State,  which  has  granted  the  subsidiary
         protection status, shall on an individual  basis  demonstrate  that
         the person concerned has ceased  to  be  or  is  not  eligible  for
         subsidiary protection in accordance with paragraphs 1, 2 and 3  of
         this Article.


45. The QD was implemented in the United Kingdom by the Refugee  or  Person
    in Need of International Protection  (Qualification)  Regulations  2006
    and by amendments to  the  Immigration  Rules.   Nothing  relevant  for
    present purposes appears in the Regulations.   Specific  provision  was
    originally made, with effect from 9 October 2006, at paragraphs 339C to
    339G of the Immigration Rules.  Revisions were made to those provisions
    in November 2015 and November 2016.  Currently,  and  at  all  material
    times for the purpose of this appeal, Part 11 of the Immigration  Rules
    provides materially as follows:

    Grant of humanitarian protection
    339C - A person will be granted humanitarian protection in  the  United
    Kingdom if the Secretary of State is satisfied that:
      i) they are in the United Kingdom or have arrived at a port  of  entry
         in the United Kingdom;


     ii) they do not qualify as a refugee as defined in regulation 2 of  The
         Refugee   or   Person   in   Need   of   International   Protection
         (Qualification) Regulations 2006;

    iii) substantial grounds have been shown for believing that  the  person
         concerned, if returned to the country of return, would face a  real
         risk of suffering serious harm and is unable,  or,  owing  to  such
         risk, unwilling to avail  themselves  of  the  protection  of  that
         country; and

     iv) they are not excluded from a grant of humanitarian protection.

    339CA [...]

    339 D [...]

    339E [...]


    Refusal of humanitarian protection
    339F. Where  the  criteria  set  out  in  paragraph  339C  is  not  met
    humanitarian protection will be refused.


    Revocation of, ending of or refusal to renew humanitarian protection
    339G. A person's humanitarian protection granted under  paragraph  339C
    will be revoked or not renewed if any  of  paragraphs  339GA  to  339GB
    apply. A person's humanitarian protection granted under paragraph  339C
    may be revoked or not renewed if any of paragraphs 339GC  to  paragraph
    339GD apply.


    339GA [...]


    Revocation of humanitarian protection on the grounds of exclusion
    339GB. This paragraph applies where the Secretary of State is satisfied
    that:
      i) the person granted humanitarian protection should have been  or  is
         excluded from humanitarian protection  because  there  are  serious
         reasons for considering that they have committed  a  crime  against
         peace, a war crime, a crime against humanity, or any other  serious
         crime or instigated or otherwise participated in such crimes;


     ii) the person granted humanitarian protection should have been  or  is
         excluded from humanitarian protection  because  there  are  serious
         reasons for considering that they are guilty of  acts  contrary  to
         the  purposes  and  principles  of  the  United  Nations  or   have
         committed, prepared  or  instigated  such  acts  or  encouraged  or
         induced others to commit, prepare or instigate such acts;

    iii) the person granted humanitarian protection should have been  or  is
         excluded from humanitarian protection  because  there  are  serious
         reasons for considering  that  they  constitute  a  danger  to  the
         community or to the security of the United Kingdom;

     iv) the person granted humanitarian protection should have been  or  is
         excluded from humanitarian protection  because  there  are  serious
         reasons for considering that they have committed a  serious  crime;
         or

      v) the person granted humanitarian protection should have been  or  is
         excluded  from  humanitarian  protection  because  prior  to  their
         admission to the  United  Kingdom  the  person  committed  a  crime
         outside the scope of paragraph 339GB (i) and  (iv)  that  would  be
         punishable by imprisonment had it  been  committed  in  the  United
         Kingdom and the person left their country of origin solely in order
         to avoid sanctions resulting from the crime.

46. Before leaving the Immigration Rules, we should also  remind  ourselves
    that Ms Radford made reference in her submissions to paragraph 6, which
    states that 'humanitarian protection' means "leave granted pursuant  to
    paragraph 339C and which has not been  revoked  pursuant  to  paragraph
    339G to 339H".

47. The policy upon which the FtT based its decision  is  the  respondent's
    policy on Humanitarian Protection, now in its  fifth  iteration,  which
    was published on 7 March 2017.  The policy is 29 pages long and  we  do
    not propose to set out lengthy tracts of it in this decision.   At  the
    time of writing, it may be found at the footnoted hyperlink[1].

48. Two particular sections of the policy are relevant.  The second  refers
    back to the first and it is logical, in this context, to  consider  the
    sections in that order.  At page 23, the  second  relevant  section  is
    entitled "Revocation of humanitarian protection".  It begins by stating
    that an individual's humanitarian protection 'will be  revoked  or  not
    renewed if any of paragraphs 339GA to 339GB  apply'.   Under  the  sub-
    heading 'Triggers that lead to a review  of  humanitarian  protection',
    there is a list of such 'triggers' for caseworkers.   One  of  the  six
    triggers is criminality, in respect of which the policy states:

         "Irrespective of the length of sentence, a review of a grant of  HP
         must be conducted where there  are  criminality  issues  (paragraph
         339GB(iii to v).  Criminality will not normally amount to a  change
         of personal circumstances under paragraph 339GA such that a  person
         no longer needs protection, but it is possible that  a  review  may
         highlight that protection is no longer  needed  or  that  exclusion
         provisions apply."

49.  Under  the  sub-heading  'Considering   revocation   of   humanitarian
    protection, there is guidance on the application of  paragraphs  339GA,
    339GB and 339GD.  In respect of paragraph 339GB, the policy provides as
    follows:


         "Revocation on the grounds of exclusion
         Under paragraph 339GB(i) to(v)of the Immigration Rules, HP will  be
         revoked or not renewed if the Secretary of State is satisfied  that
         one of the following applies:

         (the person granted HP should have  been  or  is  excluded  because
         there are serious reasons for considering that they have  committed
         a crime against peace, a war crime, a crime  against  humanity,  or
         any other serious crime or instigated or otherwise participated  in
         such crimes

         (the person granted HP should have  been  or  is  excluded  because
         there are serious reasons for considering that they are  guilty  of
         acts contrary to the purposes and principles of the United  Nations
         or has committed or prepared or instigated such acts


         ( the person granted HP should have been  or  is  excluded  because
         there are serious reasons for considering that  they  constitute  a
         danger to the community or to the security of the UK

         ( the person granted HP should have been  or  is  excluded  because
         there are serious reasons for considering that they have  committed
         a serious crime

         ( the person granted HP should have been  or  is  excluded  because
         prior to their admission to the UK they committed a  crime  outside
         the scope of paragraph 339GB (i) and (iv) that would be  punishable
         by imprisonment had it been committed in the UK and they left their
         country of origin solely in order to avoid sanctions resulting from
         the crime


         Caseworkers must refer to exclusion  from  Humanitarian  Protection
         and particularly serious criminality for the  relevant  definitions
         of serious crime and  examples  of  when  the  claimant  should  be
         regarded as a danger to the community or to  the  security  of  the
         UK."


50. The section entitled 'Exclusion from humanitarian protection' begins at
    the foot of page 16 of the policy.  It begins by stating that a  person
    will not be eligible for a grant of HP if  they  fall  to  be  excluded
    under paragraph 339D of the Immigration Rules for one of the  following
    reasons:


         "( there are serious reasons for considering they have committed  a
         crime against peace, a war crime, a crime against humanity, or  any
         other serious crime or instigated or otherwise participated in such
         crimes


         ( there are serious reasons for considering they are guilty of acts
         contrary to the purposes and principles of the  United  Nations  or
         they have committed, prepared, instigated or encouraged or  induced
         others to commit, prepare or instigate such acts


         ( there are serious reasons for considering that they are a  danger
         to the community or to the security of the UK


         (  there  are  serious  reasons  for  considering  that  they  have
         committed a serious crime


         ( prior to their admission to the UK they committed  a  crime  that
         would be punishable by imprisonment were it committed in the UK and
         they left  their  country  of  origin  solely  to  avoid  sanctions
         resulting from the crime"


51. After that bullet-pointed list of alternatives, there is the  following
    additional guidance:


         "Paragraph 339D mirrors the exclusion provisions in Article  17  of
         the Qualification Directive (QD). Where the conduct is the same  as
         that in Article 1F of Article 33(2) of the Refugee Convention, they
         must be interpreted in the same  way.  Paragraph  339D(i)  reflects
         Article 17(i)(a) of the QD  and  applies  to  those  who  would  be
         excluded from refugee status under Article  1F(a)  of  the  Refugee
         Convention. Paragraph 339D(ii) reflects Article 17(i)(c) of the  QD
         and applies to those who would be excluded under Article  1F(c)  of
         the Refugee Convention. See Exclusion under Article 1F and 33(2) of
         the Refugee Convention.


         Paragraphs 339D(iii) and (iv) reflect Article 17(i)(d) and  (b)  of
         the QD and apply where there are reasonable grounds  for  regarding
         an individual as a danger to the  security  of  the  UK,  including
         those who exhibit extremist behaviours, or to those who  have  been
         convicted of a particularly serious crime such that they are deemed
         to be a danger to the community."


52. There are then separate sections on 'Serious crimes' and 'Danger to the
    security of the community'.  The section  about  serious  crimes  makes
    reference, amongst other things, to what was said  by  Ward  LJ  in  AH
    (Algeria) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 395; [2012] 1 WLR 3469.

Analysis

53. It is quite clear that the FtT erred in law in its  decision  to  allow
    the appeal on the basis we have summarised above.   The  only  rational
    conclusion which was open to it, having concluded  that  the  appellant
    had committed a serious crime, was to dismiss the appeal insofar as  it
    was brought on the ground of appeal in s84(3)(b) of the 2002 Act.   Our
    reasons for reaching that conclusion are as follows.

54. Quite aside from the points advanced by Mr Deller before us, it  became
    apparent at the very end of Ms Radford's submissions that there  was  a
    wholesale failure of fair  procedure  before  the  FtT.   Her  skeleton
    argument before the FtT had not been retained on  the  Tribunal's  file
    and we asked for a copy of it.  She undertook  to  provide  a  copy  by
    email but noted, with characteristic frankness, that we would  find  no
    argument directed to a legitimate expectation based on the respondent's
    policy there.  She stated that she had made no such  submission  before
    the FtT and the respondent had not had an  opportunity  to  respond  to
    this point.

55. With respect to the FtT, that was not an appropriate  way  to  proceed.
    If the FtT had formed a provisional view, after it had risen, that  the
    respondent's  policy  somehow  committed  her  to  a  more  restrictive
    approach to revocation of humanitarian protection than was required  by
    the QD or the Immigration Rules, fairness required  that  both  parties
    should have an opportunity to make submissions on the  point.   Whether
    or not the conclusion was  substantively  correct,  therefore,  it  was
    reached by a procedurally improper means.


56. The conclusion was  not  substantively  correct,  however.   The  FtT's
    understanding of the policy  was  clearly  wrong.   The  only  rational
    understanding of the policy was that the respondent had instructed  her
    staff to follow the approach required by the  QD  and  the  Immigration
    Rules in considering whether or not to revoke humanitarian  protection.



57. Policy statements should be interpreted objectively in accordance  with
    the language used, read as always in its proper context, and it is  for
    a court or Tribunal to give the policy its proper meaning: Tesco Stores
    Ltd v Dundee City Council [2012] UKSC 13; [2012]  PTSR  983,  at  [18],
    endorsing R (Raissi) v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ  72;  [2008]  QB  836.   As
    Sedley LJ put it in First Secretary of State v Sainsbury's Supermarkets
    Ltd [2005] EWCA Civ 520; [2005] NPC 60, "What a policy  says,  it  is."
    To similar effect is what was said by Sir Thomas  Bingham  MR  in  R  v
    Director of Passenger Rail  Franchising  ex  parte  Save  Our  Railways
    (1996) CLC 589: a policy 'means what it means'.  It is an error of  law
    for a decision maker to attach a meaning to a policy which  it  is  not
    capable of bearing: R v Derbyshire County Council, Ex  p  Woods  [1997]
    JPL 958.

58. What this policy clearly did not  mean  was  that  the  respondent  had
    committed herself to revoking HP on the  grounds  of  criminality  only
    where the  crime  was  a  serious  one  and  the  individual  concerned
    represented a danger to the community.  The FtT gave  the  policy  that
    meaning as a result of the paragraph which we have set out at [16]  and
    [51] above.  In doing so, it fell into error in several ways.

59. The FtT erred, firstly, in failing to note that  neither  the  relevant
    paragraph nor the policy as a whole signals a clear intention to depart
    from the  approach  adopted  in  the  QD  and  the  Immigration  Rules.
    Article 17(i)(b) and (d) contain two alternative grounds upon which  an
    individual can be excluded from HP: commission of a  serious  crime  or
    danger to the community.  Article 19(3)(a), which makes  provision  for
    revocation with reference to Article 17(1), does not conflate those two
    alternatives.  The alternatives are preserved  in  paragraph  339D(iii)
    and (iv) of the Immigration Rules, as they are in paragraph  339GB(iii)
    and (iv).  The  bullet-pointed  list  at  pages  24-25  of  the  policy
    entitled 'Revocation on  the  grounds  of  exclusion'  (which  we  have
    reproduced at [49] above) also preserves the  alternative  grounds  for
    revocation which appear in the QD and the Rules.

60. Nowhere in the policy is there any indication that the  respondent  has
    chosen, notwithstanding the  clear  intention  behind  the  Immigration
    Rules, to adopt a policy which would  severely  limit  her  ability  to
    revoke the humanitarian protection  status  those  who  commit  crimes.
    Instead, the policy reflects the respondent's intention that  decisions
    should be made consistently with the QD and the Immigration Rules.  The
    reader is consistently directed towards  the  relevant  provisions  and
    page 6 of the policy states that 'the Immigration Rules and our  policy
    on HP reflect the subsidiary protection provisions in Articles 15 to 19
    of the Qualification Directive'.  The policy is said, on the same page,
    to be designed to meet (not exceed) the UK's international  obligations
    under EU Law.  We also note the statement on page 7, that the policy is
    also designed to

         "Review cases in which someone with HP commits a  criminal  offence
         or evidence emerges that they represent a  danger  to  security  so
         that  revocation  action  is  taken  where  appropriate   and   the
         individual is removed  or  placed  on  more  restrictive  leave  to
         facilitate removal as soon as possible." [emphasis added]

61. We recognise, of course,  that  the  QD  sets  minimum  standards  (see
    Article 3 and (8) of the Recitals) and that  it  would  accordingly  be
    open to the respondent to adopt a policy which is  more  generous  than
    the QD.  She could therefore have adopted a policy  pursuant  to  which
    revocation of (or exclusion from) HP would only be pursued  on  grounds
    of  criminality  upon  the  commission  of  a  serious  crime  and  the
    presentation of a danger to the community.  Reading  the  policy  as  a
    whole, however,  it  is  simply  not  rational  to  conclude  that  the
    respondent intended to do so or did so.

62.  The  FtT  also  overlooked  the  context  in  which  the  policy   was
    promulgated.  The Secretary of State for the Home Department makes  the
    Immigration Rules and they  are  placed  before  Parliament  under  the
    negative resolution procedure prescribed by the Immigration  Act  1971.
    As we have explained above, the Immigration Rules on HP were formulated
    in 2006 and were subject to revision in late 2015 and  late  2016.   If
    the respondent intended drastically to restrict  the  circumstances  in
    which she could revoke the HP of an individual such as  the  appellant,
    she evinced no such intention when she made the original Rules or  when
    she amended the Rules in 2015 and 2016.  It is inherently unlikely that
    she would have such  an  intention  when  she  came  to  formulate  the
    relevant  policy,  some  four  months  later.   Had  she  had  such   a
    significant intention, we incline to  the  view  that  she  would  have
    promulgated the necessary change by way of amendment to the Immigration
    Rules, rather than by way of a rather oblique sentence in the middle of
    a policy.

63. The FtT erred, therefore, in failing to consider the policy as a  whole
    or in its proper context.   It  further  erred,  in  our  judgment,  in
    failing to appreciate that the particular words upon  which  it  seized
    ("to those who have been convicted of a particularly serious crime such
    that they are deemed to be a danger to the community") appear in a list
    of two examples.  So much is clear from the earlier  use  of  the  word
    'including'.  The relevant paragraph  states  that  those  who  exhibit
    extremist behaviours or those who have been convicted of a particularly
    serious crime such that they are deemed to be a danger to the community
    might be excluded.  It does not state  that  exclusion  on  grounds  of
    criminality  would  be  appropriate  only  where  the  individual   has
    committed a serious crime and represents a  danger  to  the  community.
    Properly understood, therefore, the sentence upon which the FtT  seized
    provides examples of those who might be excluded; it does  not  purport
    to delimit the circumstances in which revocation is to be pursued.

64. For all of these reasons, therefore, we accept the submission  made  in
    the respondent's second ground  of  appeal  that  the  policy  was  not
    sufficiently unambiguous to found a  legitimate  expectation  that  the
    respondent would not follow the approach to  revocation  prescribed  by
    the Immigration Rules.

65. In order to consider the respondent's first ground of appeal,  however,
    we must proceed on the basis that the policy was sufficiently clear and
    unambiguous.  Let us suppose for present purposes, therefore, that  the
    policy had read as follows:

         "Notwithstanding  the  alternative  bases  for  revocation  of   HP
         contained in paragraphs 339GB(iii)  and  (iv)  of  the  Immigration
         Rules,  it  is  the  Secretary  of  State's  current  policy   that
         revocation of P's humanitarian  protection  status  on  grounds  of
         criminality will only be pursued when  a  serious  crime  has  been
         committed by P and P represents a danger to  the  security  of  the
         UK."

66. By her  first  ground,  the  respondent  submits  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal lost sight of the limited scope of its statutory  jurisdiction
    and that the authorities it cited all related to the era in  which  the
    FtT (or its predecessors) was empowered to allow an appeal on the basis
    that the decision under appeal was 'otherwise not  in  accordance  with
    the law'.  Mr Deller submits that the FtT's only task - as presented by
    s84(3) of the 2002 Act - was  'to  address  breaches  of  international
    obligations' and that the respondent's policy was simply irrelevant  to
    that task.


67. Mr Deller is obviously correct to observe that the FtT  no  longer  has
    jurisdiction to consider  whether  a  decision  is  'otherwise  not  in
    accordance with the law'.  Before the amendments to the 2002 Act  which
    were made by the Immigration  Act  2014,  that  ground  of  appeal  was
    available to an appellant as a result of  s84(1)(e)  and  the  FtT  was
    required by s86(3)(a) to allow the appeal insofar as  it  thought  that
    the decision was not in accordance with the law.  That ground of appeal
    was removed by the 2014 Act on 19 October 2014, subject to transitional
    and saving provisions which are presently immaterial.

68. As Mr Deller submits, the starting point must be that  the  authorities
    which explored the 'not in accordance with the law'  ground  of  appeal
    are of no application following the statutory amendments made in  2014.
    To the extent that Greenwood No. 2 (para 398  considered)  [2015]  UKUT
    629  (IAC)  held  otherwise,  that  decision  was  disapproved   by   a
    Presidential panel of the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Charles  (human  rights
    appeal: scope) [2018] UKUT 89 (IAC); [2018] Imm AR 911.   The  relevant
    paragraph of the judicial headnote in Charles is as follows:


         Following the amendments to ss.82, 85 and 86 of NIAA  2002  by  the
         Immigration Act 2014, it is no longer possible for the Tribunal  to
         allow an appeal on the ground that a decision is not in  accordance
         with the law. To this extent, Greenwood No. 2 (para 398  considered
         [2015] UKUT 629 (IAC) should no longer be followed.

69. The FtT erred, therefore, in drawing on the decision in D S Abdi v SSHD
    [1996] Imm AR 14, since that decision considered the earlier and  wider
    appellate jurisdiction.  It also erred in having regard to R (Semeda) v
    SSHD  [2015]  UKUT  658  (IAC)  because  that  was  a  decision  on  an
    application for  judicial  review,  in  which  there  was  no  relevant
    statutory constraint on the Upper Tribunal's ability to consider public
    law errors in the decision under challenge.


70. We also accept the submission made by both advocates before us that the
    decision in Charles is to be read alongside what was said in SF  &  Ors
    (Guidance, post 2014 Act) Albania [2017] UKUT 120 (IAC); [2017] Imm  AR
    1003 and the subsequent consideration of that decision in  MS  (British
    citizenship; EEA appeals) Belgium [2019] UKUT 356  (IAC);  [2019]  INLR
    226.  As the President explained in the latter decision,  SF  (Albania)
    turned on the Tribunal's acceptance that a published policy applied  in
    favour of the appellants, in light of which the  respondent  could  not
    successfully resist the appellants' human rights appeals by pointing to
    the importance of maintaining immigration control as  justifying  their
    removal.  There may be cases,  such  as  SF  (Albania),  in  which  the
    satisfaction of a policy operates as a potentially determinative factor
    in a Tribunal's consideration of the  fifth  (not  the  third)  of  the
    questions posed by R (Razgar) v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27; [2004] Imm AR 381.



71. This was not a case in which  a  human  rights  ground  of  appeal  was
    available to the  appellant,  however.   Although  the  respondent  had
    initially decided to refuse his human rights claim, that  decision  had
    been withdrawn before the hearing.  The only extant  decision  was  the
    decision to revoke the appellant's protection status and the grounds of
    appeal upon which he was entitled to rely concerned  only  the  Refugee
    Convention and humanitarian protection.  Even if there had been a clear
    policy statement of the kind we have postulated  above,  it  would  not
    have been open to the FtT in an appeal of this nature to conclude  that
    the satisfaction of that policy reduced or removed the public  interest
    in removal to the point that the decision was unlawful under section  6
    of the Human Rights Act 1998; no such ground of appeal was available.

72. In recognition of the statutory obstacles in her path, Ms  Radford  did
    not submit that the FtT had been able to allow the appeal on the  basis
    that the decision was not in  accordance  with  the  law  or  that  the
    revocation of the appellant's protection status was somehow  in  breach
    of the ECHR.  Her submission, instead, was that the Secretary of  State
    owed  the  appellant  an  obligation  of  good  administration,   which
    encompassed a duty not to frustrate his legitimate expectation that she
    would adhere to her own  policy,  and  that  his  appeal  was  properly
    allowed on the basis that the revocation therefore  breached  the  UK's
    obligations in relation to persons eligible for a grant of humanitarian
    protection.

73. It is not necessary for the purposes of this decision to  consider  the
    scope of the 'obligations' contemplated in s84(3)(a).  In deference  to
    Ms Radford's researches, we nevertheless record the  essential  strands
    of her argument in a little more detail.  Article 41 of the EU  Charter
    of Fundamental Rights describes the right of every person to 'have  his
    or her affairs handled impartially, fairly and within a reasonable time
    by the institutions, bodies, offices and agencies of the  Union.'   (We
    note that the Charter is not part of domestic law after  IP  completion
    day but that the fundamental rights which  exist  irrespective  of  the
    Charter were retained beyond that point: s 5 of the European Withdrawal
    Act 2018, as amended, refers.) By reference to what was said  at  [120]
    of Schindler Holding v European Commission (T-138/07);  [2013]  4  CMLR
    39, Ms Radford submits that the right to good administration  which  is
    enshrined  in  European  Law  includes  the  protection  of  legitimate
    expectations.  If the respondent's policy applies, Ms Radford  submits,
    it would be a breach of the UK's obligations for  her  to  depart  from
    that policy without proper reasons, expressly stated, for doing so.


74. Had it been necessary to reach a conclusion on the extent to which  the
    obligations in s84(3)(a) include the right to  good  administration  as
    enshrined in Article 41, our view would have been  that  the  provision
    (and the underlying right which it recognises) concerns the actions  of
    the institutions, bodies, offices and agencies of the Union.  It is not
    addressed to or concerned with the actions of the Member States:  YS  v
    Minister voor Immigratie, Integratie en Asiel (C-141/12); [2015] 1 CMLR
    18, at [67], and MC v  Ufficio  territoriale  del  governo  (U.T.G.)  -
    Prefettura di Foggia (C-17/20), at [27]. We  note  in  that  connection
    that the decision in Schindler Holding concerned  the  actions  of  the
    European Commission, which is undoubtedly one  of  the  bodies  of  the
    Union to which Article 41 relates.

75. The reason that it is not necessary to  consider  the  breadth  of  the
    obligations in s84(3)(a) is because the difficulty  with  Ms  Radford's
    argument  lies  in  the  remaining  words  of  that  sub-section.   The
    obligations in question are those owed 'to persons eligible for a grant
    of humanitarian protection'.

76. The effect of Article 2(e) of the QD is that a person to whom  Articles
    17(1) and (2) apply is not a person  who  is  eligible  for  subsidiary
    protection.  By its mandatory  'shall',  Article  19(3)(a)  requires  a
    Member  State  to  revoke  the  subsidiary  protection  status  of   an
    individual upon his being 'excluded from being eligible for  subsidiary
    protection in accordance with Article 17(1) and (2)'.

77. The effect of paragraphs 339G  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  read  with
    paragraph 339GB(iii) and (iv) is  identical  to  the  effect  of  those
    provisions of the QD.  By its mandatory 'will', paragraph 339G requires
    the Secretary of State to revoke humanitarian protection granted  under
    paragraph 339C if either paragraph 339GA or paragraph 339GB applies.

78. The natural reading of the scheme created by the QD and the Immigration
    Rules is therefore that a person who has committed a serious  crime  or
    who represents a danger to  the  community  is  not  a  person  who  is
    eligible for a grant of subsidiary or humanitarian protection.

79. Ms Radford  did  not  accept  that  analysis.   She  submitted,  as  we
    understood her, that the UK owes the  obligations  in  s84(3)(a)  to  a
    person who has been granted humanitarian protection, and  that  such  a
    person remains  'eligible'  for  a  grant  of  humanitarian  protection
    precisely (and merely) because they have been granted it.   In  support
    of that submission, Ms Radford relied on s82(2)(d)  of  the  2002  Act,
    which requires  that  the  term  'humanitarian  protection'  is  to  be
    construed in accordance with the Immigration Rules, and on paragraph  6
    of the Rules, which defines 'humanitarian protection' as 'limited leave
    granted pursuant to paragraph 339C of these  Rules  and  has  not  been
    revoked pursuant to paragraph 339G or 339H'.  An individual such as the
    appellant therefore remains eligible for humanitarian  protection,  she
    submitted, until that status had been  revoked  pursuant  to  paragraph
    339G or 339H.  Ms Radford submitted that the  respondent's  obligations
    of  good   administration   applied   whilst   revocation   was   under
    consideration.

80. We  reject  that  submission,  which  fails  to  take  account  of  the
    Immigration  Rules  as  a  whole.   Section  82(2)(d)   requires   that
    humanitarian protection is to  be  construed  in  accordance  with  the
    Immigration Rules, not only in  accordance  with  paragraph  6  of  the
    Rules.  Read as a whole, the Rules operate  exactly  as  the  Directive
    does.  An individual is not eligible for subsidiary protection if he is
    excluded from it under Article 17.  An individual who has been  granted
    subsidiary protection status is no  longer  eligible  for  that  status
    when, inter alia, he has committed  a  serious  crime.   In  an  appeal
    against the revocation of humanitarian  protection,  as  in  an  appeal
    against the  refusal  of  humanitarian  protection  status,  the  first
    question is therefore whether  the  individual  is  eligible  for  that
    status.  An individual who falls to be excluded is not eligible  for  a
    grant of that  status  and  is  not  a  person  to  whom  any  relevant
    obligations are owed.

81. The respondent therefore establishes both of her grounds of appeal.  We
    find that the FtT erred in its conclusion that  the  policy  created  a
    legitimate expectation that the respondent had adopted an  approach  to
    revocation which was more generous  than  the  QD  or  the  Immigration
    Rules.  And we find that the FtT had no jurisdiction to bring any  such
    legitimate expectation to bear in an appeal under s84(3) in any  event.



82. The consequence of these conclusions is that the policy point which was
    developed by the FtT of its own volition and without any argument  from
    the parties was not only a frolic; it  was  a  red  herring.   The  FtT
    concluded that the appellant had committed a serious crime.  Whether or
    not he was a danger to the community of the UK (and the  FtT  obviously
    concluded that he was not), he was not a person who was eligible for  a
    grant of humanitarian protection because he had committed such a crime.
     His appeal fell to be dismissed on the ground of appeal  in  s84(3)(b)
    as a result.  We therefore allow the respondent's appeal and substitute
    a decision dismissing the appeal on that ground.

83. It remains to consider Ms Radford's application to 'revive' the  asylum
    ground of appeal.  As we noted at the very start of this  decision,  it
    is clear that the appellant's solicitors raised the Refugee  Convention
    in form IAFT-5.  They were obviously entitled to do so, since  that  is
    an available ground under s84(3)(a).  In her written and oral  argument
    before the FtT, however, Ms Radford relied solely on  the  humanitarian
    protection  ground  of  appeal  in  s84(3)(b).   In  making  only  that
    submission, and in submitting  that  the  appellant  was  eligible  for
    subsidiary protection, Ms Radford must be taken to have accepted before
    the FtT that the appellant did not qualify as a refugee.  That is quite
    clear from Article 2 of the  Qualification  Directive,  which  provides
    that it is only those who  do not qualify as refugees who are  eligible
    for subsidiary protection.

84. It has now been  established  that  the  appellant  is  ineligible  for
    humanitarian protection, not because he is a refugee but because he has
    committed  a  serious  crime  which  disentitles  him   to   subsidiary
    protection.  It is in these circumstances that Ms Radford now seeks  to
    rely on the Refugee Convention ground  of  appeal  in  s84(3)(a).   She
    maintains in her rule 24 response to the grounds  of  appeal  that  the
    appellant would be at  risk  on  return  to  Iraq  on  account  of  his
    ethnicity, his faith and his Westernisation.

85. We are surprised that the Refugee Convention ground was not relied upon
    before the FtT, although we accept that the respondent's  amendment  of
    her stance before the FtT might have resulted in a  lack  of  focus  on
    what was properly in  issue.   In  the  circumstances,  and  given  the
    pragmatic stance adopted by Mr Deller, we consider that  the  appellant
    should have an opportunity to argue the Refugee Convention ground  upon
    which he originally relied, which is perhaps arguable, bearing in  mind
    what was said in SMO, KSP & IM (Article 15(c); identity documents) Iraq
    CG  [2019]  UKUT  400  (IAC).   The  appeal  will   be   remitted   for
    consideration on that ground alone.  There has been no challenge to the
    findings that the appellant's crime was  a  serious  one  and  that  he
    represents no danger to the  community  of  the  UK  and  the  remitted
    hearing does not provide an opportunity for reviving those issues.

Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal is allowed.  We set aside  the  decision  of
the FtT to allow the appellant's appeal on humanitarian protection  grounds.
 We substitute a decision dismissing the appeal on that ground.  The  appeal
is remitted to the FtT to consider the Refugee Convention ground of  appeal.


No anonymity direction was sought or made


|13 August 2021                    |M.J.Blundell                   |
|                                  |                               |
|                                  |Judge of the Upper Tribunal    |
|                                  |Immigration and Asylum Chamber |

-----------------------
[1]
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/a
ttachment_data/file/597377/Humanitarian-protection-v5_0.pdf

