
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

     KV (scarring - medical evidence) Sri Lanka [2014] UKUT 00230 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Determination Promulgated   |
|On 3 and 4 February and 3 March 2014         |                            |
|                                             |............................|
|                                             |...........                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                                     KV

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
                                     and

                         THE HELEN BAMBER FOUNDATION

                                                            Interested party
Representation:

For the Appellant:           Ms C Bayati and Mr N Paramjorthy, Counsel,
instructed by                Vasuki   Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Mr P Duffy, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Interested party:    Ms S Jegarajah and Mr C Yeo, Counsel, directly
instructed

                           � CROWN COPYRIGHT 2014


   1. When preparing medico-legal reports doctors should not  -  and  should
      not feel obliged to - reach conclusions about  causation  of  scarring
      which go beyond their own clinical expertise.


   2.  Doctors  preparing  medico-legal  reports  for  asylum  seekers  must
      consider all possible causes of scarring.

   3. Where there is a presenting feature of  the  case  that  raises  self-
      infliction by proxy (SIBP) as a more than fanciful possibility of  the
      explanation for scarring:-


   i) a medical report adduced on behalf of a claimant will be  expected  to
      engage with that issue; it cannot eliminate  a priori or routinely the
      possibility of SIBP; and


      (ii)  a judicial fact-finder will be expected to address  the  matter,
      compatibly with procedural fairness, in deciding whether, on  all  the
      evidence, the claimant has discharged the burden of proving that he or
      she was reasonably likely to have been scarred  by  torturers  against
      his or her  will.

   4. A lack of  correlation  between  a  claimant's  account  and  what  is
      revealed by a medical examination of the scarring may enable a medico-
      legal report to shed some clinical light on the issue of whether  SIBP
      is a real possibility.


   5. Whilst the medical literature  continues  to  consider  that  scarring
      cannot be dated beyond 6 months from when it was inflicted,  there  is
      some medical basis for considering in relation  to  certain  types  of
      cases that its age can be determined up to 2 years.


   6.  Whilst if best practice is followed medico-legal reports will make  a
      critical evaluation of a claimant's account of scarring said  to  have
      been caused by  torture,  such  reports  cannot  be  equated  with  an
      assessment to be undertaken by decision-makers in a legal  context  in
      which the burden of proof rests on the claimant and when  one  of  the
      purposes of questioning is to test a  claimant's  evidence  so  as  to
      decide whether (to the lower standard) it is credible.
















                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

OUTLINE:

INTRODUCTION

The general issues
Nomenclature
The appellant
Case management and procedural issues
The hearing and post-hearing: procedural issues
Istanbul Protocol


THE EVIDENCE

The Appellant
The appellant's claim at interview
The reasons for refusal by the respondent
The appeal before the First-tier Tribunal
Further evidence on the appellant's claim
Family evidence

Expert Evidence
Professor Lingam: written report
David Rhys Jones: written; oral; supplementary written
Dr Frank Arnold: written; oral
Dr Enrique Zapata Bravo: written; oral
Dr Joy Odili: written; oral
Professor Cornelius Katona: written; oral
Dr Sonia Allam: written report
The appellant's GP

Other Medical Documentation
Medical Investigation Handbook written by Peel and  others,  2005;  Shedding
light on a dark practice: Using the Istanbul Protocol to  document  torture,
2009 Handbook; Others

Background Country Evidence
COI reports
Report by Appathurai Vinayagamoorthy, LLB (Col)


SUBMISSIONS

Written submissions
Oral submissions



DISCUSSION

Istanbul Protocol

The Tribunal's questions:
Distinguishability between scars inflicted by torture  and  scars  inflicted
by SIBP
Evidence of medical intervention/palliative care
Dating of scarring
Other questions
Effect of infections on fresh burn scarring wounds
Effect of infections on appearance of scars
R�sum�

SIBP
A priori rejection of SIBP as a possibility
SIBP and routine consideration
    SIBP and human experience
    SIBP and medical experience
Self-inflicted harm
SIBP and reasonable likelihood/real possibility
      SIBP and reasonable likelihood
      SIBP and real possibility
Procedural fairness
Medical reports and background COI
Medical reports and veracity
Evidential burden of proof
Psychological evidence


ASSESSMENT OF THE APPELLANT'S APPEAL

General aspects
Medical aspects
      The evidence of Mr Vinayagamoorthy

Conclusion

APPENDIX A: Error of law decision

APPENDIX  B:  Home  Office  Policy  Instructions  on  Medico-Legal  reports,
January 2014


INTRODUCTION

The general issues

 1. The appellant's case raises  a  number  of  issues  concerning  medical
    evidence, in particular the issue of whether doctors  and/or  decision-
    makers, when assessing claimants who have scarring which they attribute
    to  torture,  need  to  consider  the  possibility   that   they   have
    deliberately had their scarring inflicted by a third party acting  with
    their consent. We apologise for its length but think this reflects  the
    success of the parties in convincing us that the issues raised  by  the
    case were complex and were ones that have not been  squarely  addressed
    hitherto. From an early case management stage it became clear that  the
    medical issues involved were ones which could  potentially  affect  the
    work done by medical experts engaged in writing reports on the cases of
    asylum-seekers claiming to have suffered ill treatment in their country
    of origin. At that  point  Freedom  from  Torture  (FFT),  one  of  two
    organisations whose work in this field has been formally recognised  by
    the Home Office (most recently in its Asylum Policy Instruction, Medico-
    Legal Reports from the Helen Bamber Foundation (HBF)  and  the  Medical
    Foundation Medico-Legal Report Service, Version 3.0,  17  January  2014
    which is reproduced as Appendix B of this  determination),  applied  to
    intervene. Despite the Tribunal acceding to their request,  they  later
    chose to withdraw. We are fortunate that shortly after this,  the  HBF,
    the other main organisation in the field, sought to intervene and, upon
    our accepting them as  an  interested  party,  proceeded  to  submit  a
    significant body of relevant materials covering the  main  issues  that
    arise in this  case.  The  appellant's  representatives  also  assisted
    greatly. We are grateful too to Mr Duffy who  took  over  the  case  at
    short notice. We particularly wish  to  record  our  gratitude  to  the
    doctors who gave evidence.  We are acutely conscious that  to  do  this
    they had to take time out from their onerous responsibilities.  In  the
    writing of the determination which follows all  members  of  the  panel
    have played a part.

 2. We should clarify at the outset that, as we  made  clear  at  the  case
    management stage, it is not our task in this  case  to  re-examine  the
    issue of the extent to which the fact that a Sri  Lankan  national  has
    scarring constitutes a risk factor. This case is not a country guidance
    case and whilst  we  refer  to  Country  of  Origin  Information  (COI)
    relating to the methods of torture used by the Sri Lankan authorities -
    which include scarring - our concern about scarring is confined to  its
    relevance to the credibility of an asylum claim  made  by  someone  who
    alleges that  the  authorities  of  his  country  of  origin  inflicted
    scarring on him.

Nomenclature

 3. Throughout this determination we use the acronym "SIBP",  which  stands
    for self-infliction of injuries by proxy, meaning injuries caused by  a
    third party at a person's invitation. That may not  necessarily  be  an
    apt term  in  the  asylum  field  where  the  focus  is  on  actors  of
    persecution or serious harm. If injuries are inflicted "by proxy"  that
    means they have been inflicted  by  a  third  party;  if  inflicted  by
    consent, then the adjective "self-inflicted" may confuse. We stick with
    the acronym nevertheless because that is what medical experts who  gave
    evidence in this case chose to call it   and  we  are  anxious  not  to
    encroach on their terrain. When we refer to  claims brought by  "asylum
    seekers" or to "asylum claims"  or  "asylum  cases",  we  mean  (unless
    otherwise clear from the context) to refer to claims or cases  alleging
    that a person faces a real risk of persecution or of serious  harm,  or
    of ill treatment contrary to Article 3 ECHR.  We  should  also  mention
    that in this determination we refer to the person being examined  by  a
    doctor for the purposes of preparing a  medico-legal  report  regarding
    his or her claim to have  been  the  victim  of  torture  variously  as
    "individual", "alleged victim", "subject" or "patient". In so doing  we
    reflect,  we  believe,   usages  prevalent  in  the  medical   evidence
    presented to us, but we would emphasise that we  are  of  course  aware
    that such a person will often  not  be  receiving  treatment  from  the
    doctor concerned and so may not be a "patient" in that sense.

The appellant

 4. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka born in 1982  and  he  appeals
    against the decision dated 1 April 2011 to remove  him  as  an  illegal
    entrant.  It is his case that he arrived in the United  Kingdom  on  24
    February 2011 on a passport in the name of  another  having  previously
    applied for entry clearance as a points-based Tier 4  Student  in  2005
    and on two occasions in 2006.  On 14 March 2011 he  claimed  asylum  at
    the respondent's offices in Croydon  and  on  22  March  2011,  he  was
    interviewed substantively about that  claim.  His  appeal  against  the
    removal decision was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Jhirad  for
    reasons given in her determination dated 18 May 2011.

 5. In a decision dated 7 September 2012, Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson found
    error in that determination and set aside the decision. A copy  of  his
    decision is at appendix A from which will be seen, he indicated that in
    re-making the decision, guidance would be given by the Tribunal on  the
    approach to asylum  cases where it has been asserted by the  respondent
    that the scarring relied on in support of his claim was not  caused  in
    the manner asserted.

 6. In summary, it is the appellant's claim that he had  no  problems  with
    the Sri Lankan authorities until March 2007 when one of the  young  men
    he was sharing a house with in  Colombo  was  arrested  the  day  after
    Katunayake airport in Colombo was bombed.  He decided to  flee  with  a
    housemate, who, like the person arrested was an LTTE member, and go  to
    Vanni,  which  was  an  LTTE-controlled  area,  where  he  stayed  with
    relatives.

    The  appellant  claimed  that  he  was  arrested  by  the  Sri   Lankan
    authorities in May 2009 following his  surrender  with  others  to  the
    army.  He was detained in an army camp until he was able to procure his
    release or escape on 4 February 2011.  During his  prolonged  detention
    he claims that he  was  ill-treated  on  a  sustained  basis  including
    torture by heated rods being applied to his back and  right  arm.   The
    respondent did not accept that these  scars  had  been  caused  in  the
    manner claimed. The appellant had presented nine  photographs  of  that
    scarring  at  his  substantive  asylum  interview.   It   appears   the
    particular interest in him was because although not  a  member  of  the
    LTTE, he had assisted them with regard to  their  jewellery  and  gold.
    The authorities were interested  in  finding  out  the  extent  of  the
    appellant's involvement and where the LTTE had kept their gold as  well
    as in what he knew about the whereabouts of LTTE members.

Case management and procedural issues

 7. As already noted, on 9 May 2013,  permission  was  granted  to  FFT  to
    intervene as an interested party in the proceedings.  On 13 August at a
    further case management hearing,  a  panel  comprising  Upper  Tribunal
    Judges Storey and Dawson were informed that FFT  no  longer  wished  to
    intervene, essentially because of  their  reluctance  to  disclose  for
    reasons of confidentiality the underlying data they intended to rely on
    in a proposed report regarding the  burn  scarring  issue.   The  panel
    issued specific directions regarding the general issues to be addressed
    by the parties in the forthcoming appeal as follows:

         "8.      The Tribunal proposes the following issues be addressed at
             the hearing in addition  to  the  specific  re-making  of  the
             decision in the appeal:

            Taking account of the decisions in SA (Somalia)  v  SSHD  [2006]
             EWCA Civ 1302 and RT v SSHD (causation of scarring) Sri  Lanka
             [2008] UKAIT 00009 the parties  are  invited  to  address  the
             following  matters  in  the  context  of  the  general   issue
             regarding  whether  it  is  possible  to  distinguish  between
             scarring arising from torture  and  that  which  results  from
             injury brought about by consent (and with  some  amendment  to
             the issues in [14] of the error of law decision):

             (i)       whether it  is  possible  to  differentiate  between
                  burns scarring caused by hot  rods  or  wires  or  similar
                  heated instruments  including  cigarettes  that  has  been
                  brought about by torture and scarring caused by the  above
                  categories that has come about at the  invitation  of  the
                  person affected;

             (ii)      whether it is possible to determine from the  nature
                  of scarring itself what if  any  medical  intervention  or
                  palliative care has been provided to enable recovery;

             (iii)      whether  it  is  possible  to  diagnose  with   any
                  precision with reference to the nature of scarring when it
                  occurred."

 8. On 26 September 2013 the HBF  were  granted  leave  to  participate  in
    proceedings as an interested party and further directions were given in
    anticipation of the hearing of the appeal proceeding substantively on 1
    October.  As matters turned out,  that  hearing  had  to  be  abandoned
    because of problems with interpretation.  There  were  subsequent  case
    management reviews resulting in additional directions. These included a
    direction to the respondent to disclose using all reasonable endeavours
    any evidence in her possession relating  to  a  practice  of  claimants
    consenting to procedures, whether  in Sri Lanka or elsewhere, that give
    rise  to  scarring  which  is  subsequently   relied   on   in   asylum
    applications.

 9. The evidence the respondent sought to rely on in compliance  with  that
    direction led to the hearing being adjourned again on 30 January.





The hearing and post-hearing: procedural issues

10. At the outset of the hearing counsel for the appellant and the HBF made
    an application under rule 15 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
    Rules 2008 to exclude a statement made  by  a  Presenting  Officer  and
    emails between a Senior Presenting Officer and an  unidentified  person
    which  the  respondent  had  served  (late)  in  answer   to   Tribunal
    directions. Having heard submissions we acceded to  that  request:  not
    only was that evidence served late but the  anecdotal  nature  of  that
    evidence raised more evidential questions than it answered.

11.  The  same  counsel  also  requested  that  the  Tribunal  exclude  two
    unreported Tribunal determinations. UV and BV. In BV, decided in  March
    2010, the judge mentioned the possibility of SIBP but did  not  make  a
    finding that this had occurred, simply  holding  the  appellant's  case
    "not proved". The judge had found that at the time BV  said  his  scars
    were inflicted he had been in the UK for 2 years. In  UV,  decided   in
    November 2011 the judge concluded in the  light  of  damaging  evidence
    regarding credibility that notwithstanding a medical report attributing
    the appellant's scarring to torture,  it must have  been  caused  by  a
    third party at the request and with the consent of the appellant.

12. In support of their application,  counsel  pointed  out  that  previous
    findings of fact do not set precedents for  later  cases  except  where
    there is a close overlap in the factual matrix  (AA  (Somalia)  and  AH
    (Iran) v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 1040. They sought to rely on  the  Senior
    President's Practice Direction of 15  February  2010  paragraph  11  on
    citation of unreported determinations. We decided to  admit  these  two
    determinations but only insofar as they  constituted  two  examples  of
    determinations in which tribunal judges had seen  fit  to  address  the
    issue of SIBP.

13. At the hearing on 3  February,  with  Mr  Duffy  substituting  for  the
    previous  Presenting Officer, we heard evidence from the appellant, his
    two brothers and his uncle. In addition  we  heard  from  a  number  of
    experts on the general issues set out above  and  specifically  on  the
    appellant's claim. We have therefore ordered our determination so  that
    it begins with a brief account of the Istanbul Protocol, followed by  a
    summary of the evidence of the appellant and his witnesses, the  expert
    evidence and relevant background  evidence,  then  submissions,  before
    giving our conclusions on the evidence in the context of the issues  to
    be decided. Thereafter we have turned our attention to the  appellant's
    appeal including our further assessment of the medical evidence  in  so
    far it is specific to his claim.

14. Following completion of the hearing on 3 March, the Tribunal gave  time
    for the appellant's representatives to produce a further medical report
    from an anaesthetist, Dr Allam (which was sent on  11  March  (together
    with a supplementary statement  from  Mr  Rhys-Jones)  and  received  a
    response from Mr Duffy concerning the anaesthetist report on 19  March.
    On 2 April the appellant's representatives made  an  application  under
    rule 15(2) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  to
    adduce further evidence which it was said had not been available at the
    time of the hearing. It consisted of a report by Yasmin Sooka,  of  The
    Bar Human Rights Committee of England and Wales and  the  International
    Truth and Justice Project, Sri Lanka, "An Unfinished War:  Torture  and
    Sexual Violence in  Sri  Lanka  2009-2014",  March  2004,  relating  to
    conditions in Sri Lanka and the use by the  Sri  Lanka  authorities  of
    torture. This report stated that it was based, inter alia, on 57 medico-
    legal reports, although none of  these  was  appended.  We  decided  to
    refuse this application. As already noted, it was  made  clear  by  the
    Tribunal at the case management stage that the general  issues  arising
    in this appeal were not country guidance issues and that we  would  not
    be revisiting any country guidance issues and the  parties  have  known
    that this was the position throughout:  see paragraph 2 above.  At  the
    hearing the appellant's representatives did not alert the  Tribunal  to
    any imminent reports on torture in  Sri  Lanka  and  in  our  view  the
    Tribunal must be permitted to deal with evidence  as  at  the  date  of
    hearing. We made an exception in relation to an  anaesthetist's  report
    and a further supplementary report from  Mr  Rhys  Jones  because  they
    helped complete the medical picture; neither item related to conditions
    in Sri Lanka. Further, if we were to have admitted this report we would
    in fairness have had had to afford the respondent  the  opportunity  to
    adduce further COI or country reports relating  to  the  same  matters.
    Another consideration was that insofar as  this  new  report  seeks  to
    document that one of the methods of torture  used  by  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities is burning with  hot  metal  instruments,  we  already  had
    evidence that this is the case and it became clear during  the  hearing
    that the respondent accepted that this was indeed one of the methods of
    torture used.

The Istanbul Protocol

15. The Istanbul Protocol (hereafter "IP" or "Protocol") -  the  Manual  on
    the Effective Investigation  and  Documentation  of  Torture  or  Other
    Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, as revised in 2004
    - has come to occupy a central role in cases in which medical  evidence
    is sought to support claims made by asylum applicants  that  they  have
    been ill treated by the authorities in their country of origin.

16. The IP deals with both physical and psychological sequelae  of  torture
    (i.e. conditions resulting from torture).

17. In relation to the assessment of  physical  scars  or  lesions,  it  is
    stated at paragraph 187 of the Protocol that there  are  5  degrees  of
    consistency in an ascending scale:

         "For each lesion and  for  the  overall  pattern  of  lesions,  the
         physician should indicate the degree of consistency between it  and
         the attribution:

         "(a)     Not consistent: the lesion could not have been  caused  by
             the trauma described;

         (b)      Consistent with: the lesion could have been caused by  the
             trauma described, but it is non-specific and  there  are  many
             other possible causes;

         (c)      Highly consistent: the lesion could have  been  caused  by
             the trauma described, and there are few other possible causes;

         (d)      Typical of: this is an appearance that  is  usually  found
             with this type of trauma, but there are other possible causes;

         (e)      Diagnostic of: this appearance could not have been  caused
             in any way other than that described."

18. Paragraph 188 adds:

         "Ultimately, it is the overall evaluation of all  lesions  and  not
         the consistency of each lesion with a particular  form  of  torture
         that is important in assessing the torture story (see Chapter  IV.G
         for a list of torture methods)."

19. Assessment of psychological sequelae is dealt with in Chapter VI and at
    paragraph 287 therein it is said that:

         "In formulating a clinical impression for the purposes of reporting
         psychological  evidence  of  torture,   the   following   important
         questions should be asked;

         (i)      Are the psychological findings consistent with the alleged
             report of torture?

         (ii)      Are  the  psychological  findings  expected  or   typical
             reactions to extreme stress within  the  cultural  and  social
             context of the individual?

         (iii)    Given the  fluctuating  course  of  trauma-related  mental
             disorders over time, what is the time frame in relation to the
             torture events? Where is  the  individual  in  the  course  of
             recovery?

         (iv)      What  are  the  coexisting  stressors  impinging  on  the
             individual (e.g. ongoing persecution, forced migration, exile,
             loss of family and social role)? What impact do  these  issues
             have on the individual?

         (v)      Which  physical  conditions  contribute  to  the  clinical
             picture? Pay special attention to head injury sustained during
             torture or detention;

         (vi)     Does the clinical picture suggest a  false  allegation  of
             torture?"

20. At  paragraph  105,  which  is  in  the  chapter  dealing  with  "Legal
    Investigation of Torture" (chapter  III),   in  what  seems  to  be  an
    attempt to give an overview covering assessment of  both  physical  and
    psychological sequelae (see  also  Annex  1),  it  is  stated  that  in
    formulating  a  clinical  impression  for  the  purposes  of  reporting
    physical  and  psychological  evidence  of  torture,   "six   important
    questions to ask are:

         "(a)     Are the physical  and  psychological  findings  consistent
             with the alleged report of torture?

         (b)       What  physical  conditions  contribute  to  the  clinical
             picture?

         (c)       Are  the  psychological  findings  expected  or   typical
             reactions to extreme stress within  the  cultural  and  social
             context of the individual:

         (d)      Given the  fluctuating  course  of  trauma-related  mental
             disorders over time, what is the time frame in relation to the
             torture events?  Where  in  the  course  of  recovery  is  the
             individual?

         (e)      What other stressful factors are affecting the  individual
             (e.g. ongoing persecution, forced migration,  exile,  loss  of
             family and social role, etc)? What impact do these issues have
             on the victim?

         (f)      Does the clinical picture suggest a  false  allegation  of
             torture?"



THE EVIDENCE

The Appellant

The appellant's claim at interview

21. We should explain at this stage that although the appellant is recorded
    by interpreters as having referred  to  being  burnt  with  "hot  metal
    wires" and sometimes to being burnt with  "hot  metal  rods",  we  have
    accepted that the words in Sinhalese are the same and can  be  rendered
    for the purposes of this case as "hot metal rods".

22. At  his  screening  interview  on  14  March  2011  the  appellant  was
    interviewed in the usual way by the Secretary  of  State  in  order  to
    establish his bio-data detail and  method  of  journey  to  the  United
    Kingdom.  Questions for him also included enquiries as  to  his  health
    (at part 3) and the basis of his claim (part 4).  As to whether he  had
    any medical conditions the appellant disclosed that he  had  back  pain
    which he had suffered from for one  and  a  half  years  and  that  the
    treatment he was receiving was  over  the  counter  medication  in  the
    United Kingdom, being painkillers.  Against the enquiry as to the  name
    and address of his GP, the answer recorded is "none".

23. As to his reasons for coming to the United Kingdom,  the  appellant  is
    recorded as saying they were to seek safety and to seek asylum.  As  to
    his claim, he  referred  to  having  gone  to  Vanni  after  his  entry
    clearance had been refused in Colombo to  join  the  struggle  for  his
    community.  He valued jewellery and other valuables for the  LTTE.   He
    confirmed that he had been detained in Pampai Madu Camp for one  and  a
    half years from 10 May 2009 and that he escaped  on  4  February  2011.
    The appellant also referred to the presence of his two brothers N V and
    P V in the United Kingdom.

24. On 22 March, as noted above, the appellant produced nine photographs of
    scarring and was asked 133 questions. The following key matters emerged
    in the course of that interview:

      i) He last attended school in 2007 where he studied a CIMA course.  He
         also referred to having last worked  for  the  jewellers  in  March
         2007.

     ii) He had started  working  for  the  LTTE  in  2003  when  he  valued
         jewellery that had been brought by them.  In  addition,  he  helped
         them to dig bunkers and transported  food.   He  had  had  no  LTTE
         training.  That involvement with the LTTE had been when he  was  in
         Trincomalee when he was working with his father  in  his  jewellery
         shop.  This included his father melting gold brought  by  the  LTTE
         and returning it to them.

    iii) The appellant's problems first began in Sri Lanka  in  March  2007.
         He had been studying in Colombo and on 25 March  2007  the  airport
         was attacked by the LTTE.  Two others who were members of the  LTTE
         shared his house.  Following the attack, one of them  was  arrested
         and the other  was  scared  and  proposed  to  go  to  Vanni.   The
         appellant decided to accompany him as  he  believed  his  life  too
         would be in danger.   They travelled by bus to Vanni  on  27  March
         2007 where he stayed in a house owned by  his  father's  relatives.
         His "mother's brother", a jeweller as well and a LTTE  member  also
         lived there.  Although asked to join the LTTE,  the  appellant  did
         not wish to but began helping them in other ways.  He  had  stopped
         helping the LTTE in connection with the  jewellery  (valuation)  in
         2008.

     iv) The appellant was arrested in Mulliviakal on 10 May 2009.   He  had
         gone with other people to surrender and the army had taken  him  to
         the camp.  They had gone with white flags and surrendered.  Despite
         having been invited to do so, the appellant did not reveal  himself
         as a member of the LTTE because he had not been.

      v) In the course of his time in the  camp  the  appellant  was  beaten
         almost every day.  He was forced to sign a confession  paper.   The
         ill-treatment included severe beatings to his  back  and  elsewhere
         resulting in him having a  problem  bending  his  knee.   When  his
         captors learnt of the work that he had done for the LTTE  with  the
         gold, he was taken for further interrogation and asked about  where
         it had been kept.  His fingerprints and photograph were  taken  and
         the torture he had received led him to faint.  Hot  iron  rods  had
         been used to torture him on his  back  and  right  arm.   The  ill-
         treatment continued until about five days before his escape.

     vi) The appellant's father had not been arrested due to his involvement
         with the LTTE but the army had gone to his family and asked for the
         appellant's whereabouts.

    vii) As to whether he was conscious when tortured with  hot  iron  rods,
         the appellant answered in the affirmative.  This particular torture
         had occurred, he thought, in August 2009 [4 months after the end of
         the civil war].  He needed medical treatment but was not given any.
          As to how long this particular  torture  had  continued  for,  the
         appellant was unconscious so did not know.  He  became  unconscious
         when the hot iron was applied to his arm.  As  soon  as  he  became
         conscious he was beaten with gun butts.  Petrol was poured  on  his
         body and he was threatened with being set on fire.   It  had  taken
         about three months for the skin to heal over after the torture.

   viii) As to his escape, the appellant came to know that the Elam  Peoples
         Democratic Party (EPDP) were helping people escape for  money.   He
         approached an individual who got in touch  with  his  parents.   In
         February  2011  the  appellant  learned  he  would  be  taken  out,
         concealed in a lorry loaded with empty vessels.   As  part  of  the
         arrangements for his departure the appellant was given a Sri Lankan
         ID card with a Muslim name.

     ix) The appellant stayed  in  Negombo  at  an  agent's  address  before
         setting out by flight for France and subsequently the UK  where  on
         arrival the agent called his maternal uncle, a British  citizen,  S
         S.  The appellant confirmed his mother also had another brother  in
         the United Kingdom.

The reasons for refusal by the respondent

25. In addition to the matters disclosed by the appellant in the  screening
    and substantive asylum interviews, the respondent had before her,  when
    she came to formulate her reasons for refusal, nine photographs of  the
    appellant which showed scarring on parts of his body, in particular his
    back and arms.  Her reasons for rejecting the claim are set out in  her
    letter dated 31 March  2011.   That  letter  begins  with  an  accurate
    account of the claim given at the substantive  asylum  interview.   The
    respondent did not accept the appellant was entitled to  either  asylum
    or  humanitarian  protection  and  in  essence  this  was  because  she
    disbelieved him for the following reasons:

      i) The evidence when the appellant had first worked for the  LTTE  had
         been inconsistently given at interview (either 2002 or 2003).

     ii) The appellant had been inconsistent as to when he had last  worked.
         Earlier in the asylum interview he  had  stated  that  he  had  not
         worked since March 2007; however he later  stated  that  whilst  in
         Vanni (from 27 March 2007) he had worked in his uncle's jewellers.

    iii) It was "not considered consistent" that  the  appellant  would  put
         himself at risk by travelling with a known  LTTE  member  to  Vanni
         when he was already fearful that the authorities had connected  him
         to the LTTE.

     iv) Inconsistent evidence had been given by the appellant regarding the
         frequency of torture "almost every day" and  "every  two  or  three
         days".

      v) The appellant had claimed an EPDP member had identified him  as  an
         LTTE member to the Sri Lankan authorities which was  "inconsistent"
         with his account that an  EPDP  member  had  assisted  him  in  his
         release.

26. The respondent observed that by the appellant's own  admission  he  had
    never been an LTTE member and it was not accepted that as a  non-member
    he would be entrusted with such an important role as handling  valuable
    LTTE belongings such as jewellery.  No documentation had  been  offered
    regarding the valuation of jewellery, either for the LTTE  or  for  any
    other reason, and it was not accepted he had therefore ever worked  for
    the LTTE.

27. The respondent did not accept that the appellant had been  arrested  or
    detained.

28. As to the claim to have been tortured and in particular the photographs
    produced showing several scars on his back and  two  on  his  arm,  the
    appellant had provided no medical evidence to suggest that those  scars
    had been obtained in the manner  claimed.   There  was  no  "objective"
    evidence to suggest that the Sri Lankan authorities  tortured  suspects
    with iron rods and in the absence of any evidence to  corroborate  that
    claim, taking account also of previous inconsistencies, the  respondent
    did not accept the appellant  had  been  tortured  by  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities.

29. The respondent  also  considered  the  account  of  release  from  army
    detention  to  have  been  "inconsistent".   The  appellant's   release
    effected in the  manner  claimed  undermined  his  claim  that  he  was
    personally of adverse interest; reference was made in  this  regard  to
    the Tribunal decision in PT (Risk - bribery - release) Sri Lanka [2002]
    UKAIT 03444.  It was considered that had the appellant  been  suspected
    as an LTTE member and the Sri Lankan authorities  had  an  interest  in
    him, it would have been a risk for the EPDP  member  involved  to  have
    associated himself with his release.  Had the appellant  been  held  in
    the manner claimed, he would have found it extremely difficult to  have
    spoken with the EPDP member whilst being locked up  as  claimed.   With
    further reference to  the  Country  of  Origin  Information  Report  of
    November 2010, the respondent considered the appellant had  not  proved
    he would suffer any more than any other Tamil citizen of Sri Lanka  due
    to the general country situation.  Even if  he  had  been  involved  in
    previous political  activities,  his  release  from  detention  was  in
    accordance with the protocol that the  authorities  had  in  place  for
    detainees who were not of any interest to them.

30. The respondent  considered  the  appellant's  claim  against  the  risk
    factors identified in LP (LTTE area - Tamils -  Colombo  -  risk?)  Sri
    Lanka [2007] UKAIT 00076 and TK (Tamils -  LP  updated)  Sri  Lanka  CG
    [2009] UKAIT 00049 and concluded the appellant did  not  have  a  well-
    founded fear of persecution in Sri Lanka and so  did  not  qualify  for
    asylum.

31. Similarly, the respondent addressed humanitarian protection  and  found
    that this was not made out,  nor  that  the  appellant's  rights  under
    Article 8 would be breached.  His case was addressed in accordance with
    paragraph 395C of the  Immigration  Rules  and  stated  her  view  that
    removal of the appellant was appropriate.

The appeal before the First-tier Tribunal

32. The error of law  decision  (see  Appendix  A)  sets  out  the  judge's
    conclusions on the evidence.  Although the appellant was cross examined
    the determination does not reveal what was said; the evidence  set  out
    appears to be from the above statements. The judge rejected  the  claim
    as not  credible  and  as  to  the  report  by  Professor  Lingam,  her
    criticisms are set  out  in  the  error  of  law  decision.  The  judge
    considered that there "must be a method by which  injuries  capable  of
    being inflicted on the appellant by invitation to a third party  to  do
    so and injuries caused by third parties as  a  result  of  torture  and
    detention could be differentiated".

Further evidence on the appellant's claim

33. For the purposes of this hearing the appellant relies  on  two  witness
    statements dated 11 May 2011 and 26 September 2013, the earlier  having
    been placed before the First-tier Tribunal Judge  when  she  heard  the
    appeal on 13 May 2011.  In addition, the appellant relies on statements
    by his brothers VN and VP, neither of whom  gave  evidence  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Both are here as students.  VN's first  statement
    is dated 30 August 2012 and his second statement dated 30 October 2013.
     Similarly, VP relies on two statements of the  same  dates.   Finally,
    reliance is placed on a statement by the appellant's uncle, V S,  dated
    31 January 2014.

34. In his first witness statement, the  appellant  adds  more  detail  and
    addresses points raised by the respondent in the  refusal  letter.   He
    clarifies that he began working for the LTTE  from  2003.   His  father
    helped them (on this basis) in 2002 and the appellant misunderstood the
    question as referring to him personally.  He valued the  jewellery  for
    the LTTE providing then detail of weight and carats.  Although  he  had
    helped the LTTE dig bunkers and transport food, he wanted to study  and
    he was  able  to  appease  them,  when  asked  to  join,  by  providing
    assistance in other ways.  They were not forceful as the ceasefire  was
    in place at the time.  The appellant clarifies that he had been working
    in his father's shop as an assistant, not as a  jeweller.   His  father
    would melt gold for the LTTE.

35. The appellant refers also to being a student as well as a  jeweller  in
    Sri Lanka.  He started work as a jeweller in 2007 from which he  earned
    a reasonably good living.  His family were doing  well  before  he  was
    compelled to relocate to Vanni.  Prior to that he had been studying  in
    Colombo.  He confirmed that both the Tamil boys living with him in  the
    house in Colombo were LTTE members and one had received a message  from
    the LTTE hierarchy in Vanni to return there.

36. The explanation for travelling with an LTTE member to  Vanni  was  that
    this was the best way for him to enter Vanni and seek refuge as he knew
    the authorities would be after him as they had arrested one of his LTTE
    housemates, the appellant having left the  house  in  Colombo  the  day
    after this had occurred.

37. In Vanni the appellant stayed in his father's  relative's  house.   His
    mother's brother, who was also an LTTE member, lived there.   The  LTTE
    did not ask him to help them straightaway but after they came  to  know
    that his uncle was an LTTE member  and  that  he  had  helped  them  in
    Trincomalee, he was approached and started to provide assistance.

38. He had been helping them whilst in Colombo and in Trincomalee  but  had
    to gain trust from the LTTE as members were  separated  from  different
    districts.  The LTTE started gathering information about him and it was
    only after they had liaised with the LTTE Trincomalee office that  they
    allowed him to do so.

39. The appellant was not paid for helping the LTTE.  He had been paid  for
    the help he provided to his father who was also a jeweller.  He  ceased
    helping the LTTE in 2008 as they did not have a permanent base and kept
    moving.  The Sri Lankan authorities were making  serious  advances  and
    were being supported by China with airstrikes.   There  was  a  massive
    exodus of the LTTE and Tamil people into other areas.

40. The appellant's  arrest  on  10  May  2009  had  been  in  Mullivaikal.
    Following the final war there, people had surrendered to the  army  and
    were taken to different camps.  The appellant was taken to Pampai  Madu
    detention camp where he declared himself as a civilian  and  not  as  a
    LTTE member.  The army separated civilians and LTTE suspects and he was
    asked to stand with the latter.  There were around 200 to 300 people in
    that camp.  He was not taken to a rehabilitation  camp  as  in  reality
    that did not always happen.

41. As to his ill-treatment, the appellant was beaten almost every day  and
    "if not at least it mainly occurred every  two  or  three  days".   The
    beatings had been with gun butts and wooden poles.  He  was  forced  to
    sign a confession on the fifth day of his detention and  did  so  under
    duress due to the torture.  He was severely beaten on his back and knee
    which his left him with problems in bending that knee.  A member of the
    EPDP and People's Liberation Organisation of Tamil Eelam (PLOTE) stated
    the appellant had been involved with the LTTE and that  he  had  helped
    them with their gold.  When (the authorities) became aware of  this  he
    was taken to another room and interrogated about  the  LTTE  and  where
    they had kept their gold.  His fingerprints and photos were  taken  and
    he fainted due to the torture.  They burned his back and right arm with
    hot rods and he thought this was in August 2009 (the burning  with  the
    rods).  He was given no treatment.  He believed he had also been beaten
    with gun butts when he was unconscious.  The  authorities  also  poured
    petrol on his body and threatened they would set him  on  fire.   Since
    the petrol was on fresh wounds it was very painful.  There were  around
    ten officers, some of whom questioned him and  some  of  whom  were  on
    guard and others undertook the ill-treatment which happened  every  two
    or three days and for around two hours at any one time.  The length  of
    questioning varied.  They would torture him first and the whole  period
    would last four to five hours.  The torture was for  a  period  of  two
    hours in a four to five hour period during which they would then  bring
    break off and question  him  and  then  restart  the  torturing.   This
    occurred in front of other prisoners and sometimes he  was  also  taken
    into a separate room.   The  appellant  signed  the  confession  as  he
    considered the torture might reduce.  He  was  tortured  further  after
    that signing after being identified by  the  EPDP/PLOTE  member.   This
    member was not the man who had helped him escape.  The  timing  of  the
    identification by the EPDP/PLOTE occurred a week after  the  confession
    was signed.

42. The ill-treatment was continuous until  around  five  days  before  the
    appellant's escape which occurred at a time when the  authorities  were
    concentrating on Independence Day celebrations.  The  appellant's  skin
    healed some three months after he endured his torture  but,  not  being
    medically qualified, he could not be sure.

43. As to his account, the appellant noticed a lot of people from the  camp
    were escaping and he was informed by one of the  five  who  shared  his
    room that EPDP were helping people in return for money.  He thus  spoke
    to an EPDP member named S whom he had known as  he  helped  him  unload
    things in the past and he  had  spoken  to  him  in  the  toilets.   In
    November 2010 he got  his  parents'  contact  number  and  returned  in
    December that year to inform him he had spoken to the family and  would
    need money to get out of detention.  He returned on  3  February  2011,
    explaining that he would return the following day and take him away.

44. He did so as promised after asking him to lie down in a lorry which was
    carrying empty vessels, S having brought food and water  to  the  camp.
    He placed things on top of him.

45. The lorry was checked by an army officer at the exit to the camp but he
    did not see the appellant.  The journey lasted  around  1.5  hours  and
    when it did the appellant was introduced to a Sinhalese  man.   In  the
    light of the appellant's reluctance to go with him, he called his uncle
    J who lives in Colombo who confirmed he should follow the Sinhalese man
    called D.  He was given a false Sri Lankan ID card in a Muslim person's
    name and a name to give the army were they stopped.  The second leg  of
    the journey was to Negombo which took around six  to  seven  hours  and
    they did not stop at any checkpoints, although they passed two and  the
    appellant recalled being informed that he must lie down and not come up
    for any reason when they did so.  He remained at D's house  in  Negombo
    with the latter's wife and children.  D  brought  him  painkillers  and
    clothes.  He took a photograph of him.  Two  days  later  someone  else
    came and explained that he was the appellant's agent who would get  him
    out of the country under the guise that he was his son.  The  appellant
    was first informed to be ready for direct travel to the UK but the plan
    changed and he was informed the travel would be  via  France.   He  was
    given a French passport in the car.  The appellant was informed not  to
    claim asylum in France and arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  travelling
    with the agent on 24 February 2011 around 4am.  They slept in  the  car
    until 8am after which the agent called  the  appellant's  uncle  again.
    There was no answer to the phone call initially.  That uncle spoke to a
    solicitor and the next day the appellant was given  an  appointment  to
    see his solicitor. An appointment was then  with  the  Home  Office  to
    claim asylum.  He identifies his uncle as S S.   In  addition  to  that
    uncle, the appellant's mother's two brothers are  also  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

46. In his second witness statement, the appellant explains that  the  idea
    that he could have  caused  the  injuries  he  has  is  something  that
    disgusts and offends him.  He did not have any reason  to  do  this  to
    himself.  He refers to his family circumstances with his father earning
    sufficient income and that they had everything they  needed.   When  he
    went to Colombo in 2003 he studied there and worked in a jewellery shop
    in Sea Street.  He also returned home to Trincomalee once a month where
    he worked in his father's jewellery store as well.

47. As to UK activity, the appellant refers to having attended  Nullivakail
    remembrance days in May 2012 and 2013 and Heroes' Days in November 2011
    and 2012.

48. As to the way in which he had been ill-treated the appellant refers  to
    having been kept in a cell with around ten other  males,  all  of  whom
    were Tamil, although the number was not exact.  Some were taken out for
    questioning and some were taken for rehabilitation and not seen  again.
    The floor was bare concrete and there was no bedding, nor  any  sheets.
    There was no toilet and detainees were allowed out at  irregular  times
    to use the toilet but they were permitted to use water from a large vat
    to wash themselves.   The  appellant  refers  to  being  beaten  almost
    everyday and the way in which food given to him had often  been  kicked
    away.

49. As to his ill-treatment,  in  particular  the  burning,  the  appellant
    explains he saw one of the soldiers with a metal rod and  the  end  was
    glowing red and easy to make out.  Before he could think about what was
    going to happen, it was pressed against  his  right  arm.   He  recalls
    screaming in pain, feeling intense heat,  and  then  passing  out.   He
    could not place a time span on how long he had been out for:

         "But the pain to my back and right arm was so harsh, that  I  could
         not bear the pain but at the same time I  could  feel  the  burning
         sensation.  The officers then continued to ask me questions  as  to
         where the gold had been hidden and they had stated  that  they  had
         information from the outset from EPDP  or  PLOTE  (I  cannot  quite
         remember which group they mentioned now) [stating]  that  I  helped
         the LTTE to hide gold."

50. The appellant went on to explain that he was held by five to ten people
    and they poured petrol over his face and  his back and they  said  they
    were going to set him alight.  He could  not  see  his  back  but  kept
    looking at his right arm and saw that the outer layer of skin,  already
    so dry from being in the cell, was now wet and slimy  and  starting  to
    peel off.  He was taken back to his room by two people and recalls  the
    looks of the other detainees.  He slept on the floor at a strange angle
    and as he could not lie on his back or lean on his arm.  He was allowed
    to bathe the following day and was permitted to go first by  the  other
    detainees.  When he came to take his T-shirt off it was  stuck  to  his
    back and another detainee assisted him.  He could see layers  of  blood
    and skin in different colours on the shirt.  One of the officers  threw
    a new T-shirt into the room and although it caused him so much pain  to
    wear it he did not want the wounds to be exposed and had to wear  a  T-
    shirt thereafter for quite some time.  He had  a  very  bad  fever  for
    around two or three days after the burning and kept  asking  the  other
    detainees to describe the scars as he wanted to see whether  they  were
    getting better or worse.

51. After coming to the United Kingdom, he registered with a GP to whom  he
    showed his scars but was told there was  no  treatment  that  could  be
    given.  The natural healing process  must  take  its  course.   He  was
    however treated for his knee.  The appellant made clear that he did not
    inflict these scars himself.

52. The appellant concluded by explaining that he and his brothers had  not
    called his parents for  a  number  of  years  now.   Their  father  was
    paranoid that the home phone was tapped by the authorities in that  the
    phone there was clicking.  At the date of that statement (26  September
    2013) the appellant did not know  whether  his  father's  business  was
    still running.  His brothers had sent letters to his  father  to  which
    they had had no reply but he had received a  telephone  call  from  his
    father in July 2013 from a mobile number.  It had been his  father  and
    he stated that he  was  using  somebody  else's  mobile  and  that  the
    authorities in the east had started registration of the  houses.   They
    had information that the appellant was in the UK and involved with  the
    LTTE.

53. At the  hearing  before  us  the  appellant  was  tendered  for  cross-
    examination.  When it was put to him that he  was  surely  at  risk  in
    travelling with another LTTE member, he responded that he had no choice
    but to use that member's knowledge to get to the LTTE area.  Given that
    he had connections in  the  LTTE,  he  was  asked  why  he  would  need
    assistance.  The appellant explained that it was an immediate  decision
    he had to take and it was highly improbable to ask relatives to come to
    Colombo.  As to why he  chose  to  take  the  bus,  he  said  that  his
    housemate said it would be safer.  As to why he  needed  assistance  to
    take the bus, the appellant acknowledged that he could go  by  bus  but
    did not have knowledge of how to get to the place he referred to as the
    LTTE area.  The appellant explained in terms that one  could  not  just
    enter the LTTE area and one was checked up on before being let in.

54. The appellant, in response to further questions, explained that he  had
    stayed with his father's relative in Vanni.  He had not  contacted  his
    family in Trincomalee  to  tell  them  he  was  there.   The  appellant
    explained that he thought they may have had trouble and so therefore he
    sent messages through the relatives  he  was  staying  with  in  Vanni.
    Those relatives had travelled to Trincomalee themselves.

55. The appellant explained that he had worked in the shop of his  father's
    relative in Trincomalee where he took orders and gave a description  of
    the range of work he undertook as a jeweller.  He was  first  asked  by
    the LTTE to help with the gold three months after arrival  and  he  had
    provided services to them for one year.  In  addition  to  melting  and
    forming gold into ingots he  assisted  them  with  supplying  food  and
    digging bunkers in Vanni.  As to the regularity  of  activity,  once  a
    week the LTTE came with a big sack of gold.  No-one else provided  such
    a service.  They came and collected it.  He had no idea what  they  did
    with the gold after taking it away.

56. Turning to the circumstances of his detention, the appellant  explained
    that he was directly taken to the camp where he was  held  where  there
    was a mixture of those suspected as well as members of  the  LTTE.   He
    confirmed that he had been tortured mostly every two or three days  and
    others were treated the same.  They were also  burned.   He  could  not
    give an accurate account of how many were in the camp but on the  first
    day some 200 to 300 were there but then some were taken away.   He  had
    no liberty and was locked up which was always the case.  There were ten
    people in the cell and explained the reference he had made at interview
    about there being  five people in the cell as being because  whilst  he
    was in detention  some people were  taken and did not return.   He  had
    not read the confession which  he  signed  about  five  days  into  his
    detention and did not therefore know what was in the document.  He  was
    not fingerprinted and photographed the same day.

57. As to the nature of the questions he was asked, the  first  were  where
    the LTTE leaders were hiding.  He was tortured because he did not  know
    the answer.  As to whether the questions were the same throughout,  the
    appellant explained after some  time  he  realised  EPDP  members  were
    coming into the camp and he believes they must have told the army  that
    he had been assisting with the gold.  As to whether he knew  they  were
    EPDP members or simply made an assumption, he explained that during the
    torture he could vaguely recall  his  torturers  saying  they  had  got
    information from EPDP or PLOTE.

58. The appellant had been burned on only the one occasion.  As to  how  he
    had been restrained, he demonstrated this with  the  assistance  of  Mr
    Paramjorthy. He kneeled and his head was being  pushed  down.   He  was
    able to see a little bit of the burning on his arm.

59. As to how he had made contact with EPDP or PLOTE, this was when he used
    the toilet, confirming that the cell did not have such facilities.   He
    had been escorted by the army and as to how he was  able  to  speak  to
    someone else they had not  accompanied  him  into  the  toilet  and  so
    therefore he had the opportunity to speak.  In the  first  instance  he
    approached someone in the toilet and begged to help him get out of  the
    place and this was the person who assisted him escaping.  He  took  the
    appellant's home address and on the second occasion had talked  to  his
    father and said that he would assist if he received money.

60. As to the manner in which he escaped the camp in the  lorry  concealed,
    the appellant explained that he was covered by empty water cans and was
    unable to comment on the  thoroughness  of  the  check  the  guard  had
    undertaken, although he had heard someone open the door  and  shut  it.
    In noticing other escapes, he had the  opportunity  to  talk  to  other
    members who were missing who explained the EPDP had been given money to
    rescue people.  He asked other  people  how  the  escaping  was  taking
    place.

61. In re-examination, Mr Paramjorthy asked about what happened at the LTTE
    checkpoint. He referred to a conversation between  the  person  he  had
    been living with and those manning the checkpoint and thereafter he had
    been permitted to enter the area.

62. Our questions were for clarification of aspects of the  evidence.   The
    appellant said he was 22 years old when he went  to  Colombo  where  he
    remained from 2003 until 2007. As well  as  studying  he  worked  in  a
    jeweller's shop owned by distant relatives.  The bus he had taken  when
    leaving Colombo was travelling  to  Omanthi.  (The  appellant  did  not
    understand our question whether Vanni was on the way  to  this  place.)
    When the bus passed from the army area to the LTTE area  the  appellant
    and everyone else had their IDs inspected. He had  to  produce  his  ID
    which he had with him. They asked him why he was travelling and he said
    that he was going to see relatives.

63. The appellant also explained that the burn  scarring  had  taken  place
    after the army came to know about  the  gold.   The  reference  by  the
    appellant to torture otherwise in the witness statement was to beatings
    with a gun on his back.  As to the studies  he  had  been  pursuing  in
    Colombo, this was an IELTS course.  At the beginning he  had  taken  an
    English exam and thereafter had undertaken CIMA first stage  which  had
    been in English.

64. As to the process of melting the gold,  the  appellant  explained  that
    equipment called Tirubal was used which  revolves,  the  fire  is  kept
    burning, and the gold is put into a container.  When the air is  blown,
    the gold melts.  It was not possible to hold the container  with  hands
    and so it was necessary to lift it  with  tong-like  instruments  after
    which the gold was poured. (We would observe that in giving evidence on
    this aspect of his claim the appellant spoke with great  animation  and
    confidence.)

65. The appellant was then referred to what he had  told  Professor  Lingam
    (that he definitely felt heat and pain before he fainted) and clarified
    that he had not told Professor Lingam that he  felt  the  burning  each
    time it had occurred.  He clarified that it was the next  day  when  he
    was allowed to have a bath for the first time.  One  of  the  detainees
    had helped him to take off his T-shirt.

66. In re-examination he was asked whether there were shower facilities  in
    the detention centre and the appellant responded that there was  a  tap
    and a bucket which could be used.

Family evidence

67. The statement by the appellant's brother, VN, dated 30 August 2012 gave
    the same chronology of the  appellant's  account  as  to  his  move  to
    Colombo and from there to Vanni explaining that the family lost contact
    with him after he moved to the latter location.  VN  explains  that  he
    went to Colombo in December 2009 to apply for a student visa to come to
    the United Kingdom and at that time he did not have any news about  the
    appellant although they knew thousands of Tamils had ended up in  camps
    in Sri Lanka.  He remained in Colombo until he obtained that visa.  His
    father called him on the  day  the  appellant  left  Sri  Lanka  on  22
    February 2011 to explain that the appellant was coming  to  the  United
    Kingdom although he could not state much on the phone and that  he  was
    unsure of the appellant's exact travel plans.  The appellant called  VN
    on 24 February to explain that he had arrived and that  the  agent  had
    dropped him at their uncle's house in Wellington which is not far  from
    where VN lived.  VN did not make contact  with  their  parents  due  to
    their father's concern that his phone was being  tapped.   He  has  not
    returned to Sri Lanka since being in the United Kingdom.

68. VN's more recent statement dated 30 October 2013 further clarifies that
    he left Sri Lanka on 30 May 2010 on a Tier 4 Student visa  which  after
    renewal resulted in leave to remain until February 2015.  He lives with
    his brother, PN, and their uncle, V near  Croydon.   He  describes  his
    background as a middle class affluent family and that his father was  a
    jeweller.  He and his  brother,  PN,  did  not  know  exactly  why  the
    appellant "was going to Vanni from Colombo  but  I  remember  that  our
    parents told me and PN that he was travelling to Vanni".   In  response
    to questions, he said that the appellant's parents stated that  he  had
    had problems after the LTTE had attacked Katunayake Airport and that he
    had had problems from the authorities.  VN and PN found  out  that  the
    appellant had been arrested when their father called them in the United
    Kingdom to tell them so and to say he had only managed to get  him  out
    of detention on 4 February 2011.

69. In late July 2013, the appellant's father called him and stated that he
    was using  another  person's  mobile  and  that  the  authorities  were
    maintaining a high presence in the east due to the elections.   JN  and
    AN had stated to their father that they knew the appellant was  in  the
    United Kingdom and he was involved with  the  LTTE.   Apparently  their
    father had stated that he did not know where he was and their  response
    was that it was only a matter of time before he was sent  back  to  Sri
    Lanka.  VN had not heard from  his  father  since  and  they  have  not
    written to him in case this causes him  any  problems.   In  his  first
    statement  dated  30  August  2012,  VP  discloses  nothing  materially
    different from VN.  Similarly in his more recent statement, he explains
    that he too has leave as a  Tier  4  Student  until  2015.   Again,  he
    discloses nothing new of a material nature not covered by his brother.

70. According to his statement, the uncle VS explains that he went  to  Sri
    Lanka "after years" with his wife and 2 year old son in  October  2013.
    Their purpose was to accomplish  prayers  and  to  see  relatives.   He
    wished to complete those prayers in Trincomalee temples but he had been
    told by his family not to try to go there  in  any  circumstances.   VS
    explains that his mother had brought his relatives to  Colombo  to  see
    them at 3.15 in the morning without VS being aware.  He was  forced  to
    stay in Colombo.  VS said he had planned to see his  elder  sister  and
    her husband and had had no contact with his sister since the  appellant
    had arrived in the United Kingdom because of concern that his  sister's
    phone calls were tapped and being recorded by the Sri Lankan government
    authorities.  He had had contact with  his  mother  before  he  reached
    Colombo.  He went on to explain that his sister and brother-in-law, the
    appellant's parents, had met him the last day before his  departure  to
    London without any prior notification.  He was told also by  her  about
    unknown phone call threats and that she could hear clicking  noises  on
    the phone and so considered it could be tapped.  They could  also  hear
    some unusual digital sounds and conversation  in  Sinhala.   They  also
    observed a white van standing in front of the house most of the day and
    night, sometimes they heard the heavy stomping of boots in the yard.

71. VS explains that on the day the appellant had an interview at the  Home
    Office he had taken the photographs at his house (of the scars).

72. At the hearing, VS gave evidence after the appellant and  was  tendered
    for cross-examination.

73. With reference to his statement that he had no contact with his  sister
    since the appellant had arrived in the  United  Kingdom,  VS  explained
    that he was told by his mother  that  all  telephone  calls  they  were
    receiving were monitored by the Sri Lankan authorities  and  that  they
    were recorded. It was for that reason that he was not able  to  contact
    them, and he was not aware of the location in which they  were  living.
    Asked why, although the phones  were  monitored  they  could  not  have
    discussed other things, he said that they had changed contact  numbers.
    Asked to confirm then that the reason for the lack of  contact  was  in
    fact that he did not have their  phone  number,  he  said  that  if  he
    contacted his sister "they" would know that she had contact  with  him.
    As to why the sister being  in  contact  would  give  trouble,  it  was
    because VS believed  they  (the  authorities)  had  come  to  know  the
    appellant was here.  To the questions why they did not speak about  the
    appellant and why would that cause problems, VS responded that  he  did
    not have their contact number and did not know where they were  living.
    VS also referred to the appellant's father having been beaten, although
    he could not remember exactly  when,  but  stated  it  was  during  the
    eastern province election time in 2012, although  emphasising  that  he
    was unsure.

74. In response  to  questions  from  the  Tribunal,  there  being  no  re-
    examination, VS explained that he is a British  citizen  which  he  had
    become in 2001.  He confirmed that his brother-in-law (the  appellant's
    father) had been tortured he thought  in  2012  and  that  he  had  not
    contacted his sister because of calls being tapped.  As to how  it  was
    he felt safe going back, VS  responded  that  he  had  not  had  direct
    contact as his life was "separate from them".  He felt fear  only  when
    he arrived in Sri Lanka; however he did confirm concern that  he  might
    be linked to the appellant.  His reason for going back was a compelling
    one and was for a religious purpose.

75. Since the day he arrived in Colombo, his mother lived  with  him.   She
    previously lived in Trincomalee.   When  reminded  of  the  appellant's
    answer at interview that he had an uncle in the LTTE, VS confirmed that
    it was his brother.  As to where he is now, he knew him to be safe  but
    did not know where he is.  As to the relatives the appellant had stayed
    with in Vanni, he knew  them  when  he  was  young,  and  as  to  their
    relationship to the appellant, he described it as his father's mother's
    sister's son.

76. As to the meeting up  with  the  appellant's  parents  in  Colombo,  VS
    referred to his mother having brought them in the  night  as  she  knew
    where they were living.  As to why she  had  not  telephoned  them  and
    invited them to the city, VS explained that she was scared  to  mention
    on the telephone that he had arrived.  She also told him that  she  did
    not have their number.  As to when he had first told his mother of  his
    return to Colombo, he said it was on the day previous (to his  travel).
    As to why he had not given more notice, VS said he  could  not  make  a
    decision because his son was not well.  As to whether his  mother  knew
    of the possibility of his journey  to  Sri  Lanka,  VS  responded  that
    because of the son's illness he was unable to give specific  dates  but
    she anticipated him coming.  She had warned him about the danger.

77. As to the white van treatment VS  responded  in  re-examination  by  Ms
    Bayati that this had been mentioned by his  mother.   He  had  been  in
    England and had made the call from his house here.

78.  The  appellant's  brother,  VN,  was  similarly  tendered  for  cross-
    examination.  He explained how he had totally avoided contact with  his
    father when it was suggested that he could have spoken to him  and  not
    talked about the appellant.  He confirmed that his father still had the
    same gold shop.

79. There was no  re-examination  and  in  response  to  questions  by  the
    Tribunal he explained that in 2007 he was living in  Trincomalee.   His
    visa to come to the United Kingdom had been issued in  Chennai  as  the
    High Commission (in Colombo) had been shut for renovations.   When  the
    LTTE surrendered to the army in 2009 he had been living in Trincomalee.
     With reference to his mother's brother being a member of the LTTE  and
    as to what had happened to him, VN explained that he knew he was  there
    in 2007 but did not know what had happened after the war.  He  had  not
    discussed his circumstances with anybody.

80. Likewise, PN was tendered for cross-examination.  He explained that his
    studies are sponsored by his father.

81. The Tribunal sought clarification about the uncle who had been a member
    of the LTTE.  PN explained that he had been told he was working for the
    movement and he had no idea what had happened to him.  He had not asked
    anyone recently but he knew that he was married and had no children.



Expert Evidence

Professor Sundara Lingam: written report

82. Professor  Lingam  has  lengthy  medical  experience  as  a  Consultant
    Paediatrician and a First Contact Physician in Harley  Street.   He  is
    the Executive Director of Medical Express Clinic.   He  is  trained  in
    medico-legal matters and in report writing for the courts.  We did  not
    hear oral testimony from Professor Lingam. His report  was  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and although we  indicated  in  earlier  directions
    that he should appear before us, the dates fixed were not convenient.

83. Professor Lingam had examined the appellant  on  6  May  2011  and  his
    report of the same date.  He described  the  appellant  as  having  six
    hyperpigmented scars.  Their appearance indicated they were  caused  by
    heated metal rods applied at nearly the  same  time  and  by  the  same
    mechanism.  He considered that his findings on the  scars  "are  highly
    consistent with the history provided by  the  patient  that  all  these
    scars were due to burn by heated metal rods. The scars are very typical
    of burn injury".

84. Professor Lingam next considered alternative causation.  He first ruled
    out the possibility they were self-inflicted because  the  areas  where
    the scars are located are not reachable by the appellant.  Secondly, he
    considered whether they were caused deliberately to mislead.   "I  have
    ruled that, no way I could  scientifically  differentiate  between  the
    wounds inflicted deliberately from the wounds inflicted from  the  said
    torture".  Thirdly he ruled out the possibility the scars  were  caused
    by  a  medical  condition  or  a  surgical  procedure.   Fourthly,   he
    considered if these were caused by accident or wounds from training  as
    LTTE or childhood injuries.  He rejected  these  possibilities  because
    "the patient denied any wounds or accidents  other  than  the  injuries
    caused by torture".

85. Professor Lingam went on to say that the appellant was  "much  stressed
    and may have depression which will explain his poor memory and slowness
    in recollecting events".  When  he  administered  the  Beck  Depression
    Inventory (a 21-question multiple-choice self-report inventory, created
    by Dr. Aaron T. Beck, which is one of the most widely used  instruments
    for measuring the severity of depression), it showed the appellant  was
    severely depressed.

86. Under the sub-head "Conclusion" Professor Lingam stated  that  "I  have
    concluded that the scars and other injuries I saw are  consistent  with
    the  history  provided  by  the  patient.  I  have   considered   other
    alternative causation as to the scarring, namely childhood illness  and
    diseases and accidental injuries which might have caused the scarring".



David Rhys Jones: written evidence

87. Mr Rhys Jones is not a doctor but an advisor  on  matters  of  law  and
    policy at the HBF.  Previously he had worked for the Medical Foundation
    for the Care of Victims of Torture, first as a policy officer and  then
    as a legal officer.  He had extensive experience of training  volunteer
    doctors and clinicians on legal aspects of medico-legal report writing.
     He was co-author (with Dr Juliet Cohen) of FFT's paper on "Methodology
    Employed in the Preparation of Medico-Legal Reports on  Behalf  of  the
    Medical Foundation", 2 June 2006.

88. Applying, he said, the UN Convention Against Torture (UNCAT) definition
    of torture, it was clear that SIBP could not be described as an act  of
    torture.  Injuries inflicted in such circumstances would  amount  to  a
    "false allegation  of  torture"  as  described  in  paragraphs  105(f),
    287(vi) and 290 of the IP.

89. Whilst in the context of  asylum  claims  the  judge  is  the  ultimate
    arbiter of fact, it was consistent with the duties to the  court  of  a
    medical expert to consider whether there  was  a  false  allegation  of
    torture.  The HBF would not prepare a report if it was  concluded  that
    this was the case.

90. It was a misconception to think  that  doctors  preparing  medico-legal
    reports simply accept the history told to them at face value.  Thus  in
    everyday practice doctors will carefully interpret matters such as  the
    amount of alcohol consumed, exercise taken or severity of pain reported
    in light of their observations of the patient's  appearance,  mobility,
    answers to questions etc.  During the examination,  doctors  critically
    assess the account given in relation to the injuries received.  This is
    not an assessment of credibility but  a  proper  consideration  of  the
    overall clinical picture as required by paragraphs 105(f)  and  287(vi)
    of the IP.  The minimum content of a medico-legal report as set out  at
    Annex 1 of the  IP  encompassed  a  thorough  and  exhaustive  process,
    including  circumstances  of  the  interview;  history;  physical   and
    psychological examination; and opinion.

91. Mr Rhys Jones highlights the contrast between Chapters V and VI of  the
    IP,  the  former  dealing  with  physical  sequelae,  the  latter  with
    psychological  sequelae.   The  well-known  hierarchy  of  degrees   of
    likelihood at paragraph 187 in Chapter 5 finds no equivalent in Chapter
    6. The temptation therefore to extrapolate the hierarchy  available  in
    paragraph 187 should be avoided.

92. One component of a medico-legal  report  was  psychological/psychiatric
    evaluation so as to form an impression of the degree to  which  torture
    has contributed  to  psychological  problems.   Such  a  report  should
    consider both the physical and psychological sequelae of  torture.   Mr
    Rhys Jones considers that the IP  methodology  ensures  that  there  is
    consideration of whether there was a false allegation  of  torture.  It
    also deals with whether there is a possibility  that  torture  has  not
    contributed to psychological problems.  The absence  of  a  correlation
    between events and symptoms may well  indicate  psychological  findings
    inconsistent with the allegation  of  torture.   However,  even  though
    diagnosis of trauma-related  mental  disorder  supports  the  claim  of
    torture, absence of such symptoms does not  mean  the  person  was  not
    tortured.

93. Mr Rhys Jones states that in his training work emphasis was  placed  on
    what factors can reasonably be established in clinical terms  and  what
    cannot.  What cannot be determined in a  medico-legal  report  is  "the
    hand behind the implement of torture".   Clinicians  are  also  advised
    against being drawn into speculation about the survivor which cannot be
    clinically tested, so the motivation of  the  torturer  was  ordinarily
    outside their field of expertise.

94. Mr Rhys Jones concludes that the IP provided a comprehensive  means  by
    which possibilities that injuries may have been self-inflicted or  SIBP
    can be considered and made the subject of clinical  findings.  However,
    in his opinion SIBP should only be considered as reasonably  likely  if
    there was evidence that it had occurred.

David Rhys Jones: oral evidence

95. Mr Rhys Jones said that whilst it was not the place  of  clinicians  to
    conduct a far-ranging assessment of credibility, within the  HBF  there
    was a great wealth of knowledge  about  torture,  which  could  include
    conditions in a particular prison based on patients' information.

96. That  medical  reports  which  were  not  IP-compliant  should  not  be
    discounted and could still have  value  was  well-illustrated  by   the
    report considered by the European Court  of  Human  Rights  in  R.C.  v
    Sweden [2010] ECHR 307.

97. Asked how important the social and cultural  context  was  for  doctors
    examining patients, Mr Rhys Jones said the IP made clear that this  was
    always important.  He was aware that patients  from  certain  parts  of
    Africa, for example, could have ritual scarring and there could  be  an
    overlap between such scars and ju-ju  rituals.   He  accepted  that  in
    broad terms such scarring  was  inflicted  by  consent.   Ritual  marks
    tended to be symmetrical.  He had heard of "crocodile  scarring"  [i.e.
    tribal initiation rites that leave the men's skins scarred all over  in
    patterns resembling crocodile scales].  But how much regard doctors had
    for  the  social  and  cultural  context  depended  very  much  on  the
    particular case.  For example, if a patient said that scars which  were
    patently vaccination scars were cigarette burns, the doctor would  need
    to test the evidence that much more.  It remained that it  was  unusual
    to find scarring deliberately inflicted by consent.

98. Mr Rhys-Jones said he accepted that  given  such  phenomena  as  tribal
    scarring, even horrific scarring may be caused by voluntarily inflicted
    harm (of course sometimes it could be involuntarily inflicted, as  with
    FGM) but the psychological response could be very different.

99. Mr Rhys-Jones said he knew of the occurrence of tattoo  scarring  (i.e.
    scarring resulting from tattooing).

100. Doctors were always mindful of the possibility of self-inflicted  harm.
    Thus a cigarette burn which could  have  been  made  by  the  patient's
    dominant hand was a possibility a doctor would be alert to.

101. In his opinion doctors have to focus not on  theoretical  possibilities
    but what was reasonably likely.  Unless there was  sufficient  evidence
    of a practice of SIBP generally, doctors did not need to address it.

David Rhys Jones's supplementary statement, 11 March 2014

102. In a further statement Mr Rhys Jones sought to give more  detail  about
    HBF training for doctors writing medico-legal reports: At paragraphs 10
    and 13 he stated that:

         "10.     MLR writers are reminded that their reports may be subject
             to  criticism.   For   example,   if   they   suggest:   bias;
             exaggeration; credulity; advocacy; stray outside  one's  field
             of expertise; that the contents of the report is  inconsistent
             with what the subject has said elsewhere; that the content  of
             the report is internally inconsistent; that the  report  lacks
             reasoning,  is  inadequately  reasoned  or  the  reasoning  is
             flawed.

         13.      If credibility is clearly an issue in any of the papers or
             the  HBF  is  directed  to  consider  credibility  issues   in
             instructions then MLR writers are expected to be alert to  the
             possibility of  feigning  or  exaggeration.  The  case  of  BN
             (psychiatric evidence - discrepancies) Albania [2010] UKUT 279
             (IAC) usefully demonstrates some of the issues here.  However,
             see the sub heading below -  'Credibility,  inconsistency  and
             logical fallacies.' "

103. Under the sub-heading "Discrepancies" he states:

         "14. MLR writers are reminded that there may be  many  explanations
             for discrepancies in addition to the fallibility of the  human
             memory or  intent  to  deceive.  For  example:  interpreter(s)
             error, interviewing officer error, legal representative error,
             the interviewing  technique  adopted.  However,  discrepancies
             should not be  ignored  and  simply  passed  over,  not  least
             because in addition to the above they  are  capable  of  being
             introduced unwittingly by the MLR writer himself.

         15.      Discrepancies should therefore be put to  the  subject  as
             they arise. For example, "you told me that this happened on  x
             date but in your statement you said y date?"  The  explanation
             for the discrepancy should be noted. The MLR  writer  is  then
             expected  to  provide  an  opinion  on  those   matters   when
             clinically relevant. Obviously, this will vary  from  case  to
             case. For example,  occasional  discrepancies  on  matters  of
             little significance are inevitable  in  any  retelling  of  an
             account,  but  numerous  discrepancies  or  discrepancies   in
             significant areas may be of clinical relevance.

         16.      MLR writers who have undertaken  examinations  of  torture
             survivors before will be aware that the  means  and  level  of
             disclosure  of  traumatic  events   is   often   significantly
             different from that given elsewhere. It ought therefore not to
             be  considered  discrepant  if  the  subject  discloses  to  a
             clinician something not previously said.

         17.      Again, there are numerous possible explanations for  this.
             For example: stigma/shame; confidentiality issues; the  gender
             of  the  interviewer/interpreter/legal   representative;   the
             development of trust and rapport between the report writer and
             the  subject;   or   following   a   period   of   therapeutic
             intervention.

         18.      MLR writers are reminded to  anticipate  comments  in  the
             Secretary of State's decision  letter  or  in  an  Immigration
             Judge's determination. They are also told that their  role  is
             to assist the court in its understanding of matters  in  which
             the court may not have expertise, and  that  it  is  therefore
             very important that all steps in the  process  which  goes  to
             preparing the report are clearly set out."







104. At paragraphs 23-25 he addresses shortcomings in decision letters:

         "23.     MLR writers are taught in their training at the  HBF  that
             credibility is a matter for the  decision-maker  and  that  to
             deal directly with credibility 'usurps  the  function  of  the
             immigration judge'. However, in my  experience,  both  at  the
             Medical Foundation ... and the HBF the  Secretary  of  State's
             decision letters frequently do not  address  true  credibility
             (for want of a  better  expression)  but  actually  engage  in
             logical fallacies.

         ...

         25.      MLR writers are invited to bring such  statements  to  the
             reviewers. In my experience,  the  conclusions  drawn  in  the
             decision letter can at time be 'unpicked' by  the  MLR  report
             writers by taking a forensic approach to the facts...."

Dr Frank Arnold: written report

105. Dr Arnold is  a specialist in problems of wound  healing,  having  been
    Director of Research at the Oxford Wound Healing  Institute  (Churchill
    Hospital) and has published more than 40 research papers on problems of
    wound  repair.  Since  undergoing  clinical  training  at  the  Medical
    Foundation for the Care of Victims of  Torture  in  2004-2005,  he  has
    written  approximately  1,000  medico-legal   reports,   mainly   about
    survivors of human rights abuses. He has taught on courses for  doctors
    organised by the Department of Health and the Medical Justice  Network.



106. In a report dated 10 January 2014, Dr Arnold states  that  he  had  not
    had  an  opportunity  to  examine  the  appellant.   He  had  read  the
    criticisms made by the First-tier Tribunal Judge of Professor  Lingam's
    report.  In his view the judge was wrong to assert that  "[t]here  must
    be a method by  which  injuries  capable  of  being  inflicted  on  the
    appellant by invitation of a third party to do so and  injuries  caused
    by third parties  as  a  result  of  torture  and  detention  could  be
    differentiated".  There was no such method.   As  regards  the  judge's
    view that the professor had failed to consider whether "the nature  and
    extent of the injuries were such that the  appellant  would  have  been
    able to undertake a protracted air journey to the UK without some  form
    of medication or assistance", the appellant had stated  in  his  asylum
    interview  that  he  received  pain-killers  after  his  release   from
    detention.  Given that the appellant said  that  the  branding  was  in
    August 2009 it was unlikely that the  torture  he  received  five  days
    before his escape was  branding by burns because the wounds would  have
    been at a much earlier stage of healing.

107. Dr Arnold states that if burns were inflicted by a third party  at  the
    subject's voluntary request it would be necessary for  the  subject  to
    hold or be held still for the duration  of  each  episode  of  burning;
    otherwise the  edges  of  the  scarring  would  tend  to  blur  as  the
    involuntary withdrawal reflex causes a person to try and move away from
    the injurious object. For immobilisation/anesthetization to occur,  one
    would need to postulate a site "(a counterfeit  torture  factory?)"  at
    which people  could  deliberately  choose  to  have  marks  deceptively
    suggesting torture inflicted on  their  bodies  by  a  third  party  or
    parties surreptitiously. Such an 'enterprise' would need to:

           o Immobilise or anaesthetize the subject; or

           o Be in an extremely isolated place; or

           o Employ gagging; or

           o Enjoy protection  sufficient  to  prevent  publicity  and  the
             dissolution of such a 'torture factory'."

108. It was possible for an experienced medical  rapporteur  to  distinguish
    roughly by examination, the stage of repair a scar had reached  at  the
    time of examination.  If the chronology  of  the  subject  was  grossly
    discordant it will be possible to draw conclusions about  the  veracity
    of the account (e.g. if a wound is in early stages of  repair  but  the
    subject says it was inflicted some years earlier), but such  a  finding
    would not "prove" SIBP.

109. The characteristics of wounds and scars can be affected by whether  the
    wound has been infected but usually not by the  way  it  has  otherwise
    been  treated.   Infection  can  increase  tissue  damage,  causing  an
    expansion or irregularity of the edges of the scar.  Impairment  of  or
    delay  in  healing  can  be  caused  by   serious   illnesses,   severe
    malnutrition etc.  However, "infection is probably not a relevant issue
    here..."  Treatment to prevent or  eradicate  infection  would  not  be
    detectable months  or  years  after  (apart  from  one  rare  exception
    relating to silver compounds).   He observes, "[h]owever, I have no way
    of ascertaining what  infection  control  might  have  existed  in  the
    hypothetical circumstances of an alleged "torture factory" - for  which
    I have not been shown evidence of - and therefore decline to  speculate
    further on this question".

110. Dr Arnold states there was no known method that  would  enable  doctors
    to differentiate between branding scars due to SIBP (if the  phenomenon
    exists) and those due to torture.

111. Dr  Arnold  sought  to  clarify  the  ways  in  which  doctors  made  a
    diagnosis.  It was a process of continuing  refinement  of  alternative
    hypotheses thereby reducing uncertainty.  "In this process of  reducing
    uncertainty, the competent doctor will not consider  causes  which  are
    clinically implausible.  They are not, in  strictly  medical  terms,  a
    reasonable likelihood".   In  the  absence  of  evidence  supporting  a
    contention that a torture fabrication facility actually exists  it  was
    neither feasible nor reasonable to  require  that  medical  rapporteurs
    should explicitly consider a hypothetical cause of branding scars.

Dr Frank Arnold: oral evidence

112. Dr Arnold confirmed that he had  not  examined  the  appellant's  scars
    himself. Dr Arnold was asked  several  questions  about  possible  pain
    management  measures  in   response   to   burn   scarring.    Use   of
    morphine/heroin  carried  dangers  e.g.  to  breathing  and   did   not
    necessarily eliminate pain.  Use of alcohol carried dangers too.   Once
    a few days had passed, strong painkillers such as codeine could assist.

113. He  said  that  complications  that  could  arise  from  burn  scarring
    included infections.  Chronic complications could affect the nature  of
    the scarring e.g. by blurring its edges.

114. As regards the effects  of  fainting/losing  consciousness  on  someone
    having burn scars inflicted on them, it was difficult  to  say  because
    there were different levels of unconsciousness.  At  a  shallow  level,
    muscles might still involuntarily react for example.  He did not  think
    one could tell from looking at scars whether a person was conscious  or
    unconscious when they were inflicted.

115. In regard to the apparent difference of opinion between  Dr  Odili  and
    Dr Zapata-Bravo on the aging of scars - see below paragraphs 129,  139,
    154, 159, 162  -  Dr Arnold said Dr Odili had only referred to  "up  to
    two years" and she did not define what she meant by  "new  scars".   Dr
    Arnold thought the difference was not material, as  precision  was  not
    possible.   The  proportion  of  scars  over  which  there   might   be
    disagreement about ageing was likely to be relatively  small.   Plastic
    surgeons and forensic  medical  experts  have  different  purposes  and
    approaches.

116. In relation to the possibility of SIBP, he did not think it  was  right
    to speculate about such things.  Medical students had drummed into them
    a version of Occam's Razor[1]: when in an English field  one  does  not
    look for zebras - unless there is a safari park nearby.  You would need
    some presenting evidence to make SIBP a scenario to be considered.   It
    was within the spectrum of possibilities, but at the speculative end.

117. Asked by the Tribunal  whether  he  had  dealt  with  cases  of  ritual
    scarring, Dr Arnold said he had seen around twenty cases, but  not  one
    was consistent with thermal burns on a visible part of  the  body.   It
    was important to be sensitive to different  cultures,  but  there  were
    certain human constants and the fact  was  there  was  no  evidence  of
    branding by consent for the  purposes  of  deception  anywhere  in  the
    world.  He had seen cases of tattoo scarring but they were pretty rare.
     With them the aim was broadly to introduce colour into the  skin,  not
    to cause scarring.

118. Asked whether the length of the  repair  process  for  scars  could  be
    significantly affected by beatings  inflicted  on  the  site  of  fresh
    scars, Dr Arnold said it could, but after four months,  beatings  would
    have a diminishing effect.

119. Dr Arnold  was  asked  about  his  dismissive  references  to  "torture
    factories": did he mean by them to say SIBP could not  occur  in  other
    contexts, as administered by, for example, an  ex-doctor  or  nurse  or
    "backstreet" medic or even a "quack"?   Dr Arnold  said  he  could  not
    exclude such possibilities but he had to focus on  what  was  medically
    plausible.

120. Asked what he would do if he had a case where there was clear  findings
    of fact by a judge that at  the  time  a  claimant  said  he  had  been
    tortured abroad he was in the UK, Dr Arnold said that if the age of the
    scar was wholly inconsistent with the claimed torture it would  be  his
    duty to point that out in the report, although whether  the  claimant's
    lawyer would then submit that report was not for him to say.

121. Asked whether he considered the IP a "complete code",  Dr  Arnold  said
    he found some parts  of  it  problematic:  e.g.  he  thought  it  quite
    confusing that in an ascending order  of  likelihood  paragraph  187(c)
    should say that "typical of" meant "few other possible causes"  whereas
    paragraph  187(d),  at  a  lesser  threshold,   should  not  make  that
    qualification.  He also echoed Mr Rhys Jones'  opinion  that  paragraph
    187 did not really apply to psychological assessment.

122. Asked whether he thought the dousing of petrol on a  fresh  burn  could
    delay repair, Dr Arnold said it  could  but  it  would  depend  on  the
    circumstances.  He could not really say if petrol  would  increase  the
    likelihood of infection.  The appellant's burns were "partial thickness
    burns" i.e. burns which left some of the epidermis intact.

123. Asked whether he would prepare a report where he  was  satisfied  there
    was a false allegation of torture, Dr Arnold said if it was  blindingly
    obvious the allegation was false he would contact the lawyer and say so
    as it would be a waste of his time.  If the situation was not  entirely
    black or white he would  more  likely  prepare  a  report  voicing  his
    concerns.  He had encountered the problem only on rare occasions.

Dr Enrique Zapata-Bravo: written report

124. Dr Zapata-Bravo is a Consultant Psychiatrist (he had previously  worked
    as a consultant in Chest Medicine).  Currently  he  is  an  independent
    consultant and a medico-legal expert for the  HBF.   His  past  medical
    experience included working in accident and emergency  departments  and
    surgical services where he had treated burn patients and at HBF.

125. In  a  report  dated  9  October  2013  Dr  Zapata-Bravo  set  out  his
    assessment of the appellant's scarring based on the account the  latter
    had given of a session of torture he had experienced in August 2009. He
    examined the appellant's scars on 3 September 2013.

126. He identified two scars on the appellant's upper right arm (S6 and  S7)
    and five on his back (S1-S5).

127. Dr Zapata-Bravo explains that burns are  classified  according  to  the
    depth of tissue injury into: superficial epidermal  burns,  superficial
    dermal burns; deep dermal burns (partial  thickness  burns);  and  full
    thickness burns.  The deeper the burn the  longer  it  takes  to  heal.
    Scars are formed  where  the  full  thickness  of  the  skin  has  been
    breached.  The scar is initially pink or reddish in colour and  becomes
    paler as the scar tissue gradually fades.  In some skin  types  bruises
    can lead to hyperpigmentation which may last for  several  years.   The
    intensity of hyperpigmentation is proportional to the severity  of  the
    burn, which in turn depends on the temperature of the  source  of  heat
    and the time of contact.  Burns from hot objects tend to take the shape
    of the surface that caused the burns ("branding" effect).

128. In the appellant's case Dr Zapata-Bravo  found  seven  scars  that  the
    appellant  attributed  to  torture  (scars   S1-S7).    All   exhibited
    hyperpigmentation, suggesting that the initial burns were  deep  dermal
    burns.  The long and narrow shape of each of the  scars  (with  a  very
    similar width in all of them) and the precise margins  of  these  marks
    suggest that the hot object causing the original burn was solid, narrow
    and relatively long.  Scar S6, situated at the top of the right deltoid
    area, is raised which suggests it was a full-thickness burn caused by a
    more severe burn than all the others.  All of these scars were  located
    in places that could not be  reached  by  the  appellant  in  order  to
    produce these particular marks.  For  that  reason  he  excluded  self-
    infliction as a possible cause  for  these  scars.   To  produce  these
    particular marks there would have had to  be  immobility  and  lack  of
    reaction during a certain time.

129. The 'quiescent' appearance of the scars meant that they were  all  more
    than six months old.  To his understanding it is not possible  to  date
    the scars more accurately than this: he referred in this  regard  to  a
    publication by Forrest, 2000.  In any event, in  this  case  there  was
    already evidence of the scars being  quiescent  when  Professor  Lingam
    looked at them in May 2011 and prior to that  the  appellant's  GP  had
    told him in February 2011 that there was no treatment he could give him
    for the scars.

130. Dr Zapata-Bravo states  that  none  of  the  appellant's  scars  showed
    ostensible signs of having received treatment in the past, although non-
    surgical treatments such as antibiotics  or  analgesics  would  not  be
    traceable by any physical examination that can be done today.

131. Under a sub-head,  'Possible  causes  of  the  scars'  Dr  Zapata-Bravo
    considers but eliminates the possibilities that the  appellant's  scars
    were caused by skin diseases, tattoos (their size, shape and appearance
    would be highly unusual for tattooing), lacerations, surgical incisions
    or other cuts, lashings, strikes given with a wooden rod,  electricity,
    radiation.  The marks S1-S7 were "diagnostic of specific  burns  caused
    by a hot solid object".

132. Whilst the appellant's activity as a jeweller brought him into  contact
    with fire and molten metal, they were unlikely to have caused burns  to
    his upper arm and back and the expected burns would not  have  resulted
    in patterns such as the ones observed in this case.

133. Any other accidental setting was also unlikely as the said pattern  did
    not correspond to any known object (for example  a  radiator  or  other
    manufactured article) and would not have affected two  quite  different
    sites (arm and back).

134. The appellant being unconscious would provide a  good  explanation  for
    the perfect 'branding' of the scars on his back that resulted.   If  he
    had been conscious but restrained by third parties during the branding,
    faultless hyperpigmentation marks would not  have  resulted.   The  two
    scars in the right deltoid area (S6 and S7) were shorter and the  shape
    of the rod is not replicated in the shoulder scars which suggests  that
    he may have been conscious  when  they  were  inflicted.   At  [63]  he
    concludes that "[a]s to the possibility that [the scars] were  produced
    by the instrument described by [the appellant] and in the way  depicted
    by him, I should state that my findings not only do not contradict  his
    history, but they are highly consistent with it".

135. Dr Zapata-Bravo  then  addresses  the  possibility  of  SIBP.   It  was
    significant that in the appellant's  case  there  were  at  least  five
    original burns.  This meant that the person who inflicted the burns did
    so on at least five occasions, twice to burn him in  the  deltoid  area
    and three more times in  the  back.   "It  should  be  assumed  that  a
    mechanism to heat and re-heat the rod should have been available during
    this operation and that  the  appellant  was  immobile."   The  use  of
    sedation by alcohol or medication would not  have  produced  the  total
    analgesia required to eliminate all reaction to pain.  "The severity of
    the pain in an operation repeated many times would have  woken  up  the
    individual and therefore the resulting scars would  not  have  had  the
    characteristics they had".

136.  In  Dr  Zapata-Bravo's  opinion  the  only  way  to  achieve  complete
    analgesia and immobility, other than the unlikely one of  inducing  the
    process of shock or coma that [the appellant] might  have  suffered  on
    the day of the incident was to use general  anaesthesia.   "This  would
    restrict the number of available people  capable  of  cooperating  with
    [the appellant] to those belonging to  the  health  professions,  which
    would have the appropriate training.  In  my  opinion,  the  hypothesis
    that [he] invited somebody else to cause his burns  is  unlikely.   The
    history provided by the client offers a plausible  explanation  for  my
    findings".

137. Dr  Zapata-Bravo  says  that  he  had  not  been  asked  to  produce  a
    psychiatric report but he noted (a) that the episodes  of  torture  and
    other ill-treatment recounted by the  appellant  were  likely  to  have
    caused him pervasive distress and  PTSD;  (b)  in  May  2010  Professor
    Lingam had found him "severely depressed".

Dr Enrique Zapata-Bravo: oral evidence

138. We heard oral evidence from  Dr  Zapata  Bravo  by  telephone  link  to
    Chile.

139. Asked by Mr Duffy about whether he agreed  with  Dr  Odili  that  scars
    could be dated up to two years, Dr Zapata-Bravo said that most  of  the
    literature put the time limit as six months.

140. Dr Zapata-Bravo said that because S6 was a very profound burn it  could
    have been infected early on; the appellant did  say  he  suffered  from
    fever; that is something that can happen with open wounds.

141. Asked if the appellant would have been at high risk of infection  given
    that he was in a very run-down condition prior to  being  tortured,  Dr
    Zapata-Bravo said he would have been, although the fact he was  allowed
    to bathe on a daily basis would have been in his favour.

142. Asked if fresh scars from burns would take longer to heal if a  subject
    was beaten in the  same  area,  Dr  Zapata-Bravo  said  that  was  very
    possible especially in the second and third months, but  it  would  not
    necessarily affect the outline of the scarring fundamentally  if  there
    was no open wound.

143. Dr Zapata-Bravo was asked on what basis  he  thought  it  unlikely  the
    appellant had had a general anaesthetic in the  context  of  SIBP.   He
    said that the relevant drugs were not easily obtainable and would  need
    to be administered by a person with some experience.  But he could  not
    rule out "back-street" health professionals doing it illegally.

144. He had not had any personal experience of a SIBP case and had not  been
    able to find any colleagues who had.

145. Dr Zapata-Bravo said he had come across tribal scarring many times  and
    assumed in most cases there had been social consent to it by the person
    scarred.  He had heard of persons having pain  free  operations  whilst
    conscious through acupuncture although he  had  no  expertise  on  that
    subject.

146. He had considered what motives the appellant's  torturers  might  have,
    but he was not an expert on countries or politics.  He thought  it  was
    quite plausible to consider from the patterns formed by the appellant's
    scarring that it was "tiger branding"; although it had not occurred  to
    him when he first saw it.

147. As regards  the  state  of  unconsciousness  caused  by  the  shock  of
    infliction of a burning hot instrument on his arm, its  duration  could
    not be predicted.  When the appellant had further burns inflicted  that
    could have woken him up.  He was burned at least a further  four  times
    which would have required at least ten minutes.  This led him to  think
    something else  must  have  happened  to  the  appellant  to  make  him
    unconscious for that period of time.  The fact that he was  in  a  poor
    state of health, with a poor diet, had lost weight and had not eaten or
    had fluids could possibly explain it.  A blow to the head could explain
    it, although that was not the appellant's account.  Pure shock  through
    pain was not enough to explain the appellant remaining unconscious.

148. Asked whether drugs other  than  a  general  anaesthetic  could  ensure
    immobilisation during infliction of such scarring, Dr Zapata-Bravo said
    he did not think any morphine or heroin or analgesic  would  have  been
    sufficient.  Restraint whilst he was still conscious would  have  meant
    his muscles would have contracted violently and  the  scars  would  not
    have been as precise as they were.

Dr Joy Odili: written report

149. Dr Odili is a Consultant Plastic Surgeon based at St George's  Hospital
    in Tooting and Queen Mary's Hospital in Roehampton.  She is an Honorary
    Senior Lecturer at St George's Hospital and her teaching roles  include
    delivering the  plastic  surgery  curriculum  to  undergraduates.   She
    routinely deals with issues around wound healing  and  burns.   She  is
    often called to comment on  wounds  particularly  where  non-accidental
    injury is being considered.   On  13  September  2013  the  appellant's
    solicitors  asked  her  to  prepare  a  report  addressing  the  issues
    identified in the Tribunal directions and "[i]n addition. 1. Could  you
    kindly assess the scarring on the Appellant's  body  and  provide  your
    expert opinion on how the scarring was caused  with  reference  to  the
    Istanbul Protocol addressing each scar/area  of  scarring  individually
    together with detailed reason for those conclusions".

150. In her written report of  24  September  2013  she  explains  that  she
    examined the appellant's  scars  on  10  and  24  September  2013.  Her
    examination of the appellant revealed that he  had  two  scars  on  his
    right arm and six scars on his back.  Her opinion  is  that  all  these
    were caused by the same object and all were typical of a burn  "with  a
    heated rod".  She considered the fact that the scars on the appellant's
    arm were  slightly  wider  and  darker  to  indicate  that  these  were
    inflicted first when the heated rod was hottest.

151. She had considered but ruled out  that  these  scars  could  have  been
    caused by a stain  or  by  skin  diseases  or  by  burns  sustained  in
    childhood or by cuts or lacerations.   They  had  not  been  surgically
    treated.  They could not have been the result of  skin  grafts  because
    that left tell-tale signs of which there were none.  She considered the
    scars were  not  consistent  with  sports  injuries.   As  regards  the
    possibility that they  were  work-related,  she  thought  that  as  the
    appellant worked with fire and molten gold, it was  feasible  he  would
    have sustained burn injuries at work but the pattern, distribution  and
    location of the burns made this highly unlikely.  Clinically she  could
    not tell if these burns were caused as part of military training.

152. Whilst it was feasible that the scars on  his  right  upper  arm  could
    have been inflicted by the appellant, he would not have  been  able  to
    inflict the burns to his own back.

153. Dr Odili also  considers  whether  the  appellant's  scars  could  have
    arisen by accident.  "The client reports that his scars are a result of
    torture. They could only have arisen by  accident  if  he  was  pressed
    against a heated metal rail such as a radiator with multiple horizontal
    rails.  However the appearance of the client's scars are not consistent
    with this theory". The burn scars were not perfectly parallel, also  if
    one touched a very hot radiator instinct and pain makes you pull  away;
    the time and contact between skin and metal would be too short to leave
    such scars.

154. As regards their age, the appearance of the scars was typical  of  burn
    scars more than two years old; "The exact age of the  scars  cannot  be
    determined beyond this".  Burn scars fade with  time:  the  scars  were
    darker in the 2011 photographs and paler now.  The scars  on  his  body
    were not consistent with any types of injury other than a burn.

155. The fact that the burn scars  were  so  similar  with  no  blurring  or
    smudging indicated to her that the appellant must have been immobilised
    or unconscious when they were delivered.

156.  In  reply  to  specific  written  questions  raised  by  the  Tribunal
    following an earlier case management hearing, Dr Odili states  that  it
    is not possible clinically to differentiate between scars inflicted  by
    torture and scars inflicted by consent.  Burns caused by  torture  tend
    to be deep and the  torturer  persists  until  the  desired  effect  is
    achieved.

157. In response to a written question whether it was possible to  determine
    from the nature of the scarring itself what if any medical intervention
    or palliative care measures had been provided to  enable  recovery,  Dr
    Odili states that in general the appearance and texture of  burn  scars
    can be modified by such measures for any  period  up  until  two  years
    after the burning.

158. As regard whether it is possible to diagnose with  any  precision  with
    reference to the nature of the scarring  when  it  occurred,  Dr  Odili
    states it can take up to two  years  for  a  scar  to  heal  perfectly.
    Therefore one can tell new scars (pink and  raised)  from  scars  older
    than two years (pale and flat).

Dr Joy Odili: oral evidence

159. Dr Odili said that from the time a burn was inflicted she  had  between
    eighteen months to two years to make an impact as  a  plastic  surgeon.
    It is not possible to tell, looking at old burn scarring,  whether  the
    patient had palliative care at the time.  The appellant would have been
    very prone to infection - he was very lucky and may have been saved  by
    the fact he was allowed to wash daily.

160. Dr Odili said beatings  delivered  to  the  same  area  as  fresh  burn
    scarring would alter the healing process but  not  the  nature  of  the
    scarring, so that healing took up to four months.

161.  Dr  Odili  said  she  had  dealt  with   patients   who   had   tribal
    scarification, and also with patients who had tattoo scarring.  She had
    dealt with patients who had deliberately burnt themselves.  It was rare
    for her to deal with burn scarring inflicted by torture.   As  she  had
    said in her written report, she was sure the appellant's scarring could
    not have been caused accidentally.

162. Having looked at the photos taken of the appellant's scarring  in  2011
    she said that from the coloration of some (pink)  she  considered  they
    had been inflicted within a period of two years before that.

Professor Cornelius Katona: written report

163. Professor Katona is Honorary Professor,  Department  of  Mental  Health
    Sciences, University College London, Emeritus Professor of  Psychiatry,
    University of Kent and also Medical Director, HBF. From 1998 until July
    2003 he was Dean, Royal College  of  Psychiatrists.  He  has  published
    widely and held many teaching posts.  He has  been  involved  with  the
    Medical Justice Network since 2006. He currently chairs a Royal College
    of Psychiatrists working party on the writing of asylum and immigration
    related psychiatric reports for the courts.

164. Professor Katona states that the IP contemplates that doctors  consider
    the possibility of fabrication of the clinical  picture  both  physical
    and psychological, referring to paragraphs 105(f), 287(vi) and 290.

165.  His  report  seeks  to  address  the  psychological  aspects  and  the
    techniques used by psychiatrists in assessing the mental state  of  the
    patient.  The main tool for doing this  is  the  psychiatric  interview
    which is wide-ranging in scope.  The mental state examination  involves
    detailed description of the patient's  appearance,  behaviour,  speech,
    mood, thought content, any abnormal experiences and  an  assessment  of
    cognitive function.  The interview is often supplemented by a  physical
    examination.

166. In broad terms the idea that mental illness is easy to fabricate  is  a
    misconception.  Any pretence cannot usually  be  sustained  and  "real"
    symptoms or "real" elements in the causation of  the  illness  tend  to
    reveal  themselves  in  the  context  of   sustained   and   supportive
    interviewing.

167. Whilst it is crucial within a psychiatric interview  to  establish  and
    maintain rapport and be non-judgmental, the  psychiatrist  will  attend
    closely to the patient's behaviour and, as conveyed by paragraph 290 of
    the IP, any apparent inconsistencies (such as exaggerated  distress  or
    apparent indifference) will contribute  significantly  to  the  overall
    conclusions drawn.  They will be gently and non-judgmentally  explored.
    Any conclusions within a psychiatric report will involve  consideration
    of  all  relevant  information  and   in   particular    any   apparent
    discrepancies.

168. Torture survivors may have difficulty in  giving  specific  details  of
    their torture  due  to  the  trauma  it  causes  associated  with  high
    emotional arousal, impaired memory, mental illnesses such as depression
    and  Post  Traumatic  Stress  Disorder  (PTSD).   Some  patients   have
    difficulty in disclosing what happened to them because of  feelings  of
    guilt or shame.

169. Where there had been a previous finding that  the  claimed  events  had
    been fabricated, the medical expert had then to  consider  whether  the
    illness may provide an explanation for any  feigning  or  exaggeration,
    whether the illness may be real  despite  the  feigned  or  exaggerated
    claims, and whether the finding of feigning or exaggeration might  have
    been mistaken.  "It is not always possible in psychiatric  practice  to
    be sure about the aetiology (causation) of illness  in  the  particular
    context of PTSD.  The  psychiatrist  must  also  consider  whether  the
    illness may have been  caused  by  stressors  other  than  the  reasons
    initially stated.  Particular care is taken by psychiatrists to  assess
    for feigned symptoms or history."

Professor Cornelius Katona: oral evidence

170. Professor Katona said that over  the  past  30  years  he  had  written
    nearing two thousand medical reports, a third on patients from cultures
    other  than our own in the UK.  He said it was  important  for  medical
    report writers to  make  an  overall  clinical  assessment  integrating
    physical  and  psychological  aspects.   In  a  psychiatric  assessment
    doctors do not base their assessments just on what patients say.   Just
    as with NHS doctors,  HBF  doctors  writing  reports  had  to  consider
    whether a patient was feigning symptoms.  It was good  practice  for  a
    doctor to make explicit that he or she had  considered  feigning  as  a
    possibility.  Feigning was difficult  to  maintain,  as  patients  were
    unlikely to have the detailed knowledge to enable them to do that.  The
    starting point should always be the  clinical  features  of  the  case.
    Consistency between the injury or trauma and the patient's  attribution
    was medical consistency.

171. Professor Katona  said  the  IP  provides  guidance  on  best  practice
    devised by a very large committee of experts.

172. Regarding whether the first infliction of  branding  on  the  appellant
    would have kept him unconscious, he did not understand  unconsciousness
    to be an absolute; there was  a  continuum  between  consciousness  and
    unconsciousness.  Psychological trauma could play a part.  Such  events
    could affect memory and cause severe traumatisation and PTSD  may  vary
    over time.  Clinical manifestations may be delayed.

173. Asked by Mr Duffy whether  a  person  could  be  traumatised  by  SIBP,
    Professor Katona said  he  had  not  seen  such  a  case,  but  it  was
    plausible.  Patients undergoing operations in which the anaesthetic had
    failed had been known to suffer trauma.

174. Asked if people living in war zones were more likely  to  suffer  PTSD,
    Professor Katona said that was likely but people vary in  their  degree
    of resilience.

175. Stories people have been told to use by smugglers and traffickers  tend
    not to be clinically convincing.

176. If he had doubts about the veracity of a patient's  stay  he  tried  to
    express that in the interview itself, with  sensitivity  especially  if
    the case involved sexual trauma, where patients  may  not  be  able  to
    disclose the truth for some time.  The doctor had to combine being non-
    judgmental and fostering trust with being critical and probing.  He did
    not start with any absolute assumptions.  If he was satisfied a patient
    had feigned symptoms he may well decide not to make a report.

177. Psychiatrists used structured interviews to help differentiate  between
    PTSD and, say, biological depression.

178. Professor Katona said he had never seen  SIBP;  although  he  had  seen
    ritual or tribal scarring; he could not recall if he  had  seen  tattoo
    scarring.

179. In reply to questions from  the  panel  Professor  Katona  said  issues
    about states of unconsciousness caused by fainting in reaction to acute
    pain were on the edges of his experience, although he was familiar with
    the Glasgow coma scale [a neurological  scale  that  aims  to  give  an
    objective reading of varying states of unconsciousness].

180. He was primarily concerned with making a diagnosis that  was  reliable.



Dr Sonia Allam: written report

181. It became clear during the hearing that there  were  questions  arising
    relating to whether there are different levels of unconsciousness.  The
    parties agreed that this required an opinion from an  anaesthetist  and
    the Tribunal gave directions to facilitate this. A report by  Dr  Sonia
    Allam dated 17 March 2014 followed.

182. Dr Allam is a Consultant Anaesthetist at Forth  Valley  Royal  Hospital
    and has specialised in this area of medicine for  over  10  years.  Her
    report first addresses the question  of  whether  it  was  possible  to
    achieve a state of  unconsciousness  similar  to  that  existing  under
    anaesthesia by administering heroin or morphine so  that  burns  and/or
    scars inflicted upon someone would not  cause  pain  or  discomfort  or
    discernible  flinching  of  the  muscles.  She  said  that  to  attempt
    deliberately to achieve  "general  anaesthesia"  using  diamorphine  or
    morphine would  be  extremely  dangerous  and  difficult  even  for  an
    experienced clinician. Further, such a state could not be sustained for
    any length of time.

183. By contrast, when anaesthetists induced planned general anaesthesia  in
    medical practice, numerous mandatory safety measures are in  place.  Dr
    Allam considers that attempts using alcohol would be more difficult  to
    achieve but would carry the same life-threatening dangers.   The  sixth
    question she was asked was, "If someone faints from ill treatment,  how
    likely would he/she [to] regain consciousness  if  the  same  pain  was
    inflicted again?" Her reply was that a "faint" or vasovagal syncope can
    be caused by any painful or unpleasant stimuli and she  had  experience
    of patients who had experienced this in  the  course  of  insertion  of
    intravenous cannulae and epidurals:

         "Following lying down, consciousness  was  regained  very  quickly,
         usually within  seconds.  I  believe  in  the  above  situation  in
         question any vasovagal syncope would be likely be short  lived  and
         self-terminate once lying down, which is usually the case,  as  any
         upright individual would fall unless impeded.  Further  appropriate
         response to a painful and unpleasant stimulation in the  individual
         would then likely  be  seen  again.  Other  factors,  such  as  the
         health/physical state of the individual,  could  affect  the  speed
         with  which  they  regain  consciousness  or  could  increase   the
         propensity for further vasovagal response".

The appellant's GP

184. Although not an expert  this  is  a  convenient  point  to  record  the
    evidence of the appellant's GP. The appellant produced  a  letter  from
    his GP stating that the appellant came to see  him  on  13  April  2011
    complaining of lower back pain.  He had recently arrived from Sri Lanka
    on 24 February 2011.  He alleged he was subjected to  ill-treatment  by
    the army in Sri Lanka.  He alleged that he had four burn marks  on  his
    back due to hot iron rods being applied and was also hit by the butt of
    a rifle in his back.  "On examination he was noted  to  have  four  dry
    burn marks across the back which were horizontal which  may  have  been
    due to iron rods being applied.  There were no signs  of  infection  or
    inflammation.   He  was  given  a  combination  of  topical  and   oral
    analgesia.  There was  no  record  of  subsequent  attendances  at  the
    surgery."

Other Medical Documentation

185. The evidence submitted to the Tribunal included  Medical  Investigation
    Documentation of Torture: A Handbook for Health Professionals,  written
    by Michael Peel and Noam Lubell with Jonathan Beynon, 2005 published by
    the Human Rights Centre, University of Essex, Shedding light on a  dark
    practice: Using the Istanbul  Protocol  to  document  torture,  a  2009
    Handbook produced  by  the  International  Rehabilitation  Council  for
    Torture Victims.





Background Country Evidence

COI reports

186. Several of the background reports, including the COI Bulletin dated  30
    November 2011 document  the  use  by  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  of
    torture. Several include reference to one of  the  methods  of  torture
    used being burning  with  hot  metal  instruments.   For  example,  the
    Country of Origin Information Report for Sri Lanka dated November  2010
    ("COI") at 8.42 quotes from The USSD report 2009,  which  contains  the
    following reference to torture methods in Sri Lanka at this time.

         "Civil society groups and  former  prisoners  reported  on  several
         torture cases. For  example,  former  detainees  of  the  Terrorist
         Investigation Division (TID) at Boosa  Prison  in  Galle  confirmed
         earlier reports of  torture  methods  used  there.  These  included
         beatings, often with cricket  bats,  iron  bars,  or  rubber  hoses
         filled with sand; electric shock;  suspending  individuals  by  the
         wrists or feet in contorted positions, abrading knees across  rough
         cement; burning with metal objects and cigarettes;  genital  abuse;
         blows to the ears; asphyxiation with plastic bags containing  chili
         pepper mixed with gasoline; and near-drowning.  Detainees  reported
         broken bones and other  serious  injuries  as  a  result  of  their
         mistreatment." (Emphasis added)

187. At  8.39 the COI quotes the EU report of October 2009 as follows:

         "International  reports  indicate  continual  and   well-documented
         allegations of widespread torture and  ill-treatment  committed  by
         State forces (police and military) particularly  in  situations  of
         detention. The UN Special Rapporteur on Torture has expressed shock
         at the severity of the torture employed by the army, which includes
         burning with soldering irons and suspension of detainees  by  their
         thumbs." (Emphasis added)

188. Paragraph 3.9.17  of the OGN v14 issued July 2013 records that the  FFT
    report, "Out of the Silence: New Evidence of  Ongoing  Torture  in  Sri
    Lanka", released on 7 November 2011 noted that high levels of  scarring
    [based on a data set of '35 medico-legal reports (MLRs) prepared by FFT
    clinicians in relation to clients, most of whom are asylum  seekers  or
    refugees' in the UK] could reflect a policy of  permanently  'branding'
    victims not  only  to  inflict  long-term  psychological  and  physical
    damage, but also to ensure that the individual may be easily identified
    in future as having been suspected of links to the LTTE.

189. In the preceding paragraph (3.9.16) it is noted that the  British  High
    Commission observed in a letter of 5 January 2012 that whilst  scarring
    has been used in the past  to  identify  suspects,  this  practice  has
    either ceased or is used less frequently.

190. Elsewhere the OGN  refers  to  various  sources  stating  that  torture
    continues to be used by the authorities in Sri Lanka.

191. We also need to note that  the July  2011  COI   at  8.35   stated  the
    following:

             "A letter from the British High Commission (BHC) Colombo  dated
             11 May 2011, reported:
             -I asked the Senior Government Intelligence officials if  there
             was any truth in allegations that the  Sri  Lankan  authorities
             were torturing suspects. They denied  this  was  the  case  and
             added that many Sri Lankans who had claimed asylum  abroad  had
             inflicted wounds on themselves in  order  to  create  scars  to
             support their stories.
             -[A Colombo based human rights worker] added that it  was  well
             known that many persons who were held in IDP camps at  the  end
             of the conflict scarred themselves  so  that  on  release  they
             could make allegations  that  the  Sri  Lankan  government  had
             tortured them."

However, by the time of the later COI report for March 2012, that  paragraph
had been removed. We note that in the skeleton argument of  the  HBF  it  is
said that that passage  in  the  COI  for  2011  had  been  withdrawn  under
pressure from the Chief Inspector of the UKBA (John Vine) and from NGOs.

Report by Appathurai Vinayagamoorthy, LLB (Col)

192. In an undated but seemingly recent  report  Mr  Vinayagamoorthy  stated
    that he was an Attorney at Law in Sri Lanka. He was also an MP  elected
    as one of the Tamil National Alliance candidates in 2010.  As a  lawyer
    representing detainees under prevention of terrorism legislation he had
    an opportunity to handle the case of torture survivors in Sri Lanka  on
    a day to day basis. Torture perpetrated by state actors within both the
    military and police has continued in Sri Lanka after the conflict ended
    in May 2009. The authorities had a culture of branding  going  back  to
    1983. Research showed that people were subjected to a range of  torture
    methods including deliberate burns with  cigarettes  and  heated  metal
    instruments. His report gives several examples of cases  he  had  dealt
    with. They included a Mr KT and Mr JJ and Mr SM who are  said  to  have
    been severely tortured and left with permanent scars of  burning.   His
    report concludes:

         "In my opinion, burning with hot metal objects  (branding)  is  the
         second most common method of torture among the above, which  I  see
         on a regular basis...This particular method is used for a number of
         reasons. Firstly, it is the easy way to cause severe  pain  without
         any special apparatus. Secondly, burning with iron  rods  or  other
         objects  will  leave  permanent  scarring  and  this  is  used   as
         identification technique by the authorities. This  is  deliberately
         used to humiliate the victim and to identify the victim  easily  in
         the future. This also prevents the victim from  escaping  from  the
         detention as this scarring is permanent and visible.  I  have  seen
         approximately 1500 of my clients who were burned in a way that left
         permanent marks. In my observations, although the size  and  number
         of the burns differ from person to person, these marks resemble the
         tiger stripes. It is widely said that the police deliberately  want
         to brand the victim with tiger stripes, so  that  they  can  easily
         identify him or her in the future".

193. Having  stated  that  Sri  Lankan  medical  experts  did  not  properly
    document such injuries caused by  torture  for  fear  of  getting  into
    trouble with the security forces,  his  report  goes  on  to  say  that
    nonetheless in some cases medical experts:

           "[I] have examined and  have  concluded  that  these  scars  were
         consistent of [sic] torture account. Also the medical experts could
         not find any other alternative method of causation. I personally do
         not have any reason to believe that these branding scars could have
         caused by any other means. This is mainly because I have seen  such
         scars during my prison visits and there is no way my clients  would
         have sustained these burns,  other  than  torture,  whilst  in  the
         detention".



SUBMISSIONS

Written submissions

194. The respondent's skeleton argument rehearsed the  reasons  for  refusal
    given by the respondent in her  decision  letter  and  then  turned  to
    comment on the new evidence relied on in recent witness statements from
    the appellant and his family members. The respondent submitted that  it
    was not credible that the appellant had been told by his father in late
    July 2013 that the Sri Lankan authorities were looking for him and that
    they were aware of his presence in the UK. It was  not  accepted  there
    would have been no other contact between the appellant or his  brothers
    and their parents. The respondent also challenged the appellant's claim
    in his witness statement to have had no  reason  to  leave  Sri  Lanka,
    given that prior to his illegal entry and application for asylum he had
    made no less than 3 applications to leave Sri Lanka and study abroad in
    the UK and his two brothers had also sought to migrate abroad.  In  the
    alternative the respondent submitted that even if  the  appellant  were
    found credible as to his activities for the LTTE in Sri Lanka, he would
    still not be at risk on return in the  light  of  the  current  country
    guidance  case  of  GJ.  In  relation  to  the  medical  evidence,  the
    respondent highlighted the difference of  opinion  between  Dr  Zapata-
    Bravo and Dr Odili over the dating of scarring over 6 months  old.  The
    respondent reminded the Tribunal that a finding  by  a  medical  report
    identifying scarring consistent  with  a  claimant's  account  was  not
    binding on a tribunal judge. Albeit in general unlikely that  a  person
    would undergo scarring to establish an opportunity to remain in the UK,
    it remained open to a judge to conclude that a claimant  has  undergone
    scarring to support a false claim.

195. Counsel for the appellant submitted that the medical evidence  produced
    in support of  the  appellant's  claim  was  capable  of  amounting  to
    independent corroborative evidence that he had been tortured.  Dr Odili
    had concluded that his scarring was "typical" of  being  burnt  with  a
    metal rod as claimed.  She expressly  considered  possible  alternative
    causes, including employment, self-infliction and infliction by a third
    party with consent.  Whilst she concluded that it  was  not  clinically
    possible to differentiate between scars caused  by  torture  and  those
    with consent of the individual, she was adamant  that  if  carried  out
    with consent, it would have been necessary for him  to  be  immobilised
    due to the extent of the pain caused.  The written submission states:-

         "It is submitted that this report, based upon a clinical assessment
         of the appellant's scars and his history, is a report which  should
         be accorded considerable weight.  No evidence has been  adduced  to
         displace this report and there is no reliable evidence  that  there
         is a practice of self-infliction or infliction by proxy  of  scars.
         Further, the physical evidence  taken  together  with  the  medical
         evidence produced from a doctor with considerable expertise and the
         background  evidence  of  torture  meted  out  by  the  Sri  Lankan
         authorities of detainees (a fact accepted by the respondent  in  GJ
         (Sri Lanka) is such that applying the lower standard of  proof  the
         appellant's account of being detained and tortured is credible."

196. In relation to the evidence the appellant gave of being  tortured,  his
    account that he was beaten almost every day and or every two  to  three
    days was consistent with that which he gave to Dr Odili and Dr  Zapata-
    Bravo.  The written submissions stated:  "[T]he  Tribunal  is  reminded
    that the appellant was ill-treated  in  detention  erratically  between
    2009-2011 and the appellant's evidence is that  there  was  no  regular
    frequency to his pattern of ill-treatment."

197. It was submitted that the appellant had been able to  give  a  detailed
    account of being burnt in detention.  The assertions that there  is  no
    background evidence to demonstrate that the Sri Lankan authorities  use
    heated metal implements to burn and/or brand detainees (which  was  one
    of the reasons relied on by the respondent in her  refusal  letter  for
    finding him not credible), is irrational and is completely at odds with
    the background evidence.

198. Regarding the written submissions by the HBF, it will be convenient  to
    refer to relevant passages when we turn to analyse the medical evidence
    below.

Oral Submissions

199. For the respondent Mr Duffy's submissions on the  general  issues  were
    brief He  urged  the  Tribunal  to  apply  the  guidance  given  in  AJ
    (Cameroon) [2007] EWCA Civ 373 which at [11] made clear that the burden
    of proof rested on the claimant to show that his scars were  caused  by
    torture and that it was not necessary for the decision-maker to do more
    than decide whether that burden had been discharged.  If the  decision-
    maker concluded it had not been discharged it was not incumbent on  him
    to prove what he considered the actual cause  of  the  scarring.   That
    would be an unduly speculative enterprise anyway because such  evidence
    as there was about the practice of SIBP in the context of Sri Lanka was
    little more than hearsay.

200. Mr Duffy said he agreed with HBF that SIBP was unlikely to arise as  an
    issue except in rare cases, in particular where the  evidence,  medical
    and/or non-medical,  indicated  a  person's  injuries  could  not  have
    happened in the way claimed.  Such was the situation in the case of  BV
    where it was found that at the time when the claimant said  he  was  in
    Sri Lanka being tortured he was in the UK: see above paragraph 11.

201. Mr Duffy said the medical answers the  Tribunal  had  received  to  its
    three  questions  highlighted  the  limits  to  the  medical  expertise
    available to decision-makers in scarring cases.  To the first  question
    the clear answer was there was no way of telling the difference between
    scars inflicted by torturers and scars that were SIBP: It was likely  a
    proxy would try and replicate what was done by  torturers,  although  a
    proxy might be in a position to achieve more precise scars (because the
    patient would be immobilised).

202. To the second question the equally clear answer was that there  was  no
    way of telling whether after the scarring had been inflicted there  had
    been palliative treatment.  If there had been surgery  on  skin  grafts
    they could show up, but lesser forms of medical intervention would  not
    be discernible.

203. As to the third question regarding the period of  time  after  which  a
    scar could not be dated, he thought that  whilst  the  answer  was  not
    entirely clear-cut (Dr Odili saying two years; Dr Arnold one  year  and
    Dr Zapata-Bravo  six  months)  he  was  prepared  to  accept  that  the
    differences in the range between six months and  two  years,  reflected
    the different contexts in which medical  specialists  worked.   In  the
    case of Dr Odili, she would normally be seeing patients  shortly  after
    they had suffered burns.  In the typical case of a doctor asked to do a
    medical examination of an asylum seeker, six months  to  one  year  was
    more likely to be the medical norm.

204. In relation to the evidence given by Mr  Rhys  Jones  and  the  medical
    witnesses, Mr Duffy said that he did not in broad terms take issue with
    any of it.  In broad terms the Home  Office  would  attach  significant
    weight to reports from doctors working for FFT and the HBF  because  it
    was known these organisations had good working practices.   In  respect
    of Professor Katona's evidence,  he  thought  it  significant  that  it
    reaffirmed that doctors in their reports  are  concerned  with  medical
    plausibility, not with the wider issue of the plausibility of an asylum
    claim.  He considered that when doctors were  asked  to  write  reports
    addressing a person's psychological condition, that  could  be  a  very
    formidable task if they came from a country like Sri  Lanka  which  had
    experienced civil war.  That could make assessing  the  cause  of  PTSD
    very difficult.

205. For the HBF Mr Yeo said that it was significant that having  originally
    maintained in her  refusal  decision  that  there  was  evidence  of  a
    practice of SIBP by Sri Lankan asylum seekers, the  respondent  through
    Mr Duffy had accepted there was not a shred of admissible  evidence  to
    show that.  It had not originally been the Home Office case  that  SIBP
    was an issue in this case; that had only arisen as a possibility  as  a
    result of the FtT assessment;  proceedings  since  then  had  shown  it
    should never have been an issue.

206. As regards the age of scars, Mr Yeo submitted that there  was  no  real
    difference between the witnesses and to the extent that there  was,  he
    thought (like Mr Duffy) that  was  likely  to  be  a  function  of  the
    different context in which doctors in different fields operated.

207. The core HBF position, said Mr Yeo, was that the  decision  makers  had
    to look at the evidence in accordance with IP  guidelines  and  not  to
    speculate.

208. Recognition of the different functions of doctors  and  decision-makers
    should not obscure the fact  that  a  medical  report  was  capable  of
    strongly corroborating a claimant's account, as the European  Court  of
    Human Rights (ECHR) made clear in  R.C.  v  Sweden  App.  no.  41827/07
    judgment 9 March 2010.

209. The HBF was particularly  concerned  that  decision-makers  should  not
    disregard medical reports just because they did not  emanate  from  HBF
    and FFT doctors or did not match the "gold standard" of the IP.  It was
    noteworthy that in R.C. v Sweden the ECtHR attached important weight to
    a medical report even though it was not IP-compliant.

210. Adverting to the scenario mentioned by Mr  Duffy,  where  an  appellant
    was found to be in the UK when he claimed  to  be  in  his  country  of
    origin being tortured, it may simply be that  the  Secretary  of  State
    and/or the judge was wrong.  There could be all sorts  of  reasons  why
    such an asylum-seeker might not have told the truth.

211. Ms Jegarajah, also instructed by HBF,  pointed to  the  recognition  of
    the importance of the IP in UK case law, SA (Somalia) [2006]  EWCA  Civ
    1302 in particular.  A central plank was  that  decision-makers  should
    look at an appellant's account in the round  and  not  compartmentalise
    the medical evidence.  A holistic approach also meant, in  relation  to
    assessment of physical scars, not simply analysing each  in  isolation,
    but making an overall assessment.

212. Another key plank was the  principle  established  in  AM,  R  (on  the
    application of the Secretary of State for the Home  Department)  [2013]
    EWCA Civ 521, that a medical report is independent evidence and  cannot
    be rejected just because it bases  itself  on  a  patient's  narrative.
    Furthermore, it was a misconception to think that doctors  uncritically
    accepted the patient's narrative.   If  the  HBF  decided  a  patient's
    account was false, either it would not endorse  it  or  not  produce  a
    report.  This case afforded a very useful opportunity for the  Tribunal
    to develop the case law further in the light of the important  evidence
    from leading experts.  She drew attention  to  the  Joint  Presidential
    Guidance Note No 2 of 2013 on Child,  Vulnerable  Adult  and  Sensitive
    Appellant Guidance.

213. It was hoped that the Tribunal would  recognise  that  just  because  a
    medical report did  not  deal  with  both  physical  and  psychological
    sequelae did not mean it was not creditworthy.

214. Ms Jegarajah asked the Tribunal to take cognisance  of  the  procedural
    fairness aspects to cases in which a  decision-maker  considered  there
    was a real possibility of SIBP.  If there was considered to be  such  a
    real possibility, that should be put to the claimant.  If one looked to
    see the genesis of the suggestion that SIBP was  occurring,  it  turned
    out, in the Sri Lankan context, to be a statement  by  the  Sri  Lankan
    Government and a hearsay account of what had been said by one  Colombo-
    based human rights worker.  It was wrong that such dubious  speculation
    should be treated seriously.  If a case worker  or  Presenting  Officer
    had concerns about SIBP, these should be put to  the  claimant.   If  a
    judge lent credence to such a scenario, that  would  be  wrong  in  law
    because  it  would  amount  to  taking   account   of   an   irrelevant
    consideration.  Certainly it would be wrong to treat such a concern  as
    a reason for marginalising a medical report finding that  scarring  was
    caused by torture.

215. Ms Jegarajah submitted that existing case law indicated that  to  treat
    SIBP as a serious possibility in the absence of any evidence of such  a
    practice happening  would  be  to  elevate  what  the  Tribunal  in  RR
    (Challenging evidence) Sri Lanka [2010] UKUT 000274 (IAC) described  as
    "cynicism" over rational assessment.  The focus had to be on  what  had
    probably, not conceivably, caused the scarring.

216. It was imperative for decision-makers to bear in  mind  the  importance
    of COI for what light it shed on likely causes of scarring.  In the Sri
    Lankan context, there was evidence that the Sri Lankan authorities used
    particular methods of torture the  second  most  common  of  which  was
    scarring by hot metal instruments.  There was no  basis  therefore  for
    speculation about SIBP "torture  factories";  the  "torture  factories"
    were to be found in  the  detention  centres  run  by  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities!  If a judge has evidence that torture often takes the form
    of scarring by branding and that a claimant bears burn scars,  then  he
    or she ought to accept the claimant has been a victim of torture.   She
    highlighted a number of passages from the COIS report, paragraphs 8.33,
    8.35, 8.47 in particular.

217. Like Mr Yeo, Ms Jegarajah sought support for the position  advanced  by
    the HBF from the ECtHR case of R.C. v Sweden.   This  established,  she
    submitted,  that  if  a  claimant  submitted  a  medical  report,  that
    established a prima facie case and it was for the government to  dispel
    any doubts about that.  Once the appellant  discharges  the  burden  of
    proof, the onus  shifted  to  the  government.   That  stood  in  stark
    contrast to the position of the Secretary of State which appeared to be
    that the claimant had to disprove an outlandish alternative to the  one
    identified by the medical report.  The fact that there might  be  other
    possible causes should not matter if there was strong medical  evidence
    that torture was the probable cause.

218. Ms Jegarajah reiterated points made  by  Mr  Yeo  in  relation  to  the
    evidence given by Mr Rhys Jones and the medical witnesses.   She  urged
    the Tribunal not to surmise whether it was likely the appellant's scars
    would have become infected which might have been expected to make their
    outline less regular.  It was difficult clinically to identify  whether
    there had been infection retrospectively.

219. Like Ms Bayati, Mr Paramjorthy on behalf of  the  appellant  associated
    himself with the submissions made by  Counsel  for  the  HBF.   It  was
    highly significant to the assessment to be made of the medical evidence
    that the Home Office OGN for July 2013 itself contained  references  to
    hot metal instruments being a common form of torture used  by  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities.

220.  In  response  to  questions  from  the  Tribunal,  Mr  Duffy  for  the
    respondent said he accepted that if a decision-maker  formed  the  view
    that there was potentially no other explanation, he or she  should  put
    that concern to the claimant.  However, on the  principles  set  out  a
    [11] of AJ (Cameroon), a decision-maker  was  entitled  to  conclude  a
    claimant had not proved his claim to have been tortured without  having
    to make a specific finding on whether the  scars  were  the  result  of
    SIBP.

221. In an email of 19 March Mr Duffy drew attention to the answer given  by
    Dr Allam to a sixth question, which seemed he said, "to  point  to  the
    appellant's profound unconsciousness in response to the initial burn as
    being contrary to this anaesthetist's experience".  He  submitted  that
    this was a factor which the panel should take into  consideration  when
    assessing the credibility of the appellant's claim to have  passed  out
    and been unconscious throughout the whole burning experience.



DISCUSSION

Istanbul Protocol (IP)

222. The HBF submitted that the Tribunal should  regard  the  IP  as  having
    attained  the  status  of  customary  international  law,  based  on  a
    statement by Dean Claudio Grossman  (current  Chair  of  the  Committee
    against Torture), "The normative value of the Istanbul Protocol", in  S
    Kjaer and A Kjaerum (eds), Shedding light on a dark practice: Using the
    Istanbul Protocol to  document  torture  (International  Rehabilitation
    Council  for  Torture  Victims  (IRCT)),  2009.  Bearing  in  mind  the
    requirements for the creation of customary international  law,  as  set
    out by the International Court of  Justice  in  North  Sea  Continental
    Shelf Cases, 20 February 1969, ICR Rep.1969, 3 paragraphs 70-74, such a
    submission is fraught with difficulties. As  analysed  by  Wallace  and
    Wylie in "The Reception of Expert Medical Evidence  in  Refugee  Status
    Determination", IJRL, Vol 25, No.4 pp755, these  range  from  the  fact
    that the IP does not itself purport to impose legal  standards  to  the
    fact that the UN Committee against Torture has noted that  there  is  a
    lack of knowledge about the Protocol  and  "very  few"  countries  were
    using it. Even in  the  context  of  European  state  practice  the  EU
    institutions chose in 2011 not to proceed  with  an  amendment  to  the
    recast Procedures Directive, which would have required the IP to be one
    of the instruments that should inform the  "national  measures  dealing
    with identification and documentation of symptoms and signs of  torture
    or other serious acts of physical or mental violence, including acts of
    sexual violence, in procedures covered by  [the]  Directive".  We  find
    that the case for regarding the IP as having the  status  of  customary
    international law has not been made out.

223. At the same time, the fact that the  IP  was  mentioned  in  the  draft
    recast of the Procedures Directive, coupled with the endorsement  given
    to the IP by the ECtHR in cases such as Bati and Others  v  Turkey  App
    nos. 33097/96 and 57834/00, 3 June 2004, are just two of  a  number  of
    indices showing that the IP is becoming more embedded in the  framework
    of international protection. As stated by Wallace and Wylie:

         "...irrespective of legal uncertainties as to the normative  status
         of the Istanbul Protocol, it undoubtedly does  represent  a  global
         consensus as to standards and principles for the investigation  and
         documentation of torture".

224. In the UK recognition of its central role has come both from the  Upper
    Tribunal, the courts and  the  Home  Office.  Accurately  encapsulating
    this,  the Home Office Policy Instructions (which we consider it useful
    to append:  see Annex A)  state at 3.3 that:

         "The Protocol, the central importance of which is accepted  by  the
         UK courts in the asylum context, makes  clear  that  reports  which
         document and evaluate a claim of  torture  for  asylum  proceedings
         need only provide 'a relatively low level of proof of  torture  [or
         serious harm]'.Therefore, the [FFT and HBF] report  in  support  of
         the  applicant's  claim  of  torture  or  serious  harm  cannot  be
         dismissed or little or no weight attached to them when the  overall
         assessment of the credibility of the claim is made."





The Tribunal's questions

225. To the three questions we posed at the case management stage it can  be
    seen from our earlier summary of the evidence that the answers given by
    the medical experts were as follows:-

Distinguishability between scars inflicted by torture  and  scars  inflicted
by SIBP

226.  In  answer  to  the  first  question  ("whether  it  is  possible   to
    differentiate by any known means of physical examination or  invitation
    between burns scarring caused by hot rods or wires  or  similar  heated
    instruments including cigarettes that has been brought about by torture
    from scarring caused by the above methods that has come  about  at  the
    invitation  of  the  person  affected"),  the  medical  witnesses  were
    unanimous that there was no clinical  way  of  differentiating  between
    scars inflicted by torture and scars inflicted by SIBP. Mr Rhys Jones's
    evidence made a similar point when he said that the medical  literature
    was clear that there was no  scientific  way  of  detecting  the  "hand
    behind the [implement of] torture". (Whether we accept this  answer  as
    wholly correct is a matter we will need to address  separately  in  due
    course.)

Evidence of medical intervention/palliative care

227. The second question asked by the Tribunal was "whether it  is  possible
    to determine from the nature of the scarring itself what if any medical
    intervention or palliative care has been provided to enable recovery?"

228. As we understand it, the answer given by the medical  experts  to  this
    question was that unless there was evidence of  surgical  intervention,
    e.g. the existence of a site elsewhere on the patient's body used for a
    skin graft, or unless the medical examination was  a  very  short  time
    after the alleged torture (when for example it might still be  possible
    to detect the presence of drugs in a person's bloodstream), it was  not
    possible to  tell  whether  there  had  been  medical  intervention  or
    palliative care.

Dating of scarring

229. The third question was whether it is  possible  to  diagnose  with  any
    precision with  reference  to  the  nature  of  the  scarring  when  it
    occurred. It is clear from the substantial evidence we  heard  on  this
    subject that there is no scientific consensus as to  the  precise  date
    beyond which it becomes impossible to tell how old the scarring is, but
    there was agreement amongst the representatives that in the context  of
    assessment of  scarring said by claimants to be the result  of  torture
    it was only possible ordinarily to assess the  age  of  scarring  -  by
    reference  to  various  features  such  as  the  colouring,  elevation,
    hyperpigmentation etc. -  within the first 6-12 months. The evidence of
    Dr Odili, who  brought  the  perspective  of  a  plastic  surgeon  with
    specialism in burns, indicates that it may  sometimes  be  possible  to
    date scarring up to 2 years old depending  on  the  particular  medical
    context. That is lent some support  by  Dr  Zapata-Bravo's  observation
    that in some skin types bruises can lead to hyperpigmentation which may
    last for several years: see above paragraph 127.

 Other questions

230. We have also had helpful answers  to  two  other  medical  issues  that
    arose, both of which also have a possible bearing  on  the  appellant's
    case.

Effect of infections on fresh burn scarring wounds

231. Those medical experts who commented  on  the  matter  appear  to  agree
    that, unless treated, fresh wounds caused by burn scarring are prone to
    infection, although whether that occurs  will  depend  on  a  range  of
    factors such as  the  general  health  of  the  victim,  age,  hygiene,
    physical surroundings, etc.

Effect of infections on appearance of scars

232. The experts were also in agreement with the possibility  that  if  burn
    scars were the subject of infection  this  could  affect  the  eventual
    contours of the scars, making their edges or outlines less precise  for
    example.

R�sum�

233. We will have cause to discuss the answer to the first  question  later,
    but at a  general  level  the  answers  given  to  all  five  questions
    illustrate the present limits of medical expertise  and  underline  the
    point that medical reports, although of great importance  as  types  of
    evidence in asylum cases, may not necessarily be able  to  resolve  key
    questions regarding causation. Generally speaking, they  are  not  like
    DNA test results which can furnish near certainty one way or the other.
    Put another way, taken as they stand the medical answers to all five of
    the  above  questions only take us  so  far,  and  they  do  not  fully
    resolve what has always been the central issue  raised  by  this  case,
    namely whether SIBP is a possible cause that doctors  should   consider
    when preparing medico-legal reports in asylum cases.  To  resolve  that
    issue we need to consider the medical evidence and submissions in their
    entirety and in the light of established case law.

SIBP

234. The HBF submissions on the issue of SIPB had several  strands.  In  its
    preliminary skeleton argument the HBF submitted that:

         "In terms of the IP, the reason why SIBP claims should not be given
         any legitimacy is that these claims  are  anathema  to  proper  and
         lawful refugee determination.  If  such  claims  continue  it  will
         become legitimate for some Tribunals to find that an Appellant  has
         self-harmed deliberately in circumstances where it is difficult  to
         reconcile  a  strong  report  with   an   adverse   assessment   of
         credibility. Or worse, an expert is required to address the  degree
         to which scarring arises as a result of SIBP as a matter of course,
         thereby requiring an expert to go beyond the scope of the  Istanbul
         Protocol...The upshot is that there will be an additional threshold
         that an asylum applicant will have to cross when demonstrating  his
         asylum claim, namely that his torture was not caused by himself..."

235. In their skeleton argument, the HBF position was  summarised  as  being
    that  the  Foundation  "maintains  that  the  alleged  issue  of  self-
    infliction by proxy is not in fact an  issue,  either  evidentially  or
    legally. Medical professionals should not be required by  the  tribunal
    to attempt to prove a negative. "

236. In the concluding part of their preliminary skeleton argument  the  HBF
    submission  was  that  "[t]he  suggestion  of  SIBP  reflects  aberrant
    behaviour rather than the norm. If such a claim is  made,  it  must  be
    particularised with care and sufficient notice  must  be  given...As  a
    matter of principle such claims ought to be rare."

237. In their oral submissions Counsel for the HBF emphasised  that  medical
    experts were concerned with what was reasonably likely  not  just  what
    was possible.

238. The different strands to the HBF submissions can be identified as:  (i)
    SIBP should be rejected a priori as a possible cause; (ii) SIBP was not
    a possibility doctors should routinely consider; (iii) unless SIBP  was
    a reasonable likelihood or real possibility in a  case,  it  should  be
    eliminated from consideration. We shall address each in turn.

A priori rejection of SIBP as a possibility

239. We do not find the suggestion that SIBP as a possible cause  should  be
    simply excluded a priori - as seems to be implied by  HBF's  references
    to  it  being  "illegitimate"  and   "anathema"   to   proper   refugee
    determination - to be at all helpful. There are a number of reasons for
    this.

240. First, it is a suggestion which is not reconcilable  with  other  parts
    of HBF's submissions, asserting that "such claims ought to be rare" - a
    submission which logically accepts they can sometimes,  albeit  rarely,
    arise.

241. Second, it is at odds with  at  least  one  of  the  medical  witnesses
    called by HBF to support the appellant's case, Dr Zapata-Bravo. In  his
    main report the latter stated at paragraph 65 that although he had  not
    seen any example or seen reference to one in  epidemiological  studies,
    nevertheless "the possibility should be contemplated  and  Peel  et  al
    (2005) have stated, 'Very rarely an accomplice might be asked to  cause
    a wound in a place the person cannot reach'".  In  some  parts  of  his
    evidence Dr Arnold said much the same.

242. Third, it is at odds with the report  prepared  on  this  appellant  by
    Professor Lingam on which the appellant's  representatives  also  rely.
    From Professor Lingam's report it is clear that  his  methodology  when
    dealing with possible causes was to address, not just torture but  also
    both  self-infliction  and  "if  these  were  caused  deliberately   to
    mislead".  The Tribunal was  informed  that  as  a  matter  of  course,
    Professor Lingam who provides a number  of  reports  on  Tamils  asylum
    seekers  considers  both  possibilities  without   being   specifically
    instructed to do so.

243. Fourth, it is contrary to IP methodology. In  our  view  the  terms  of
    paragraph 187 embody the concern of the  IP's  authors  to  base  their
    methodology on a scientific method so as to ensure doctors stay  within
    the parameters of their clinical expertise. At the  purely  logical  or
    scientific level, it is clear that the possible causes of scarring  can
    only arise in a finite number of ways. If  we  understand  the  medical
    literature put before  us  correctly,  either  they  will  have  arisen
    through a bodily  reaction  (e.g.  a  skin  disease);  through  natural
    phenomena (e.g.  falling  debris,  molten  lava);  the  patient  having
    (deliberately or by accident) inflicted them on himself; or they having
    been inflicted on him or her (deliberately or by accident) by  a  third
    party (or parties). Within the category of  third  party,  the  crucial
    distinction is between an actor who does it against the patient's  will
    and an actor who does it with the consent of the patient (which is what
    the HBF understands by the acronym SIBP). Reflective of this concern to
    adhere to scientific principles, the IP methodology treats ascertaining
    causation as a matter of eliminating as far as  possible  causes  other
    than torture.

244. In accord with this scientific method, it  must  be  incumbent  on  the
    doctor to consider just that - all  possible  causes.  Furthermore,  if
    consideration of all possible causes were not to include  consideration
    of SIBP that would  also  undermine  one  other  component  of  the  IP
    methodology which, as the witnesses were anxious to remind us, requires
    doctors to consider false allegations of  torture.  If  a  patient  has
    scarring but is found to be making a false allegation of torture,  then
    that means that it may very well have had an alternative causation.

245.  Obviously  that  does  not  in  itself  entail  that  the  alternative
    causation must have been SIBP; and indeed the  dangers  of  jumping  to
    that kind of conclusion are strongly underscored by  the  analysis  set
    out in the 2009 publication,  Shedding light on a dark practice:  Using
    the Istanbul Protocol to document torture when commenting on  the  fact
    that paragraph 187 specifies that one of the findings that can be  made
    is "not consistent" (defined to mean that "the lesion  could  not  have
    been caused by the trauma described").  As the authors properly warn at
    p.16, whilst a finding of "not  consistent"  "generally  leads  to  the
    assumption that a person is fabricating or embellishing an  account  of
    torture", that does not necessarily mean such  a  finding  demonstrates
    fabrication. But by dint of the  same  reasoning,  a  finding  of  "not
    consistent" or of a "false allegation of torture"  cannot  be  said  to
    exclude SIBP as a possible cause.

246. Fifth, the need for a medical expert to approach matters  in  terms  of
    possible causes is well-established by case law, as illustrated by  the
    case of BN (psychiatric evidence - discrepancies) Albania  [2010]  UKUT
    279 (IAC) in which the Tribunal considered that the doctor  had  failed
    to approach his task according to a proper method, stating at [44]:

         "That is not to say however that there were not proper and powerful
         criticisms which could be made of Professor Prasher's  reports:  it
         was Professor  Prasher  who  pointed  out  that  there  were  three
         possible explanations, alone or in  combination  for  the  symptoms
         described and seen: medication, malingering, and  genuine  illness.
         He took steps to eliminate the first. But he never returned to  the
         second in either report, whether to  say  that  no  view  could  be
         formed or that he had concluded, and if so why, that  the  symptoms
         were or might be genuine or not. That is not satisfactory."

247. On the other hand, in similar fashion to IP methodology,  the  Tribunal
    in that case was anxious to highlight in the  following  paragraph  the
    limited value of a finding which merely fails to  exclude  one  of  the
    possible explanations:

         "But for all that, she [the tribunal judge] had to  deal  with  the
         report which did express a view, and the  fact,  which  we  accept,
         that the possibility of malingering could not be ruled out, did not
         prove that it  was  present.  She  did  reach  the  view  that  the
         appellant was feigning his symptoms but in reaching that view,  she
         had to grapple with what Dr Van Woerkom actually  did  say,  giving
         proper reasons for rejecting it, even though he did  not  elaborate
         the basis for his conclusion on what  Professor  Prasher  had  left
         open."

248. Sixth, (as Dr Zapata-Bravo acknowledged) it clashes with  the  guidance
    given in the Medical Investigation Handbook written by Peel and  others
    in 2005, which at  pages  37-38  clearly  does  not  rule  out  such  a
    phenomenon:

         "Sometimes a patient will say that an injury was caused by  torture
         when clearly  that  is  not  the  case"  (p.37)...It  is  sometimes
         suggested that scars and other  lesions  might  be  self-inflicted.
         True self-inflicted wounds are of two main types. One  is  where  a
         person is deliberately harming him or herself to  support  a  false
         claim of assault. Such wounds are generally superficial and  within
         easy reach of the dominant hand. Very rarely an accomplice might be
         asked to cause a wound in a place the person cannot reach, such  as
         in the middle of the back... (p. 38)".

249. If we take the answer given by the medical experts to the first of  the
    three questions posed by the Tribunal as they stand, it could  also  be
    said that it reinforces the need to leave open the possibility at least
    of SIBP. To this question the experts  were  united  in  replying  that
    there  was  no  scientific  method  which  would  enable  a  doctor  to
    differentiate between scarring inflicted  by  torture  and  SIBP.  That
    surely entails that at the level  of  clinical  inquiry  into  possible
    causes it must always be kept in mind that  scarring  could  either  be
    inflicted by torture or by SIBP.  The  exercise  of  trying  to  reduce
    uncertainty is said to be unable clinically to eliminate one as opposed
    to the other. However, as for reasons we shall come to shortly we think
    the evidence provided by more than one of the medical experts  conveyed
    a somewhat different answer, we only mention this  point  to  highlight
    internal inconsistencies in the argument that the possibility  of  SIBP
    can be rejected a priori.

SIBP and routine consideration

250. A separate strand of the HBF submission -  which  in  combination  with
    the third strand, we take to be more reflective of their submission  as
    a whole -- is that doctors should not routinely consider SIBP - because
    the job of a medico-legal expert is to  focus  on  what  is  reasonably
    likely and not on  mere  or  theoretical  possibilities  and  they  are
    adamant that SIBP is either non-existent or rare.

251. We respectfully cannot endorse this strand either.

252. It is  worthwhile  pausing  to  consider  what  factors  might  warrant
    declining to consider SIBP routinely in a medical report in  this  area
    of law.

253. One such factor might be  if  it  were  outside  of  human  experience.
    Another might be if it is contradicted by medical experience.  We  will
    examine each of these in turn.

SIBP and human experience

254. One possible feature of SIBP that might conceivably  be  said  to  show
    that it was outside human experience is the unwillingness of  a  person
    to consent to a procedure that causes him or her  pain  either  at  the
    time of its infliction or afterwards. However, no one  could  seriously
    suggest that human beings lack the capacity  sometimes  to  undergo  or
    risk severe pain voluntarily, as a means to a  desired  end.   Further,
    human experience encompasses a multiplicity of cultures and  historical
    settings. And, if we limit ourselves for a  moment  to  our  particular
    area of law, everyone agrees  that  when  dealing  with  asylum  claims
    decision-makers  must  be  wary  of  applying  western  norms  to   the
    likelihood of events or behaviour. It would be wholly  na�ve  therefore
    for doctors to consider that just because patients are  asylum-seekers,
    they should not  be considered routinely  as  never  being   likely  to
    consent to the infliction of pain  (on themselves either directly or by
    proxy) as a means to an end.

255. We must also bear in mind that it  is  not  as  if  SIBP  would  always
    necessarily involve experiencing severe pain. As  the  medical  experts
    have reminded us, there are  a  range  of  palliative  steps  that  may
    theoretically be taken at least to significantly reduce  pain  both  at
    the  time   of   infliction   and   afterwards,   ranging   from   full
    anaesthetisation, acupuncture, morphine,  heroin,  analgesics,  alcohol
    etc., and if the scars are not inflicted on the  patient's  face  there
    are not necessarily any cosmetic concerns.

256. Another possible feature of SIBP that  might  justify  treating  it  as
    outside human experience would be if there were no  known  examples  of
    it. But that is plainly not the case.  Under  questioning  the  medical
    experts all agreed (more or less) that within the category of SIBP  one
    would have to include such practices as ritual or tribal scarring. That
    entails that if a doctor is dealing with patients from certain  African
    (or New Guinean) tribes, it would not necessarily be at all rare to see
    ritual or tribal scarring. Indeed, Dr Zapata-Bravo in his oral evidence
    said that  he  had  come  across  tribal  scarring  "many  times":  see
    paragraph 145. In the context of medical examination of asylum-seekers,
    who by definition are from countries  other  than  England/the  UK,  Dr
    Arnold's invocation of  Occam's  Razor  through  the  metaphor  of  not
    looking for zebras in  an  "English  field"  strikes  us  as  decidedly
    unfortunate.

257.  Dr Arnold accepted  that  he  had  seen  cases  of  ritual  or  tribal
    scarring, but said that none of them had been cases of  burn  scarring.
    Even assuming ritual or tribal scarring never or  only  rarely  employs
    burn scarring, that  already  shows  that  it  would  be  erroneous  to
    classify the category SIBP as rare or uncharted in the literature. What
    must then be meant is a sub-category of SIPB -  SIBP  confined  to  the
    context of burn scarring.

258. The danger of seeking in this way to refine the category  is  that  one
    would be at risk of constructing categories around  just  one  type  of
    scarring - burn scarring - and also at risk of  shutting  out  possible
    further examples of SIBP (other than  ritual or tribal scarring),  such
    as tattoo scarring. As regards the latter, the experts were not able to
    tell us much except to say that it was rare, although interestingly  Dr
    Zapata-Bravo did include tattoos as  one  of  the  possible  causes  he
    considered in his written report on the appellant. One would also be at
    risk of ignoring known historical examples, e.g. (going back just a few
    centuries and considering even only Western history), ignoring accounts
    that sometimes young men would  inflict  cuts  on  themselves  or  have
    friends do so, so they could then pass them off  as  "duelling  scars",
    which were regarded  as a badge of honour. We certainly did not have  a
    full enough body of evidence regarding  human  experience  and  history
    before  us  to  show  that  doctors  in  their  medical  reports  could
    clinically  disregard the possibility  of  SIBP  except  in  a  clearly
    defined subcategories of cases.

SIBP and medical experience

259. Even if - in order to get round the fact that as regards  the  category
    of SIBP as such the medical experts have experience of it in  the  form
    of tribal or ritual scarring and much more rarely tattoo scarring -  we
    confine ourselves to the sub-category of scarring SIBP for the purposes
    of manufacturing an asylum claim, we cannot see that medical experience
    is able to negate it as a possibility.

260. In order to explain why, it will  assist  first  to  address  the  more
    general question of whether doctors  can  say  anything  about  torture
    methods by drawing on their medical experience.

261. In general terms, we concur with Mr Rhys Jones that it would  be  wrong
    to regard the medical expertise of doctors, certainly  those  connected
    to bodies  such  as  the  HBF  and  FFT  or  who  have  relevant  field
    experience, as being confined to  purely  clinical  expertise.  Medical
    experience may enable a doctor to become  familiar  with  the  specific
    types and methods of torture used by torturers  in  specific  locations
    and time periods. In the IP at paragraph 162, albeit in the context  of
    dealing with detainees, it  is  stated  that  clinicians  "should  have
    knowledge  of  prison  conditions  and  torture  methods  used  in  the
    particular region where the patient was imprisoned ..."

262. We would emphasise, however, that such medical experience is not to  be
    confused with doctors' non-medical knowledge  based  on  COI  or  other
    background data (we will address that separately below).

263. In general terms, then, we would accept  that  medical  experience  can
    shed light on evaluation of scarring in certain circumstances.

264. Reference was made to an article written by Dr Arnold in  May  2013  in
    which he stated that "[a] colleague has carefully  searched  the  world
    medical and legal literature on factitious torture. So have I. We  have
    found a tiny number of cases, none of them connected with asylum or Sri
    Lanka. Absent hard evidence, in  the  specific  case,  self-torture  by
    proxy is simply not a rational argument".

265. We see value in being told about the state of the  medical  literature,
    but Dr Arnold's summary of it can scarcely be said to provide  a  sound
    factual foundation for excluding SIBP from being a  possible  cause  of
    scarring - if for no other reason than that if it is a phenomenon  that
    does occur (at least in the context of deliberate  infliction  for  the
    purposes of improving an asylum  claim),  it  is  one  which  would  be
    clandestine.  If the phenomenon of SIBP did occur in this context it is
    unlikely to be one  that  individuals  would  undertake  in  public  or
    advertise and, if they have done it  in  order  to  fabricate  a  false
    allegation of torture,  it  is  unlikely  they  would   volunteer  that
    information to an examining doctor.  Just  as  one  cannot  infer  from
    absence of evidence about torture taking place in secret prisons  in  a
    country that it does not take place, so one cannot infer  from  absence
    of evidence of SIBT that it does not occur. This observation is not for
    one moment intended to suggest the two phenomena are at all comparable;
    only to underline the basic point that, certainly  in  the  context  of
    practices which are intentionally clandestine, absence of  evidence  is
    not evidence of absence.

266. Nor are we filled with confidence when we look at the reasons given  by
    Dr Arnold for considering SIBP  to  be  something  doctors  should  not
    routinely consider. In this same article his  reasons  presuppose  that
    SIBP is something asylum seekers would only do prior to  leaving  their
    country of origin ("From extensive experience of inflicting pain  as  a
    surgeon and suffering it as a patient I am certain that the  answer  is
    that no  one  could  hold  still  for  such  harms  without  a  general
    anaesthetic (which is and was almost certainly unavailable to detainees
    in displaced persons camps in Sri Lanka)". Two obvious  questions  this
    gives rise to are: "why must STBP take place prior to  departure?"  and
    "on what basis can one assert that  a  general  anaesthetic  would  not
    potentially be available to persons intent on SIBP?"

267. Nor do we find convincing Dr Arnold's attempt to  reduce  the  question
    of whether the phenomenon of SIBP (in the context of fabrication of  an
    asylum claim) exists to a question about whether there is any  evidence
    of "torture factories". His analysis presupposes that the existence  or
    non-existence of the latter is something doctors would be  more  likely
    to know about than, say,  investigative  journalists.  Given  that,  as
    noted already, if SIBP exists it will be clandestine, we  fail  to  see
    why this should be so. Unsurprisingly, when seeking in this way  to  go
    beyond their medical expertise, doctors risk criticism for  failing  to
    consider  all  relevant  possibilities.  Why  for  example  would   the
    phenomenon of SIBP only be  possible  in  the  context  of  a  "torture
    factory"?  Why could it not occur by a person seeking the  services  of
    an ex-nurse or "quack" doctor for example to undertake it? We emphasise
    this point not to suggest any possession of knowledge on  our  part  of
    the existence of SIBP  practices  in  the  asylum-seeking  context  but
    simply to emphasise that for all involved in this very  difficult  area
    we must be wary of going beyond what we know and  if  the  position  is
    that doctors do not know then that is all they can - and should -  say.



268. In short, whilst the medical experts tell us that  SIBP  (at  least  in
    the  asylum-seeking  context)  is  non-existent  or  rare,  what   they
    principally mean by that turns out to  be  simply  that  it  is  not  a
    phenomenon which they have come across or have been able or have sought
    to identify, i.e. in general terms it is outside  their  knowledge  and
    experience.

Self-inflicted harm

269. Doctors  do  not  consider  the  same  to  be  true  of  self-inflicted
    scarring.  The  medical   witnesses,   supported   by   other   medical
    publications, tell us that it is the experience of clinicians that self-
    inflicted scarring is relatively easy to detect. Mr Rhys Jones' written
    evidence made reference to an undated statement made by David Alton  MP
    which he had obtained from Professor Bernard Knight who had  41  years'
    experience as a Home Office pathologist:

         "The professor says that although it is  impossible  always  to  be
         certain about a single injury,  most  self-inflicted  injuries  are
         instantly recognisable by an experienced  medical  observer...Self-
         inflicted injury tends to be repetitive, superficial and places  in
         areas easily accessible and usually avoids vital structures."

270. In relation to psychological  harm/mental  illness,  the  IP  notes  at
    paragraphs 290 that "[t]he clinician should keep  in  mind...that  such
    fabrication requires detailed knowledge about  trauma-related  symptoms
    that individual rarely possess".  In similar vein Professor Katona  was
    clear that  whilst  both  the  psychiatric  history  and  mental  state
    examination are potentially liable to being "faked", that was difficult
    and, as paragraph 290 of the IP emphasises that "t]he clinician  should
    bear in mind ...that such fabrication requires detailed knowledge about
    trauma-related symptoms that individuals rarely possess".

271. Drawing together what has been said so far, it seems  to  us  therefore
    that in order to remain faithful to the IP methodology  doctors  cannot
    routinely exclude SIBP from their consideration of  possible  causes  -
    certainly not if the reason for  doing  so  arises  out  of  a  set  of
    assertions which on their face are outside the limits of their  medical
    expertise.

SIBP and reasonable likelihood/real possibility

272. A third strand we glean  from  the  HBF  submissions  and  the  medical
    evidence was the proposition that doctors should only  be  expected  or
    required to consider SIBP as a possible cause  when  it  is  reasonably
    likely or is a real possibility.

273. We use the expression "reasonably likely  or  is  a  real  possibility"
    because in some places counsel for HBF appeared to rely on  the  former
    proposition, in other places the latter.

274. Whilst in key respects the difference between these  two  terminologies
    may not be of particular significance, the difficulty with the first in
    this case is that it was coupled in the submissions with  the  somewhat
    different proposition that medical reports supportive of an appellant's
    claim to have been tortured of themselves established that  that  claim
    was reasonably likely to be true and so  meet  the  lower  standard  of
    proof applied in asylum cases: see e.g. paragraph 216 above.

275. It is first necessary to explain why this latter proposition  finds  no
    support in the IP. To do so throws into sharp relief one key aspect  of
    IP methodology dealing with causation of scarring (to which we  already
    alluded at paragraphs 15-20 above).

SIBP and reasonable likelihood

276. What we have in mind is that the IP does not anywhere talk in terms  of
    what is reasonably  likely.   At  paragraph  187  the  IP  sets  out  a
    causation hierarchy which identifies four rising degrees of consistency
    between scars and causes attributable to torture: "consistent", "highly
    consistent", "typical of" and "diagnostic of "[2] (see  also  paragraph
    121(d)).  But:

      a) as already noted, it does so by reference to a concept of "possible
         causes" (see in particular paragraph 121(e)); and

      b) even when talking about "degrees of  consistency"  (e.g.  Annex  IV
         XII.1.C,  2A),  it  makes  no  reference  as  such  to   reasonable
         likelihood.

277. The closest the IP comes to such language  is  at  Annex  1  6(b)  (iv)
    wherein  a  written   report   is   enjoined   to   include   "Opinion:
    interpretation as to the probable  relationship  of  the  physical  and
    psychological findings to possible torture or ill-treatment..."  Whilst
    a doctor trying to use this hierarchy is  engaged  in  what  Dr  Arnold
    aptly called "a process of reducing uncertainty", it is clear  that  it
    is envisaged that medical reports may come  to  a  range  of  different
    conclusions as to the degree of consistency, some of which will  reduce
    uncertainty but some of which will not: see e.g.  Annex  IV.  XII.  2A,
    XIII.1. As observed  at  169,  "[a]ll  complaints  made  by  a  torture
    survivor are significant. Although there may be no correlation with the
    physical findings, they should be reported".

278. A possible  suggestion  to  the  contrary  might  appear  to  arise  at
    paragraph 92 where the IP notes that evaluations of torture  can  arise
    in  different  contexts  and  that  "[f]or  example,  an  investigation
    culminating in the trial of an alleged  perpetrator  will  require  the
    highest level of proof, whereas a report supporting an application  for
    political asylum in a third country need provide only a relatively  low
    level of proof of torture", but we take that to be a comment about  the
    resulting effect of a good medical report,  not  about  the  scientific
    method reports should follow.

279. Counsel  for  the  appellant  and  HBF  have  emphasised  that  the  IP
    methodology is not limited to assessing the paragraph 187 hierarchy  of
    causation but also extends to making  an  "overall  evaluation  of  all
    lesions" under  paragraph  188   and  that  other  paragraphs  instruct
    doctors to make an overall assessment  of  physical  and  psychological
    sequelae (paragraph 83(c); paragraph 104). As  regards  paragraph  188,
    that seems to us to be intended to ensure no more than that  evaluation
    should not just be made scar by individual scar, but should  involve  a
    consideration of the scarring in the round. Making sure to address both
    physical and psychological sequelae says nothing of  itself  about  the
    likelihood of their causation.

280. We would accept, however, that the IP encourages doctors  not  just  to
    undertake a psychological as well as a physical examination, but to try
    and address the likelihood of possible causes in more detail. Thus,  if
    the doctor considers that the scarring is "highly consistent" with  the
    patient's attribution, it may be possible for the doctor to say, of the
    other possible causes - e.g. sports injuries,  battle  injuries,  work-
    related injuries, torture injuries - that they are less likely.

281.  Likewise,  established  case  law   emphasises   the   importance   of
    considering  possibilities  by  reference  not  just  to  possible  but
    "everyday" explanations and also by reference to the patient's own life
    experiences. As observed by the Court of Appeal in SA(Somalia) at [44]:

         "In the case of marks or injury which are inherently susceptible of
         a number  of  alternative  or  "everyday"  explanations,  reference
         should be made to such fact, together with any physical features or
         "pointers" found which may make the particular explanation for  the
         injury advanced by the complaint more or less likely"

282. In RT (Medical reports-causation of scarring) Sri  Lanka  [2008]  UKAIT
    00009 the Tribunal stated that "It is of particular importance that the
    report specifically examines  [other  possible  causes]  to  gauge  how
    likely they are, bearing in mind what is known about  the  individual's
    life history and experiences".

283. However, it is equally clear that the  IP  methodology  places  a  very
    important caveat on this type of evaluation, which is  that  assessment
    of causation must be made according to clinical expertise. As stated at
    paragraph 162 of the IP, "[a] medical  evaluation  for  legal  purposes
    should be conducted with objectivity and impartiality.  The  evaluation
    should be based on the physician's clinical expertise and  professional
    expertise". It follows that (with one caveat) doctors should  only  try
    and assess the likelihood of other possible causes if they are able  to
    bring to bear some  clinical  or  other  medical  expertise.  Thus  for
    example they may be able to say whether the nature and type of scarring
    could have been caused by sporting injuries or occupational injuries or
    battle injuries because they have medical experience of  what  sporting
    or occupational injuries or particular battle injuries  look  like  and
    the range of circumstances in which they can or cannot arise.  Thus  in
    the  2005  Handbook  by  Peel  et   al   (Medical   Investigation   and
    Documentation of Torture: A Handbook for Health  Professionals)  it  is
    noted at p.36 that "a sportsperson may have many scars on  his  or  her
    legs, and it is impossible to say which were caused by  contact  sports
    and which,  if  any,  were  caused  by  being  kicked  by  soldiers  in
    detention. A stab wound on the trunk, however, is  not  going  to  have
    been caused by sporting activities". At p.51 when describing  the  uses
    of medical documentation, the example is given  of  a  case  where  the
    survivor of torture alleges that a lesion was caused by  being  beaten,
    but the defence lawyers suggest that it was a  sporting  injury.  "[A]n
    experienced health professional", it is explained, "might  be  able  to
    say which of the two attributions was more  likely".  Similarly,  if  a
    doctor has experience of dealing with patients  wounded  in  particular
    war zones in which special types of landmines are used, he or  she  may
    well be able to say whether  the  scars  or  lesions  could  have  been
    inflicted by someone in the vicinity of that war zone.

284. The dilemma posed by SIBP is that, in contrast to how they  proceed  in
    the above examples, doctors do not appear to think they  can  bring  to
    bear any relevant medical experience.

285. Mr Rhys-Jones properly referred to the overlap between the  task  of  a
    medical expert and an asylum decision maker, but as the  issues  raised
    by this case illustrate, it is just as important to keep  in  mind  the
    differences. Two seem of particular importance to us here. One is  that
    whereas the latter is ordinarily obliged to reach a finding on  whether
    a person is reasonably likely to have been  tortured (he or she  cannot
    simply say it "may" have happened or avoid the issue),  for  a  medical
    expert he or she can only go so far  as  is  possible  clinically.  The
    other is that in the latter context it will sometimes not  be  possible
    to say more than that there are a range of possible causes:  see  above
    paragraph 277.

SIBP and real possibility

286. But the third strand of  the  HBF  submission  also  contained  a  less
    tendentious proposition, which was that doctors should only be expected
    to consider SIBP as a possible cause when  there  was  some  basis  for
    considering  that  that  was  a  real  possibility  (meaning  in   this
    determination simply a possibility that is not  a  merely  fanciful  or
    theoretical one).

287. We consider that this proposition is a  sensible  one  and  offers  the
    best way forward for devising a framework for dealing with  the  triple
    concerns of remaining faithful to IP methodology, not eliminating  SIBP
    as a possible cause, but at the same time not expecting doctors to give
    credence to it in every case (or to raise the spectre of them, to quote
    from HBF submissions, "having to prove a negative"). The  question  is,
    "what is it that should make SIBP a possible cause that doctors  should
    engage with in a  meaningful  way  in  any  particular  case?"  In  our
    judgment, there would need to be  some  presenting  feature  about  the
    state of the evidence before the doctor that makes SIBP something  that
    he or she is required to engage with.

288. It seems to  us  that  presenting  features  could  be  of  two  kinds:
    clinical or non-clinical.

289. Dealing first with presenting evidence in a clinical context, it  seems
    to us that the evidence provided by Dr Zapata-Bravo and Dr Allam (which
    was not contradicted by the other medical experts) affords  a  specific
    example of a case in which  features were identified which  meant  that
    SIBP should have been seen to change from being a mere  possibility  to
    being a real possibility. On their evidence, if a person has been burnt
    with hot metal instruments that had been applied several times  over  a
    period of some 10 minutes and as a result has   scarring  with  precise
    edges,  it would be necessary for that person  to have been unconscious
    throughout  the  procedure,  and  that  was  likely  to  have  required
    anaesthetisation.  Therefore, faced with a patient who claims  to  have
    fainted on the first application of a hot metal instrument and remained
    unconscious throughout several further applications, it is incumbent on
    an examining doctor to consider whether the torture claim is clinically
    plausible. (We deal more fully with the medical  evidence  relating  to
    this aspect of the appellant's case below).

290. Trying to reformulate this and similar examples given  by  the  medical
    experts in more general terms, it would  appear  that  such  a  feature
    arises when there is a tension or mismatch between what is revealed  by
    a physical examination of the scarring and the patient's account of how
    he came to have it. We see no reason why the  possibility  of  a  false
    allegation in the form of SIBP could not fall within this  category  in
    certain circumstances.

291. Turning to non-clinical presenting features, whilst we would  not  seek
    to define these exhaustively either, they would arise when there was  a
    clear mismatch between the claimant's account of when and where and how
    he was tortured and the established facts. One example would  be  where
    the claimant stated that he was tortured in his country of origin in  a
    particular month and year but  it  was  incontrovertible  that  at  the
    relevant time he was in the UK.

292. We hasten to add that in both these examples  of  presenting  features,
    it will always be necessary to consider whether matters are quite  what
    they seem, e.g. (in relation to the first example) whether the  failure
    to wake up from having fainted when there were further applications  of
    a hot metal instrument to the subject's body could have been caused  by
    poor physical condition) or whether (in relation to the second example)
    the claimant could have been explicably confused about  the  period  of
    time he said he was in his country of origin. At the  same  time,  once
    they have taken  such  possible  explanations  into  account,  decision
    makers are entitled to make findings and draw reasonable inferences.

293. From what we have just elaborated it will now be clear why  we  do  not
    consider that the negative answer given by the medical experts  to  the
    first question posed by the  Tribunal  at  the  case  management  stage
    (whether it was possible to differentiate between  scars  inflicted  by
    torture and scars inflicted by SIBP) accords with the medical  evidence
    furnished by two of them. We recognise that in seeking to  answer  this
    question the medical experts appear to have principally had in mind the
    incontrovertible point that clinical examination  cannot  identify  the
    "hand behind the (instrument of) torture". They  also  appear  to  have
    wanted  to  underscore  the  different  view  they  have  as   to   the
    distinguishability of scars inflicted by torture and scars inflicted by
    someone self-harming: the latter they find to  be  relatively  easy  to
    "detect". At the same time, given that it turns out, from  the  medical
    evidence we had in this case, that clinical examination can shed  light
    on whether it is plausible that scars  were  inflicted  in  the  manner
    claimed, we think that a more nuanced answer should have been given  to
    the first question.

294.  For completeness we need to clarify what  doctors  should  do  or  say
    about the SIBP possibility when there are  no  presenting  features  to
    suggest it. We only mean here to identify what we as judges consider as
    best practice in respect of preparation of medico-legal reports for use
    in asylum cases. It follows from our earlier  conclusion  -  that  SIBP
    cannot be excluded as a possible cause, either a priori or routinely  -
    that (i) doctors should indicate in their assessment  that  SIBP  as  a
    possible cause has been considered (in the same way as Professor Katona
    said it was best practice for doctors to consider feigning generally as
    a possible cause; and in the same way that Dr  Zapata-Bravo  considered
    whether the appellant's scarring could have been caused by  tattooing);
    but (ii) if there is an absence of any presenting feature  giving  rise
    to a concern about a "false allegation of torture" of this  type,  then
    all the doctor need do is state that whilst SIBP as  a  possible  cause
    has been considered, there is no presenting feature making it more than
    a mere or remote possibility .

295. So far as decision-makers  are  concerned  (primary  or  judicial),  it
    should not be thought that our  analysis  requires  them  to  make  any
    definitive finding of whether scarring is the result of  SIBP.  If  the
    evidence strongly points to such a finding we do think it is  necessary
    to say that SIBP is a real possibility.  In this regard we do not agree
    with Mr Duffy that it is enough simply to say that the burden of  proof
    in asylum cases rests on the appellant and that if  he  has  failed  to
    demonstrate that his scarring was the result of torture,  then  he  has
    not established his claim. That does not in itself make intelligible to
    the reader why the decision maker has  engaged  with  SIBP  as  a  real
    possibility. When there is at least one presenting feature of the  case
    that makes SIBP a real possibility  and,  after  consideration  of  the
    state of the  evidence as a whole there is no other  real  possibility,
    that should be said. To state as much is entirely consistent  with  the
    guidance given to decision-makers in Karanakaran [2000]  EWCA  Civ  11,
    [2000] Imm.AR. 271. But to go further would risk violating the cardinal
    principle  of  holistic  assessment.  In  the  context  of  a  holistic
    assessment,  where  for  example  a  claimant  has  given  a   strongly
    consistent and plausible account of his claim to  have  been  tortured,
    but the medical evidence points against this, a  decision  maker  might
    properly conclude that the claimant has nevertheless made out his claim
    to the lower standard.

Procedural fairness

296. As regards the procedures used by doctors when  preparing  medico-legal
    reports, we have had evidence regarding how they operate at the HBF and
    we are aware from the background documentation of how they historically
    operated at the former Medical Foundation. We have no reason  to  think
    there are any procedural fairness issues  that  arise  at  this  level,
    certainly not such as are relevant to asylum appeals.

297.  As  regards  first-instance   decision   makers,   from   the   Policy
    Instructions cited earlier, it seems to us that the Home  Office  takes
    sufficient steps to ensure procedural fairness in respect of  claimants
    who allege they have suffered torture: e.g. at 2.1 it  is  stated  that
    "Where an account of torture  or  serious  harm  is  given  during  the
    interview, the caseworker should suggest that the applicant may wish to
    approach one of the Foundations for  care  and  treatment."  (See  also
    2.8.2).

298. So far as concerns tribunal judges dealing with  appeals,  we  consider
    that the head note  in  RR  recognises  the  importance,  in  order  to
    guarantee a  fair  hearing,  of  ensuring  that  an  appellant  has  an
    opportunity to deal with allegations  that  an  injury  has  been  "not
    caused in  the  way  alleged  by  the  appellant  but  by  a  different
    mechanism".

299. However, we do not consider that RR can be taken as authority  for  the
    proposition that the respondent should not put an  allegation  of  SIBP
    unless she has background evidence of its existence. We  do  not  think
    the Tribunal in that case meant  to  say,  for  example,  that  if  the
    medical report relied on raised  serious  concerns  about  whether  the
    scarring could have been caused in the  way  claimed  (because  it  had
    presenting features such as described  earlier),  that  even  then  the
    respondent should not pursue the point.

300. We do not exclude either, subject to the  parties  being  given  proper
    opportunity to address the  matter,  that  a  tribunal  might  want  to
    explore with a claimant and the parties the possibility of SIBP of  its
    own motion. It follows from what we have said earlier that this is  not
    something a tribunal should do lightly: it would require  there  to  be
    some presenting feature, as described earlier.

Medical reports and background COI

301. We noted earlier that when  preparing  medical  reports  doctors  might
    also have before them non-medical evidence in the form of COI  relating
    to known methods of torture.

302. Of course, such non-medical evidence may be of  varying  kinds.  It  is
    well-established that doctors preparing reports in asylum cases  should
    have regard to evidence  other  than  that  within  their  own  medical
    expertise or experience. Indeed  in  JL  the  Tribunal  summarised  the
    effect of case law on this point as being that:

         "Those writing medical reports are to ensure  where  possible  that
         before forming their opinions they study any assessments that  have
         already been made of the appellant's credibility by the immigration
         authorities and/or a tribunal judge ("It is  essential  that  those
         who are asked  to  provide  expert  reports,  be  they  medical  or
         otherwise, are provided with the documents relevant to the  matters
         they are asked to consider. Failure to do so is bound  to  lead  to
         the critical scrutiny of the expert's report, and may lead  to  the
         rejection of the opinions expressed in that  report...."  (SS  (Sri
         Lanka)  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  155  [30];  BN   (psychiatric   evidence
         discrepancies) Albania [2010] UKUT 279 (IAC) at [49], [53])). "

303.  In  BN  the  Tribunal  was  highly  critical  of  the  fact  that  the
    psychiatrists had either not read the interview records, statement  and
    letters or had not evaluated them in reaching  their  conclusions.   At
    [54] it added:

         "The solicitors provided no material to suggest that they  had  had
         any difficulty in taking instructions or  preparing  the  statement
         after the screening interview, or in writing the letter  after  the
         substantive interview. Neither statement nor  letter  suggests  any
         difficulty on the appellant's part at all in remembering either the
         events described at interview or  the  interviews  themselves.  The
         purpose was to correct answers, which suggest  that  he  remembered
         events quite clearly, the answers given, and what  he  thought  was
         wrong with them.  The first explanation for inconsistency  was  the
         malice of the interpreter which was withdrawn after some time. When
         depression was first raised it was not  to  explain  inconsistency,
         but just to correct the omission by the appellant to  say  that  he
         was depressed. None of this is mentioned or evaluated by  Professor
         Prasher or Dr Van Woerkom. We would not have thought it possible to
         give any weight to their views on  inconsistency  being  caused  by
         depression."

304. Materials as identified in  such  cases  will  sometimes  include  COI,
    often as summarised in the respondent's reasons for refusal  letter  or
    in the  tribunal  judge's  determination.  We  can  see  no  basis  for
    excluding COI from the materials a doctor can be expected to look at by
    this route.

305. However, it is equally clear that there are at least three  caveats  to
    doctors drawing on COI materials.

306. The first is that unless the COI has some  specific  relevance  to  the
    clinical assessment of the cause of torture (e.g.  it  deals  with  the
    most common methods of torture used in a particular country of  origin)
    doctors should not go searching for such  materials  themselves  -  and
    indeed doctors are not and should not purport to be country experts.

307. Linked to the first, a second caveat is that even when they do draw  on
    COI materials, doctors should  make  clear  that  they  are  not  in  a
    position to say what the overall state of the COI is, only to say  what
    they have been made aware of: once again, they are not country  experts
    who can be expected to have a comprehensive picture of COI.

308. A third caveat is that in the context of a medical report the  doctor's
    task is to assist the asylum decision-maker by bringing to bear his  or
    her medical expertise. He or  she  is  not  conducting  a  free-ranging
    assessment of the credibility of the claimant's story.  This  point  is
    equally reinforced by established case law. As pointed  out  in  JL,  "
    [w]here the materials before the doctor include previous determinations
    by a judge, they  should  not  conduct  a  running  commentary  on  the
    reasoning  of  the  judge  who  has  made  such  findings,  but  should
    concentrate on describing  and  evaluating  the  medical  evidence  (IY
    (Turkey) [2012] EWCA Civ 1560 [37]."

309. In this regard we do voice slight concern about the tenor  of  some  of
    the evidence given by Mr Rhys Jones  in  his  supplementary  statement,
    especially what is said at paragraphs 23-25: see above  paragraph  104.
    It may be that within organisations such as HBF there are persons  such
    as Mr Rhys Jones who through their lengthy case work experience are  in
    a position to identify poor quality reasoning on the part of an  asylum
    case worker in the reasons for  refusal  or  even  on  the  part  of  a
    tribunal judge. But the forum for ventilating such concerns is not that
    of a medico-legal report written by  a  doctor.  Contrary  to  what  is
    suggested in one part of his supplementary statement, the focus  of  an
    MLR should not be to "unpick" the reasons given by the  respondent  for
    finding a claimant not credible unless the doctor's clinical  expertise
    can shed light on deficiencies in such reasons.   As  experts,  doctors
    should never do anything to suggest they have  an  advocacy  role:  see
    Secretary of State for Home Department v MN and KY [2014] UKSC at [55].
    To reinforce the point made by the Court  of  Appeal  in  IY  (Turkey),
    doctors  in  their  reports  should  concentrate  on   describing   and
    evaluating the medical evidence and drawing on their medical expertise.
    In order to focus on, in Dr Arnold's phrase,  "clinical  plausibility",
    there must be  a  clinical  basis  for  doing  so.  We  would  add  the
    observation  that  the  more  doctors  stray  beyond   their   clinical
    expertise, the greater the risk they run that judges  will  not  attach
    significant weight to their reports.

Medical reports and veracity

310. As is clear from a number of authorities, whilst it is not the role  of
    a medical expert to assess the credibility of a patient's asylum claim,
    it is part of their role to assess (once  again,  to  use  Dr  Arnold's
    term) clinical plausibility. Principally the latter is (or should be) a
    matter of examining the physical  and  psychological  sequelae  of  the
    claimed ill-treatment and reaching a  conclusion  as  to  causation  in
    accordance with the IP hierarchy. Counsel for the HBF  have  sought  to
    emphasise that the conclusions  represent  the  result  of  a  critical
    evaluation by the doctor;  they  are  not  based  uncritically  on  the
    patient's narrative. They have highlighted the  fact  that  the  IP  at
    paragraphs 143 and  209  requires  the  medical  examiner  to  consider
    inconsistencies. We are sure that is a fair description of what a model
    medical report should consist of, but whether reports always  fit  that
    description is a different matter, although if they properly  apply  IP
    methodology and best practice as identified by the  HBF  and  the  FFT,
    that should be the result. (An example of a doctor relying uncritically
    on a patient's report can be found in Professor  Lingam's  report.   He
    rejected  several  possibilities  of  the  causes  of  the  appellant's
    scarring relating to accident, wounds from training with  the  LTTE  or
    childhood injuries because "the patient denied any wounds or  accidents
    other than the injuries caused by torture": see above paragraph 84.)

311. But even then the notion of critical evaluation  thus  formulated  must
    be kept in its rightful context. The primary duty of  a  doctor  is  to
    "promote the patient's best interest" (Peel et al, 19).   According  to
    the IP, doctors owe "a clear duty of care to any patient  they  examine
    or treat" (paragraph  67);  the  doctor-patient  relationship  in  both
    contexts is based on trust (paragraph 164); and, in the  context  of  a
    psychiatric interview, Professor Katona likewise ventured that  it  was
    "crucial...to establish and maintain rapport and to be non-judgmental".
    He also referred in this context to paragraphs 143, 262 and 290 of  the
    IP.

312. That is some considerable remove from the assessment  of  the  evidence
    which must be undertaken by the decision-maker in a  legal  context  in
    which the burden of proof rests on the claimant and  when  one  of  the
    purposes of questioning is to test the claimant's  evidence  so  as  to
    decide whether (to the lower standard) it is credible.

Evidential burden of proof

313. By reference to R.C v Sweden counsel for  the  appellant  and  the  HBF
    have sought to argue that once a claimant has  sought  and  obtained  a
    medical report supporting their claim (whether or not IP-compliant)  to
    have suffered torture then  that  should  be  treated  as  prima  facie
    evidence which it is for the government to  rebut.  We  note  that  the
    Tribunal has dealt with the approach to documentary evidence  taken  by
    the ECtHR in MJ (Singh v Belgium: Tanveer Ahmed unaffected) Afghanistan
    [2013] UKUT 253 (IAC) and NA (UT rule 45: Singh v Belgium) Iran  [2014]
    UKUT 00205 (IAC) and we see no reason  to  deviate  from  the  guidance
    given therein.

314. In any event, in relation to the approach we  must  take  there  are  a
    number of decisions of the Court of Appeal that are binding on  us  and
    in none of them has it been accepted that production  of  a  favourable
    medical report creates a shift  in  the  evidential  burden  of  proof.
    Certainly we would agree with counsel for the HBF that a medical report
    is capable of being probative of an asylum claim. As noted by Sir  Mark
    Potter at [27]  in SA (Somalia) [2006] EWCA Civ 1302 one of the "tasks"
    a medical report can be "  tendered  to  perform"  is  "to  corroborate
    and/or lend weight to the account of  the  asylum  seeker  by  a  clear
    statement as to the consistency of old scars  found  with  the  history
    given". But that falls well short of endorsing the proposition advanced
    by HBF in its preliminary skeleton argument that "medical  evidence  of
    torture  raises  a  strong  likelihood  that  the  Appellant  has  been
    tortured". Such a position not only overlooks that  the  weight  to  be
    given to  medical  evidence  of  torture  will  depend  on  a  holistic
    assessment and will vary depending on the contents of that  report,  it
    is also inconsistent with IP methodology which envisages  that  medical
    reports can furnish a range of assessments, not all of which  could  be
    said to establish a strong likelihood: see above paragraphs 277, 285.

315. Consistent with this, one of the findings the IP states it is  open  to
    a doctor to make in a medical report is that  a  person's  scarring  is
    "consistent with" torture. This only amounts, according to the IP, to a
    relatively weak finding that "the lesion could have been caused by  the
    trauma described, but it is  non-specific  and  there  are  many  other
    possible causes".

316. Courts and tribunals greatly value medical  reports  in  asylum  cases,
    but we cannot accord them some hallowed status;  and  the  weight  they
    possess is very much a function of the extent  to  which  the  clinical
    evidence enables them to make  positive  findings  about  causation  of
    injuries, as well the individual quality they possess.

Psychological evidence

317. From our summary of the submissions it will be  apparent  that  counsel
    for the HBF were anxious to highlight the fact  that  the  IP  requires
    medical reports to  deal  with  both  the  physical  and  psychological
    sequelae of torture. They pointed to  paragraphs  83(c)  and  104,  the
    latter of which states that "[a] psychological appraisal of the alleged
    torture victim is always necessary and may  be  part  of  the  physical
    examination or where there are  not  physical  signs  be  performed  by
    itself".

318. They wished to underscore as well that medical reports that dealt  with
    only one of these two types of sequelae should not necessarily be  seen
    as having less weight for that reason alone. It is perhaps as well that
    they coupled these two submissions together because none of the reports
    we had from the medical experts who gave evidence dealt  directly  with
    the appellant's psychological condition - not even Dr Zapata-Bravo  who
    of course was the only doctor  apart  from  Dr  Odili  to  examine  the
    appellant and who is a Consultant Psychiatrist. In that  respect  their
    reports did not strictly comport with paragraph 104  of  the  IP.   The
    only doctor who did deal directly with  the  appellant's  psychological
    condition was Professor Lingam whose medical report as we have observed
    above had been prepared for the First-tier Tribunal.

319. Nonetheless we have no difficulty accepting both of  these  submissions
    as valid. As the Home Office Policy Instructions  also  recognise,  the
    fact  that  a  person  who  has  physical  scars  does  not  have   any
    psychological sequelae does not in itself indicate  that  the  physical
    scars were not caused by torture.



ASSESSMENT OF THE APPELLANT'S APPEAL

General aspects

320. In the light of Mr Duffy maintaining the challenge to  the  appellant's
    credibility, we need to make findings of fact in order to  assess  what
    risks there are if returned. We do so on the lower standard and  assess
    therefore whether the account the appellant  relies  on  is  reasonably
    likely to have occurred or (putting it another way), whether there is a
    real possibility that the events claimed  happened.  Our  findings  are
    based on all the evidence, medical and non-medical, taken in the  round
    and without compartmentalising one or the other. We apply, so far as it
    is relevant, the country  guidance  set  out  in  GJ  (post-civil  war:
    returnees) Sri Lanka CG (Rev 1) [2013] UKUT 319 (IAC) (5 July 2013).

321. We bear in mind when assessing the appellant's credibility that we  now
    know from the background COI as set out at paragraphs 186-9 above  that
    one  of  the  reasons  given  by  the  respondent  in  her  letter  for
    considering that his asylum claim was not credible was  erroneous.  The
    decision letter counted wrongly against him that there was no  evidence
    that the Sri Lankan authorities  use  burn  scarring  as  a  method  of
    torture.  Nevertheless  we  are  required  to  assess  the  appellant's
    credibility for ourselves in the light  of  the  much  larger  body  of
    evidence now before us.

322. We count in the appellant's favour that in his various accounts of  his
    experiences in Sri Lanka there are a number of matters about  which  he
    has given been broadly consistent evidence and that, in relation to his
    claimed  experiences  in  detention,  he  has  been  able  to  give   a
    significant amount of detail, albeit much of that  has  emerged  during
    the appeal process. Albeit they were family members,  the  evidence  of
    his witnesses also broadly corroborated his claim. It is  also  in  his
    favour that he sought and obtained  medical  evidence  to  support  his
    claim, a medical report from Professor Lingam being prepared for use at
    his hearing before the First-tier Tribunal and reports by  two  doctors
    who examined him (Drs Zapata-Bravo and Odili) being prepared for use in
    the present hearing. It is also now confirmed that when he visited  his
    GP in April 2011 he did show the doctor scarring on his back  (although
    there is no mention of scarring on his arm). Whilst the  three  reports
    from doctors who examined him focused on examination  of  his  physical
    scarring, Professor Lingam's  does address (albeit  very  briefly)  his
    psychological condition and found that he was severely depressed and Mr
    Duffy has not sought to challenge that finding.  Accordingly  we  apply
    the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2013 on Child,  Vulnerable
    Adult and Sensitive Appellant Guidance and have thus  given  particular
    consideration throughout to whether any discrepancies in  his  evidence
    could be satisfactorily explained by his psychological history .

323. We  note  that  the  respondent  considered  that  the  appellant  gave
    discrepant evidence in relation to when he first  started  working  for
    the LTTE, having said at one point 2002 and in  another  2003.  We  are
    prepared to accept,  however,  that  this  difference  arose  from  the
    appellant's misunderstanding as to whether he was being asked about his
    father or himself. We are also prepared to  accept  that  although  the
    appellant gave different dates as to when he last worked as a jeweller,
    this can be explained in terms of the ad hoc nature  of  the  jewellery
    and gold-related  work he did in Colombo and then in Vanni.

324.  However, there are other aspects of the account that  trouble  us.  It
    is difficult to accept that the appellant, who is educated and no doubt
    aware of the risks of being involved with LTTE members, would decide to
    travel publicly within less than 48 hours of a major  terrorist  attack
    at the airport on 25 March 2007 in Colombo. This is particularly so  in
    the light of the reason he gave for his flight, i.e. the arrest of  one
    of the two LTTE members he lived with the day before.  If indeed  there
    had been interest in the LTTE member  who  travelled  with  him,  which
    appears to have been the case because of his evidence  that  he  learnt
    later that there had been an army visit to his house, it is significant
    that the appellant and his LTTE member  housemate,  despite  travelling
    together, did not  encounter  any  difficulties  in  making  their  way
    through Sri Lanka to the LTTE area. We do not have any evidence  before
    us that deals with the immediate consequences of  the  bombing  of  the
    airport. We note however that it has been a consistently  mentioned  in
    UKBA COI reports on Sri Lanka and other major country reports  that  in
    2006 (the year preceding the year when  the airport bombing took  place
    and the appellant said he left Colombo (in May 2007), there had been an
    increase in the number of checkpoints and  roadblocks  in  the  capital
    city  and there were road closures to the A-9 Kandy to  Jaffna  highway
    restricting the movement of passengers and supplies through  the  LTTE-
    controlled Vanni region and on roads leading in and out  of  the  city;
    and that the Sri Lankan authorities were applying a heightened level of
    vigilance through checks and controls on freedom of movement: see  e.g.
    COI report on Sri Lanka,  dated  2007,  paragraphs  28.01-  28.12.  The
    appellant's representatives said nothing to suggest they considered the
    situation to be otherwise. Up until the hearing before us there was  no
    mention by the appellant of the two of them meeting with any check.  At
    the hearing before us the appellant mentioned for the first  time  that
    the bus they travelled on had been stopped and that he had to show  his
    ID card, but, in addition to finding  it  surprising  he  had  made  no
    mention of this previously, we find it most implausible  there  was  no
    point at which he and his friend were questioned. To reiterate, on  his
    account one of his housemates had  been  arrested  the  day  before  in
    connection  with  the  airport  bombing  and  very  shortly  after  the
    authorities had visited his house looking for him.

325. The ease with which the appellant was  able  to  travel  with  an  LTTE
    member and his failure to mention previously  that the bus  he  was  on
    had been  the subject of any stop or search  at  checkpoints  does  not
    accord with the COI. Although the appellant said that he felt he had to
    attempt the journey even though it was risky to do so, we note that  he
    did not describe himself as considering  less  risky  options  such  as
    going to stay with friends or seeking an agent in Colombo  to  try  and
    arrange for him to leave the country (as he did some two years  later).
    At that point he had lived in Colombo for a number of years,  so  would
    have had friends and contacts he could have tried.

326.  It is  also  significant  that  despite  having  helped  the  LTTE  in
    Trincomalee and,  latterly  in  Colombo,  through  the  medium  of  the
    jewellery business, there is a  complete  absence  of  any  account  of
    difficulties encountered by the appellant either  prior  to  coming  to
    Colombo in 2003 or during his time in that city. There was no  evidence
    of any prior interest in his LTTE member house  mates  either.  Despite
    therefore his  claim  to  have  worked  for  the  LTTE  and  to  having
    accommodated two of their members, it is significant that the appellant
    has given no account of adverse encounters or prior interest  from  the
    authorities in any of them.

327. On the assumption that the appellant did leave Colombo as  claimed  and
    worked in  a  LTTE  controlled  area  without  becoming  a  member  but
    nevertheless had dealings with them, our attention turns to his account
    of being taken on surrender into an army detention camp in 2009.  Being
    held there for so long needs  to  be  considered  against  the  country
    information. It is clear from  the COI  reports  dated  June  2009  and
    November 2011 (e.g.  at  4.36-4.38)   and  other  contemporary  country
    reports that during this period many people  were  being  detained  for
    lengthy periods and so there is nothing in itself implausible about the
    appellant's claim to have been detained for some 21 months.

328. Against that background,  we  turn  to  what  the  appellant  has  said
    happened to him in detention.

329. As to the time line of these events  in  detention,  according  to  his
    first witness statement he signed a confession 5 days after being taken
    into detention. He was identified by PLOTE/EPDP a week  thereafter.  At
    the hearing he explained his belief that the EPDP members in  the  camp
    must have told the army that he had been assisting the  LTTE  with  the
    gold. The appellant could not be expected to know the  detail  of  when
    this information was passed on but it seems highly unlikely  that  they
    would have delayed for over two months (between late  May  and  August)
    before seeing fit to torture him in order to find out  where  the  LTTE
    had stored their gold.

330. Although it is wrong to look for rationality by torturers, it  is  also
    difficult to see why the army  would  put  so  much  effort  into  ill-
    treating the appellant over such an extended period of time  if,  apart
    from the issue  over  the  gold,  their  interest  was  solely  in  him
    identifying where the LTTE leaders were hiding to which he  could  give
    no answer and there must have been a point when they  realised  he  was
    not a member. His evidence is that he  was  "burned"  during  just  one
    session of torture in August 2009.  Furthermore, the decision  to  burn
    the appellant  appears  to  have  been  taken  without  any  particular
    triggering event: on the  appellant's  evidence  the  authorities  were
    reasonably likely to have known of his work as a goldsmith well  before
    then.  The appellant gave no evidence that he  revealed  or  was  in  a
    position to know where the LTTE had stored their gold or what they  had
    done with it.  There must have also come a time  when  the  authorities
    knew that they were getting nowhere and that must have been soon on  in
    the detention. The only explanation for the  continuing  ill  treatment
    was a desire to inflict sadistic and cruel harm.  Having regard to  the
    well documented claims of serious abuse by the Sri Lanka forces  we  do
    not rule out this possibility, but equally we find it very difficult to
    accept that the authorities would invest so much effort in ill-treating
    him on a daily or almost daily basis and to do so over a very  extended
    period (21 months).

331. We should mention that we do not think the appellant's  representatives
    helped the cause of clarity by submitting at one point that  we  should
    consider there was no regular pattern to the appellant's ill-treatment.
    Given that on his own account beatings were daily or almost daily,  the
    pattern was of regular and frequent ill-treatment. Nevertheless  we  do
    not consider this is a point that goes to the substance of what we have
    to decide in this case.

332. The appellant's account of how he was able to negotiate his way out  of
    detention does not stand close scrutiny. If he  was  of  such  interest
    that he was  held  in  a  cell  and  escorted  to  a  lavatory,  it  is
    questionable how he was able to strike up a conversation  with  a  non-
    prisoner who put in hand arrangements for his  escape  and  would  have
    been permitted to load things on to trucks. That escape  indicates  lax
    security and this is difficult to reconcile with  the  closely  guarded
    conditions under which the appellant claims he was kept. We accept that
    the background evidence shows that the EDPD were complicit  in  helping
    detainees escape, but that evidence does not indicate they were able to
    do this in relation to persons who were closely guarded  and  subjected
    to daily or almost daily beatings.  We note also  that  he  gave  quite
    different accounts of the numbers of persons  with  whom  he  shared  a
    cell, and, although he sought to explain that in terms of  the  numbers
    varying over time, we do not see why he did not  explain  that  in  his
    asylum interview.

333. Given the brutality of the  treatment  which  the  appellant  says  was
    meted out to him daily or almost daily over a period of some 21  months
    (and leaving to one side whether he had  suffered  burn  scarring),  we
    consider it extraordinary that he was able to fly  so  soon  after  his
    release in February 2011  and  arrive  in  the  UK  not  suffering  any
    injuries requiring immediate treatment. We note that he  did  not  seek
    any medical help in the UK from his arrival on 24 February  2011  until
    10 April the same year and when he did so his main  presenting  problem
    was confined to his knees and he was  merely  given  a  combination  of
    topical and oral analgesia. He did not attend the  surgery  after  that
    time.

334. As regards the evidence from family members, we  have  given  it  close
    consideration notwithstanding that being family members  none  of  them
    could be described as independent witnesses. The  appellant's  brothers
    were curiously reticent and gave short accounts that they did not  know
    what had happened to him following the mass  surrender  in  2009.   The
    appellant's account of how the family came to  know  of  him  going  to
    Vanni has been put in an odd way.  If  indeed  relatives  travelled  to
    Trincomalee (where the brothers were living)  to  explain  how  he  had
    sought refuge in Vanni, it  is  odd  they  did  not  have  more  detail
    available.  It is also curious that they had not  sought  to  find  out
    what happened to their uncle who was  the  LTTE  member  despite  their
    uncle with whom they live in the United Kingdom being aware that he  is
    safe.  It was not explored how it is known that he is safe.

335. The uncle's (VS's) account of how he was unable to leave  Colombo  when
    he made his visit in 2013 does not stand up  to  scrutiny.   Given  the
    evidence he gave about what he knew had happened to  close  members  of
    his family, it is difficult to believe that he did  not  have  his  own
    safety concerns about undertaking a trip along with his  family  before
    he left and felt them only on arrival, particularly in the light of his
    evidence that he had been aware prior to that journey that in 2012  his
    brother-in-law had been tortured.  We find contrived the  account  that
    the appellant's mother brought his brother-in-law  and  sister  in  the
    middle of the night to Colombo for them to meet him.

336. We also find it very difficult to understand how it was  that  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities  had  not  arrested  and  detained  the  appellant's
    father. On the information the appellant said he gave to his torturers,
    he had been working in his father's shop as an assistant to his father.
    They suspected him of helping the LTTE with melting  down  and  valuing
    their gold. Why the  authorities  would  arrest  and  detain  the  shop
    assistant but not the shopowner is difficult to comprehend,  especially
    given the great effort stretching over more than 18 months during which
    the authorities ill-treated the appellant in order  to  find  out  more
    about what had taken place in this man's shop. If his father  had  been
    arrested and/or detained we would most certainly have  heard  about  it
    since, on the appellant's account and that of his witnesses, his father
    had made contact with him on at least one occasion and there  had  been
    indirect contact with other family members.

Medical aspects

337. We turn to address the medical evidence relating to his scarring  which
    has informed our overall assessment. If the  appellant's  scarring  was
    caused by torture in detention then the possibility of the  appellant's
    account  being  true,  notwithstanding  the  identified   shortcomings,
    becomes a real one.

338. The appellant has scarring which having regard to  its  appearance  was
    clearly not the result of an accident or sports injury or  work-related
    injury, as the experts have all agreed. The medical  evidence  was  not
    entirely clear-cut regarding whether  the  appellant's  scarring  could
    have been caused by military training. Dr Odili  said  that  clinically
    she could not tell whether it had; Professor Lingam said  he  ruled  it
    out but the only reason he gave was that the appellant had  denied  any
    causation other than torture. However, all the medical  experts  agreed
    that his scars were deliberately inflicted and there was no evidence to
    suggest  that  military  training  with  the  LTTE  has  ever  involved
    deliberate infliction of burn scarring.  Hence (leaving aside  what  we
    consider it indicates about SIBP) we take the  medical  evidence  as  a
    whole to point strongly against military training being a cause.

339.  There is a slight difference between the three  doctors  who  examined
    the  appellant  (Professor  Lingam,  Dr  Zapata  Bravo  and  Dr  Odili)
    regarding the number of scars the  appellant  has,  but  we  attach  no
    significance to that as all three were  agreed  about  what  they  were
    describing. The medical evidence is  also  not  entirely  clear  as  to
    whether the appellant's burn scars, at the time  they  were  inflicted,
    would have been open wounds  or  ones  which  did  not  bleed.  In  his
    evidence Dr Zapata-Bravo appeared to proceed on  the  basis  that  when
    inflicted the appellant's scars were "open wounds",  whereas  Dr  Odili
    appears to have proceeded on the opposite basis and Dr Arnold  said  he
    thought the burns concerned were "partial thickness burns",  i.e.  ones
    that left some of the epidermis intact. This  evidence  is  not  easily
    reconciled with the appellant's account - he said that  when  cellmates
    helped him take his T-shirt off the next day it was  blood-encrusted  -
    but in the absence of  more  detailed  medical  consideration  of  this
    possible difference, we take no point against the  appellant  regarding
    it.

340. Notably, none of the medical witnesses bar one made a specific  finding
    in accordance with paragraph 187 of the IP that the appellant's account
    was either "typical of" or "highly  consistent"  with  his  account  of
    being tortured. Indeed Professor Lingam's conclusion was limited  to  a
    finding of mere consistency. Despite being  specifically  requested  to
    make a finding about the causation of the scarring in relation  to  the
    appellant's attribution, in accordance with the Istanbul  Protocol,  Dr
    Odili confined herself to making findings  as  to  the  causative  link
    between the scars and the type of instrument  used  and  the  technical
    circumstances in which the scarring came about. Her findings cannot  on
    any reading be treated as findings that the  appellant's  scarring  was
    "diagnostic  of",  "typical  of"  or  "highly  consistent   with"   the
    appellant's attribution (torture). That is not a criticism of Dr Odili.
    Indeed we consider  it  a  proper  clinical  response  to  the  limited
    evidence that she had and the principal focus  of  it.  Dr  Arnold  and
    Professor Katona did  not  examine  the  appellant  and  very  properly
    confined their reports to the implications of the appellant's case  for
    broader issues relating to SIBP and the proper preparation  of  medical
    reports in the context of asylum  cases.  Even  though  Mr  Rhys  Jones
    purported to argue at a general level that BF doctors were entitled  to
    "unpick" Secretary of State decisions, his written  and  oral  evidence
    (quite properly) did not seek to do that in the appellant's  case.  The
    only doctor who made a specific finding that the  appellant's  scarring
    was "highly consistent" with his attribution was  Dr  Zapata-Bravo.  We
    will deal with his findings below.

341.  Of the medical witnesses, we prefer the evidence  given  by  Dr  Odili
    and Dr Zapata-Bravo as to the  technical  circumstances  in  which  the
    scarring may have come about.  Unlike Dr Arnold and  Professor  Katona,
    both examined the  appellant.  As  noted  above,  Professor's  Lingam's
    finding was limited to one of mere consistency and such a finding  does
    not entail more than a conclusion that  torture  was  one  among  other
    possible causes. Whilst we have commented favourably on certain aspects
    of Professor Lingam's methodology, we find  little  assistance  in  his
    application of this to  the  appellant's  case  in  relation  to  other
    possible causes, as he  appears  to  have  decided  to  eliminate  some
    possible causes simply  because  they  were  not  consistent  with  the
    appellant's narrative.

342. All the medical experts agreed that that  there  was  no  inconsistency
    between the date the appellant said he was  subject  to  burn  scarring
    (August 2009) and the appearance of his scars as shown first to his  GP
    and then photographed in April/May 2011. They were all agreed  as  well
    that, from the fact that the  scarring  on  the  appellant's  back  had
    precise edges and patterning, he would have needed  to  be  unconscious
    throughout as otherwise, even with restraint or his being  held  still,
    his muscles' involuntary reflex would  have  caused  the  edges  to  be
    blurred. The time involved is also a relevant factor here.  Dr  Zapata-
    Bravo, without contradiction by the other experts, estimated  that  for
    the scars to have been inflicted on the  appellant's  back  there  must
    have been several more applications of a heated  metal  instrument:  he
    considered that was likely to have taken 10 minutes.

343. We have already observed that in our judgment the medical  evidence  we
    received raised a significant presenting difficulty for the appellant's
    account. On his account, it must be recalled, he was first burnt on the
    upper right arm and  the  pain  from  that  burn  caused  him  to  fall
    unconscious. If it was clinically likely that someone  could  be  burnt
    once, then fall unconscious yet not wake up, even when there were  more
    applications of a  hot  metal  instrument,  there  was  nothing  to  be
    concerned about. But if on the  clinical  evidence  that  scenario  was
    unlikely, then the appellant's account was  clearly  problematic.  This
    issue was addressed by Dr Zapata-Bravo in his oral evidence, but  given
    that his answer then was that he considered it unlikely that  a  person
    who had fainted would remain unconscious upon fresh infliction of pain,
    that was a matter that should have been apparent to him  at  the  stage
    when he was examining the appellant and preparing his  written  report.
    We find it difficult to follow why in the end he said  the  appellant's
    account of remaining unconscious was plausible. Both he  and  Dr  Odili
    were entitled to treat as one  relevant  factor  the  appellant's  poor
    physical condition, but on the medical evidence as a whole, that was an
    unlikely  explanation of the  fact  that  he  had  not  woken  up.  The
    evidence Dr Zapata-Bravo gave to the effect that shock-induced fainting
    was  not  sufficient  for  unconsciousness  over  the  relevant  period
    (approx. 10  minutes)  was  subsequently  confirmed  by  Dr  Allam,  an
    anaesthetist. (We are also surprised that neither Professor Lingam  nor
    Dr Zapata-Bravo explored more closely with the  appellant  the  claimed
    severity of the beatings he received almost daily for 21 months,  given
    that  they  found   no  other  physical  ill-effects  except  for  knee
    problems).

344. At all events, we consider that the medical evidence as now  before  us
    discloses a presenting difficulty for the appellant. If his account  is
    correct - and he was given ample opportunity to correct or qualify it -
    then he  was  able  to  remain  unconscious  despite  several  repeated
    inflictions  of  burn  scarring  which  clinically  was   an   unlikely
    hypothesis.

345. Dr Allam has described a  sedation  scale  beyond  which  there  is  no
    response to painful stimulus. Her evidence about the way in which opoid
    analgesics or alcohol can achieve  states  of  unconsciousness  is  not
    relevant to the claim as it is not the appellant's case that these were
    used.  As to fainting (which is the appellant's  case),  she  considers
    that a faint can be caused by any painful stimulus but that,  following
    lying down, consciousness is regained very quickly as observed  in  her
    own patients, "usually  within  seconds".  She  refers  also  to  other
    factors such as health/physical state that could affect  the  speed  of
    recovery but does not suggest such factors could  have  caused  him  to
    remain unconscious even when the hot metal rods were re-applied.

346. It is  not  the  appellant's  case  that  he  was  lying  down  and  he
    demonstrated that the burns were applied when  he  was  in  a  kneeling
    position throughout which he was restrained.  It  seems  to  us  highly
    unlikely that had the appellant fainted he would have remained kneeling
    and is likely to have slumped. There would be no need for  his  captors
    to hold him in the kneeling position  which  would  have  required  his
    cooperation and the rods could have been as effectively applied  if  he
    were lying on his front.

347. A further aspect of the clinical picture in the  appellant's  case  was
    that on his account he had not experienced any significant infection as
    a result of the episode of burn scarring (apart from suffering  from  a
    fever for a short period)  notwithstanding that (i) he was  in  a  poor
    physical state; (ii) the conditions in his cell were unhygienic and his
    wounds were not dressed; (iii) straight  after  he  was  burnt  he  had
    petrol poured over his body; (iv) when he went back to his cell he said
    his surface skin around and over the wounds  peeled  off;  and  (v)  he
    continued to be beaten all over the body including on  his  back  on  a
    daily basis or at least every two or three days.  There  was  consensus
    amongst the  medical  experts  that  if  burn  scarring  wounds  become
    infected, that can affect the eventual contours of  the  scars,  making
    their edges or outlines less precise  for  example.  We  note  that  Dr
    Zapata-Bravo and Dr Odili considered that the odds of  the  appellant's
    scarring becoming infected may have been reduced by the fact  that  (on
    his account) he had been allowed to bathe the day after and was given a
    clean shirt. At the same time, both clearly considered that even so  he
    was "very lucky" to  escape  infection.  Whilst  the  medical  evidence
    regarding this aspect of his claim was not definitive, we think  it  is
    another indicator that the account he has given is not credible.

348. It follows from the above that we  do  not  consider  that  Dr  Zapata-
    Bravo's  conclusion  that  the   appellant's   scarring   was   "highly
    consistent" with his account of having been tortured is justified  when
    account is taken of the doctor's own evidence  indicating  (i)  it  was
    clinically unlikely, given their  precise  edging,  that  his  scarring
    could have been inflicted unless he was unconscious; and (ii)  that  it
    was clinically unlikely a person could  remain  unconscious  throughout
    multiple applications of hot metal rods to his arms and back, unless he
    was   anaesthetised;   immobilisation    or    restraint    short    of
    anaesthetisation would have caused his muscle reflexes involuntarily to
    cause movement.

349. Yet a further aspect of the clinical picture  was  that  the  appellant
    was found by Professor Lingam to be severely  depressed.  However,  the
    treatment of this aspect of the appellant's claim by the Professor  was
    extremely cursory and he did not recommend any particular treatment for
    the  appellant's  psychological  condition.  Nor  we  observe  had  the
    appellant's GP who saw him in April 2011 referred to any  psychological
    problems.  As  already  noted,  we  find  it  surprising  that  despite
    considerable efforts being taken by the appellant's representatives  to
    obtain medical evidence to support his claim,  no  further  steps  were
    taken to confirm  Professor  Lingam's  psychological  diagnosis  or  to
    ascertain whether his psychological condition had  a  specific  linkage
    with his burn scarring and experiences of other kinds of ill treatment,
    particularly  since  Professor  Katona  in   his   evidence   expressed
    willingness to provide such a report. Nevertheless,  we  bear  in  mind
    that Professor  Katona  and  Mr  Rhys-Jones,  in  common  with  the  IP
    guidelines, have emphasised that lack of  psychological  symptoms  does
    not necessarily demonstrate that a person has not been  the  victim  of
    torture. Overall,  we  find  the  evidence  regarding  the  appellant's
    psychological condition does not materially assist his claim.

350. To  summarise  we  find  that  the  lack  of  correlation  between  the
    appellant's  account of how he was tortured and the resulting nature of
    the scarring, counts against the credibility of that account.

The evidence of Mr Vinayagamoorthy

351.  In  reaching  our  conclusions  on  the  appellant's  account  and  in
    particular whether he was burned in detention in the manner claimed, we
    have  examined  the   COI,   including   the   report   by   Appathurai
    Vinayagamoorthy at page 85 of the appellant's bundle. He was instructed
    on behalf of the appellant to prepare a report in relation  to  various
    aspects of issues relating  to  torture  in  Sri  Lanka.  He  describes
    himself as an Attorney and he sets  out  his  political  background  of
    involvement with various Tamil political groups. He is an MP, belonging
    to the Tamil National Alliance.

352. He describes the political and human rights  situation  in  Sri  Lanka,
    and we return to that assessment in due course. In  "Appendix  two"  Mr
    Vinayagamoorthy refers to his  having  handled  torture  cases  in  his
    capacity as a lawyer. Under the sub-heading "The  Use  of  Torture  and
    Other Cruel, Inhumane, or Degrading Treatment as Interrogation  Devices
    in Sri Lanka" there is what appears to be an extract  from  a  document
    which is not identified, and which concerns the use of torture  in  Sri
    Lanka. It is in italics, unlike the majority of the report.  It  starts
    with the statement that :

         "Sri Lanka is infamous for its record  of  systematic  torture  and
         branding, which goes back to 1948".

353. Mr Vinayagamoorthy's report refers to the various  methods  of  torture
    which it is stated  include  burning  with  heated  metal  rods.  In  a
    paragraph that commences "Fact from Sunday Time" giving a web  address,
    some examples of cases  of  torture  are  given.  Mr  Vinayagamoorthy's
    report continues in  stating  that  in  the  overwhelming  majority  of
    "torture survivors" referred to him, 99% bear the marks of  torture  on
    their bodies. He gives a limited number of  examples,  with  names  and
    other details included. He states on page 13 of  the  report  that  the
    torture is done to cause permanent damage and scars "because this  will
    put them in danger of prosecution again."

354. In the "Conclusion" paragraph he states that in his opinion:

         "burning with hot metal  objects  (branding)  is  the  second  most
         common method of torture among the above, which I see on a  regular
         basis."

355. He concludes by stating that this particular method of torture is  used
    for a number of reasons, in summary: as an easy way to cause  pain,  it
    leaves permanent scarring which is used as a method  of  identification
    by the authorities, to humiliate the victim, prevents the  victim  from
    escaping from detention because the scarring is permanent and  visible.
    He states that he has seen approximately 1,500 of his clients who  were
    burned in a way that left permanent marks.

356. He goes further and states that although the size  and  number  of  the
    burns differ from person to person  "these  marks  resemble  the  tiger
    stripes", and that it is widely said that the police deliberately brand
    the victim with tiger stripes so that they  can  identify  him  in  the
    future.

357. Such injuries are not properly documented by doctors in Sri  Lanka,  he
    states, mainly because judicial medical officers do  not  want  to  get
    into  trouble  with  the  security  forces  by  recording   "the   real
    causation". The report goes on to state that on the other hand in  some
    cases medical experts have concluded that these scars  were  consistent
    with  torture  and  the  medical  experts  could  not  find  any  other
    alternative method of causation. He "personally  [does]  not  have  any
    reason to believe that these branding scars could have caused (sic)  by
    any other means."

358. We are prepared to accept that one of the methods of  torture  used  by
    the security forces is burning with a heated rod or similar  instrument
    and that  this  causes  scarring.  That  much  is  evident  from  other
    documentary material to which we have referred, for example the  USSDR.
    We  are  however,  sceptical  about  Mr  Vinayagamoorthy's  claim  that
    "burning with hot metal rods (branding)" is the  "second  most  common"
    method of torture. At the very least, it is difficult to ascertain from
    his report which, of the 24 "documented methods" he lists on  p.10  are
    the first or third or fourth etc most common. Despite his own reference
    to having seen 1,500 "clients" with permanent burn scarring, his report
    does no more than provide several illustrations.

359.  As regards his claim that  such  scarring  is  inflicted  because  the
    authorities want to make it easy to identify the victim in  the  future
    and to prevent the victim from escaping, although something similar was
    said by FFT in a November 2011 report (see above paragraph 187), in  a
    letter of 5 January 2012 the British High Commission stated that whilst
    scarring had been used in the past to identify suspects  this  practice
    has either ceased or is used less frequently. We note further  that  in
    GJ the Tribunal found that the procedure  applied  by  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities at the airport in respect  of  returnees  was  now  benign;
    there is questioning but no detention facilities and that the regime no
    longer relied on checkpoints  and  searches;  rather  its  approach  is
    intelligence-led  (see  GJ,  paragraphs  347-354).  Even  if   we   had
    considered  that  the  regime  continued  to  rely   significantly   on
    checkpoints  and  searches,   we   would   still   have   regarded   Mr
    Vinayagamoorthy's   claim   as   far-fetched,   since   scarring    for
    identification purposes would surely only apply if the burns were in  a
    place where they could be seen, such as the face, or  perhaps  arms  or
    legs if not covered by clothing.  In  this  appellant's  case,  on  his
    account he was able to escape despite the burns; they were on his back.
    There is nothing to suggest in  his  report  that  "tiger-branding"  is
    inflicted on the face or forearms.

360. Furthermore, the background  material  put  before  us  which  includes
    details of the methods of torture does not indicate that any particular
    method of torture is more  prevalent  than  any  other.  None  of  that
    material refers to "tiger stripes"  branding  as  being  a  significant
    phenomenon.

361. Importantly,  and  as  a  general  observation  on  the  report  of  Mr
    Vinayagamoorthy, we are of the view that he cannot be considered as  an
    impartial expert on the matters contained within his  report.  We  note
    his political background. We also  detect  in  the  report  a  lack  of
    impartiality. That is perhaps understandable if  he  has  had  dealings
    with many people who have been subjected to  torture  and  taking  into
    account his political background. Understandable or not, it does affect
    the extent to which his report can be relied  on  as  impartial  expert
    evidence.

362. A specific example of the emotive, overstated  and  tendentious  nature
    of his evidence  can be seen in the following paragraph on page 6 which
    we quote in full:

         "Impunity like malignant cells causes cancer and  ultimately  kills
         its host. It is invasive and pervasive and victimises even its one-
         time  practitioner-beneficiaries,  as  the  fate  of  Gen.  Fonseka
         demonstrates. The rulers of Sri Lanka profited from impunity during
         the war. Their appetite for it remains undiminished. The attacks on
         the media is a clear warning to every dissenter in Sri Lanka, be it
         General Fonseka a political opponent or  a  critical  journalist-no
         one will [escape] the wrath of the Rajapaksa regime."

363. We observe that however critical  the  major  country  reports  on  Sri
    Lanka have been, none go anywhere near as far as saying  that  "no-one"
    will escape persecution. We do not consider that  the  evidence  of  Mr
    Vinayagamoorthy  advances  the  appellant's  case  in  any  significant
    respect in any event. We have already accepted on  the  basis  of  more
    objective sources that many Tamils were arrested and held in  detention
    camps during the 2009-2011 period and that  the  authorities  in  those
    camps used torture, burning with  hot  metal  rods  being  one  of  the
    methods of torture they employed. Where his evidence concurs with  such
    sources we are prepared  to  accept  it,  but  his  evidence  does  not
    establish that such a method of torture is any more prevalent than  any
    other or that the security forces 'brand' detainees in the manner of so-
    called tiger stripes.

Conclusion

364. Considering the evidence as a whole, including the  background  country
    evidence, the evidence of the  appellant  and  his  witnesses  and  the
    medical evidence, we are not satisfied, even  on  the  lower  standard,
    that he has made  out  his  claim.  There  is  evidence  of  wide-scale
    detention of Tamils in Sri Lanka in 2009-2011 and of torture  involving
    burns in Sri Lanka. However in our judgment, these facts are not enough
    even on the lower standard  to  persuade  us  that  the  appellant  was
    detained in the way that he described or at all or that he  was  burned
    and acquired the scars he has in the manner  claimed.  In  addition  to
    certain  discrepancies,  his  story  has  too  many   implausible   and
    inadequately explained aspects.  In relation to the  medical  evidence,
    we have found that whilst it  assisted  in  eliminating  some  possible
    causes, it left us with  only two that were  real  possibilities:  that
    the appellant was tortured as claimed; that his scarring was  SIBP.  Of
    these two real possibilities, we have  found,  on  analysis,  that  the
    former claim does not withstand scrutiny. Certainly we  cannot  say  in
    his case that the evidence inexorably points to SIBP, but given that we
    have concluded it is left as the only real possibility that we have not
    been able to discount, taking the evidence as a whole, we are satisfied
    that he has not shown  his account is  reasonably likely to be true.

365. Taking all the evidence  in  the  round  we  do  not  accept  that  the
    appellant had to flee Colombo for Vanni, that he provided services as a
    goldsmith to the LTTE or that he  was  detained  on  the  cessation  of
    hostilities. We find that after 2003 he lived and remained  in  Colombo
    and at no stage then or thereafter did he come to the adverse attention
    of the army or police before coming to the UK.  He can safely return to
    Sri Lanka without fear as there is nothing in his past apart  from  his
    ethnicity that would cause the authorities to show  any  interest.  The
    absence of any anti government activity pre and post flight  will  mean
    that any enquiry will not crystallise into concern about the  appellant
    being a security risk.

366. To conclude, even though there is evidence of torture  involving  burns
    in Sri Lanka, and notwithstanding that we apply the lower  standard  of
    proof, that is not enough to persuade us that the appellant was  burned
    and acquired the scars he has in the manner claimed.

367. In reaching this conclusion we have considered the appellant's case  in
    accordance with the current guidance as set out in GJ and are satisfied
    that he would be of no interest to the authorities as he would  not  be
    perceived to be a risk to the state. In  particular  we  are  satisfied
    that the appellant is not on  either a "stop"  or  "watch"  list.   The
    absence of problems before he left  coupled  with  the  nature  of  the
    limited activity he has undertaken in  the  United  Kingdom  (attending
    Nullivakail remembrance days in May 2012 and 2013 and  Heroes'  Day  in
    November 2011 and 2012) means that he does  not  have  the  profile  of
    someone who will be regarded as a threat or of adverse  interest.   Any
    intelligence led enquiry would not indicate that  the  appellant  is  a
    Tamil activist nor does he have  any  intention  of  becoming  such  an
    activist on return. We do not consider that the appellant's case  falls
    within any of the current categories of risk identified by the Tribunal
    in GJ  nor  under  any  other  categories  discernible  from  available
    evidence.

368. For the above reasons:

    The First-tier Tribunal was found to have erred in law and its decision
    was set aside.

    The decision we re-make is to dismiss the appellant's appeal on  asylum
    and human rights grounds. The appellant is not entitled to a  grant  of
    humanitarian protection.



Signed:

             Upper Tribunal Judge Hugo Storey
APPENDIX A: Error of law decision


          DECISION AND DIRECTIONS BY UTJ DAWSON OF 7 SEPTEMBER 2012


 1. This appeal comes before me  pursuant  to  a  transfer  order  dated  4
    September 2012 having been previously listed before  UTJ  Waumsley  and
    myself on 12 September 2011.  The appellant, a national  of  Sri  Lanka
    born 17 August 1982, appeals with permission the decision of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Jhirad who dismissed his appeal against the decision  to
    remove him as an illegal entrant on 31 March 2011.  The  appellant  had
    arrived in the United Kingdom unlawfully and applied for asylum  on  14
    March 2011 based on a fear from the authorities because of his previous
    support as a Tamil for  the  LTTE.   This  had  led  to  his  detention
    following the surrender of many  LTTE  supporters  in  May  2009.   The
    appellant was taken to Pambamadu detention camp where he  was  tortured
    and held until his escape with the assistance of a member of  the  EPDP
    who smuggled him out of the camp concealed in a lorry in February 2011.
     The appellant relies on scarring as evidence  of  that  detention  and
    torture.   According  to  Professor  S  Lingam,  an  Executive  Medical
    Director of Medical Express Clinic based in Harley Street  London,  the
    scars on his back and right shoulder were caused by heated  metal  rods
    (although it is the appellant's account  they  were  caused  by  heated
    wires).

 2. As to the appellant's account, in summary, his father was a jeweller in
    Trincomalee.  The  appellant's  father  helped  the  LTTE  through  his
    business in 2002. The appellant started working for the LTTE in 2003 by
    valuing their jewellery they brought to him  and  he  also  helped  dig
    bunkers and transport food. He started work as a jeweller in 2007  (the
    precise  chronology  is  uncertain).  In  addition  to  this  work  the
    appellant pursued a course of study in Colombo  where  he  lived  in  a
    house owned by his parents together  with  two  LTTE  members  although
    their reason for being in Colombo is  not  clear.   The  appellant  had
    previously made three unsuccessful applications for entry clearance  to
    come to the United Kingdom as a student on 6 October 2006,  13  October
    2006 and earlier on 27 June 2005.  His case is that in the aftermath of
    an LTTE attack on Colombo Airport on 25 March 2007, one of  the  Tamils
    with whom he lived was arrested and the other had  received  a  message
    from Vanni for him to return (it appears from the LTTE).  The appellant
    decided to accompany him as he knew the authorities would be after him.
     There was no evidence of the appellant having  previously  encountered
    any difficulties from  the  authorities.   On  arrival  in  Vanni,  the
    appellant stayed with his father's brother who was an LTTE  member  and
    started to help them.  He ceased helping them in 2008.  His arrest,  as
    described above, followed on 10 May 2009 leading to  his  detention  in
    Pambamadu.  The EPDP member who facilitated his  escape  (called  Sasi)
    had made contact with the  appellant's  parents.  On  his  escape,  the
    appellant was provided with a false Sri Lankan ID card in the name of a
    Muslim.  He journeyed to Negombo where he was given a  French  passport
    and was accompanied by the agent through checks at the airport and  who
    informed him not to claim asylum in France.  He claims to have  arrived
    in the United Kingdom on 24 February 2011.  The agent called his  uncle
    in the United Kingdom and after he was dropped off, that uncle made  an
    appointment with the Home Office for the  appellant  to  claim  asylum.
    The appellant's mother's two brothers are also in the United Kingdom.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal judge did  not  believe  the  appellant  giving
    these reasons:

          i) The appellant had given no credible reason why he  would  want
             to return to Vanni with a known Tiger member and thus risk the
             authorities' adverse interest in him.

         ii) No reasonable explanation had been given why his  parents  who
             owned a house in Colombo would risk allowing their son and two
             known Tiger members to occupy that property.

        iii) There was no reasonable  explanation  why  it  had  taken  the
             appellant's parents one and a half years to  facilitate  their
             son's release from detention.  If Sasi, the EPDP  member,  had
             been able to get in touch with the  appellant's  parents,  the
             judge considered she had no explanation why the parents  could
             not have taken steps earlier to find out where  the  appellant
             was detained.  His father, a  businessman  had  supported  the
             Tigers and it is likely he would have known whom to approach.

         iv) It was  significant  the  appellant  had  attempted  on  three
             previous occasions to enter the United Kingdom as a student.

          v) Although the appellant's father had apparently  been  arrested
             no subsequent adverse interest had been shown in  him  by  the
             authorities.  There is no evidence that those authorities  had
             issued an arrest warrant for the appellant.

         vi) Professor Lingam had not tested the  appellant's  account  but
             accepted it at face value.  In his finding that he  could  not
             scientifically   differentiate   between   wounds    inflicted
             deliberately from wounds inflicted from torture,  he  had  not
             stated what scientific tests or other means  he  had  used  to
             establish this opinion.

        vii) There must be a method by  which  injuries  capable  of  being
             inflicted on the appellant by invitation to a third  party  to
             do so and injuries caused by third  parties  as  a  result  of
             torture and detention could be differentiated.

 4. After addressing the risk categories identified in TK the judge decided
    the appellant would not be at risk if returned and  would  be  safe  in
    Colombo.

 5. At the hearing before me I heard submissions from Mr Paramjorthy on the
    grounds of application and responses where appropriate from Mr Wilding.
     I say this as on 12  September  2011,  Mr  Jarvis  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State accepted  the  judge  had  made  an  error  of  law.
    Unfortunately no decision was then  promulgated  by  the  Tribunal  and
    following Judge Waumsley's retirement the need for the  transfer  order
    referred to above came about.

 6. In essence, the appellant relies on four grounds.  The  first  is  that
    the judge had failed to engage with the appellant's oral  evidence  why
    he would return to  Vanni  from  Colombo.   Mr  Paramjorthy  made  only
    limited submissions on this ground and I accept Mr  Wilding's  argument
    that there was no clear explanation from the appellant why  he  decided
    to go to Vanni except for a  fear  from  the  authorities.   That  fear
    however needed to be considered in  the  absence  of  any  evidence  of
    previous difficulties by the appellant.  The evidence before the  judge
    was that one of the Tamil members had been arrested on  27  March  2007
    but in  the  absence  of  evidence  of  any  adverse  interest  in  the
    appellant, the finding of the judge on this aspect  was  one  that  was
    open to her on the evidence.

 7. The second ground  relates  to  the  plausibility  of  the  appellant's
    parents permitting him and two LTTE members to occupy their property in
    Colombo.  It is stated  in  the  application  that  the  appellant  had
    provided oral evidence that he had not registered their  presence  with
    the  authorities.   The  judge  does  not  refer   to   this   in   her
    determination.  It is not immediately apparent from the judge's  record
    of  proceedings  whether  this  specific  point  was  put   in   cross-
    examination.  The appellant had  been  tendered  for  cross-examination
    adopting his statement but even on  the  assumption  it  had  not  been
    raised, it was arguably open to the judge to  be  concerned  about  the
    likelihood of the appellant's father putting himself personally at risk
    by permitting occupation of his house by LTTE members in Colombo.

 8. The third ground relates to the judge's conclusion that  there  was  no
    explanation why the appellant's parents had  not  located  him  earlier
    following his detention.  This  ground  argues  that  it  was  not  the
    appellant's parents who made contact with the EPDP member but  that  he
    had made contact with them.  I do not accept Mr Paramjorthy's  argument
    that the judge was confused.  What she  stated  was,  "the  appellant's
    father is a businessman who supported the Tigers and it  is  likely  he
    would have known whom to approach in order to put enquiries  in  motion
    as to the whereabouts of the appellant".  It was not the case that  the
    judge had misunderstood the evidence.  It is an unusual view  taken  by
    the judge that the  LTTE  would  be  in  a  position  to  disclose  the
    whereabouts of the appellant but nevertheless it is not  one  which  of
    itself discloses an error of law.

 9. There is however merit in  the  fourth  ground  which  relates  to  the
    judge's assessment of the medical  evidence.   There  was  no  evidence
    before the judge to support her view that there must  be  a  method  by
    which there could be a differential  identification  of  the  cause  of
    injuries of the kind suffered by the appellant.  She was  in  error  in
    rejecting  the  evidence  of  Professor  Lingam  for  this  reason  and
    furthermore, because of her view that he had not tested the appellant's
    evidence.

10.  Professor  Lingam's  report   does   raise   potential   difficulties.
    Unsatisfactorily, he explains that in Tamil the  word  cambi  can  mean
    both metal wires and metal rods.  He is  not  a  language  expert.   He
    explains in his report that he spoke to the appellant in Tamil as he is
    conversant in that language.  He does not explain  the  extent  of  his
    language competence.  His report explains, inter alia,  that:  "I  have
    ruled that, no way I could  scientifically  differentiate  between  the
    wounds inflicted deliberately from the wounds inflicted from  the  said
    torture".  He does not explain why he is unable to do so.  Further,  he
    states, " I considered if these were caused by a medical condition or a
    surgical procedure, I have ruled that, no medical condition would  have
    caused the scarring described in this report".   He  does  not  explain
    what methodology he used to come to  this  conclusion  despite  earlier
    concluding that he was unable to  scientifically  differentiate  wounds
    caused deliberately from those brought about by torture.  He  does  not
    answer the second limb of this question whether the scars  were  caused
    by surgical procedure.

11. As accepted by Mr Wilding, the judge clearly erred in her  approach  to
    this important evidence that had the potential to meet the  credibility
    concerns which led her to  disbelieve  the  appellant's  account  as  a
    whole.  My view is that the error  is  sufficiently  material  for  her
    decision to be set aside and remade.   If  the  appellant  is  able  to
    establish that the scarring came about as a result  of  his  detention,
    there is a real possibility that his account therefore is true.

12. Mr Wilding did not accept that if the Tribunal were to  find  that  the
    scarring was caused in detention  it  would  be  determinative  of  his
    claim.  This is a position he was entitled to take but  Mr  Paramjorthy
    was correct in reminding me of the weight to be given  to  evidence  of
    previous ill-treatment in assessing future risk with reference  to  the
    QD.

13. The Tribunal is often confronted with the difficulty  of  deciding  the
    cause of particular  scarring.   The  respondent  in  her  reasons  for
    refusal letter of 31 March 2011 did not accept the appellant  had  been
    tortured by the Sri Lankan authorities.   Whatever  shortcomings  there
    are in the report by  Professor  Lingam,  it  is  clear  from  what  he
    observed that the appellant does have significant scars which, although
    not visible wearing a short sleeve  short  would,  were  the  appellant
    required to strip, be sufficient to raise enquiries in the mind  of  an
    observer.

14. The appellant's case is that the scarring was inflicted  by  hot  wires
    and specifically on that both Mr  Wilding  and  Mr  Paramjorthy  agreed
    there is merit in there being general guidance by the Tribunal on:

          i) whether it is possible to differentiate between burn  scarring
             caused by hot rods or wires or similar heated instruments that
             has been self inflicted or inflicted with  consent,  and  burn
             scarring caused by  torture  of  the  kind  described  by  the
             appellant as having occurred during detention.

         ii) whether it is possible to determine from the  nature  of  such
             scarring  if someone has had any form of medical  intervention
             or treatment and if so of what kind;

        iii) whether it is possible and with any  precision,  to  age  such
             scarring by any means.

15. The case will be listed for a case management review four  weeks  hence
    by when the parties will have had the opportunity  of  considering  the
    nature of expert evidence required to deal with the issues in paragraph
    14  above,  in  particular  whether  that   evidence   needs   both   a
    dermatologist and a trauma consultant.  It will also be an  opportunity
    to re-categorise, add to or vary the three areas of  enquiry  described
    above.  The parties are directed to liaise on this and  to  identify  a
    joint expert(s) - details of their identities and  qualifications  will
    need to be made available  to  the  Tribunal  at  the  case  management
    review.

16. In summary therefore I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal made a
    material error of law requiring  the  decision  to  be  set  aside  and
    remade.  None of the findings of the First tier Tribunal is  preserved.
    The appeal will be heard substantively on  a  date  convenient  to  the
    parties after the case management review before a panel  of  judges  of
    the Upper Tribunal.





Signed                                             Date 7 September 2012


Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson








APPENDIX  B:  Home  Office  Policy  Instructions  on  Medico-Legal  reports,
January 2014



Asylum Policy Instruction

Medico-Legal Reports from the Helen Bamber Foundation and the Medical
Foundation Medico-Legal Report Service



Version 3.0

17 January 2014
Contents

|Section 1: Introduction                                                   |3  |
|1.|Purpose of instruction                                                 |3  |
|1 |                                                                       |   |
|1.|Background                                                             |3  |
|2 |                                                                       |   |
|1.|Policy intention behind considering MLRs                               |4  |
|3 |                                                                       |   |
|1.|Application in respect of children                                     |4  |
|4 |                                                                       |   |
|Section 2: Process and Case Management                                    |5  |
|2.|Referrals to the Foundations                                           |5  |
|1 |                                                                       |   |
|2.|Children                                                               |5  |
|2 |                                                                       |   |
|2.|Pre-Assessment procedure by the Foundations                            |5  |
|3 |                                                                       |   |
|2.|Cases accepted for a pre-assessment                                    |6  |
|4 |                                                                       |   |
|2.|Assessment timescales                                                  |7  |
|5 |                                                                       |   |
|2.|Case management                                                        |7  |
|6 |                                                                       |   |
|2.|Granting leave without the need for an MLR                             |8  |
|7 |                                                                       |   |
|2.|Case handling at the substantive interview stage                       |8  |
|8 |                                                                       |   |
|2.|Interim Reports                                                        |10 |
|9 |                                                                       |   |
|2.10 Cases where referral does not lead to an MLR                         |10 |
|2.11 Detained Fast Track Processes                                        |11 |
|Section 3: Considering the content of MLRs                                |12 |
|3.|Introduction                                                           |12 |
|1 |                                                                       |   |
|3.|Interviewing                                                           |13 |
|2 |                                                                       |   |
|3.|Considering MLRs as part of the decision making process                |13 |
|3 |                                                                       |   |
|3.|Assessing the overall claim                                            |15 |
|4 |                                                                       |   |
|3.|MLRs submitted following refusal of asylum                             |16 |
|5 |                                                                       |   |
|3.|Preparing case files for appeal hearings                               |16 |
|6 |                                                                       |   |
|Section 4: Miscellaneous                                                  |17 |
|4.|Difficulties with the Foundations                                      |17 |
|1 |                                                                       |   |
|4.|Reporting                                                              |17 |
|2 |                                                                       |   |
|Annex A -Template Letter: Advising Legal Representative that the case is  |18 |
|on hold                                                                   |   |
|Annex B: Background information on the Foundations                        |19 |
|Section 5: Change Record                                                  |21 |



          Asylum Policy Instruction: Medico-Legal Reports from Freedom from
                              Torture and Helen Bamber Foundation V3.0
                              (2014-01) Page 2 of 21

                  Note: This Document Becomes an Uncontrolled & Unsupported
                  Version if Printed
Section 1: Introduction

1.1  Purpose of instruction

This guidance explains how caseworkers should process and consider asylum
claims involving allegations of torture or serious harm where a Medico-
Legal Report (MLR) from the 'Medical Foundation Medico-Legal Report
Service' at Freedom from Torture or the Helen Bamber Foundation forms part
of the evidence. There is separate guidance for medical (or expert) reports
submitted by other individuals or organisations in Medical Evidence (Non
Medical Foundation cases), and where a report is submitted in relation to
an Age Dispute case.



This is a supplementary instruction and must be read in conjunction with
other relevant guidance when considering the claim, including:

    . Considering the Asylum Claim and Assessing Credibility;

    . Humanitarian Protection;

    . Gender Issues in the Asylum Claim;

    . Internal Relocation;

    . Victims of Trafficking (Guide for Competent Authorities);

    . Appendix FM (Family Life) and Long Residence and Private Life;

    . Discretionary Leave (DL);

    . Human Rights claims on medical grounds.



 1. Background

Torture, trauma and ill treatment can form part of any asylum and/or human
rights claim and victims and survivors may have difficulties in recounting
details because of the traumatic and sensitive nature of those experiences.
Nevertheless, where an applicant claims to have been tortured or the victim
of other forms of serious ill-treatment, caseworkers are required to
consider any information about when, where, how, and by whom the torture or
serious harm was inflicted. This may involve considering MLRs submitted as
evidence to support the claim.

This guidance is for caseworkers processing cases where either the Medical
Foundation Medico Legal Report Service or the Helen Bamber Foundation (the
Foundations) has registered an interest in the case and specifically, where
either organisation has provided an MLR as part of the evidence of ill
treatment. Further details about both organisations can be found in Annex
B.


                                                            Back to Contents






          Asylum Policy Instruction: Medico-Legal Reports from Freedom from
                               Torture and Helen Bamber Foundation V3.0
                               (2014-01) Page 3 of 21

                  Note: This Document Becomes an Uncontrolled & Unsupported
                  Version if Printed
1.3  Policy intention behind considering MLRs

The underlying policy objective when processing claims involving
allegations of torture or serious harm and considering MLRs in the context
of an asylum claim is to:

    . ensure all asylum claims are  properly  considered  in  a  timely  and
      sensitive manner on an individual, objective and impartial basis;

    . ensure all cases are managed effectively throughout the asylum process
      to avoid unnecessary delay;

    . ensure all relevant medico-legal (and any other) evidence provided  by
      the Foundations in support of the claim  is  properly  considered  and
      given appropriate weight.




   3. Application in respect of children

Children can be victims of torture and in certain circumstances the
Foundations will accept referral of cases involving unaccompanied and
accompanied children. As with adults who allege torture or serious harm,
referral of a child to one of the Foundations for an MLR comes via their
legal representatives. Referrals for treatment services may also be made by
GPs, teachers or social workers. In respect of claims involving torture or
serious harm, Medical Foundation and the Helen Bamber Foundation MLRs
relating to children must be considered in the same way as those relating
to adults.

Specially trained caseworkers deal with asylum claims from children,
including cases where torture or serious harm is alleged. The Foundations'
MLRs may occasionally provide evidence relevant to the age of the child. If
age is in dispute, this evidence must be considered alongside all other
relevant evidence on age. Where the MLR contains more information which
raises credibility issues around the claim, wherever possible, this should
be put to the child (if this is being done in person, this must be in the
presence of a responsible adult) to give them an opportunity to explain or
clarify the credibility point in question.

Evidence provided in the MLR must not be given 'no weight' in the overall
consideration of the claim. Further guidance on weighing up conflicting
evidence on age is given in the Asylum Instruction Assessing age.

Caseworkers must also be aware of our obligations under Section 55 of the
Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009. Further guidance is
available at Section 55 Children's Duty Guidance.


                                                            Back to Contents










          Asylum Policy Instruction: Medico-Legal Reports from Freedom from
                               Torture and Helen Bamber Foundation V3.0
                               (2014-01) Page 4 of 21

                  Note: This Document Becomes an Uncontrolled & Unsupported
                  Version if Printed
Section 2: Process and case management



2.1  Referrals to the Foundations

For asylum claimants who allege torture, referral to one of the Foundations
usually comes via their legal representatives, but it can also be made by
GPs, other health professionals, frontline refugee agencies or, in the case
of children, teachers or social workers. This second type of referral can
also lead to an internal referral for an MLR.

Where an account of torture or serious harm is given during the interview,
the caseworker should suggest that the applicant may wish to approach one
of the Foundations for care and treatment. However, it is for the applicant
or their representative to decide whether to seek an appointment with one
of the Foundations. Where a caseworker suggests a referral, this does not
necessarily mean that the claim of torture has been accepted at this point.



2.2  Children

The Foundations will accept referral of cases involving unaccompanied and
accompanied children. Claims from children who have provided evidence that
they are awaiting an appointment with the Foundations must be dealt with in
the same way as those from adults, although caseworkers should be aware
that the Foundations have limited clinical resources in this area which may
lead to delays. See also section 1.4 above.




2.3  Pre-Assessment procedure by the Foundations

Once the applicant has  been  referred  to  one  of  the  Foundations,  from
whatever source, for an MLR, the referral  is  assessed  by  the  Foundation
and, on the basis of the information contained in it;  a  decision  will  be
made to:

   . Reject the request without an appointment or;

   . Invite the applicant to attend a 'pre-assessment' interview; or

   . Move directly to an appointment with a clinician.


Although this varies between the Foundations, only approximately 30 per
cent of applications are accepted for pre-assessment. The decision not to
invite an applicant for an assessment does not necessarily reflect upon the
applicant's credibility. This decision may be taken on a number of grounds,
including instances where the case does not fall within the remit of the
Foundation, where another clinician may be better placed to document the
evidence, where there is nothing to document physically or psychologically
or where injuries have already been documented and the Foundation has
nothing to add. Caseworkers must not draw adverse inferences regarding the
credibility of the asylum claim from the Foundations decision not to invite
the applicant for an assessment or not to proceed with an MLR after a pre-
assessment.



          Asylum Policy Instruction: Medico-Legal Reports from Freedom from
                              Torture and Helen Bamber Foundation V3.0
                              (2014-01) Page 5 of 21

                  Note: This Document Becomes an Uncontrolled & Unsupported
                  Version if Printed
Paragraph 161 of the Istanbul Protocol states that:


      The absence of physical evidence should not be construed to suggest
      that torture did not occur, since such acts of violence against
      persons frequently leave no marks or permanent scars.

Similarly paragraph 236 of the Protocol states:


      It is important to recognize that not everyone who has been tortured
      develops a diagnosable mental illness. However many victims experience
      profound emotional reactions and psychological symptoms.

Paragraph 234 of the Protocol though makes clear that:


      The psychological consequences of torture, however, occur in the
      context of personal attribution of meaning, personality development
      and social, political and cultural factors.

In cases where applicants are not accepted for an appointment with a
clinician or other health care professional, the Foundation will promptly
inform them of the reason, usually through their legal representative, who
should, where the Home Office is awaiting the outcome of the referral,
promptly inform the caseworker to ensure the case is not unnecessarily
delayed.

                                                            Back to Contents


2.4 Cases accepted for a pre-assessment

When the caseworker is informed in writing by the applicant's legal
representative that the case has been accepted for a pre-assessment
appointment, they should normally suspend the substantive decision if they
are not minded to grant any leave (see section 2.8 below). If the
caseworker is informed by phone, the legal representative should be asked
to provide written confirmation and a copy of the letter from the
Foundation (which should be available).

However, there may be cases where the applicant's account of events,
including incidents of torture, is accepted but this does not give rise to
a need for international protection where, for example, the country
situation has changed or there is sufficiency of protection. In such cases
the caseworker may proceed to decision without waiting for the MLR but
should first contact the legal representatives and give them an opportunity
to provide representations as to why the decision should be suspended to
wait for the MLR. Caseworkers should discuss a decision to proceed with a
Senior Case worker.

Where it is decided to delay the decision pending receipt of the MLR,
caseworkers should confirm that the decision has been suspended in writing
to the applicant and legal representative (if represented). A template
letter is available at Annex A.

                                                            Back to Contents




          Asylum Policy Instruction: Medico-Legal Reports from Freedom from
                              Torture and Helen Bamber Foundation V3.0
                              (2014-01) Page 6 of 21

                  Note: This Document Becomes an Uncontrolled & Unsupported
                  Version if Printed
2.5  Assessment timescales

The Foundations aim to produce a full MLR within five months1 of the date
that the legal representative or applicant has been notified in writing
that the case has been placed on hold by the Home Office. However,
flexibility is required when considering whether to delay cases beyond the
five month target as there may be exceptional reasons for delay.
Caseworkers must consider any reasons for the delay provided by the legal
representative and act reasonably in deciding whether to allow more time.

There are several factors that may lead to a delay in the completion of an
MLR, and which may warrant the grant of extra time. These include, but are
not limited to:


    . a high level of  trauma  and/or  a  long  history  of  torture  and/or
      multiple injuries requiring additional clinical sessions;

    . the need to match the applicant with a particular specialist;

    . missed appointments due to travel disruption;

    . a decision not to release the applicant from detention; or

    . illness on the part  of  the  applicant  or  Foundation  clinician  or
      interpreter.

    . In children's cases, securing the appropriate clinical  resources  and
      expertise.


However, the Home Office are unable to delay a decision indefinitely whilst
awaiting receipt of an MLR and is entitled to set a reasonable time limit
for the receipt of additional evidence after which the case will be
decided. It is not possible to state a rigid time limit which would be
appropriate for all cases where provision of an MLR has not been possible
within the 5 month timeframe. Therefore, a reasonable time limit should be
set on a case-by-case basis, in consultation with a Senior Caseworker who
must consider any correspondence from the legal representative regarding
the reasons for the delay.

                                                            Back to Contents


2.6 Case management

When deciding whether or not to delay consideration of a case pending
receipt of an MLR from either Foundation, the guiding principle is that the
caseworker must act reasonably. The decision to delay must be made on a
case-by-case basis. Caseworkers should assess the importance and relevance
of the evidence to the claim, and seek advice from a Senior Caseworker if
in doubt.

Cases must be actively managed whilst any report is being produced.
Caseworkers must ensure regular contact with the applicant's legal
representative (where they are represented) is maintained to minimise any
delays in either the production of the MLR or the existence of other
factors that could reasonably be expected to delay the decision more than
is necessary.




1 The Foundations have significantly reduced the timescales for provision
of MLRs from 12-18 months to 5 months in the majority of cases following a
pilot in 2011-12 to improve internal processes.


          Asylum Policy Instruction: Medico-Legal Reports from Freedom from
                              Torture and Helen Bamber Foundation V3.0
                              (2014-01) Page 7 of 21

                  Note: This Document Becomes an Uncontrolled & Unsupported
                  Version if Printed
Caseworkers must clearly document on the Home Office file all communication
with the applicant's legal representative, including any failure to provide
updates on the progress of the case when requested to do so. If there is no
indication from the applicant's legal representatives as to why the case
has been delayed, consideration must be given to proceeding to a
substantive decision. Caseworkers must ensure that every effort has been
made to discuss the progress of the case with the legal representative
before proceeding to make a decision.

Where repeated attempts to contact the legal representative are
unsuccessful, caseworkers can write directly to the Foundations, who will
follow up directly with the legal representative to avoid unnecessary
delay. The Foundations' are experts instructed by the legal representative
on behalf of the applicant so direct communication between the Foundations
and the Home Office will normally be inappropriate. However, in the absence
of a legal representative the caseworker may contact the Foundation direct
and vice versa.

Where a request for permission to take up employment is received whist the
case is on hold, this must be considered in accordance with the guidance on
'Permission to Work'.



2.7 Granting leave without the need for an MLR

If caseworkers are minded to grant asylum, Humanitarian Protection, leave
under Appendix FM (Family Life) or Paragraphs 276ADE to 276 DH (Private
Life) or Discretionary Leave they may do so without waiting for an MLR,
even where the case has already been referred to the Foundations.

The legal representative must be informed promptly, especially if, for any
reason, the decision will not be served immediately so that they can advise
the Foundation which will be able to reallocate an assessment appointment
if appropriate (where asylum is refused but another form of leave is
granted, an MLR may still be needed for any appeal of the decision to
refuse asylum under Section 83 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
Act 2002).



2.8 Case handling at the substantive interview stage

2.8.1 Request received before the substantive interview date

The asylum interview should not be delayed pending receipt of an MLR unless
there is evidence that a medical condition may prevent the applicant from
attending or participating fully with the interview process. Any letter
from the Foundation provided in support, must clearly state why the
applicant is unable to participate in the interview.

                                                            Back to Contents



2.8.2 Dealing with torture claims at the substantive interview



          Asylum Policy Instruction: Medico-Legal Reports from Freedom from
                              Torture and Helen Bamber Foundation V3.0
                              (2014-01) Page 8 of 21

                  Note: This Document Becomes an Uncontrolled & Unsupported
                  Version if Printed
Caseworkers must check the Home Office file prior to interview as part of
their preparation to see whether:


    . evidence has been submitted indicating that the applicant  intends  to
      submit a medico-legal report;

    . the applicant has approached a medical practitioner;

    . the applicant may require particular care during the interview;

    . the Screening Interview Record notes any previous mention of a medical
      condition, medication, other treatment or other relevant information.

See the Asylum Instruction, 'Conducting the Asylum Interview'.


Where an account of torture or serious harm is given during the interview,
the caseworker should suggest that the applicant may wish to approach one
of the Foundations for care and treatment. If during the interview, an
applicant indicates that they or their legal representative has approached
one of the Foundations, the caseworker must make a note of this on the
interview record, photocopy any evidence of a medical appointment, and
place this on file.

Where evidence of a medical appointment is not available at the interview
the caseworker should request that a copy is provided within 5 working
days. The interview should, where possible, establish the relevance of the
MLR to the claim because evidence provided during an interview may be
sufficient for the caseworker to accept an account of torture or serious
harm without the need for an MLR. Caseworkers must be aware that in some
cases the applicant may not be aware that the legal representative has
referred the case to one of the Foundations for initial assessment.

It should be made clear to the applicant that the report must be submitted
as soon as possible and that without an explanation for any subsequent
delay, a decision will not necessarily be delayed beyond any agreed date.
The applicant and/or legal representative should be informed by email or
letter the agreed deadline for receipt of the MLR, following consultation
with a Senior Caseworker.

                                                              Back to
                                                              Contents

2.8.3 Dealing with cases that have not been referred

Applicants who inform caseworkers that they intend to seek referral to one
of the Foundations, but have not yet done so, are not entitled to have
consideration of their claim suspended pending confirmation that they have
actually been referred. In such instances, caseworkers must advise
applicants of this fact, but inform them that, if a letter confirming a
Foundation appointment is received before a decision is made, the case may
be placed on hold to await any further evidence from the Foundation before
deciding the claim. Where the applicant is represented, caseworkers should
contact the legal representative to confirm if a referral has been made
before proceeding with a decision.





          Asylum Policy Instruction: Medico-Legal Reports from Freedom from
                              Torture and Helen Bamber Foundation V3.0
                              (2014-01) Page 9 of 21

                  Note: This Document Becomes an Uncontrolled & Unsupported
                  Version if Printed
Interviews should not be suspended or cancelled on the basis that an
applicant has informed the Home Office that they intend to approach one of
the Foundations. See 'Conducting the asylum interview' for guidance on the
circumstances in which it may be appropriate to suspend or cancel the
interview.

                                                            Back to Contents


2.9 Interim Reports

The Helen Bamber Foundation (and sometimes the Medical Foundation) may
produce an interim report. This may be because although the clinician
cannot yet be as comprehensive as he or she might in a full report or
because a full history has not yet been obtained (for clinical reasons)
there are nevertheless significant factors to report. Often there are
cogent psychological reasons why it has not been possible to take a full
history but those reasons may, of themselves, be worthwhile discussing in
an Interim Report.

Where an interim report has been completed, it will depend entirely on the
individual facts of the case and the content of the report as to whether it
would be appropriate to proceed to a decision. In cases where an interim
report does provide sufficient evidence to justify a grant of leave there
is no need to wait for the full MLR. The principles set out in Section 3:
Considering the content of MLRs should be applied.



2.10 Cases where referral does not lead to an MLR

The Foundations may decide not to write a report for a number of reasons
and the absence of a report should not be taken as a reason for refusal.
The reasons they may decline to write a report Include (for example):

    . Where nationality is in dispute;

    . Where they cannot match the testimony to the injury:

    .  Where  there  is  no  apparent  physical  scarring  or  psychological
      consequences of torture or serious harm to document.


Caseworkers must be aware that some methods of torture do not produce
scarring and the absence of scarring does not necessarily mean that the
torture did not take place; it could mean that there is simply nothing
physical to document to the requisite standard. Similarly, some survivors
of torture are highly resilient and do not have ongoing psychological
problems capable of being documented. Where torture or serious harm is not
in dispute or is sufficiently well documented by others of appropriate
expertise, the Foundations may also decline to write a report.

Agencies other than the Medical Foundation and the Helen Bamber Foundation
prepare MLRs and, on occasion, the Foundations will refer the legal
representatives to those other agencies.




          Asylum Policy Instruction: Medico-Legal Reports from Freedom from
                              Torture and Helen Bamber Foundation V3.0
                              (2014-01) Page 10 of 21

                  Note: This Document Becomes an Uncontrolled & Unsupported
                  Version if Printed
This may be because of geographical location or particular expertise, a pre-
existing relationship with the client/patient, or a temporary lack of
resource in a particular field.



2.11 Detained Fast Track processes

Applicants routed into the Detained Fast Track (DFT) can be referred to the
Foundations by legal representatives in the same way as other applicants
who are not detained. If either Foundation agrees to accept an applicant
for pre-assessment before a substantive decision is made, the applicant
will be taken out of the DFT process providing confirmation of the
appointment is received. The referral is usually accepted within 24 hours.
It is Home Office policy to remove from DFT processes any applicant who is
accepted by the Foundations for a pre-assessment appointment. In such
cases, unless there are other reasons for the applicant to remain detained
he or she should usually be released and the case transferred to the Asylum
Casework Directorate (ACD) who will take responsibility for the case
management and decision making process.


                                                            Back to Contents














































          Asylum Policy Instruction: Medico-Legal Reports from Freedom from
                              Torture and Helen Bamber Foundation V3.0
                              (2014-01) Page 11 of 21

                  Note: This Document Becomes an Uncontrolled & Unsupported
                  Version if Printed
Section 3: Considering the content of MLRs

3.1  Introduction

Both Foundations are accepted by the Home Office as having recognised
expertise in the assessment of the physical, psychological, psychiatric and
social effects of torture. Clinicians and other health care professionals
from the Foundations are objective and unbiased. Reports prepared by the
Foundations should be accepted as having been compiled by qualified,
experienced and suitably trained clinicians and health care professionals.

Reports may also be compiled by other experts with extensive experience in
this field and should be accepted providing details of their
qualifications, training and experience have been provided and it is clear
that the report has been compiled using the standards and terms employed
by, for example, the Istanbul Protocol: Manual on the Effective
Investigation and Documentation of Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or
Degrading Treatment or Punishment (United Nations, 2004). No report or its
contents should be given little weight on the grounds that the writer,
whether a GP, Consultant, other clinician or health care professional is
not sufficiently qualified to write it. In particular, in relation to
mental health conditions, the report will be accepted by the Home Office
whether completed by a GP, clinical psychologist, consultant psychiatrist,
other health care professional or other expert with extensive experience in
this field.

If a caseworker considers the writer of a report compiled by another expert
on behalf of one of the Foundations is not apparently qualified to write
the report, they must first refer it back to the legal representative. The
concerns regarding the qualifications must be clearly set out so that the
legal representative - as commissioner of the report - can raise these
concerns with the relevant Foundation before a decision is made on the
asylum claim.

Agencies other than the Foundations prepare MLRs and, on occasion, the
Foundations will refer the legal representatives to those other agencies.
This may be due to geographical location or particular expertise, a pre-
existing relationship with the client/patient, or a temporary lack of
resource in a particular field. Where the subsequent report is not prepared
by the Foundations, caseworkers should ask the legal representative to
confirm that the report has been prepared following the Foundations own
processes. If the report has not been prepared using the Foundations
processes, the Home Office instructions regarding the Foundations do not
apply and caseworkers should instead refer to guidance on handling medical
reports from providers other than the Foundations. See Medical Evidence
(Non Medical Foundation cases).


                                                            Back to Contents









          Asylum Policy Instruction: Medico-Legal Reports from Freedom from
                              Torture and Helen Bamber Foundation V3.0
                              (2014-01) Page 12 of 21

                  Note: This Document Becomes an Uncontrolled & Unsupported
                  Version if Printed
3.2  Interviewing

The traumatic nature of torture means that particular care and sensitivity
is required when interviewing applicants who claim to be victims of
torture. Caseworkers must ensure that they are familiar with guidance on
interviewing alleged victims of torture in the Asylum Instruction,
'Conducting the Asylum Interview'. Caseworkers should note that not all
forms of torture necessarily result in physical scars or injuries that are
identifiable during a medical examination or are visible to an interviewing
officer.

A torture victim's potential shame, distress, embarrassment and humiliation
about recounting their experiences are difficulties which may need to be
overcome. Many find this particularly difficult in the atmosphere of an
official process. Those who have suffered at the hands of their own
authorities may distrust officials here, despite travelling to this country
to seek refuge. In many ways, this is an intractable problem but common
sense, awareness and sensitivity can reduce its influence. All Home Office
staff are expected to treat people with respect and must adopt a
professional and sensitive approach during the interview process.

                                                            Back to Contents


3.3  Considering MLRs as part of the decision making process

It is important that reports prepared by the Foundations are understood
fully and given proper weight in the consideration process. MLRs are expert
evidence, not simply a report on the credibility of a claim of torture. The
report may provide additional information that the applicant was unable to
convey at interview but was able to disclose during sessions with the
clinician. Caseworkers must take great care when assessing expert medical
evidence. Due consideration must be given to the opinion of the medical
expert on the degree of consistency between the clinical findings and the
account of torture or serious harm, on the understanding that this does not
impinge on the caseworkers duty to make an overall finding on credibility.

Foundation clinicians can be assumed to have considered the possibility of
'a false allegation' of torture in forming a clinical view as this is
required by the Istanbul Protocol: Paragraphs 105(f) and 287(vi) require
the report writer to consider whether the clinical picture suggests a false
allegation of torture.

It is not the role of caseworkers to dispute the clinical findings in the
report or purport to make clinical judgements of their own about medical
evidence or medical matters generally. Examples of clinical judgements that
are inappropriate for the caseworker to make include:

    . what in the caseworkers opinion ought to  be  physically  possible  or
      survivable;

    . speculation as to alternative causation of physical  or  psychological
      injuries;

    . questioning the accuracy of a diagnosis (based on selective quoting of
      the diagnostic criteria);

    . substitution of the caseworkers own  opinion  on  late  disclosure  or
      discrepancies in the testimony when a clinical  explanation  has  been
      provided in the MLR or




          Asylum Policy Instruction: Medico-Legal Reports from Freedom from
                              Torture and Helen Bamber Foundation V3.0
                              (2014-01) Page 13 of 21

                  Note: This Document Becomes an Uncontrolled & Unsupported
                  Version if Printed
    . speculation  with  regard  to  the  amount  of  detail  with  which  a
      particular traumatic event ought to be remembered.


It is also inappropriate for caseworkers to provide their own subjective
opinion either about the applicant's behaviour, for example the reasons for
not having sought or received treatment previously, or for refusing to
consent to an examination. Some other examples include:

    . the use of information obtained  via  the  internet  about  diagnostic
      criteria or medication;

    . the use of statements made by an applicant at interview that they
      'feel well' to subsequently dispute medical problems identified and
      documented by the Foundation;

    . selective quoting from the MLR to challenge  representations  made  by
      the claimant that the report supports when read properly  and  in  its
      entirety.


This is not exhaustive and if caseworkers are in doubt as to whether a
finding is a clinical judgement, they should discuss the case with a Senior
Case worker who may consult Asylum Operational Policy where necessary.

Where further particulars relating to the content of the report are
required, requests should be made to the legal representatives if the
applicant is represented. If there is no response to requests for further
information from the legal representative, caseworkers can write directly
to the Foundations. The Foundations will liaise with the legal
representative to progress the case and will not provide information
directly to the Home Office as this would be inappropriate given the
Foundations' role as an expert instructed by the legal representative for
the applicant).

Caseworkers are required to consider all evidence in the round; including
expert medical evidence and a conclusion on the overall credibility of an
account of past events must not be reached without careful consideration of
the contents of the Foundation's MLR. Caseworkers must have in mind the
approach to assessing the credibility of past events set out in the
Karanakaran judgment, which emphasises that evidence should not be excluded
where some weight may be attached to it. They also need to bear in mind
that the standard of proof is that of a 'reasonable degree of likelihood'
which is lower than 'the balance of probabilities'. See Considering the
asylum claim and assessing credibility for further guidance. The
Foundations will not produce reports unless there is clinical evidence that
is at least 'consistent with' the claimant's account of torture or serious
harm according to the terms used in the Istanbul
Protocol.


The Protocol, the central importance of which is accepted by the UK courts
in the asylum context, makes clear that reports which document and evaluate
a claim of torture for asylum proceedings need only provide 'a relatively
low level of proof of torture [or serious harm]'. Therefore, the
Foundations' report in support of the applicant's claim of torture or
serious harm cannot be dismissed or little or no weight attached to them
when the overall assessment of the credibility of the claim is made.

                                                            Back to Contents





          Asylum Policy Instruction: Medico-Legal Reports from Freedom from
                              Torture and Helen Bamber Foundation V3.0
                              (2014-01) Page 14 of 21

                  Note: This Document Becomes an Uncontrolled & Unsupported
                  Version if Printed
If a report has been produced in support of an  allegation  of  torture  or
serious harm and, having considered the findings, the caseworker is  minded
to reject the claim to have been tortured for the reasons ascribed  by  the
applicant because there is significant  evidence  that  outweighs  the  MLR
evidence in support of credibility, the  case  must  be  discussed  with  a
Senior Case worker.

If it is decided to refuse the claim the Reasons for Refusal Letter  (RFRL)
must address the contents of the report and explain what  weight  has  been
given to the medical evidence and why this do not  outweigh  other  grounds
for not accepting the applicant's account of events.

Caseworkers should not argue that no weight can be applied to  the  report.
If the allegation of torture or serious harm has been  rejected,  the  RFRL
must state clearly the reasoning behind the rejection of the claim.

Paragraph 339K of the Immigration Rules makes it clear that the fact that a
person has been subject to persecution or serious harm, or to direct
threats of such persecution or harm, will be regarded as a serious
indication of the person's well founded fear of persecution or of a real
risk of their suffering serious harm, unless there are good reasons to
consider that such persecution or serious harm will not be repeated.

However, the existence of a medical report and/or the acceptance of past
persecution and/or torture will not necessarily justify a grant of asylum
or Humanitarian Protection on that basis alone. For example, a grant of
leave may not be appropriate if there are significant and enduring
improvements in conditions in the country such that past mistreatment does
not give rise to a future fear of persecution or if internal relocation is
reasonable. The RFRL must explain why there is no reasonable likelihood
that the applicant will be at risk in the future.

If caseworkers have concerns about the content of any medical aspect of an
MLR prepared by the Foundations, they should discuss those concerns with
Asylum Operational Policy via a Senior Caseworker. The Senior Caseworker
will then refer the matter, if necessary, to the legal representative -
outlining the reasons for the concern - before reaching a final decision on
the asylum claim. The decision should be put on hold pending the outcome of
that discussion.


                                                            Back to Contents


3.4  Assessing the overall claim

Where an MLR is submitted in support of a claim, the claim must still be
considered in its entirety and not solely on the findings set out in the
MLR, whilst always giving due weight to the report. As with all claims,
caseworkers must assess according to the appropriate standard of proof
whether:

 . there is a well-founded fear of future persecution (which may include
   torture or serious harm) for a reason covered by the 1951 Convention (in
   which case the person will normally qualify to be recognised as a refugee
   - see the Asylum Instruction Considering the Protection (asylum) Claim
   and assessing credibility) ; or if not;



          Asylum Policy Instruction: Medico-Legal Reports from Freedom from
                              Torture and Helen Bamber Foundation V3.0
                              (2014-01) Page 15 of 21

                  Note: This Document Becomes an Uncontrolled & Unsupported
                  Version if Printed
 . there are substantial grounds for believing that, if removed, there is a
   real risk of the applicant being subjected to torture or to cruel,
   inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment (in which case Humanitarian
   Protection should normally be granted. (Please refer to the Asylum
   Instruction on Humanitarian Protection.)


                                                            Back to Contents


3.5  MLRs submitted following refusal of asylum

In cases where an MLR is submitted after the claim has been refused, the
case should be reviewed before any appeal. The report should be carefully
considered taking all evidence into account in accordance with the
principles set out above. It is important to fully consider the MLR in the
context of the evidence as a whole to properly assess whether such evidence
may have resulted in a different overall assessment of credibility and
evaluation of future risk had it been available before the initial
decision. It is not sufficient to maintain, without clear explanation, that
previous adverse credibility findings mean the MLR makes no difference to
those findings.

Having considered the report it may be appropriate to withdraw the decision
only if it is clear that a grant of Asylum, Humanitarian Protection or
Discretionary Leave is appropriate. If the refusal is to be maintained it
may be appropriate to provide a supplementary RFRL setting out how the
report has been considered and why the decision is to be maintained.
Caseworkers must ensure that the legal representative is provided with a
copy of any supplementary refusal letter prior to the appeal to ensure that
the appeal can proceed without delay.



3.6  Preparing case files for appeal hearings

If there is evidence that an applicant has been in contact with one of the
Foundations, whenever possible Presenting Officers should contact the
applicants' legal representatives to confirm whether an MLR has been
received by them or is in preparation and, if so, they should request a
copy in advance of the appeal hearing in order to review the case.

If, however, the representatives confirm that the applicant is still
waiting for a report, then the officer should use their discretion on the
basis of the information that is already on file, together with any
information given by the representative as to the likely timescale for the
production of any report, and in the appeal bundle to decide whether or not
to take any further action, bearing in mind the need to avoid unnecessary
appeals.


                                                            Back to Contents









          Asylum Policy Instruction: Medico-Legal Reports from Freedom from
                              Torture and Helen Bamber Foundation V3.0
                              (2014-01) Page 16 of 21

                  Note: This Document Becomes an Uncontrolled & Unsupported
                  Version if Printed
Section 4: Miscellaneous


4.1  Difficulties with the Foundations

Asylum Operational Policy should be informed if Senior Caseworkers believe
that an MLR appears to depart considerably from the Foundations' own
guidelines. If appropriate, Asylum Operational Policy will bring any
concerns to the attention of the relevant legal representative.



4.2  Reporting

When establishing a reporting regime, caseworkers must bear in mind current
contact management policy in relation to certified Foundation cases and
take into account the implications that any future appointments or ongoing
treatment with one of the Foundations could have on an applicant's ability
to fulfil a reporting regime.

According to Home Office contact management policy, where there is
certified evidence that the applicant is a client of either of the
Foundations, they should attract a low reporting frequency. See Contact
Management Policy for further information.





                                                            Back to Contents




































          Asylum Policy Instruction: Medico-Legal Reports from Freedom from
                              Torture and Helen Bamber Foundation V3.0
                              (2014-01) Page 17 of 21

                  Note: This Document Becomes an Uncontrolled & Unsupported
                  Version if Printed
Annex A - Template Letter


Template Letter: Advising Legal Representative that the case is on hold


RE: [Case Reference (include legal representative and Foundation reference
if known) -

Applicants name]



As you will be aware your client, [name of applicant] has been accepted by
the [Helen Bamber Foundation or Medical Foundation for the care of victims
of torture] for a pre-assessment appointment regarding their claim to have
been tortured or ill-treated. I have therefore placed the case on hold.

We wish to take into account any relevant evidence provided by the
Foundation in either an interim report or a full medico-legal report as
soon as it is available. This is to enable us to proceed to a decision on
the merits of your client's claim as quickly as possible. You are therefore
required to provide updates to the Home Office whenever a request on your
clients' progress with the Foundation is made and no less frequently than
every 28 days. We will not normally keep the case on hold for more than 5
months from the date of this letter so you must provide reasons for any
delay beyond the 5 month target. It would be helpful if you could provide
details of alternative arrangements to cover any absences to ensure updates
can be provided as requested. We reserve the right to contact the
Foundation directly if you do not respond to update requests.



You should also inform the Home Office immediately (and certainly within 72
hours) once you are made aware that:

    . The Foundation has decided to take no further action in your  client's
      case;

    . Your client has been accepted for a full assessment;

    . The Foundation has provided a Medico-Legal Report on your client.



I would be grateful if you would also inform the Foundation that the case
has been placed on hold pending receipt of a Medico-Legal Report or
confirmation that no further action is to be taken.

Instances of legal representatives failing to comply with these
requirements will be reported to the Legal Aid Agency.



                                                            Back to Contents







          Asylum Policy Instruction: Medico-Legal Reports from Freedom from
                              Torture and Helen Bamber Foundation V3.0
                              (2014-01) Page 18 of 21

                  Note: This Document Becomes an Uncontrolled & Unsupported
                  Version if Printed
Annex B: Background information


Freedom from Torture

The following information about Freedom from Torture
(www.freedomfromtorture.org) has been provided by the organisation:


'Freedom from Torture is a national charity which was established in 1985.
It is the only organisation in the UK dedicated solely to the treatment of
survivors of torture and organised violence. The main treatment centre is
in London, with further centres in Manchester covering the North West of
England, Newcastle covering the North East of England, Birmingham covering
the West Midlands and Glasgow covering the whole of Scotland.

Prior to 17 June 2011, Freedom from Torture was known as the Medical
Foundation for the Care of Victims of Torture. The Medical Foundation for
the Care of Victims of Torture continues to be its name in legal and
financial dealings. This Asylum Instruction relates to Freedom from
Torture's Medico-Legal Report service which continues to be known as the

'Medical Foundation Medico Legal Report Service'.


Freedom from Torture offers medical, psychiatric and psychological
consultation, assessment and treatment, short and long term rehabilitation
through social care, casework and counselling, psychotherapy,
physiotherapy, complementary therapies, group and family work, small
financial grants to individuals as well as practical assistance with
accommodation and welfare agencies. The Medical Foundation Medico Legal
Report Service also accepts instructions for the preparation of forensic
MLRs documenting physical and psychological evidence of torture and
organised violence'.


                                                            Back to Contents


Helen Bamber Foundation

The following information about the Helen Bamber Foundation
(www.helenbamber.org) has been provided by the organisation:

'The Helen Bamber Foundation was founded in 2005 and works with survivors
of torture (whether sponsored by the State or others), war, genocide, human
trafficking for sexual exploitation or labour (slavery), gender based
violence (including violence on the basis of one's sexuality) and extreme
domestic violence. Many of our clients fall outside the remit of other
organisations.

The Foundation's understanding of the traumatic impact of such experiences
is based on 60 years direct clinical experience that began with
concentration camp survivors after WWII. The methodology for assessing and
treating victims incorporates current research on trauma. Prolonged and
repeated exposure to catastrophic experiences (such as when the victim is
in a state of captivity, unable to flee, and/or under the control of the
perpetrator) can result in


          Asylum Policy Instruction: Medico-Legal Reports from Freedom from
                              Torture and Helen Bamber Foundation V3.0
                              (2014-01) Page 19 of 21

                  Note: This Document Becomes an Uncontrolled & Unsupported
                  Version if Printed
trauma that is complex and enduring. Such trauma often results in the
victim feeling permanently damaged, the loss of previously held belief
systems, social withdrawal, the feeling of being constantly threatened, an
inability to relate to others and a fundamental change to the individual's
previous personality. Impairment to memory and capacity to articulate
traumatic experiences are often observed within this population. Examples
of the conditions in which such trauma is likely to occur include prisons,
concentration camps, slave labour camps, as well as in brothels, other
institutions of organized exploitation and within some families in which
the perpetrator creates a relationship of coercive control.

New diagnostic categories are emerging to better account for the full range
of symptom constellations that can result from multiple and chronic
traumatisation. Conventional psychiatric classifications can 'reduce' the
survivor to a category of symptoms, often discounting the individuality of
the experience, as well as its social and political context. The

Foundation considers that the complex, human dimension of an individual's
response to these experiences must be given proper consideration.

All clinical assessments are carried out by one of the Foundation's senior
clinicians, often involving members of the multidisciplinary team, prior to
implementation of a care plan. Each clinical assessment uses a range of
internationally recognised assessment schedules

(Harvard Trauma Questionnaire, Hopkins symptoms checklist etc)'.


                                                            Back to Contents










































          Asylum Policy Instruction: Medico-Legal Reports from Freedom from
                              Torture and Helen Bamber Foundation V3.0
                              (2014-01) Page 20 of 21

                  Note: This Document Becomes an Uncontrolled & Unsupported
                  Version if Printed
Section 5: Change record

 |Version | | |Author(s) | | |Date | | |Change References | | | | | | | | |
| | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| | | | | |1.0 | | |SL | | |20/03/2007 | | |New web style implemented | | |
| | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |2.0 | | |JL | |
|27/10/2009 | | |Children's duty paragraph added | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| | | | | |3.0 | | |OPRU | | |17/01/2014 | | |Updated following MLR Pilot |
| | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |

                                                                Back to
                                                                Contents















































-----------------------
[1] That is, the thesis that the simplest explanation is the most likely
one.
[2] We agree with Professor Katona that it is not entirely  clear  that  the
definition given by the IP of "typical of" conveys, as  it  must  have  been
meant to, a higher degree of consistency. It is at least  odd  that  whereas
the lesser level of "highly consistent" limits  the  number  of  alternative
causes ("...there are few other possible causes") the  higher  "typical  of"
level does not: ("...but there are other possible causes"). It also  strikes
us that the definition given of "highly consistent" is not easily  described
as conveying a high degree of consistency, since it leaves  open  there  are
other possible causes without requiring it to  be   indicated  whether  they
are less consistent.

