

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

       CM (Article 1F(a) - superior orders) Zimbabwe [2012] UKUT 00236(IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 17 April 2012                              |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING


                                   Between

                                     CM

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the appellant:        Mr D Phillips, Legal Representative, Global House
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr S Ouseley, Home Office Presenting Officer

In the context of  deciding  whether  a  person  is  excluded  from  Refugee
Convention protection  by  virtue  of  having  committed  acts  contrary  to
Article  1F(a),  the  effect  of  Article  33(1)  of  the  Statute  of   the
International Criminal Court ("the Rome Statute") is that  whilst  obedience
to superior orders can be a defence if each of its  three requirements -  as
set out at (a), (b) and (c) -  are met,  by  virtue  of  Article  33(2)  the
Article 33(1)(c) requirement can never be met in cases where the  order  was
to commit genocide or a  crime  against  humanity.  Such  cases  are  always
"manifestly unlawful". For a person alleged  to  be  criminally  responsible
for crimes against humanity the defence of obedience to superior  orders  is
unavailable.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant is a national of Zimbabwe. He  arrived  in  the  UK  on  16
October 2002 as a business visitor. He obtained further leave to  remain  as
a student until 30 November 2006. His application for further student  leave
was refused and his appeal against that  refusal  was  unsuccessful.  On  20
April 2009 he claimed asylum in Croydon.  On 16 October 2009 the  respondent
rejected that claim and decided to issue a certificate under s.  55  of  the
Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006 on the basis  that  there  were
serious reasons for considering that  he  had  committed  excludable  crimes
under Article 1F(a) of the 1951 Refugee Convention. The respondent  accepted
the appellant's claim to have been in the Zimbabwe army between 1987 -  1990
as a full-time  soldier  and  then  from  late  1989  as  a  reservist.  The
respondent accepted that as a reservist he was recruited in  2000  to  be  a
member of the "people's militia". The respondent noted the evidence  in  his
asylum interview that in 2001-2002 he had been involved  in  beatings  which
he had been ordered to carry out by his superiors. His  involvement  in  two
beatings in April 2002 was a  particular  focus.   The  respondent  did  not
accept his claim  that  he  had  sought  to  dissociate  himself  from  such
activities as soon as he could nor his claim that he had carried out  orders
to beat people in order to save his own life. It was not  accepted  that  in
April 2002 he had been ordered to kill his uncle or that it was his  refusal
to carry  out  such  an  order  that  caused  him  to  leave  Zimbabwe.  The
respondent also rejected the appellant's asylum-related  grounds  of  appeal
on the basis that due to his military service in support of the  authorities
he would be considered loyal. The respondent found there were no  Article  8
ECHR circumstances of significance.

2. In a determination notified on 14 December 2009,  Designated  Immigration
Judge (DIJ) A  A  Wilson  dismissed  his  appeal  against  the  respondent's
decision. The DIJ agreed with the respondent that the appellant fell  to  be
excluded from Refugee Convention protection by operation  of  Article  1F(a)
considerations and that he had not shown that he would be at risk on  return
to Zimbabwe for the purposes of Article 3 ECHR. The DIJ also found that  his
appeal failed on Article 8 ECHR grounds. We should  mention  that  when  the
appellant had previously appealed unsuccessfully against  a  decision  dated
16 February 2007 refusing him leave to remain as a student (on  20 May  2007
Immigration Judge Pitt having dismissed that appeal),  no  asylum  or  human
rights grounds were raised in that appeal.

3. The grounds of appeal did not challenge the  DIJ's  primary  findings  of
fact, only his application to those findings of the correct legal  criteria.
On 26 May 2011 the Upper Tribunal decided that the DIJ had materially  erred
in law and that his decision was to be  set  aside.  The  errors  identified
were the DIJ's failure to give any reasoning for his finding that  the  acts
in which the appellant had  been  involved  were  committed  as  part  of  a
widespread or systematic attack directed  against  the  civilian  population
and the failure to make any specific findings as  to  why  he  rejected  the
appellant's reasons for carrying out the alleged crimes  (which  potentially
went to the issue of  duress).  It  was  also  noted  that  there  was  also
evidence before the DIJ of mitigating  circumstances  which  may  have  been
relevant for assessment under Article 8 of the  1950  Convention.  The  case
was then set down for a resumed hearing with  directions  that  the  parties
address certain issues, in particular the defences of  duress  and  superior
orders under international  criminal  law  and  their  interconnection  with
refugee and humanitarian protection law in the context of Article  1F(a)  of
the Refugee Convention and Article 12 of the Qualification  Directive.  Also
mentioned was the recent Court of  Justice  of  the  European  Union  (CJEU)
judgment  dealing  with  the  exclusion  clauses  in  Article  12   of   the
Qualification Directive in the Joined Cases C-57/09 and C-101/09, B  and  D.
At the end of the decision the Upper Tribunal stated that:

    "the hearing to decide what decision to remake in the appellant's  case
    will not be an occasion for any revisiting of the facts as found by the
    DIJ. To repeat,  they  were  not  challenged  in  the  grounds  seeking
    permission to appeal, and hence the only relevant issues  for  decision
    are whether the appellant falls foul of Article 1F(a) or succeeds under
    Article 3 ECHR on the basis of the DIJ's findings  of  fact.  The  only
    proviso is that the appellant is entitled to submit a  further  written
    statement updating his personal  particulars  since  the  date  of  the
    hearing before DIJ Wilson; these may  be  relevant  to  the  Article  8
    issue. Both parties are also at liberty to adduce any further  evidence
    they wish relating to background country conditions  in  Zimbabwe  (the
    respondent has already intimated she will seek to rely  on  the  recent
    Tribunal Country Guidance case of EM and others (Returnees) [2011] UKUT
    96 (IAC))."

4. The DIJ's principal findings of fact were that at the time  of  the  acts
on the basis of which the respondent considered he  stood  to  be  excluded,
the appellant was in a position of authority  in  the  Zimbabwean  military,
holding the rank of sergeant (paras 19, see also para  18);  that  in  April
2002 he had been involved in the beating of two persons in his  village  who
had been ordered to attend a night rally to denounce the  opposition  party;
that he had also been involved  in  giving  orders  for  other  soldiers  to
participate in similar beatings (para 22);  that   he  was  not  a  deserter
(para 22, 31, see also para 25) and that he had not ceased to support  ZANU-
PF (paras 31, 33). The DIJ also made findings relating  to  the  appellant's
claim to have acted under duress but, since his  reasoning  on  this  matter
was found to be vitiated by legal error, his findings on it  clearly  cannot
stand. As regards Article 3 ECHR, the judge found  that  the  appellant  had
not shown that he was a deserter  or  that  he  would  not  continue  to  be
perceived as a ZANU PF supporter on return.  As regards Article 8 ECHR,  the
judge did not consider that his relationship with  his  girlfriend  amounted
to  family  life  as  it  was  "only  a   girlfriend/boyfriend   situation".
Considered as private life this relationship lacked strength  as  they  were
not living together and had not been  involved  with  each  other  for  very
long.

5. At the hearing Mr Philips confirmed that although the DIJ  had  erred  in
his treatment of crimes against humanity, it was accepted by  the  appellant
that during the dates in Zimbabwe relevant to the appellant  the  Zimbabwean
authorities were involved in the commission of crimes  against  humanity  so
as to satisfy the "chapeau" requirements of Article 7 of  the  International
Criminal Court Statute. In relation to the issue of criminal  responsibility
it was relevant to take into consideration (i) that  the  general  situation
in Zimbabwe at that time was one of lawlessness  in  which  those  in  power
gave orders  and  punished  anyone  who  disobeyed;  the  appellant  had  no
alternative but to obey orders; he had to be seen  to  be  loyal;  (ii)  his
participation was confined to one beating of two people; he  played  a  very
small part; (iii) that the appellant acted to save not  only  his  own  life
but also that of his family (he was caring for his  brother  and  sister-in-
law who were AIDS victims) as his superiors  would  have  punished  them  as
well as him had he not carried out their orders;  (iv)  he  was  already  on
thin ice as they had suspected him of disloyalty because of his  involvement
in AIDS awareness campaigning (which those in power  believed  was  used  by
anti-Mugabe supporters as a way of raising funds);  (v)  he  had  drawn  the
line at endangering loss of life and had also acted promptly to avoid  being
put on the spot to commit the serious crime which they had  ordered  him  to
carry out (killing his uncle); and  (vi) he did not hold a prominent  office
or position of responsibility; what he was doing was not his normal job;  he
was simply a part-time reservist. The upshot  of  these  considerations  was
that  the  appellant  could  not  be  said  to  have  made  a   "significant
contribution" as was required by case law and in  any  event,  even  if  the
Tribunal found he had, he  had  acted  under  duress.  Accordingly,  it  was
submitted, the  respondent  had  failed  to  show  that  the  appellant  had
committed excludable acts.

6. As regards Article 3 ECHR, Mr Phillips submitted that the  appellant  was
a deserter who was and would be perceived on  return  as  an  enemy  of  the
state. In addition he was an ex-teacher and  someone  who  was  involved  in
AIDS Awareness campaigning which had attracted the ire  of  the  regime.  In
relation to Article 8 ECHR, it was true that the  focus  of  his  Article  8
claim before DIJ Wilson had been his  relationship  with  Chipo  Maposa  and
that this relationship had lasted 2 and half years, but  he  now  relied  on
his relationship with Ms Gomo, a relationship which had  in  fact  subsisted
since 2004. The appellant and Miss Gomo  had  lived  together  at  the  same
premises throughout most of the time since then and she had  stood  by  him.
He now intended to marry her and put the past behind him. There were  recent
statements from himself and Ms Gomo affirming this.

7. Mr Ouseley for the respondent maintained that the  circumstances  of  the
appellant's involvement in beatings showed that he had committed  excludable
acts that were either torture or inhuman acts or  both:  they  had  involved
beating with whips and sticks.  He had  also  given  orders  for  others  to
commit similar acts. He could not himself rely  on  a  defence  of  superior
orders. In relation to the attempt to rely on the defence of  duress,  there
was no evidence that anyone had threatened to kill or  harm  the  appellant.
His claim that he had fled Zimbabwe as a deserter had been rejected  by  the
DIJ and was belied in any event by the circumstances in  which  he  came  to
the UK and failed to claim asylum for seven years. If he had  truly  been  a
deserter he would not have gone to the Zimbabwe Embassy in November 2006  to
get his passport renewed. His claim that he had  been  previously  suspected
of disloyalty because of involvement with  AIDS  campaigning  had  not  been
accepted by the DIJ  and  was  in  any  event  against  the  weight  of  the
evidence. As regards his claim that the authorities  had  taken  an  adverse
interest in his family members since he fled, he  had  not  raised  that  in
previous hearings and there was no basis for accepting it as  credible  now.
It was accepted that the appellant had been a teacher but that  was  a  very
long time ago and the Zimbabwean authorities had subsequently been happy  to
appoint him first as a full time soldier and  then  as  a  reservist.  These
considerations meant that he had  failed  to  show  he  was  not  a  knowing
participant in excludable acts, that he could  not  rely  on  a  defence  of
superior orders and that he had failed to show he  acted  under  duress.  He
had also failed, in relation to Article 3 ECHR, to show  that  he  would  be
perceived adversely by the Zimbabwean authorities on return. His attempt  to
rely on his ties to Miss Gomo should be roundly rejected as he  had  a  wife
in Zimbabwe and his claim  as  submitted  today  (based  on  recent  witness
statements and as confirmed by Mr Philips on instructions) that he had  been
in a continuing relationship with Ms Gomo  since  2004  was  belied  by  the
evidence he had given previously about his  relationship  with  a  different
girlfriend.

Legal framework

8. In MT (Article 1F(a) - aiding and abetting) Zimbabwe  [2012]  UKUT  00015
(IAC) the Tribunal observed that in R (JS) (Sri Lanka) [2010] UKSC  15  Lord
Brown said that when considering whether an applicant is  disqualified  from
asylum by virtue of Article 1F(a) the starting  point  should  be  the  Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court ("the ICC  Statute");  see  also
SK (Zimbabwe) [2012] EWCA Civ 80.

9. Article 7(1) of the Statute defines crimes against humanity as follows:


    "1.  For the purpose of this Statute 'crime against humanity' means any
         of the following acts when committed as part  of  a  widespread  or
         systematic attack directed against any  civilian  population,  with
         knowledge of the attack:

         (a) Murder;
         (b) Extermination;
         (c) Enslavement;
         (d) Deportation or forcible transfer of population;
         (e) Imprisonment or other severe deprivation of physical liberty in
             violation of fundamental rules of international law;
         (f) Torture
         (g) Rape, sexual slavery, enforced prostitution, forced  pregnancy,
             enforced sterilization, or any other form of  sexual  violence
             of comparable gravity;
         (h) Persecution against any identifiable group or  collectivity  on
             political,  racial,  national,  ethnic,  cultural,  religious,
             gender as defined in paragraph 3, on other  grounds  that  are
             universally recognized as  impermissible  under  international
             law, in connection with any act referred to in this  paragraph
             or any crime within the jurisdiction of the Court;
         (i) Enforced disappearance of persons;
         (j) The crime of apartheid;
         (k) Other  inhumane  acts  of  a  similar  character  intentionally
             causing great suffering, or  serious  injury  to  body  or  to
             mental or physical health."


10. Article 25 sets out the circumstances in  which  an  individual  may  be
"criminally responsible" for a crime against  humanity  falling  within  Art
7.  It provides as follows:

    "Article 25

    Individual criminal responsibility

    1. The Court shall have jurisdiction over natural persons  pursuant  to
         this Statute:

    2.   A person who commits a crime within the jurisdiction of the  Court
         shall be individually responsible  and  liable  for  punishment  in
         accordance with this Statute.

    3.      In accordance with this Statute, a person shall  be  criminally
         responsible and liable  for  punishment  for  a  crime  within  the
         jurisdiction of the Court if that person:

         (a)   Commits such a crime, whether as an individual, jointly  with
             another or through another person, regardless of whether  that
             other person is criminally responsible;
         (b)   Orders, solicits or induces the commission of  such  a  crime
             which in fact occurs or is attempted;
         (c)     For the purpose of facilitating the commission  of  such  a
             crime, aids, abets or otherwise assists in its  commission  or
             its attempted commission, including providing  the  means  for
             its commission;
         (d)    In any other way contributes to the commission or  attempted
             commission of such a crime by a group of persons acting with a
             common purpose.  Such contribution shall  be  intentional  and
             shall either:

             (i)    Be  made  with  the  aim  of  furthering  the  criminal
                  activity or criminal purpose  of  the  group,  where  such
                  activity or purpose involves the  commission  of  a  crime
                  within the jurisdiction of the Court; or
             (ii)    Be made in the knowledge of the intention of the group
                  to commit the crime ..."

11. Article 30 deals with the mental element:

            "Mental element

    1.       Unless  otherwise  provided,  a  person  shall  be  criminally
         responsible and liable  for  punishment  for  a  crime  within  the
         jurisdiction of  the  Court  only  if  the  material  elements  are
         committed with intent and knowledge.

    2.     For the purposes of this article, a person has intent where:

         (a) In relation to conduct, that person  means  to  engage  in  the
             conduct;
         (b) In relation to a consequence, that person means to  cause  that
             consequence or is aware that it will  occur  in  the  ordinary
             course of events.

    3.     For the purposes of this article,  'knowledge'  means  awareness
        that a circumstance exists or  a  consequence  will  occur  in  the
        ordinary  course  of  events.  'Know'  and  'knowingly'  shall   be
        construed accordingly."

12. Article 31 of the ICC Statute deals with grounds for excluding criminal
responsibility and Article 33 deals with superior  orders  and  prescription
of law:

         "Article 31
         Grounds for excluding criminal responsibility
         1.  In  addition  to   other   grounds   for   excluding   criminal
         responsibility provided for in this Statute, a person shall not  be
         criminally responsible if, at the time of that person's conduct:
         ...
         (d)     The conduct which is alleged to constitute a  crime  within
              the jurisdiction of the  Court  has  been  caused  by  duress
              resulting from a threat of imminent death or of continuing or
              imminent serious bodily harm against that person  or  another
              person, and the person acts  necessarily  and  reasonably  to
              avoid this threat, provided that the person does  not  intend
              to cause a greater harm than the one sought  to  be  avoided.
              Such a threat may either be:
              (i) Made by other persons; or
              (ii) Constituted by other circumstances beyond that  person's
              control.


         2.    The Court shall determine the applicability  of  the  grounds
             for excluding criminal responsibility  provided  for  in  this
             Statute to the case before it.
         3.    At trial, the Court  may  consider  a  ground  for  excluding
             criminal  responsibility  other  than  those  referred  to  in
             paragraph 1 where such a ground is derived from applicable law
             as set forth in article 21. The  procedures  relating  to  the
             consideration of such a ground shall be provided  for  in  the
             Rules of Procedure and Evidence."
         ...


                Article 33
                Superior orders and prescription of law


         1. The fact that a crime within the jurisdiction of the  Court  has
         been committed by a person pursuant to an order of a Government  or
         of a superior, whether military or civilian, shall not relieve that
         person of criminal responsibility unless:
         (a) The person was under a legal obligation to obey orders  of  the
         Government or the superior in question;
         (b) The person did not know that the order was unlawful; and
         (c) The order was not manifestly unlawful."


         2. For the purposes of this article, orders to commit  genocide  or
         crimes against
         humanity are manifestly unlawful."



Our assessment

Crimes against humanity

13. At  the  start  of  Article  7  of  the  Rome  Statute  is  the  chapeau
requirement ("chapeau" is used in this context to mean  "hat"/"covering"  or
text that prefaces  the  particular  definitions  of  the  listed  acts  and
applies to each of them; see further SK  (Zimbabwe)  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  807,
para 5).As the Tribunal stated in MT (Zimbabwe), this requirement:

    "...the chapeau requirement is an essential element in  the  definition
    of a crime against humanity and  if  not  met  the  acts  specified  in
    Article 7(1)(a)-(k) do not constitute  such  a  crime,  no  matter  how
    reprehensible they may be. As stated in Triffterer, p.168, the  chapeau
    of paragraph 1 establishes the jurisdictional threshold  of  the  Court
    over crimes against humanity under the Statute. Article 7(1) has to  be
    read together with the  Elements  of  Crimes  document  which  the  ICC
    adopted in September 2002 and which under Article 21 of the Statute  is
    part of the first rank of legal sources to which that court shall  have
    regard."

14. As already noted, it is not in dispute that at the relevant time  during
which the respondent alleges that the  appellant  engaged  in  acts  falling
within Article 7 of the ICC Statue - 2002 - the Mugabe  regime  in  Zimbabwe
was committing criminal acts as part of a widespread  or  systematic  attack
directed against the civilian population with knowledge  of  those  attacks.
Both parties accepted as much and it is our finding also that the  cases  of
MT (and SK (Zimbabwe) [2012] EWCA Civ 807, paras 73-81)  correctly  identify
that such facts were established by background country information  relating
to the situation in Zimbabwe in 2002 and the years leading up to that  date.
The evidence identified by the respondent in the Reasons for Refusal  letter
separately establishes that in any event. Mr Philips also does  not  dispute
that if the appellant  is  found  to  have  committed  acts  failing  within
Article 7, they are to be accepted as acts  forming  part  of  the  regime's
campaign of attacks against the civilian population; indeed it  was  central
to his case that the regime at that time was orchestrating such  a  campaign
from the top down. It is not in dispute that unless the defences  of  duress
and superior orders are found to apply, the mens rea element of the  chapeau
requirement has also been sufficiently proved.

Excludable acts

15. Mr Ouseley contended that  there  were  three  possible  types  of  acts
capable of constituting a crime against humanity engaged  by  the  facts  of
the  appellant's  case:   Article   7(1)(f)   (torture);   Article   7(1)(b)
(persecution)  and  Article  7(1)(k)  (other  inhumane  acts  of  a  similar
character intentionally causing great suffering, or serious injury  to  body
or to mental or physical health),  albeit  he  did  not  press  the  Article
7(1)(b) head with  any  particularity.  Mr  Philips  has  argued  that  even
assuming that the appellant was found to have committed  beatings  in  2002,
they were not severe and were committed half-heartedly and so they  did  not
qualify under any sub-head of Article 7(1). He asked us to attach weight  to
the appellant's witness statement of 5 November 2010 in which he  sought  to
resile from a number of aspects of the evidence he had given at  his  asylum
interview.

16. In relation to this statement we would first of all reiterate  that  the
Upper Tribunal made clear in its decision finding a material  error  of  law
that the principal findings of fact made by DIJ Wilson  were  to  stand  and
before us Mr Philips has not advanced any argument as to why we should  seek
now to revisit those  findings.  Despite  the  appellant's  attempt  in  the
November 2010 witness statement to resile from  what  he  had  said  in  his
asylum interview,  we  consider  the  latter  to  be  a  far  more  accurate
reflection of his involvement in beatings in his village over  the  relevant
period. The appellant  signed  his  asylum  interview  record  as  true  and
correct and confirmed that he stood by it when he gave evidence  before  DIJ
Wilson. He took no steps to cast doubt on  his  answers  in  this  interview
until he was notified of the DIJ's findings on his appeal. The  new  witness
statement contains no explanation for why the  appellant  should  have  said
what he did in his asylum interview. His asylum interview  was  much  closer
in time to the events which he described.

17. We find no merit in the contention that the appellant was  not  involved
in acts falling within the material scope of Article 7.  It  is  clear  from
his interview (even leaving  aside  his  references  to  being  involved  in
beatings in 2001-March 2002 and  concentrating  solely  on  his  account  of
events in April 2002) that: (1) he had been ordered to beat people  and  had
proceeded to carry out beatings; (2) that in  carrying  out  these  beatings
sticks and whips were used and the violence they inflicted  on  his  victims
caused tears to the skin and bleeding; (3) that these  beatings  would  take
five hours, shared between him and others  present;  and  (4)  that  he  had
ordered other beatings. We concur with Mr Ouseley that on the basis of  this
evidence the appellant had engaged  in  acts  which  fell  within  the  Rome
Statute in two separate respects: first he was  involved in acts of  torture
or, failing that, inhumane acts within the meaning of Article 7 and  Article
25(3)(a); and secondly, he was involved in ordering   others  to  carry  out
such acts, so as  to  bring  him  within  the  ambit  of   Article  25(3)(b)
("Orders, solicits or induces the commission of such a crime which  in  fact
occurs or is attempted"). (In relation to the definition of "inhumane  acts"
there is now to hand the guidance  given  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  SK
(Zimbabwe) at paras 45-63).

Level of participation
18. In MT, drawing on previous case law,  the  Tribunal  case  of  Azimi-Rad
(Art.1F(a) - complicity - Arts 7 and 25 ICC Statute) Iran  [2011]  UKUT  339
(IAC)  in  particular,  the  Tribunal  had  this  to  say  about  levels  of
participation and joint criminal responsibility:

    "119. Art 12(3) of the Qualification  Directive  provides  that,  inter
    alia, Article 1F (a) applies not only to those  who  personally  commit
    crimes against humanity but also  those  "who  instigate  or  otherwise
    participate in the commission of [crimes against  humanity]". This  is
    consistent with the approach adopted in the ICC Statute. Art  25(3)(a)-
    (d) of this Statute lay down, in effect, in descending order the  level
    of  involvement  that  an  individual  must  have  to   be   criminally
    responsible.  Article  25(3)  (b)  sets  out  the  different  forms  of
    participation and Article 25(3)  (c)  establishes  individual  criminal
    responsibility if a person "aids, abets or otherwise assists..." as  a
    subsidiary form of participation. (It is not necessary in  the  context
    of this case to seek to address the meaning of "or otherwise  assists"
    as a form of participation.)."


19. In the same paragraph the Tribunal in MT had this to  say  about  aiding
and abetting:

    "Aiding and abetting differs from joint criminal  responsibility  (jce)
    in that whilst the former generally only requires  the  knowledge  that
    the assistance contributes to the  main  crime,  participation  in  jce
    requires both a common purpose and an intentional contribution  of  the
    participant (Triffterer, pp. 756-758) to  a  group  crime.  Aiding  and
    abetting encompasses any assistance, physical  or  psychological,  that
    has a substantial effect on the commission of the crime. Article 2 para
    3(d) of the 1996 Draft Code requires that aiding and abetting should be
    "direct and substantial", i.e. the contribution should  facilitate  the
    commission of a crime in "some significant way". The Trial  Chamber  in
    Tadic  II,  the  Trial  Chamber  in  the  Prosecutor  v  Naletilic  and
    Martinovic (IT-98-34) cases and the  Appeal  Chamber  in  Prosecutor  v
    Akeyesu  (Case  No.  IT-95-14/l-T),   paras   484,   706)   interpreted
    "substantial" to mean that  the  contribution  has  an  effect  on  the
    commission, that is have a causal relationship with the result  and  it
    included within the concept "all acts of assistance by  words  or  acts
    that lend encouragement or support". In Prosecutor v Furundzija (IT-95-
    17/1-T, 10 December 1998), paras 199, 232, 273-4,   the  Trial  Chamber
    said  that  assistance  need  not  be  tangible:  "moral  support   and
    encouragement"  can  suffice,  albeit  it  must  "make  a   significant
    difference to the commission of the criminal act by the principal": see
    also Prosecutor v Brdanin (IT-99-36-A, Appeal Chamber,  3  April  2007)
    and  Prosecutor v Perisic (IT-04-81-T, 6 September 2011). The requisite
    knowledge may be inferred from all relevant circumstances, i.e. it  may
    be proven by circumstantial evidence (Prosecutor  v  Tadic,  para  689;
    Prosecutor v Akeyesu para 498)."



20. Both parties asked us  to  take  this  summary  of  the  relevant  legal
principles as being correct and this we do.

21. Applying these principles to the facts of this case,  we  consider  that
the appellant may well have been engaged in a "joint  criminal  enterprise",
but given a lacuna in the evidence as to the nature of  the  involvement  of
other reservists/militia in a common intentional purpose with the  appellant
we shall leave the issue of this higher level of involvement  to  one  side.
We shall confine ourselves to asking whether the appellant was  involved  as
an aider and abettor.

Aiding and abetting

 22. In our emphatic view  the  appellant  was  an  aider  and  abettor.  Mr
Philips submitted that the appellant's  involvement  in  such  beatings  was
only as an ordinary reservist and was half-hearted and did not amount  to  a
substantial contribution. We cannot accept that submission. On the  findings
of the DIJ and on our own review of the state  of  the  evidence  today  the
appellant held the rank of sergeant and was a principal  facilitating  actor
in the beatings in which  he  participated.  He  described  himself  in  the
asylum  interview  as  being  the  officer  in  charge   on   the   relevant
occasion(s). Furthermore, by ordering others to engage  in  beatings  it  is
demonstrated that he gave moral support and encouragement to the  commission
of criminal acts and made a significant contribution to their happening.

Superior orders

23. At several points in his submissions Mr Philips appeared to  argue  that
the appellant's participation in  beatings  was  excusable  because  he  was
acting in obedience to superior orders. As we made clear, he  was  perfectly
entitled to ask us to treat the claimed context in which the appellant  said
he was ordered to carry out the beatings as relevant both to  the  issue  of
his participation and to the issue of duress. But he  was  not  entitled  to
rely on superior orders as a defence. The reason why  this  is  so  requires
some clarification because Article 33 does not fully reject  what  is  known
as the "conditional liability approach". In the context of deciding  whether
a person is excluded from Refugee Convention protection by virtue of  having
committed acts contrary to Article 1F(a), the effect  of  Article  33(1)  of
the Rome Statute is that whilst  obedience  to  superior  orders  can  be  a
defence if each of its  three requirements - as set out at (a), (b) and  (c)
-  are met, by virtue of Article 33(2) the Article 33(1)(c) requirement  can
never be met in cases where the order was to  commit  genocide  or  a  crime
against humanity. Such cases are always "manifestly unlawful".

24.  Put  simply,  under  the  Rome  Statute,  in   relation   to   criminal
responsibility for commission of crimes against  humanity,  the  defence  of
obedience to superior orders in unavailable by operation of law.


Duress

25. Mr Philips submitted that even if we found the appellant  to  have  been
involved in acts contrary to Article 7 as an aider and  abettor,  we  should
nevertheless find that he was not excluded by virtue of his having  a  valid
defence of duress.

26. At para 104 of MT the Tribunal stated:

    "... Article 31(1) (d) of the ICC Statute makes clear that  duress  can
    be a defence to international criminal responsibility. In draft Article
    9 (dealing with 'Exceptions to the principle  of  responsibility')  the
    International Law Commission (ILC) UN GAOR Supp.No.10: UN doc. A/42/10/
    (1987) at 18 noted that for 'coercion to be considered as an exception,
    the perpetrator of the incriminating act must be able to show  that  he
    would have placed himself in grave imminent and irremediable  peril  if
    he had offered any resistance'. Whether it is a  complete  defence  and
    whether it can apply in all types of cases remains unsettled:  see  the
    Trial Chamber discussions in Prosecutor v Endermovic (IT-96-22) 7  June
    1997 (a case, like all the other  overseas  cases  to  which  we  refer
    elsewhere in this decision -unless otherwise specified- decided by  the
    International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia or ICTFY). It
    appears uncontroversial, however, that such a defence  is  confined  to
    situations where the defendant's freedom of will  and  decision  is  so
    severely limited that there is eventually no moral  choice  of  counter
    activity available; and that it has four components: the threat must be
    of imminent death or continuing or imminent serious  bodily  harm;  the
    threat must result in duress causing the crime;  a  threat  results  in
    duress only if it is otherwise unavoidable (i.e. if a reasonable person
    in comparable circumstances would have submitted and  would  have  been
    driven to the relevant criminal  conduct);  and  the  act  directed  at
    avoiding the threat must be necessary in terms of no other means  being
    available and reasonable for reaching the desired effect. "


27. Once again both Mr Philips and Mr Ouseley asked us to treat  this  as  a
correct statement of the law. We do so but (i) note that this  entails  that
we reject the respondent's contention in the Reasons for Refusal  letter  of
16 October 2009 at para 32 that duress is not a defence but only a  plea  in
mitigation; (ii) note that we take also into account  the  additional  legal
materials which the appellant's representatives had submitted in the  course
of the earlier stages of  this  appeal  and  in  particular:  the  Nuremberg
Military Tribunal cases of U.S. v Freidrich Flick et al, Case 5 Vol  VI  and
U.S. v Alfred Krupp Von Bohlen and Halbach (the Krupp  case)   Vol  IX;  the
ICTY case of Prosecutor v Darko Mrda  IT-02-59-S;  the  article  by  Jeremie
Gilbert, "Justice not Revenge: The  International  Criminal  Court  and  the
'grounds to  exclude  criminal  responsibility':  defences  or  negation  of
criminality?"; an article by Martyn Naylor, "Resistance is  Futile:  "Duress
as a  Defence  to  International  Killing",  Cambridge  Student  Law  Review
[2006];   and an unattributed piece circa 2004, "Superior Orders and  Duress
as Defences in International Law and the ICTY".

28. We unreservedly reject the appellant's claim to  a  defence  of  duress.
Once again, taking his  asylum  interview  evidence  as  the  most  reliable
source of evidence we have, there are a number of factors that show  he  did
not act under duress.

29. First, on his own account he had been complicit in beatings  ordered  by
his superiors for some period of time before he was ordered to  conduct  the
beatings in April 2002. On his own account even  during  an  earlier  period
covering 2001 -March 2002 he was authorised to go and beat  people  in  more
than one village (Qs 15, 18). It is not credible, therefore,  that  when  he
was ordered to commit the beatings in April 2002 he was caught unawares  and
not in a position to have taken avoidance  action  beforehand.  He  had  had
ample opportunity to disassociate himself from such acts and had  failed  to
avail himself of such opportunities. We note further that the appellant  did
not claim that he had sought to take any avoidance action immediately  after
the April beatings: the first order  he  disobeyed,  for  him  to  kill  his
uncle, was said to have been made "later the same month", not immediately.

 30. Second, although the appellant claimed that if he  had  not  obeyed  he
would  have  been  at  risk  of  imminent  harm  from  his   superiors   for
disobedience, he produced no evidence to support that  claim.  It  is  clear
from the case of MT and the background evidence cited by the  respondent  in
the Reasons for Refusal that the Zimbabwe authorities throughout  the  first
decade of 2000 did not visit  immediate  punishment  on  the  generality  of
soldiers or police who deserted or failed to carry out their orders.  Whilst
at para 107 the Tribunal in MT was concerned only with police  officers,  we
are satisfied, from the background evidence before us, that  what  was  said
therein was equally true for soldiers and reservists. The  reaction  by  the
authorities to desertions was likely to vary from  judicial  measures  which
take time to instigate (prosecution followed by imprisonment), to other non-
judicial measures such as quarantining and harassment about  housing  and/or
debts, which again would not happen overnight. By and  large  such  measures
did  not  constitute  acts  of  comparable  severity  to  the  beatings  the
appellant inflicted on others.

31. Third, we do not accept that the appellant has given a credible  account
of obeying orders to carry out beatings out  of  fear  of  reprisal  actions
against his family members in the village. Mr  Philips  in  his  submissions
sought to highlight that the family members in his village of  whom  he  had
care included AIDS sufferers who were vulnerable. However, we consider  that
if he had in fact feared such reprisal  action,  the  appellant  would  have
said as much at his asylum interview; whereas in fact in this  interview  he
only expressed concern for his own life (and later  his  uncle's).   Concern
about these family members was not mentioned until his oral evidence  before
the DIJ.

32. Mr Philips submitted that the appellant had also  established  that  the
appellant's fears of reprisals to his family members  in  the  village  were
real, pointing out that in the November 2010  statement  the  appellant  had
mentioned problems his family had faced after he had fled the  village.  The
relevant passage of that statement reads as follows:

    "After I ran away because I did not  want  to  murder  John  Sagandira,
    members of the ZANU-PF went to my family  home  in  the  village.  They
    questioned my mother and they searched the house  for  everything  that
    belonged to me and they took away some of my documents. They  asked  my
    mother where I was and she just said that I had run away".

33. This text does not bear the gloss Mr  Philips  seeks  to  place  on  it.
Whilst there is a mention of a visit to the appellant's family  home  and  a
description of the  authorities  manifesting  an  adverse  interest  in  the
appellant, there is no mention of any threats or  harm  being  made  to  the
mother or other family members in 2002 or in subsequent years.  Further,  it
is clear from the appellant's November 2010 statement that he  had  been  in
touch with his wife  in  2006.  If  there  had  in  fact  been  any  adverse
consequences visited on  his  wife,  mother  or  other  family  members,  we
consider he would surely have heard about it from his wife and mentioned  it
in his asylum interview; yet he made no mention of any such consequences.

34. Fourth, even in the context of  the  further  order  which  he  said  he
refused to carry out - killing his uncle - his conduct  was  not  consistent
with someone taking immediate and effective steps to avoid having  to  carry
out the orders.  According  to  his  witness  statement  of  November  2010,
although he fled his village and went to Mozambique on the same day that  he
was ordered to kill his uncle, he  then  returned  to  Zimbabwe  within  two
weeks, staying in Harare and not leaving the country until 15 October  2002.
We are satisfied that if his account were true, he would not have taken  the
risk of returning to  Zimbabwe  and  remaining  there  for  over  6  months,
especially as by then he would on his own account have been classified as  a
deserter shortly after he fled the village.

Article 3

35. We have no doubt that prior to leaving Zimbabwe the appellant was  never
at a risk of serious harm from the Zimbabwe authorities. Nor do we have  any
doubt that he would not be at risk on return. For reasons already given,  we
entirely reject his claim to have deserted from the  army.  In  relation  to
his claim to have been perceived as sympathetic with  MDC  whilst  still  in
Zimbabwe, we consider that is refuted by the fact that  during  this  period
the authorities appointed him as  a  reservist,  awarded  him  the  rank  of
sergeant and entrusted  him  with  the  carrying  out  of  orders  aimed  at
coercing villagers to support ZANU-PF.  These  actions  of  the  authorities
were done in full knowledge of  his  AIDS  awareness  work  and,  whilst  in
relation to AIDS awareness groups in  other  parts  of  the  country  or  at
different periods the authorities may have suspected them  of  pro-MDC  bias
or activities, their actions in relation to the appellant  made  clear  that
they had no suspicion in his case. We entirely reject his  claim  that  they
had ordered him  to  carry  out  beatings  because  they  suspected  him  of
disloyalty and that this was a way of testing him. We note (once more)  that
despite having claimed to have fled to Mozambique in April 2002 he  returned
to Zimbabwe very soon after and remained living in Harare for a further  six
months. Whilst in the UK he saw fit in 2006 to visit  the  Zimbabwe  embassy
personally to renew his passport. His wife in Zimbabwe  also  contacted  the
authorities there to assist him in obtaining such a renewal.  In  our  view,
anyone who feared that he had been classified  as  a  deserter  in  official
records would not have taken the risk of seeking to renew  his  passport  in
person at the London embassy or of getting  his  wife  to  collect  the  new
passport back in Zimbabwe. The appellant is an intelligent man and he  would
be well aware from contact with others in the Zimbabwe community in  the  UK
that the Zimbabwe CIO takes an active interest in Zimbabwe nationals in  the
UK and would hold records of any deserters.

36. In dealing with the appellant's position in relation  to  the  exclusion
clauses we have already dealt with the appellant's  claims  to  have  feared
for his family members and in the context of Article 3 we  reject  them  for
much the same reasons: see above paras 28-33.

37. In our view the appellant would on return be seen as a  loyal  supporter
of ZANU PF.

38. What we have said concerning Article 3 ECHR also stands to  overset  any
claim the appellant  might  have  to  subsidiary  (humanitarian)  protection
under Article 15 of the Refugee Qualification Directive (to which  there  is
an exclusion provision at Article 17 broadly analogous to Article 1F(a)).

Article 8

39. In relation to Article 8 of the  ECHR,  we  are  in  agreement  with  Mr
Ouseley  that  the  appellant's  account  of   his   history   of   personal
relationships has been extremely equivocal if not contradictory. In his  own
evidence for this appeal he has a wife in Zimbabwe and has children  by  her
and also by a previous wife. When IJ Pitt dealt with his student  appeal  in
2007 she had a letter from a Ms Gomo from his same address stating that  she
would continue to sponsor her "partner" financially  through  his  education
(see the Wilson determination, para 2).  When he made his  asylum  claim  in
April 2009 and when he appeared before  DIJ  Wilson  in  November  2009  his
Article 8 claim was made on the basis of his relationship  with  Miss  Chipo
Maposa. He said that he and Ms Maposa did not live together. There had  been
no mention of his relationship with Ms Gomo being ongoing. In  his  November
2010 statement there was no mention of any  personal  relationships  in  the
UK. There has now been produced before us a witness statement from  Ms  Gomo
dated 10 April 2012 stating that she has  indefinite  leave  to  remain  and
that she is an NHS nurse and that she has been in a  relationship  with  the
appellant since 2004 and that she and the appellant have a  "tender,  loving
relationship" which is very important  to  her.  There  is  also  a  witness
statement from the appellant dated 5 April 2012 stating  that  he  has  been
and is currently in a relationship with Ms Gomo and they are  determined  to
put past difficulties behind them and get married in  the  not  too  distant
future. "Our relationship has had its challenges during which I admit I  was
forced to go into another relationship however  since  we  have  since  come
back together again and are stronger for it".  Ms Gomo was said  to  be  the
sole breadwinner, although he would work if given permission.

40. On instructions Mr Philips was further able to clarify that it  was  the
appellant's position that he had been in a  relationship  with  Miss  Maposa
for two and half years, but that he had had a continuous close  relationship
with Ms Gomo since 2004. Mr Philips urged  us  not  to  apply  inappropriate
moral and/or cultural standards to the evidence  regarding  the  appellant's
circumstances and we have no intention of doing so. The  difficulty  however
is that despite the clear directions permitting the appellant to update  his
personal situation since the hearing before the  DIJ,  we  have  been  given
little evidence.  Although Ms Gomo attended before us  Mr  Philips  did  not
seek to call her despite directions indicating that oral evidence  might  be
given. There is a dearth of documentary evidence as to the strength of  this
relationship. There is a lack of any satisfactory explanation  for  why  the
appellant should have failed to mention  Ms  Gomo  when  making  his  asylum
application or before the FTT judge or how his claim to want  to  marry  her
now is consistent with his claim to have a wife  in  Zimbabwe  whom  he  has
been in contact with since he came to the UK and with whom he has  children.
 The claim now made that the  appellant  was  "forced  to  go  into  another
relationship" is wholly inconsistent with the evidence  he  gave  about  his
relationship with Ms Maposa before the DIJ.

41. Even if it were accepted that the appellant  and  Ms  Gomo  have  shared
accommodation for significant periods of  time,  the  evidence  taken  as  a
whole falls  well  short  of  establishing  that  there  has  been  a  close
emotional relationship between them. There is a lack of  evidence  up  until
very recently to show the two have strong personal  ties  and  the  most  we
might be prepared to accept on the basis of these latest witness  statements
is that the two are now close. Accordingly we  do  not  consider  they  have
established a close emotional relationship of any significant duration  such
as to constitute either family life or significant private life  within  the
meaning of Article 8(1). Even if we considered the appellant's  relationship
with Ms Gomo to amount to a protected right within Article 8(1), we  do  not
consider it has been shown to have significant factual content  or  quality.
Accordingly we see no difficulty with such a relationship  being  continued,
once he is removed, by electronic means or correspondence.

42. For the above reasons we conclude:

The FTT judge materially erred in law and his decisions has been set aside.

The decisions we remake are:

     To uphold the respondent's s.55 certificate on the basis that  we  are
    satisfied the respondent had shown that the appellant is excluded  from
    status as a refugee by virtue of Article 1F(a);


    To dismiss the appeal on asylum-related grounds as  the  appellant  has
    failed to show that he has a well-founded for of persecution or faces a
    real risk of serious harm or treatment contrary to Article  3  ECHR  on
    return;


    To dismiss the appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds.



      Signed

          Upper Tribunal Judge Storey


