
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Khan and Tabassum (CCOL: Postgraduate certificates) Bangladesh [2011] UKUT
00249 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 29 March 2011                              |                             |
|                                              |08 June 2011                 |


                                   Before

                      SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE P R LANE



                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                               MD SHOHEL KHAN
                               najia tabassum

                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr R. Hopkin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents: Mr A. Sayem of Immigration 4u




(1)  Those  who  assert  they  were  awarded  postgraduate  certificates  in
business management (and   IT)  by  Cambridge  College  of  Learning,  after
completing relevant courses there, will have to surmount the  important  and
obvious problem that, if such certificate courses had been run and  examined
by CCOL, and certificates awarded to successful  candidates,  the  witnesses
who gave evidence to the Tribunal in NA and  Others  (Cambridge  College  of
Learning) Pakistan [2009] UKAIT 00031 and who  were  found  credible,  would
have said so.  There was no credible evidence before the AIT  in  that  case
to suggest that any postgraduate courses in business management or  IT  were
taught and examined by CCOL. It follows that, whilst the  evidence  in  each
case must be individually assessed, NA and Others  is  indicative  of  there
being no such thing as a genuinely issued CCOL postgraduate  certificate  in
those subjects and it is therefore necessary for a claimant seeking to  rely
on such a certificate to adduce cogent evidence in support.

(2)  For the correct way to approach the use of the determination in NA  and
Others, see paragraphs 32 to 40 of the Upper Tribunal's determination in  TR
(CCOL cases) Pakistan [2011] UKUT 33 (IAC).


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The respondents are citizens of Bangladesh,  born  respectively  on  1
    January 1980 and 10 August 1989.  They are husband and wife.  The first
    respondent entered the United  Kingdom  in  June  2003  as  a  student,
    receiving further leave to remain in that  capacity  on  4  March  2005
    (until 31 December 2007) and 31 January 2008 (until 31 October  2008).
    On 8 September 2008 the first respondent was granted leave to remain as
    a Tier 1 (Post-Study)  Migrant  until  4  September  2010.  The  second
    respondent entered the  United  Kingdom  on  23  February  2009,  as  a
    dependent spouse of the first respondent,  and  was  granted  leave  to
    enter until 4 September 2010.

2.    On 3 September 2010 both respondents applied for leave  to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom as, respectively, a Tier 1 (General) Migrant  and  a
    partner of such a migrant.  On 8 October 2010, the Secretary  of  State
    refused the respondents'  applications.   In  the  case  of  the  first
    respondent, she did so because she was satisfied that,  despite  having
    stated in his current application that he had never used  deception  in
    an attempt to gain leave in the United Kingdom,  the  first  respondent
    had not told the truth because, in his  previous  application,  he  had
    submitted in support a postgraduate certificate in business  management
    from the Cambridge College of Learning.   The Secretary of State stated
    that it has "been confirmed  that  this  institution  never  offered  a
    legitimate  Postgraduate  qualification".    Accordingly,   the   first
    respondent's application was refused under  paragraph  322(1A)  of  the
    Immigration Rules, as regards the present  application,  and  paragraph
    322(2), as regards the previous one.  So far as  paragraph  322(2)  was
    concerned, the Secretary of State deemed refusal to be appropriate  and
    was not prepared to  exercise  discretion  in  the  first  respondent's
    favour.

3.    Additionally,  the  Secretary  of  State  considered  that  the  first
    respondent had failed to score the requisite  30  points  for  earnings
    under Appendix A (attributes) to the Immigration Rules, scoring only 20
    points, according to the information provided by the first respondent.

4.    The second respondent's application was  refused,  in  line  with  the
    decision taken in respect of the first respondent.

5.    The respondents appealed to the First-tier Tribunal  and  their  cases
    were heard at Taylor House on 1 December 2010 by an Immigration  Judge.
     The grounds of appeal in respect of  the  first  respondent  contended
    that he should have been awarded 10 points  under  paragraph  245C  and
    Appendix A, based on previous earnings, making a total  of  30  points.
    Although there had been a failure to provide  documentation  listed  in
    paragraph 142 of the  policy  guidance,  30  points  should  have  been
    awarded on the basis of the materials that  the  first  respondent  had
    supplied to the respondent.

6.    So far as false  representations  were  concerned,  the  grounds  said
    this:-

         "It has been stated, in particular, the Appellant submitted a false
         certificate  of  Postgraduate  Diploma   in   Business   Management
         qualification from Cambridge College of Learning to obtain a  grant
         of leave as a  Tier  1  (PSW)  Migrant.   The  Appellant,  however,
         confirms that he genuinely obtained his PGD qualification and  will
         be able  to  provide  necessary  evidences  to  meet  the  relevant
         immigration rules.  He did not deceive the UK BA in  any  way.   He
         will be able to prove the authenticity of his PGD award before  the
         Tribunal".


    It is noteworthy that the grounds  of  appeal  referred  to  the  first
    respondent (as he now is) being awarded a postgraduate diploma (PGD).


7.    At the hearing before the Immigration Judge, it was recorded that  the
    "matter proceeded by brief oral submissions, in part because  Mr  Sayen
    (sic) explained that his client studied for a postgraduate  certificate
    as opposed to a Diploma in business management from  February  2008  to
    July 2008".  The  respondent  stated  in  oral  evidence  that  he  was
    "shocked to learn upon receipt of his  decision  that  his  certificate
    from the Cambridge College of Learning  is  not  regarded  as  genuine"
    (paragraphs 6 and 7).

8.    The Secretary of State's Presenting Officer relied  on  the  authority
    of NA and Others (Cambridge College of Learning) Pakistan [2009]  UKAIT
    00031, in order to refute the  first  respondent's  assertion  that  he
    studied for and obtained the award of  a  postgraduate  certificate  in
    business  management  from  that  institution.   At  paragraph  9,  the
    Immigration Judge's findings on this issue were as follows:-

         "9.      The contentious issue of the Cambridge College of Learning
             is,  that,  I  reiterate  [the  first   respondent]   drew   a
             distinction between a postgraduate certificate which he gained
             that I have already referred to, as opposed to a Diploma.   He
             did this after studying at  the  University  of  East  London,
             having hitherto an unblemished immigration  history.   If  the
             ...  Secretary of State is alleging fraud, the onus shifts  to
             her to prove it which she manifestly has not done  in  respect
             of the Cambridge College.  As I am satisfied he did  genuinely
             study for a certificate at the college  and  gained  it,  this
             appeal succeeds in  relation  to  his  document  not  being  a
             forgery and his not having employed deception in this regard."


9.    At paragraph 8, the Immigration Judge had already found,  for  reasons
    not challenged by the Secretary of State, that the first respondent was
    entitled to the  award  of  30  points  in  respect  of  earnings.   At
    paragraph 10, she allowed the first respondent's appeal.  Although  she
    did  not  deal  expressly  with  the  second  respondent,  apart   from
    mentioning her  in  the  title  page,  it  is  to  be  taken  that  the
    Immigration Judge also allowed the appeal of the second respondent.

10.   The Secretary  of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  against  the
    determination of the Immigration Judge. On 18 January 2011, the  First-
    tier Tribunal granted such permission, on the basis of the Secretary of
    State's grounds, which asserted that the Immigration Judge  had  failed
    to  give  adequate  reasons  for  her  finding  that  the  postgraduate
    certificate in  business  management  from  the  Cambridge  College  of
    Learning was a genuine document.  The Secretary of State submitted that
    the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  had  "discussed  at  length  the
    courses offered by the Cambridge College of Learning 2007-2008.  It  is
    submitted that, with reference to NA  and  Others  [2009]  UKAIT  00031
    (paragraphs 47, 58, 131, 140, 142 and 145) that the  Cambridge  College
    of  Learning  never  ran  its  own  postgraduate  courses  in  business
    management or IT".  The Immigration Judge had accordingly  "misdirected
    herself in trying to make a distinction between  a  certificate  and  a
    diploma when it is clear from NA that no postgraduate courses  were  on
    offer from the College".

11.   On 11 February 2011, the Upper  Tribunal  gave  directions  concerning
    the conduct of the appeal.  The respondents  (as  they  now  are)  were
    directed to ensure that any necessary oral evidence could be  given  at
    the forthcoming hearing, in the event that the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal was set aside.

12.   In his submissions to me on  29  March,  Mr  Sayem  claimed  that  the
    Immigration Judge had been entitled  to  find  as  she  did  because  a
    postgraduate certificate was not the same as a postgraduate diploma.  A
    certificate was of a lower order than a diploma.  There was nothing  in
    NA and Others to the effect that the Cambridge College of Learning  had
    not  run  postgraduate  certificate  courses  in  business  management.
    Furthermore, the case of TR (CCOL Cases) Pakistan [2011] UKUT 33  (IAC)
    had made it plain  that  each  CCOL  case  needed  to  be  individually
    considered.

Error of Law

13.   In NA and  Others,  the  Tribunal  heard  oral  evidence  from  Messrs
    Stewart and Malik and Ms Ullah, each of whom had earlier made  Criminal
    Justice Act statements, upon which the Secretary of State has relied in
    many cases involving individuals, including the first  respondent,  who
    had claimed to receive  postgraduate  qualifications  from  CCOL.   The
    Tribunal found all three witnesses to be credible.

14.   Mr Stewart led the enforcement visit to CCOL on 2  December  2008  and
    gave evidence by January 2009 the Secretary of State had received 2,542
    applications for post study work from students claiming that  they  had
    CCOL PG Dips in either BM management or IT.  Mr Malik taught IT at CCOL
    but was unaware of anyone offering a PgDip in IT nor  did  he  hear  of
    anyone studying such a course.  He referred to an incident in  November
    2008 when a man approached him "asking if he would verify his PgDip  in
    BM, which he refused to do" (paragraph 19).

15.   Ms Ullah's responsibilities at CCOL included  the  day-to-day  running
    of the business department, where she had an overview of the attendance
    in all of the business classes of the College.  During her  time  there
    (January 2007 to December 2008, with a short break), "she did  not  see
    any PgDip course taught nor any PgDip students either in classrooms  or
    on any attendance records.  She had not heard  of  any  curriculum  for
    such a course, nor had she ever met any staff members who were teaching
    a PgDip in BM. She was confident in saying that the PgDip in BM did not
    exist. It was not possible that an entire PgDip course could have  been
    offered in her field without it being aware of it" (paragraph 23).  She
    considered all the teaching about which she knew was going on  at  CCOL
    to be bona fide "but she was aware  through  the  grapevine  that  some
    things  were  going  wrong  from  the  second  half  of  2008  onwards"
    (paragraph 25).  At paragraph 47, the Tribunal  noted  the  documentary
    evidence relating to what officers were  told  during  the  enforcement
    visit.   This  referred  to  a  number  of  accredited   courses:   ADE
    (certificate, diploma and advanced diploma  level),  ACP  (certificate,
    diploma and advanced diploma level) University of  Sunderland  (BSc  in
    computing) and ILM (Level 7  in  executive  management)  courses.   The
    college also run English classes.

16.   At paragraph 58, the Tribunal noted the  evidence  of  Mr  Tariq,  who
    only started working as an IT teacher one month before CCOL closed.  He
    was not aware of any postgraduate courses at CCOL.

17.   At paragraphs 130 to 145, the Tribunal considered the  issue  of  CCOL
    PgDips.  At  paragraph  140,  the  Tribunal  found  that  in  "Business
    Management the closest thing to a PgDip in  BM  was  the  ABE  advanced
    diploma in business management, but not only were the subjects entirely
    different to those the first two appellants claimed they  studied  but,
    being a course run by ABE,  this  led  to  an  award  of  the  relevant
    qualification by ABE itself, not by CCOL".

18.   At paragraph 142, the Tribunal noted that the CCOL  website  contained
    no reference to PgDip BM or IT courses, although there was a  reference
    to "level 7 courses".  The website also had this:  "Last year  we  also
    saw introduction in certificate, diploma  and  advanced  diploma  Level
    courses in the fields of business administration, business  information
    systems and travel, tourism and hospitality  from  the  Association  of
    Business  Executives".    However,  the  only  course  given   in   any
    identifiable detail related to the "ILM level 7 - management courses  -
    certificate and diploma".  At paragraph 143,  the  Tribunal  noted  the
    unchallenged evidence of Mr Malik and Ms Ullah that CCOL "has never run
    such courses and that, if they had, they would have  known  about  it".
    There were also the statements of several other teachers "none of  whom
    knew about the existence of such courses".  It was  "inconceivable"  in
    the Tribunal's view "that courses said to have  run  on  dates  between
    late 2007 and late 2008 could have taken place, without Mr Malik and Ms
    Ullah and probably  the  other  teaching  staff  who  gave  statements,
    knowing about it".  At paragraph 145,  the  Tribunal  found  that  "the
    period of time during which the  college  was  ILM-accredited  for  the
    level 7 ILM diploma in Executive Management was too short for any  CCOL
    student to have completed that course and those who had been registered
    with the ILM could never have completed various  requirements  for  its
    successful completion".

19.   It is also relevant  to  note  that  at  paragraph  21,  Mr  Malik  is
    recorded as saying that he had never heard of CCOL having a  "board  of
    examiners", whilst at paragraph 23, Ms Ullah said that in her section,
    which encompassed business management, "all exams had to be  marked  by
    the awarding body", that is to say,  the  external  body  such  as  the
    Association of Business Executives.

20.   In the  light  of  all  this,  there  is  no  question  but  that  the
    Immigration  Judge  in  the  present  case  did  not  provide   legally
    satisfactory reasoning for her conclusion  that  the  first  respondent
    "did genuinely study for a certificate at the college and  gained  it".
    Indeed, it beggars belief that the Immigration Judge could reach such a
    conclusion.  The witness statements of Stewart, Malik  and  Ullah  were
    before her; as was the case of NA and Others.  As TR (CCOL cases) makes
    plain, NA and Others was relevant in that  it  contained  an  extensive
    account of the evidence analysed by the Tribunal  in  that  case.   The
    Immigration Judge does not appear  to  have  turned  her  mind  to  the
    obvious point, which was that, if CCOL had  during  the  relevant  time
    been teaching its own  postgraduate  certificate  courses  in  business
    management, it would have been to say the least extraordinary  for  the
    witnesses in question not to have referred to that fact.  But,  as  can
    be seen from the above, the Tribunal in NA and Others examined  whether
    there was any  credible evidence, oral or written, to suggest that CCOL
    was or might have been teaching some sort  of  postgraduate  course  in
    business management, and concluded that there was not.

21.  The Immigration Judge also erred in law in failing to take  account  of
    the  fact  that  the  alleged  postgraduate  certificate  in   business
    management, put forward by the first respondent, asserted that  he  had
    "satisfied the board of  examiners  on  (sic)  July  2008".    Had  she
    examined the evidence recorded in NA and Others, the Immigration  Judge
    would have seen that credible witnesses had  denied  the  existence  of
    such a board at CCOL.

Re-making the decision in the appeals

22.   On 29 March, having announced my decision that  the  determination  of
    the Immigration Judge was legally flawed and fell to be  set  aside,  I
    proceeded to hear evidence and submissions in connection with re-making
    the decision in the appeals.

23.  The first respondent gave evidence in English.  He adopted his  witness
    statement, which was before  the  Immigration  Judge.   That  statement
    asserted that he had "genuinely undertaken a  postgraduate  certificate
    in business management at Cambridge  College  of  Learning  ...  I  had
    attended classes on a regular basis but had not spent extra time in the
    college premises.  As soon as I had obtained my  PgD  qualification,  I
    decided to apply for a grant of leave as a Tier 1 (PSW) Migrant to gain
    some work experience".  The statement went on to say that upon  receipt
    of the Secretary of State's decision, the first respondent was "shocked
    as I had genuinely undertaken my PgD course  at  Cambridge  College  of
    Learning.  I really became surprised to hear the  allegation  that  the
    College had never run any PgD course which was not true.  I felt like I
    had been robbed.  I really felt like a circumstantial victim, I  was  a
    genuine student and obtained my PgD qualification in a lawful  manner".



24.   Paragraph 7 of the statement said that "rumours spread in the  end  of
    October 2008 that Cambridge College of Learning  was  doing  an  unfair
    business with their PgD courses.  However, it was also publicised  that
    all the rumours were the result of the conflict between the two  groups
    of the management (sic).  As  I  had  already  completed  my  Cambridge
    course and had been granted leave  to  remain  on  the  basis  of  that
    qualification, I  was  not  bothered".   At  paragraph  10,  the  first
    respondent, asserted that "I believe that I am a helpless victim  to  a
    big scam which was beyond my control".

25.   Cross-examined, the first respondent confirmed that he had  signed  an
    application for leave, relying upon his CCOL certificate.  He said that
    his college tutor was Mr John Opoku, who would help him if  he  had  a
    problem and looked at his dissertation.    It  was  put  to  the  first
    respondent that at paragraph  141  of  NA  and  Others,  Ms  Ullah  and
    Mr Malik "whose evidence we found credible,  said  Mr  Opoku  had  not
    taught at CCOL since 2007".  The first respondent  reiterated  that  he
    had in fact had dealings with Mr Opoku at CCOL in 2008.

26.   The  first  respondent  was  asked  if  he  had  retained  any  course
    materials or other evidence of his work at CCOL.  He said he  had  not.
    He had, however, paid �2,500 for the course.  Once he got his visa, the
    first respondent had not seen any reason to keep anything.

27.   The first respondent said that he had studied research  in  marketing,
    human  resources,  public  analysis,  business  management  and   "some
    additional courses".  He had taken examinations and  sent  evidence  of
    these to the Home Office, who only gave him back his certificates.   He
    had not kept any photocopies of anything.

28.   In answer to a question from me, the first respondent said that  there
    were, during his time, about fourteen people who were studying at  CCOL
    on the postgraduate diploma course.  The first respondent was aware  of
    the difference between a certificate and a diploma.  He had  been  told
    about it by the students and had also asked  his  personal  tutor,  who
    said that a certificate was of a lower nature and he would have had  to
    have spent more time in order to obtain a diploma.

29.   I asked the first respondent why his statement, which he had  adopted,
    included numerous references to his PgD course and  PgD  qualification.
    The  first  respondent  then  said  that  these  were  typing  mistakes
    committed by Mr Sayem The first respondent repeated this in answer to a
    further question from Mr Sayem.

30.   For the Secretary of State, Mr Hopkin submitted that the  evidence  of
    Ms Ullah and Mr Malik  was  to  be  preferred  to  that  of  the  first
    respondent.  Mr Opoku had not taught at the college in 2008, the  first
    respondent had not kept any materials relating to his course and it was
    quite plain that the first  respondent  had  employed  deception  in  a
    dishonest way.

31.   For the respondents, Mr Sayem said that the first  respondent  had  in
    fact referred to a postgraduate  certificate  in  paragraph  5  of  his
    witness statement and the references to PgD had been mistakes.   He had
    given a clear picture of his course and what it had meant to  him.   It
    was unreasonable for the first respondent to have been expected to keep
    materials relating to the course for what were now two or three  years.
    Mr Sayem submitted that the Secretary of State had failed to show that
    paragraph 322(1A) or 322(2)  was  engaged.   The  respondents  met  the
    provisions of the Immigration Rules.  Mr Sayem categorically  confirmed
    that no Article 8 ground was being pursued by the respondents.

32.   The burden of proof in the present case is on  the  first  respondent,
    to show on the balance of probabilities  that  he  meets  the  relevant
    requirements  of  the  points-based  immigration  rules.  There  is  no
    question but that he has done  so.  The  Secretary  of  State  has  not
    challenged the finding of the Immigration Judge as to  earnings,  which
    was the only matter in respect of which fewer points were awarded  than
    those claimed. The issue in this case is therefore confined to  whether
    paragraphs 322(1A) and 322(2) properly apply in the case of  the  first
    respondent, in which event it is uncontested that the second respondent
    must fail, by reason of paragraph 319C(b).

33.  The burden of establishing that paragraphs 322(1A) and 322(2) apply  to
    the first respondent falls on the Secretary of State, to the balance of
    probabilities. Paragraph 322(1A) is  mandatory,  in  that  it  requires
    leave to remain and variation of leave to enter or remain in the United
    Kingdom to be refused:-

      "(1A) where false representations have been made  or  false  documents
          or information have been submitted (whether or not material to the
          application, and whether or not to the applicant's  knowledge)  or
          material facts  have  not  been  disclosed,  in  relation  to  the
          application".


34.   Paragraph 322(2) is  discretionary,  in  that  leave  to  remain  etc.
    should normally be refused where there has been:-

        "(2)     the making of false  representations  or  the  failure  to
             disclose any material fact for the purpose of  obtaining  leave
             to enter or a previous variation of leave"


      As we have seen, the relevant  immigration  decision  in  the  present
    case stated that the  Secretary  of  State  had  made  a  discretionary
    decision to refuse under paragraph 322(2).

35.   Having heard the first respondent give evidence, I am fully  satisfied
    that he is a flagrantly dishonest individual.   He  told  me  in  terms
    that, whilst he was at CCOL, there were also  persons  there  receiving
    instruction on a postgraduate diploma course.  As is plain from NA  and
    Others, no such course was run.  Furthermore and in  any  event,  I  am
    fully satisfied that CCOL never ran at the relevant time any course  of
    its own leading to the award of a postgraduate certificate in  business
    management.  As I have already indicated, it is absurd to suppose that,
    if such a course were being run during 2008,  Mr  Malik  and  Ms  Ullah
    would not have said so.  Not only did they not say so; the Tribunal  in
    NA and Others was not presented with any evidence even suggesting  that
    a postgraduate certificate course was taught at CCOL  and  examined  by
    those within the College, with a certificate being awarded by  CCOL  to
    successful candidates.

36.   The first respondent  specifically  asserted  that  his  tutor  was  a
    person who, according to  the  evidence  in  NA  and  Others,  was  not
    teaching at CCOL in 2008.  He also adopted as true  a  statement  which
    contained several references to the PgD course  and  award,  suggesting
    that, despite his oral evidence, the first respondent saw  no  material
    distinction between a certificate and a  diploma.   Furthermore,  as  I
    have already  indicated,  the  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal refer to a diploma and it appears not to have been  until  the
    Immigration Judge hearing that Mr Sayem advanced  the  submission  that
    the certificate course was, in  reality,  different  from  the  diploma
    course.  Finally, the first respondent belatedly attempted  to  explain
    the problems with his witness statement as being due  to  typographical
    errors, for which he blamed Mr Sayem.  Despite the alacrity with  which
    Mr Sayem attempted to take responsibility for these "errors", the  fact
    that the first respondent adopted his statement without correcting them
    is a further indication of his lack of regard for the truth.

37.   The Secretary of State has shown to the requisite  standard  that  the
    first  respondent  was  guilty  of  dishonest  behaviour   in   falsely
    representing, in connection with his  earlier  application  for  leave,
    that he had obtained a genuine  postgraduate  certificate  in  business
    management, as a result of genuine studies at CCOL.  There is no  doubt
    of dishonesty.  The first respondent would have been well aware that he
    had not in fact pursued  any  such  studies  and  that  the  so  called
    certificate was entirely  bogus.   For  the  same  reasons,  the  first
    respondent made false representations in  the  course  of  his  current
    application, in which he falsely stated that he had not previously used
    deception in an attempt to gain leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom
    (Question D 22 of the application form).

38.   Paragraph 322(1A) is made out. The immigration decision to  refuse  to
    vary the leave of the first respondent was thus in accordance with  the
    immigration rules. On the facts, paragraph 322(2) is made out and I  do
    not find that the discretionary decision inherent  in  that  provision,
    which the Secretary of State exercised against  the  first  respondent,
    falls to be made differently. The  first  respondent  has  advanced  no
    reason why it should be; and there is nothing in the  circumstances  of
    either of the respondents to persuade me that exercising the discretion
    in favour  of  the  first  respondent  would  be  the  correct  course.
    Accordingly, insofar as the immigration decision was taken by reference
    to paragraph 322(2), it was taken in accordance with the rules.

39.   The second respondent's application was, on the basis of my  findings,
    properly refused by the Secretary of State under the immigration rules.

40.  As a general matter, this case demonstrates  that  persons  who  assert
    they were awarded  postgraduate  certificates  in  business  management
    (and, for that matter, IT) by  Cambridge  College  of  Learning,  after
    completing relevant courses there, will have to surmount the  important
    and obvious problem that, if such certificate courses had been run  and
    examined by CCOL, and certificates awarded  to  successful  candidates,
    the witnesses who gave evidence to the Tribunal in NA  and  Others  and
    who were found credible, would have said so.   There  was  no  credible
    evidence before the AIT in that case to suggest that  any  postgraduate
    courses in business management or IT were taught and examined by  CCOL.
    It follows that, whilst the evidence in each case must be  individually
    assessed, NA and Others is indicative of there being no such thing as a
    genuinely issued CCOL postgraduate certificate in those subjects and it
    is therefore necessary for  a  claimant  seeking  to  rely  on  such  a
    certificate to adduce cogent evidence in support. For the  correct  way
    to approach the  use  of  the  determination  in  NA  and  Others,  see
    paragraphs 32 to 40 of the Upper Tribunal's determination in TR.

Decision

41.  The determination of the Immigration Judge contains  an  error  of  law
    and I have decided to set the determination aside.   I  hereby  re-make
    the relevant decision by dismissing  the  appeals  of  the  respondents
    under the Immigration Rules.



                               Signed


                               Senior Immigration Judge P R Lane
                               (Judge of the Upper Tribunal)

