
                                                        [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Singini (para 319C - switching to dependant category) Malawi [2011] UKUT
00248(IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On  13 April 2011                             |                             |
|                                              |25 May 2011                  |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                            MR JUSTICE McCLOSKEY
                        SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE GILL


                                   Between

                        Mr. MICHAEL CHIMPOPE SINGINI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Thathall, Counsel, instructed by UK  Immigration
                  Law Chambers.
For the Respondent:          Mr  E  Tufan,  Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
                 Officer.

Where an application for entry clearance or leave to enter or remain in  the
United Kingdom is made before 3 March  2010  and  has  not  been  determined
before that date, it will be decided  in  accordance  with  the  Immigration
Rules in force on 2 March 2010, rather than  the  Statement  of  Changes  in
Immigration Rules [HC 367] which  came  into  operation  on  3  March  2010.
Paragraph 319C(i) of the Immigration Rules, which  came  into  operation  on
the  latter  date,  is  a  freestanding  subparagraph,  divorced  from   but
following upon subparagraph (h) and is to  be  construed  accordingly.    It
follows that where the dates set out above apply,  a  person  who  was  last
granted leave to remain as a student will not be able  to  switch  from  the
student category to that of a dependant of a student unless he  is  applying
for leave as the dependant of a person who has been  granted,  or  is  being
granted, leave to remain as a Tier  5  (Temporary  Worker)  Migrant  in  the
creative and sporting subcategory under paragraph 245ZQ(b)(ii).



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The Appellant is of  Malawian  nationality  and  is  aged  forty-three
      years.  This appeal has its origins in a decision of 2 April  2010  of
      the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  ("the  Respondent"),
      whereby the Appellant's application of 9 February  2010  to  vary  his
      leave to remain in the United Kingdom was refused under paragraph 319C
      of the Statement of Changes  in  the  Immigration  Rules  HC  395  (as
      amended) (hereinafter "the Immigration Rules")  and  on  human  rights
      grounds (Article 8 ECHR).

   2. According to the Respondent's letter of decision, dated 2 April  2010,
      the Appellant made a combined application for leave to remain  in  the
      United Kingdom as a "Points Based System Migrant" and for a  biometric
      immigration document.  He had previously been granted leave  to  enter
      the United Kingdom, on 6 January 2007, as a student,  until  31  March
      2010.  His application for further  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
      Kingdom was made on 9 February 2010.  On the face  of  the  letter  of
      decision, the sole issue to be confronted and determined  was  whether
      the Appellant could, as a matter of law, convert his status from  that
      of student to dependant of a person possessing leave to remain in  the
      United Kingdom as a  Points  Based  System  Migrant.   The  Respondent
      decided that such  conversion  was  not  permissible  under  paragraph
      319C(h) of the Immigration Rules (the conversion  issue)  and  refused
      the application accordingly.  The First-tier Tribunal agreed with  the
      reasoning of the Respondent on the conversion issue and also  rejected
      the Appellant's claim under Article 8 ECHR.  The appeal was  dismissed
      accordingly.

   3. In the grant of permission to appeal, it  was  considered  that  there
      were two potentially arguable errors of law.  The first  concerns  the
      conversion issue.  The second relates to the rejection of the  Article
      8 ECHR claim.  Upon the hearing of the appeal before us, argument  was
      addressed to each of these issues  by  Mr.  Thathall  of  counsel,  on
      behalf of the Appellant and Mr.  Tufan,  the  Respondent's  Presenting
      Officer.

   4. The Appellant relies primarily upon paragraph 319C of the  Immigration
      Rules.  It is appropriate to reproduce this in full:
           "To qualify for entry  clearance  or  leave  to  remain  as  the
           Partner of a Relevant Points Based System Migrant, an  applicant
           must meet the requirements listed below. If the applicant  meets
           these requirements, entry clearance or leave to remain  will  be
           granted. If the applicant does not meet these requirements,  the
           application will be refused.

           Requirements:

           (a) The applicant must not fall for refusal  under  the  general
           grounds for refusal, and if applying for leave to  remain,  must
           not be an illegal entrant.
           (b) The applicant must be the spouse or civil partner, unmarried
           or same-sex partner of a person who:
           (i) has valid leave to enter or  remain  as  a  Relevant  Points
           Based System Migrant, or
           (ii) is, at the same time,  being  granted  entry  clearance  or
           leave to remain as a Relevant Points Based System Migrant.
           (c) An applicant who is the unmarried or same-sex partner  of  a
           Relevant  Points  Based  System  Migrant  must  also  meet   the
           following requirements:
           (i) any  previous  marriage  or  civil  partnership  or  similar
           relationship by the  applicant  or  the  Relevant  Points  Based
           System Migrant with another person must have permanently  broken
           down,
           (ii) the applicant and the Relevant Points Based System  Migrant
           must not be so closely related that  they  would  be  prohibited
           from marrying each other in the UK, and
           (iii) the applicant and the Relevant Points Based System Migrant
           must have been living together  in  a  relationship  similar  to
           marriage or civil partnership for a period of at least 2 years.
           (d) The marriage or civil partnership, or  relationship  similar
           to marriage or civil partnership, must be subsisting at the time
           the application is made.
           (e) The applicant and the Relevant Points Based  System  Migrant
           must intend to live with the other  as  their  spouse  or  civil
           partner, unmarried or same-sex partner throughout the applicants
           stay in the UK.
           (f) The applicant must not intend to stay in the UK  beyond  any
           period of leave granted to  the  Relevant  Points  Based  System
           Migrant .
           (g) Unless the Relevant Points Based System Migrant is a Tier  1
           (Investor) Migrant, there must be a sufficient  level  of  funds
           available to the applicant, as set out in Appendix E.
           (h) An applicant who is applying for leave to remain, must have,
           or have last been granted, leave:
           (i) as the Partner of a Relevant Points Based System Migrant,
           (ii) as the spouse  or  civil  partner,  unmarried  or  same-sex
           partner of a person with leave under another category  of  these
           Rules who has since been granted, or is, at the same time, being
           granted leave to  remain  as  a  Relevant  Points  Based  System
           Migrant, or
           (iii) in  any  other  category  of  these  Rules,  provided  the
           Relevant Points Based System Migrant has, or is  being  granted,
           leave to remain as a Tier 5 (Temporary Worker)  Migrant  in  the
           creative and sporting subcategory on the basis of having met the
           requirement at paragraph 245ZQ(b)(ii).
           (i) If the Relevant Points Based System  Migrant  is  a  Tier  4
           Migrant, the Tier 4 Migrant must be applying 4 for or have entry
           clearance or leave to remain for  a  course  of  study  that  is
           longer than six months."
      The final portion of paragraph 319C, set out above,  was  inserted  by
      the "Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules" laid before Parliament
      on 10 February 2010 [HC367].  The Appellant's  primary  contention  is
      founded on this newly inserted paragraph.
   5. According to the text of HC367, the changes embodied in the  Statement
      were to come into operation in the following way:

           "The changes in this Statement shall take effect  on  3rd  March
           2010.  However, if an applicant  has  made  an  application  for
           entry clearance or leave to enter or  remain  before  3rd  March
           2010 and the application has not been decided before that  date,
           it will be decided in accordance with the Rules in force on  2nd
           March 2010 and the conditions applicable to  any  leave  granted
           will be those in force on 2nd March 2010".


      This is, in effect, a transitional provision.  It is to be applied  to
      the Appellant by reference to the following undisputed facts:


      (a)   The Appellant's application for leave to remain was  made  on  9
           February 2010.


      (b)   The application was decided by the Secretary of State on 2 April
           2010.


      We conclude that the application  of  the  transitional  provision  in
      HC367 set out above to the factual matrix  of  the  present  case  can
      yield but one possible answer: the Appellant's application fell to  be
      determined in accordance with the Immigration  Rules  in  force  on  2
      March 2010.  Its determination could not - and cannot - be  influenced
      by the changes introduced in HC367.  It  is  common  ground  that  the
      Appellant's application does not satisfy the  Rules  prevailing  on  2
      March 2010.  This is fatal to his appeal.


   6. Notwithstanding the above conclusion, it remains appropriate  to  deal
      with the main submission advanced on behalf of  the  Appellant,  which
      relates to the conversion issue, as this may recur and in the event of
      a further appeal materialising.  This relates to the  construction  of
      Paragraph 319C(i) of the Rules.  In an argument which  may  fairly  be
      described as both intricate and inventive, Mr. Thathall submitted,  in
      substance, that this new provision  should  be  treated  as  a  fourth
      subparagraph of paragraph 319C(h)  and  construed  accordingly.   This
      submission, duly probed, gives rise to the following exercise :

      (a)   The conversion of the letter 'i' to a subparagraph (iv).


      (b)   The insertion of a semi-colon, followed by the word 'or', at the
           end of subparagraph (h)(iii).


      (c)   The exportation of the words "in any  other  category  of  these
           Rules", at the commencement of  subparagraph  (h)(iii),  to  the
           beginning of the new provision.


      (d)   The substitution of the words "provided that" for  "if"  at  the
           beginning of the new provision.


      (e)   The deletion of the second reference to "Tier 4 Migrant" in  the
           new provision and the insertion of "who" immediately before  the
           words "must be applying for ... (etc)".


      In considering this submission, we bear in  mind  the  observation  of
      Lord Brown in Ahmed Mahad and Others v Entry Clearance Officers [2009]
      UKSC 16:


           "[10] ... the Rules  are  not  to  be  construed  with  all  the
           strictness applicable to the construction  of  a  statute  or  a
           statutory instrument but, instead,  sensibly  according  to  the
           natural and ordinary meaning of the words used, recognising that
           they are statements of the Secretary of  State's  administrative
           policy."


      Lord  Brown  added  that  the  exercise  of  interpretation   involves
      ascertainment of the Secretary of State's intention, which -


           "... is to be discerned objectively from the language used,  not
           divined by reference to supposed policy considerations".


   7. The exercise  which  the  Tribunal  was  invited  to  perform  in  the
      construction of the new provision in paragraph 319C urged on behalf of
      the Appellant can fairly be equated  with  an  elaborate  and  complex
      surgical operation.  It entails elements of distortion, reformulation,
      addition, substitution and insertion. In  short,  a  highly  inventive
      imagination and much creative invention  are  required.   We  consider
      that as judges, rather than contortionists, it simply is not  open  us
      to construe the new provision in the manner urged.  The steps which we
      were invited to take in aid of the Appellant's suggested  construction
      of  the  new  provision  are,   in   our   view,   impermissible   and
      inappropriate.  The fundamental objection to them is that they do  not
      involve an exercise of construing the  new  provision.   Rather,  they
      require it to be radically rewritten.  This, in our judgment,  is  the
      incurable infirmity in the Appellant's argument. We are of  the  clear
      opinion that grammatically, syntactically, sensibly and logically  the
      new provision is a freestanding  addition  to  paragraph  319C  to  be
      inserted, treated and construed as subparagraph (i), divorced from but
      following upon subparagraph (h).

   8.  It follows that a person who was last granted leave to  remain  as  a
      student will not be able to switch from the student category  to  that
      of a dependant of a student unless he is applying  for  leave  as  the
      dependant of a person who has been granted, or is being granted, leave
      to remain as a Tier 5 (Temporary Worker) Migrant in the  creative  and
      sporting subcategory under paragraph 245ZQ(b)(ii).

   9. Accordingly, we have concluded that the Immigration Judge did not  err
      in law in reaching his decision  to  dismiss  the  Appellant's  appeal
      under the Immigration Rules.

  10. Finally, we turn to consider the Appellant's  Article  8  ECHR  claim.
      Immigration Judge Parker  concluded  that  the  Respondent's  decision
      would not be in breach of Article 8  ECHR,  mainly  because  he  found
      that, if the Appellant were to be returned to Malawi,  there  were  no
      compassionate circumstances other than that he might be separated from
      his wife and child for a  limited  period  whilst  she  completed  her
      studies, scheduled for termination in  January  2012,  in  the  United
      Kingdom. The Immigration Judge  therefore  determined  the  Article  8
      claim on the basis that the Appellant's  child  would  remain  in  the
      United Kingdom with his wife. Mr. Tathall informed  us  that,  at  the
      date of the hearing before  the  Immigration  Judge,  the  Appellant's
      child was in fact living in Malawi. It appears  that  the  Appellant's
      wife left the child with the child's grandparents upon her  return  to
      Malawi in November 2009 for a period of approximately two months.   We
      have taken careful note of the Appellant's  family  circumstances  and
      the various family movements between Malawi and the United Kingdom and
      vice versa since the Appellant and his wife first entered  the  United
      Kingdom some five years ago, with the benefit of a three  and  a  half
      year student visa.  If the Appellant leaves the United Kingdom at this
      stage he will be reunited with his daughter and other  family  members
      in Malawi, with an ensuing separation from  his  wife  for  a  maximum
      period of approximately eight months [or  less,  taking  into  account
      conventional student vacation periods].  To the extent that this  will
      give rise to any interference with his right to respect for the family
      life which he has enjoyed with his wife in the United  Kingdom  during
      most of the past five years this, in our view, will be modest  and  is
      demonstrably proportionate to the legitimate aim in play,  namely  the
      maintenance of firm but fair immigration control.

  11. Accordingly, any misapprehension of the  facts  on  the  part  of  the
      Immigration Judge concerning the  country  in  which  the  Appellant's
      child was living at the date of the hearing was not  material  to  his
      decision, which was nevertheless still open to him  on  the  evidence.
      The main rationale underpinning the immediately preceding paragraph is
      the disclosure to this Tribunal that the information relating  to  the
      child's whereabouts  since  November  2009  did  not  feature  in  the
      evidence available to the judge.  We are  of  the  opinion  that  this
      reinforces the judge's decision in this respect.

Decision

  12. The decision of the Immigration Judge did not   involve the making  of
      an error on a point of law such that it falls to be set aside.

                                  Signed
                                     [pic]
                                  Mr. Justice McCloskey
                                   (sitting  as  a  Judge   of   the   Upper
     Tribunal)

Approved for electronic distribution
