
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Ali (permission decisions: errors; slip rule) [2020] UKUT 00249 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House by Skype for Business    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 June 2020                               |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |



                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL

                                   Between

                                BASHARAT ALI
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Maqsood, Counsel instructed by Archbold
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
                  Officer

(1) Rule 31 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration
and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014 and rule 42 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008 may each be employed in order to correct an error in  a
decision granting or refusing permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal.
In cases of  obvious  error,  the  Upper  Tribunal  Immigration  and  Asylum
Chamber can, in general, be expected in future to proceed as follows.

(2) Where the First-tier Tribunal permission judge  has  granted  permission
when the reasons make it evident they meant to  refuse,  an  Upper  Tribunal
Judge, acting  as  a  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  will  make  the
necessary correction under rule 31 of the  FtTIAC  Rules,  as  soon  as  the
matter is identified, whether that is at case management stage, as a  result
of communication from a party, or otherwise.  Although the  matter  can  and
should (as in the present case) be raised in a rule  24  response  from  the
respondent, it is preferable  for  it  to  be  addressed  earlier,  since  a
hearing may already have been arranged before that response is received.

(3) Where the First-tier Tribunal permission judge refuses  permission,  but
clearly meant to grant it,  any  renewal  of  permission  before  the  Upper
Tribunal should point out the error and ask for it  to  be  corrected  under
rule 31.  In any event, a party should inform  the  Upper  Tribunal  of  the
mistake.

(4) In the Upper  Tribunal,  where  a  judge  grants  permission  when  they
clearly meant to refuse, the error is unlikely to be identified  at  a  case
management stage, if and insofar as that stage is  undertaken  by  the  same
judge, immediately after their mistaken grant.  This highlights  the  point,
emphasised in Isufaj (PTA decisions/reasons:  EEA  reg.  37  appeal)  [2019]
UKUT 283 (IAC), that it is  the  responsibility  of  the  permission  judge,
whether in the First-tier Tribunal or  the  Upper  Tribunal,  to  make  sure
there is no contradiction between their decision and  the  reasons  for  it.
Otherwise, the points made above in respect of the rule  24  response  apply
also in this situation.

(5) Where an Upper Tribunal Judge refuses permission to  appeal,  when  they
clearly meant to grant it, the decision is an "excluded  decision":  section
13(8)(c) of  the  2007  Act  and  cannot  be  appealed  to  the  appropriate
appellate court.  A party should, therefore, apply for  the  Upper  Tribunal
to exercise its power of correction under rule 42.

(6) The process just described applies only to those cases  in  which  there
is a clear and obvious contradiction between the intention of the judge  who
decided  the  application  for  permission  and  the  order  made  on   that
application.  In any other case, parties should proceed on  the  basis  that
the decision is that recorded in the relevant document and the  Tribunal  is
likely to regard it as productive of delay and a waste of its  resources  to
engage in an inter partes process in order to  determine  whether  the  slip
rule should be applied.



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Both members have substantially contributed to this decision.

A. The appellant

 2. The appellant, a citizen of Pakistan, came to the United Kingdom  as  a
    student in 2011 with leave to remain in that capacity until 20 November
    2012.  A subsequent application for extension was granted until 6 April
    2014.


 3. On 28 March 2014, the appellant sought further leave  to  remain  as  a
    Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant.  He sought leave to remain so that he
    could pursue a course of studies at Stanfords  College,  which  was  at
    that time based on 1393A London Road, Norbury.  The appellant gave  the
    college's address as his correspondence address in his application  for
    further leave.  The appellant continued studying at the college  whilst
    his application was pending.

 4. In August 2014, the appellant discovered  that  Stanfords  College  had
    lost its sponsor licence.  Anticipating that the  respondent  would  in
    due course make contact about this, the appellant wrote to her  offices
    in Sheffield on 8 September 2014, notifying her  that  she  should  not
    write to him at the college's address, but at his home address.

 5. The respondent wrote to  the  appellant  as  he  had  expected.   On  6
    February 2015, she wrote to  state  that  Stanfords  College's  sponsor
    licence had been revoked and that he had sixty  days  within  which  to
    secure an alternative Tier 4 sponsor.  Unfortunately, that  letter  was
    sent to 1393A London Road,  and  not  to  the  appellant's  residential
    address in East London.  The appellant did not receive the  letter  and
    took no action.  On 27 April 2015, therefore,  the  respondent  refused
    the application, holding that the sponsor identified by  the  applicant
    had lost its licence and that he did not hold a valid  Confirmation  of
    Acceptance for Studies ("CAS"). That refusal letter, a copy of which is
    before us, was also sent to Stanfords College.

 6. On 13 May 2015, the appellant issued judicial review proceedings in the
    Upper Tribunal seeking, as we understand it, a decision  on  his  March
    2014 application.  It was as a result of  those  proceedings  that  the
    appellant came to know that letters had been sent to his college rather
    than his  home  address.   The  appellant  duly  appealed  against  the
    decision of 27 April 2015 and the judicial review claim was settled  by
    consent on 8 July 2015.

 7. The appellant's appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  heard  on  10
    November 2015.  The only submission made was that  the  respondent  had
    acted unlawfully in sending the 'sixty day letter' and  the  subsequent
    refusal letter to Stanfords College, given that he had written  to  the
    respondent to notify her of the change in his  correspondence  address.
    Unfortunately, the judge in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  overlooked  the
    letter and the proof that  it  had  been  posted  to  the  respondent's
    address in Sheffield by recorded delivery.  She held,  therefore,  that
    it was the appellant who had been at fault in  failing  to  notify  the
    Home Office of his change of address.



 8. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal, relying on the failure of
    the judge in the FtT to consider his correspondence with the respondent
    in September 2014.  On 14 June  2016,  it  was  held  by  Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge  Monson  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  erred  in
    overlooking that evidence; that the appellant had corresponded with the
    Home Office  as  claimed;  and  that  the  only  fair  course,  in  the
    circumstances, was for the appellant to be issued with a further 'sixty
    day letter' to enable him to  find  another  sponsor.   The  respondent
    wrote to the appellant  very  shortly  thereafter  to  acknowledge  the
    decision that had been made in the appeal and to state that it would be
    implemented by a department in Sheffield.

 9. For reasons which are unclear, however, nearly two years passed without
    any further action on the part of the respondent.  On 15 May 2018,  she
    finally sent  a  'sixty  day  letter',  informing  the  appellant  that
    consideration of his application would be suspended for that length  of
    time so that he had an opportunity to obtain a  new  sponsor.   He  was
    told that he would have to secure a new sponsor and make an application
    for leave to remain by 13 July 2018; that no further  extensions  would
    be permitted; and that a decision would be reached after sixty days had
    passed.

10. On 8 June 2018, the appellant's solicitors  wrote  to  the  respondent.
    They confirmed receipt of the letter of 15 May 2018.  They set out  the
    history of the case, including the error which had caused Judge  Monson
    to decide as he did, and the lengthy delay following his decision.   It
    was  submitted  that  the  appellant  should  receive   a   period   of
    discretionary  leave  so  as  to  give  him  a  proper  opportunity  to
    regularise his status, for the following reasons:

         "It would be extremely unfair and harsh  to  hold  the  CAS  for  a
         period of 2 years without providing  any  cogent  reasons  to  this
         effect.  This has unreasonably caused our client into  a  stage  of
         panic and anxiety.  He is no longer able to obtain admission in any
         college with the 60 days letter due to the huge  gap.   To  correct
         the matter it would be only fair that our client  is  granted  with
         discretionary leave at least and to  provide  him  with  sufficient
         opportunity in order for him to carry on with his  studies  in  the
         future."

11. On 20 June 2018, the respondent replied.  She acknowledged  receipt  of
    the letter from the appellant's  solicitors  before  stating  that  the
    appellant's sixty day letter had been sent to his previous address  and
    signed for on 18 May 2018.  She enclosed 'a new  60  days  letter',  in
    similar terms to the first, and stated that no further extension  would
    be given.   The  respondent  also  sent  additional  documents  to  the
    appellant on that date.


12. The first of those additional documents  was  a  letter  informing  the
    appellant that he would be required to submit a  new  English  language
    test certificate in support of any future application  because  he  had
    previously submitted a TOEIC certificate which had  been  cancelled  by
    Educational Testing Services ("ETS") due to 'test result irregularities
    revealed by ETS analysis'.  This letter provided additional information
    about how and where the  appellant  might  take  a  new  English  test.
    Amongst other things, it informed the appellant that "You can  use  the
    endorsed copy of your passport enclosed with this letter to prove  your
    identity when taking the test."

13. The second additional document was a  letter  which  bore  the  heading
    'Information Leaflet'.  Although it was addressed to the appellant, its
    contents show  that  it  was  intended  to  provide  information  to  a
    potential sponsor about the appellant's situation.  In  particular,  it
    explained that consideration of an extant application was suspended  so
    that the appellant could approach new sponsors.  Amongst other  things,
    it stated:

         "We have retained the originals of their  passport  and  BRP  while
         their application remains outstanding.  If you  decide  to  sponsor
         this student, then you will need to issue  him  with  a  new  CAS."
         [emphasis in original]

14. The third additional document was another letter to the appellant about
    sitting another English test.  For reasons which will become  apparent,
    we need to set that letter out in full (we have added paragraph numbers
    for ease of subsequent reference):


      1) "In order to process any application you submit you may be required
         to sit an English Language Test  in  order  for  you  to  meet  the
         Immigration Rules.  Attached is a letter  along  with  a  certified
         copy of your passport which will enable you to do this.   You  will
         need to provide both [sic] these to  the  Secure  English  Language
         Test (SELT) provider.  Please be aware that you will need  to  make
         it clear to the SELT provider that you have both  of  the  attached
         documents from the Home Office ie certified copy  of  passport  and
         letter regarding re-test otherwise any general enquiry will  result
         in a standard reply from the SELT provider informing you that  only
         original and valid documents can be accepted.


      2) Please note the test centre you choose must match  specifically  to
         one on the list at [URL given].


      3) You will need to present the enclosed letter and certified copy  of
         your passport to the SELT provider in order  for  you  to  sit  the
         test. You have been given 60 days in which to regularise your stay,
         please note no further time will be allowed.


      4) If you encounter any difficulties in arranging a test, please  book
         your test online and then notify  the  Home  Office  via  email  to
         [email address given] within 14 days of the  date  of  this  letter
         stating the time, date and test centre. Please note the test centre
         you choose must match specifically to one on the list.  A  list  of
         approved test centres can be found  on  the  following  link:  [URL
         given].


      5) We will then assess whether it is appropriate  to  send  a  scanned
         copy of your passport to  the  test  centre  to  confirm  that  the
         passport has been checked and there are no concerns about it  being
         genuine. In the subject box of your email can you ensure you  enter
         the following: ETS -TEST BOOKED -NAME-DOB-NATIONALITY, this process
         has been agreed with the test centres."


15. The appellant attempted to contact various SELT providers with  a  view
    to arranging  an  English  test.   The  emails  before  us  from  those
    providers show that he received  the  'standard  response',  which  the
    respondent made reference to in (1) of her letter.  On  16  July  2018,
    for example, Reading University responded to the appellant's  email  of
    13 July stating 'we are only able to accept original ID documents'.


16. The appellant also attempted to engage with various Tier 4 sponsors  in
    order to secure a  place  on  a  course  of  study.   He  sent  various
    documents  to  these  potential  sponsors,  including  copies  of   the
    correspondence from  the  Home  Office  and  his  diploma  in  Business
    Management and Leadership from Stanfords College.   The  University  of
    Roehampton declined to consider an application from the appellant  "due
    to your immigration history".  The University  of  Southampton  invited
    the appellant to make an application via the Universities and  Colleges
    Admissions Service ("UCAS") and noted that  he  would  be  required  to
    "study at level 7 or above to continue  staying  within  the  UK."   St
    Mary's University stated that there was nothing they  could  offer  the
    appellant 'as you have already studied up to Level 7'.  The  University
    of Birmingham declined to make an offer because it was unable to locate
    a recognised institution by the name of Stanfords  College  UK.  Newman
    University in  Birmingham  stated  that  they  were  unable  to  accept
    international students unless they already had the right  to  live  and
    study in the UK for the full duration of the course applied for, plus a
    further year.  The University of Greenwich stated that their Compliance
    Department had advised them not to consider  an  application  from  the
    appellant. Aston University replied that all applications were via UCAS
    and that the 2018 deadline  had  already  passed.   The  University  of
    Salford's Senior International Officer replied:


         "Thanks for sending these documents.  I'm not sure we can  help  to
         be honest, you already have a postgraduate diploma so it's going to
         be very difficult to start an undergraduate degree..."


17. In the wake of these difficulties, on 17  August  2018,  the  appellant
    applied to vary his leave, based on asserted private  and  family  life
    rights in the United  Kingdom.  The  application  constituted  a  human
    rights claim.


18. Following further correspondence between the appellant's solicitors and
    the respondent, on 10 April 2019 the appellant's human rights claim was
    refused.  In the refusal, the respondent said that  the  appellant  had
    used deception in his ETS English language test in 2012.  As  such,  he
    could not  meet  the  suitability  requirements  for  leave  under  the
    immigration rules.  In terms of his private  life,  the  appellant  was
    said not to meet the eligibility requirement in the rules  because  had
    lived in the United  Kingdom  for  seven  years  at  the  date  of  the
    application and could not show he would face very significant obstacles
    to integration, if he were to return to Pakistan.  There were  said  to
    be no exceptional circumstances, giving rise  to  a  right  to  remain,
    outside the rules, by reference to the ECHR.



B. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

19. The appellant's appeal against the refusal of his  human  rights  claim
    was heard at Taylor House on 2 October 2019 by  a  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge.  In  a  decision  promulgated  on  9  October  2019,  the  judge
    dismissed the appellant's appeal.


20. At paragraph 7 of the decision, the judge stated that it was "important
    to note that at the hearing the allegation  that  [the  appellant]  had
    used a proxy test taker was withdrawn".   The  judge  noted  that  this
    meant that the appeal was resisted by the respondent on the basis  that
    the appellant did not meet the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules
    and that there were no exceptional or compelling  circumstances  (which
    rendered his removal disproportionate under Article 8 ECHR).

21. At paragraph 8, the judge recorded the fact that the  appellant  sought
    to rely on the ground that he had formed a relationship with  a  person
    settled in the United Kingdom and  that  his  removal  would,  in  that
    regard, constitute  a  disproportionate  interference  with  Article  8
    family life.  The Presenting Officer, however, did not give the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge consent to consider this "new  matter"  within  the
    meaning of section 85(6) of the 2002 Act.  Accordingly, the judge  said
    that it had not been further considered.

22. The judge's consideration of the evidence and findings of fact began at
    paragraph 29 of the decision.   The  judge  noted  that  the  appellant
    worked in Pakistan as a graduate and had spent  the  majority  of  this
    life there.  He spoke the local language.  Although he said that he was
    on an antidepressant, the judge concluded that there  was  no  evidence
    that the appellant's mood was so low that  he  could  not  re-establish
    himself in Pakistan with the support of his family.  Overall, the judge
    concluded that there were no significant obstacles  to  integration  on
    return to Pakistan.

23. At paragraph 33, the judge then turned to whether, in the light of  the
    fact that the appellant could not meet the requirements of  the  rules,
    his  removal   would   nevertheless   constitute   a   disproportionate
    interference with his human rights.  The judge examined section 117B of
    the 2002  Act,  finding  that  the  appellant  spoke  English  and  was
    financially independent.  The judge considered  these  to  be  "neutral
    factors in balance" (paragraph 36).

24. The judge then examined section 117B(5),  which  provides  that  little
    weight should be given to a private life established by a person at the
    time that person's immigration status is precarious.  The  judge  noted
    that anything short of indefinite leave to remain was "precarious"  for
    this purpose.  The appellant's private life  had,  as  a  result,  been
    accrued when his leave had been precarious and so  the  judge  attached
    little weight  to  it,  albeit  that  some  weight  was  given  to  the
    relationship  he  had  with  his  partner  and  his   friends.    Those
    relationships would, in any event, the judge found, have been disrupted
    at the end of any period of the appellant's leave.

25. At several places in her decision, the judge  expressed  disappointment
    that the Home Office had not acted more quickly,  following  the  Upper
    Tribunal's decision in 2016 in favour  of  the  appellant.   The  judge
    nevertheless found the appellant could not in any  event  have  had  an
    expectation of being able to stay beyond his visa.   The  delay  simply
    meant, according to the judge, that the appellant had remained  in  the
    United Kingdom for longer than  he  otherwise  would  have  done.   The
    appellant could, according to the judge, make a fresh  application  for
    leave on the basis of the asserted relationship with his partner.

26. At paragraph 39, the judge balanced all the relevant factors.   On  the
    appellant's side was the fact  that  he  did  not  wish  to  return  to
    Pakistan and blamed the respondent for his situation.  In that  regard,
    the judge concluded that the appellant "has  a  point".   However,  the
    judge reiterated that even if the appellant had been given  leave  "two
    years ago", that would have been for a limited period and he would have
    been expected to leave the United Kingdom at the end of it.   The  fact
    that the appellant could not meet the requirements of the rules weighed
    on the respondent's side of the balance.  Although the respondent  "has
    behaved badly there is nothing so unfair in the  conduct  of  the  Home
    Office  to  render   the   decision   disproportionate   in   all   the
    circumstances".  For these reasons, the judge dismissed the appeal.



C. The application for permission to appeal

27. The appellant's solicitors filed on his behalf an  application  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for permission to  appeal.   The  grounds  read  as
    follows:-
         "1.  The impugned decision is falwed [sic] as even  it  does  carry
             sympathy  for  the  appellant  but  it  fails  to   meet   the
             requirements laid in a leading maxim; "justice should not only
             be done but it seems to be done as well."  The  appellant  has
             clearly been held up by the Respondent for three years without
             any reasons.  His passport was reatined [sic].  He was  unable
             to renew his studies despite having a court  decision  in  his
             favour, he has provided a number of  documents  to  prove  his
             genuine intent and calibre to puruse [sic]  for  his  studies,
             however  the  honourable  Judge  could  not  respond   to   it
             adequately apart from showing some sympathy.   The  honourable
             Judge has  completely  failed  to  deliver  a  just  and  fair
             decision on this account.
         2.   The impugned decision  is  liable  to  be  set  aside  as  the
             honourable Judge has failed to  take  appropriate  account  of
             private and family life of the appellant and  his  girlfriend.
             The issue of proportionality could not  be  dealt  unless  the
             honourable Judge has taken the facts correctly.
         3.   The honourable Judge has completely failed to  understand  the
             reason as to why the couple has not been living together?  The
             appellant  and  his  partner  clearly  explained   that,   the
             appellant's girlfriend had to carry  on  working  because  the
             appellant does not have any right of work.  She was working as
             a carer and the appellant would not have been allowed to  stay
             there, that's why  they  have  been  living  separately.   The
             honourable Judge has not considered the  actual  circumstances
             of the appellant in entirety.
         4.    The  honourable  judge  was  incorrect,  not  to   take   the
             proportionality test (RAZGAR).
         5.   The test of 117B has not even been applied correctly.
         6.   Para 39 of the impugned decision is  also  flawed  as  if  the
             appellant would have  leave  two  years  ago,  he  might  have
             established his further leave to remain as he has  showed  his
             legitimate expectations (sic) while awaiting for an outcome of
             his case since 2014 till present."


28. The application for permission also dealt with why it was made  outside
    the fourteen day time limit set by the Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier
    Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014.   In  short,  it
    was submitted that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had
    been sent to the appellant's representatives by email, but not received
    by them.  Once this was discovered, the representatives had immediately
    approached the First-tier Tribunal and filed the application  promptly.





D. The decision on the application for permission to appeal

29. The application for permission went before a Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Her decision and reasons were as follows:-
         "













         In the matter of an application for permission to appeal
         First-tier Tribunal hearing at Taylor House
         Before Judge Gribble


         Appellant's name: Basharat Ali


         Application by Appellant


         Permission to Appeal is Granted
         REASONS FOR DECISION (including any decision on extending time)
          1. The application is out of time by 15 days.   That  is  a  very
             significant breach  of  the  Procedure  Rules.   However,  the
             representatives explain that  the  Decision  and  Reasons  was
             served only on them and not on the appellant and that by email
             which they were not expecting and  did  not  see.   When  they
             enquired of  the  Tribunal  it  was  re-sent  and  they  acted
             promptly thereafter in lodging  the  application.   Under  the
             circumstances I extend time and admit the application.


         2.   The  grounds  are  however  without  merit.   The  appeal  was
             advanced on private life grounds  only  and  on  the  evidence
             could not have succeeded.  The grounds argue  that  the  judge
             erred  regarding  the  appellant's   relationship   with   his
             girlfriend but are misconceived as that was a new matter  that
             the Secretary of State did not consent to being  advanced  and
             no evidence in that regard  was  adduced  and  no  submissions
             made.   The  appellant  was  represented  by  Counsel  at  the
             hearing.  The evidence and  submissions  were  solely  on  the
             basis of the appellant's private life, which  the  Judge  gave
             reasons for rejecting.


         Signed


         [Signature]
         Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal                  Date:  10  March
         2020"

30. On 22 April 2020, the respondent filed a response under rule 24 of  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008.   In   this,   the
    respondent stated that there appeared to have been  an  "administrative
    error" in the permission: "The notice states that permission  has  been
    granted but clearly  the  intention  of  the  judge  [considering]  the
    application was to refuse it on the basis that they considered  it  had
    no merit ...  The Secretary of State will concur with the views of  the
    permission judge.  The grounds are essentially a disagreement with  the
    findings of the First-tier".


31. On 14 May 2020, the Upper Tribunal gave directions for the  hearing  of
    the appeal by remote means "with a view  to  giving  guidance  on  what
    should be done, by whom and when,  in  a  matter  of  this  kind.   The
    attention of the parties is drawn to SSHD v Devani [2020] EWCA Civ 612,
    regarding the scope of the so-called slip rule".

32. Although the directions  indicated  that  the  Tribunal  was  not  then
    currently minded to use the remote hearing to decide whether there  was
    an error of law in the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  in  the
    event we did hear submissions from Mr Maqsood and Ms Isherwood on  that
    matter.  Before we consider  those  submissions,  it  is  necessary  to
    consider the general issue of what should  follow  where,  as  here,  a
    permission judge's decision is at complete variance  with  the  reasons
    given for that decision. Mr Maqsood  filed  a  very  detailed  skeleton
    argument, directly addressing the issue.  We wish to express our thanks
    to Mr Maqsood for producing this  and  for  his  equally  helpful  oral
    submissions.



E. Correcting errors in permission decisions

33. Section 22 of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 ("the 2007
    Act") provides that Tribunal Procedure Rules,  governing  the  practice
    and procedure to be followed in the First-tier Tribunal and  the  Upper
    Tribunal, are to be made by the Tribunal Procedure Committee.  Schedule
    5 makes further provision about the content of such  rules.   Paragraph
    15(1) of  that  Schedule  enables  rules  to  make  provision  for  the
    correction of accidental errors in a decision or record of a  decision.




34. Pursuant to that power, the following rules have been made:-


         Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum
         Chamber) Rules 2014 ("the FtTIAC Rules")
         "31. The Tribunal may at any time correct any clerical  mistake  or
             other accidental slip or omission in a decision, direction  or
             any document produced by it, by -
             (a)   providing  notification  of  the  amended  decision   or
                  direction, or a copy  of  the  amended  document,  to  all
                  parties; and
             (b)   making  any  necessary  amendment  to  any   information
                  published  in  relation  to  the  decision,  direction  or
                  document."


         Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) procedure Rules 2008  ("the  UT
         Rules")
         "42. The Upper Tribunal  may  at  any  time  correct  any  clerical
             mistake or other accidental slip or omission in a decision  or
             record of a decision by-
             (a)  sending notification of the amended decision, or  a  copy
                  of the amended record, to all parties; and
             (b)   making  any  necessary  amendment  to  any   information
                  published in relation to the decision or record."

35. In Isufaj (PTA decisions/reasons: EEA reg. 37 appeal) [2019] UKUT  283,
    the  Upper  Tribunal  held  that  judges  deciding   applications   for
    permission to appeal should ensure that, as a general matter, there  is
    no apparent contradiction between the decision on the  application  and
    what is said in the "Reasons for Decision" section of the document that
    records both the decision and the reasons for it.


36. As was said in Safi and others (permission to appeal decisions)  [2018]
    UKUT 388, a decision on a permission application  must  be  capable  of
    being understood by the Tribunal's administrative  staff,  the  parties
    and the court or tribunal to which the appeal lies.  In the event of an
    apparent contradiction or other uncertainty, the parties can expect the
    Upper Tribunal to treat the decision as the crucial element.

37. At the time Safi and others was decided, the view was  taken  that  the
    decision, as opposed to the reasons for it, could not be changed  under
    rule 31 of the FtTIAC Rules (or, for that matter, rule  42  of  the  UT
    Rules):  Katsonga ("Slip Rule"; FtT's general powers: Zimbabwe)  [2016]
    UKUT 228 (IAC).  However, in the light of the judgment of the Court  of
    Appeal in AS (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
    [2019] EWCA Civ 208, the Upper Tribunal held that Katsonga was  wrongly
    decided.  Where it was manifest  that  the  decision  was  at  complete
    variance with the reasons for  it,  rule  31/42  could  and  should  be
    employed by amending the  decision  to  record  what  was  plainly  the
    intention of the judicial decision-maker: MH (review; slip rule; church
    witnesses) Iran [2020] UKUT 125.

38.  Shortly  after  promulgation  of  MH  (Iran)  the  Court   of   Appeal
    categorically reached the same conclusion in Devani:-


         "23. In my view Katsonga was wrongly decided, and the passage which
             I have quoted from the UT's reasons and, still more, the terms
             of  the  headnote  are  liable  to  mislead.   The   essential
             distinction to bear in mind in considering the application  of
             the slip rule, in any  of  its  legislative  formulations,  is
             between the case where the order in question does not  express
             what the Court actually intended at the moment of promulgation
             and the case where it does express what the Court intended  at
             the time but it subsequently appreciates that it  should  have
             intended something different: see, most recently, para. 18  of
             my judgment in AS (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State  for  the
             Home Department [2019] EWCA Civ 208, [2019]  1  WLR  3065  (p.
             3071C).  As I say there, how  the  distinction  applies  in  a
             particular case may not always  be  straightforward,  but  the
             concept is clear.  The proposition which the UT drew from  the
             case to which it referred and from the White Book  commentary,
             namely that the slip  rule  "cannot  be  used  to  change  the
             substance of a judgment or  order",  is  perfectly  apt  as  a
             reference to the second of the two classes of case that I have
             mentioned; but it appears from the UT's actual  decision  that
             it understood it to mean that the slip rule could not be  used
             in a case where the correction would produce a  decision  with
             the opposite effect to that promulgated.   With  all  respect,
             that is simply wrong. In the  case  of  a  simple  failure  of
             expression - most obviously a straightforward slip of the  pen
             - the error can and should be corrected even if it alters  the
             outcome (as initially expressed) by 180�.


         24.   As  it  happens,  we  were  referred  to   Katsonga   in   AS
             (Afghanistan), and I approved the  UT's  observations  in  the
             last two sentences of para. 8: see para. 45 (p. 3078).  But  I
             added a footnote in the following terms:
                  "My citation of Katsonga should not be taken  as  implying
                  approval of  the  proposition  in  the  judicially-drafted
                  headnote that  'the  "Slip  Rule"...  cannot  be  used  to
                  reverse the effect of a decision', which if taken  out  of
                  context  may  be  misleading.   If,  say,  a  'not'   were
                  accidentally omitted from a declaration or injunction  its
                  correction might well reverse what would otherwise be  the
                  effect of the decision, but it  is  hard  to  see  why  it
                  should for that reason be illegitimate: indeed it might be
                  thought to be the paradigm of the kind of case  for  which
                  the slip rule was required.
                   That remains my view".  (Underhill LJ)

39.  Although  MH  (Iran)  and  Devani  were  concerned  with   substantive
    decisions, we consider their reasoning is equally relevant to decisions
    to grant or refuse permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.   Where,
    as in the present case, the  actual  decision  is  that  permission  is
    granted, but it is manifest from her reasons that the permission  judge
    intended the opposite, at first sight it would therefore seem that rule
    31 should be available to correct that error.  By the same token,  rule
    31 should also be available where the decision is expressed as being to
    refuse, when the reasons explain why permission has been granted.

40. Mr Maqsood, however, raises the following issue. Rule 34(4)(a)  of  the
    FtTIAC Rules requires the Tribunal to  send  with  the  record  of  its
    decision a statement of its reasons, only where  the  Tribunal  refuses
    permission to  appeal.   The  invariable  practice  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (and the Upper Tribunal) when granting  permission  to  appeal
    is, however, to give the reasons for that decision.  We  are  satisfied
    that the absence of an express legislative requirement  does  not  mean
    the reasons should not be scrutinised, in order  to  determine  whether
    the judge intended to make the decision he or she has expressed.

41. Mr Maqsood also draws attention to rule 23 (notice of appeal) of the UT
    Rules.  Rule 23(1A) provides as follows:-


         "(1A)    In an asylum case or an  immigration  case  in  which  the
                First-tier Tribunal has given permission to appeal,  subject
                to any direction of the First-tier  Tribunal  or  the  Upper
                Tribunal, the application for permission to appeal  sent  or
                delivered to the First-tier Tribunal stands as the notice of
                appeal and accordingly paragraphs (2) to (6) of this rule do
                not apply."


42. Rule 23(2) to (6) make provision for provision of a  notice  of  appeal
    within a particular timescale and for  the  provision  of  accompanying
    material, as well as requirements for service on the respondent.


43. In the light of rule 23(1A), Mr  Maqsood  submits  that  the  grant  of
    permission to appeal in the  present  case  meant  the  appeal  "became
    pending when the PTA was granted by the FtT  at  which  point  the  FtT
    became functus officio".

44. We have serious difficulties with this submission.  If  Mr  Maqsood  is
    right, then in an asylum case or an immigration case before  the  Upper
    Tribunal (that is to say, on any appeal from the First-tier  Tribunal),
    as soon as a First-tier Tribunal permission judge has mistakenly  given
    a decision granting  permission  to  appeal,  that  mistake  cannot  be
    corrected.  Such a result would create a  significant  anomaly  between
    appeals in the Immigration and Asylum Chamber of the Upper Tribunal and
    appeals in its other Chambers, since rule 23(1A) applies  only  in  the
    UTIAC.


45. In R (Commissioner of Police of the  Metropolis  v  Independent  Police
    Complaints Commission) [2015]  EWCA  Civ  1248,  the  Court  of  Appeal
    approved the definition of the term "functus officio"  adopted  by  the
    Divisional Court in that case (Burnett LJ and William Davis J); namely,
    "a judicial,  ministerial  or  administrative  actor  has  performed  a
    function in circumstances where there is no power to revoke  or  modify
    it".

46. As we have seen, rule 31 of the FtTIAC Rules states in terms  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal "may at any time correct any ... accidental slip or
    omission in a decision ..." (our emphasis).  We find there  can  be  no
    doubt that those words permit the use of rule 31 in  order  to  correct
    the decision in a substantive appeal and in a PTA  decision  mistakenly
    refusing permission to  appeal.   Particularly  having  regard  to  the
    anomalous situation that would otherwise arise, we are quite  satisfied
    that the words "at any time" impact upon the way rule 23(1A) of the  UT
    Rules falls to be interpreted and that, as a result, rule  23(1A)  does
    not restrict the power of correction in rule 31.

47. In so finding, rule 2(3)(b) of the UT Rules  is  of  assistance.   This
    provides that the Upper Tribunal  must  seek  to  give  effect  to  the
    overriding objective when it interprets any rule or practice direction.
    The overriding objective would not be furthered by a  reading  of  rule
    23(1A) that rendered all mistaken  grants  of  permission  immune  from
    correction.

48. Finally and in any event, rule 23(1A) is expressly made subject to "any
    direction of the First-tier Tribunal or the  Upper  Tribunal".   It  is
    axiomatic that a direction of the Upper  Tribunal  could  not  be  made
    before the First-tier Tribunal had given permission  to  appeal  in  an
    asylum case or an immigration case.  Accordingly, in order  to  resolve
    any mischief that might otherwise arise, the Upper Tribunal can  direct
    that the mistaken grant of permission should not stand as the notice of
    appeal, thereby enabling rule 33 to be employed.  For  the  reasons  we
    have given, we do not, however, consider this course to be necessary.

49. In view  of  our  conclusion  on  the  functus  officio  issue,  it  is
    unnecessary to adopt Mr Maqsood's suggestion that  the  Upper  Tribunal
    should employ rule 42 of its Rules to make the necessary change to  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal  PTA  judge.   In  fact,  we  doubt
    whether rule 42 could be used by the  Upper  Tribunal  to  correct  any
    decision or record of a decision of the First-tier Tribunal.   Although
    there is no definition of "decision" in the UT Rules, rule 1(2)  states
    that the Rules "apply to proceedings before the Upper Tribunal"  except
    the Lands Chamber, which has its own set of Rules.  It would  therefore
    seem that rule 42 is confined to decisions etc of the Upper  Tribunal's
    Immigration and Asylum, Administrative Appeals  and  Tax  and  Chancery
    Chambers.

50. Mr Maqsood's overall practical point is, however, a good one,  in  that
    it will usually be more convenient for the  correction  of  a  mistaken
    grant of permission by the First-tier Tribunal to be made by the  Upper
    Tribunal, where the mistaken grant is before the Upper Tribunal and  is
    being scrutinised by a judge of that Tribunal.   Since  Upper  Tribunal
    judges are, ex officio, judges of the First-tier  Tribunal,  they  can,
    where appropriate, exercise the power of correction in rule 31  of  the
    FtTIAC Rules.

51. It is now necessary to look at the reasons why the power of  correction
    needs to be available in the case of all permission decisions, as  well
    as in the  case  of  substantive  decisions.   So  far  as  substantive
    decisions are concerned, we wish to emphasise what the  same  panel  of
    the Upper Tribunal held in MH:-

         "78. Applying our analysis to a case such as the present,  we  come
             to the clear conclusion that the slip  rule  may  be  used  in
             order to correct an  accidental  slip  in  the  section  of  a
             judge's decision entitled or otherwise comprising the  'Notice
             of Decision', even where the correction  would  'reverse'  the
             effect of the decision.  To conclude otherwise, on  the  basis
             of the current authorities, would be to deprive the slip  rule
             of the purpose recognised in those  authorities,  of  ensuring
             that the decision which is issued  to  the  parties  is  truly
             reflective of the intention of the judge.  By "a case such  as
             the present", we mean a case in which it is  absolutely  clear
             that the judge intended either to allow or dismiss the  appeal
             but in which the concluding  words  of  the  decision  do  not
             reflect that intention.

         79.  There will be applications for permission  to  appeal  pending
             before the FtT in which errors of this kind have been made.  A
             judge of the FtT who considers such  an  application,  whether
             from an appellant or from the Secretary  of  State  has  three
             options.  They may  grant  permission  to  appeal.   They  may
             review the decision under  rule  35,  as  we  have  considered
             above.  Or they may use the slip rule to correct the decision,
             so as to  reflect  the  intention  of  the  judge.   Like  the
             advocates before us, we consider the last  option  to  be  the
             most expeditious and the most likely to further the overriding
             objective.   Rule  36  provides  the  mechanism  by  which  an
             application for one of these forms of relief might properly be
             considered as an application for another.

         80.  For the future, a party to an appeal who considers there to be
             an error such as occurred in the present case should write  to
             the Resident Judge of the hearing centre in  question,  asking
             for the typographical error to be corrected under rule  31  of
             the Procedure Rules.  The error may (as permitted  by  [2]  of
             the Practice Statement of the Immigration and Asylum Chambers)
             be corrected by the Resident Judge or by the judge who  issued
             the decision.  That is likely to be a matter for the  Resident
             Judge, and their decision  is  likely  to  be  influenced,  in
             particular, by the availability of  the  judge  to  attend  to
             correct the error. In the event that there is any ambiguity as
             to the intention of the judge, the slip  rule  should  not  be
             used. In that eventuality, the application to correct  may  be
             treated (under rule 36) as an application  for  permission  to
             appeal, leading to review of the decision or to the  grant  or
             refusal of permission. In the event that the judge declines to
             treat the application in this way,  the  parties  may,  if  so
             advised, pursue alternative avenues of redress. In  the  event
             that there is no ambiguity, the decision may be corrected  and
             re-issued to the parties in accordance with rule 31(a)."

52. Where permission to appeal is expressed to be granted by the First-tier
    Tribunal, when it is obvious that  the  permission  judge  intended  to
    refuse permission, no legitimate purpose  will  usually  be  served  by
    allowing the case to proceed to substantive consideration in the  Upper
    Tribunal.  In enacting section 11 of the 2007 Act, Parliament cannot be
    taken to have intended the Upper Tribunal to  deal  substantively  with
    decisions of the First-tier Tribunal that have not  been  found  to  be
    arguably wrong in law or otherwise worthy of being  considered  by  the
    Upper Tribunal.


53. We respectfully agree with Mr Maqsood that the error by the  permission
    judge must be "obvious"  or,  as  was  said  in  paragraph  78  of  MH,
    "absolutely clear".  To adopt the process we are about to  describe  in
    cases where the matter is not obvious or absolutely  clear  is,  as  Mr
    Maqsood puts it, to risk making the remedy worse than the disease.

54. In this regard, Mr Maqsood drew  attention  to  PD  40B  of  the  Civil
    Procedure Rules.  PD 40B 4.5 states that the  court  "has  an  inherent
    power to vary its own orders to make the meaning and intention  of  the
    court clear".  Where an application is made for a judgment or order  to
    be corrected, the judge may deal with that application without  notice,
    if the slip or omission "is obvious";  or  may  direct  notice  of  the
    application to be given to the other party or parties.

55. The position under the CPR is,  accordingly,  that  the  court  can  be
    expected to act on its own initiative  or  on  an  application  by  one
    party, without engaging with the other  party  or  parties,  where  the
    error is obvious; but that, where it is not, such  engagement  will  be
    required.

56. Although such a process could be adopted under rule 31/42 by the First-
    tier Tribunal/Upper Tribunal in cases where the error is  not  obvious,
    to do so risks introducing delay  and  the  possibility  of  collateral
    challenges. Accordingly, in such cases,  the  overriding  objective  is
    likely to be best  served  by  permitting  the  matter  to  proceed  to
    substantive consideration in the Upper Tribunal, by reference  to  what
    is recorded as the judge's permission decision.

57. In cases of obvious error, such as the present grant of permission, the
    Upper Tribunal Immigration and  Asylum  Chamber  can,  in  general,  be
    expected in future to proceed as follows.

58. Where the First-tier Tribunal permission judge has  granted  permission
    when the reasons make  it  evident  they  meant  to  refuse,  an  Upper
    Tribunal Judge, acting as a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal, will make
    the necessary correction under rule 31 of the FtTIAC Rules, as soon  as
    the matter is identified, whether that is at case management stage,  as
    a result of communication from a party,  or  otherwise.   Although  the
    matter can and should (as in the present case) be raised in a  rule  24
    response from the respondent, it is preferable for it to  be  addressed
    earlier, since a hearing may already have  been  arranged  before  that
    response is received.


59. Where the First-tier Tribunal permission judge refuses permission,  but
    clearly meant to grant it, any renewal of permission before  the  Upper
    Tribunal should point out the error and ask  for  it  to  be  corrected
    under rule 31.  In any event, a party should  inform the Upper Tribunal
    of the mistake.

60. In the Upper Tribunal,  where  a  judge  grants  permission  when  they
    clearly meant to refuse, the error is unlikely to be  identified  at  a
    case management stage, if and insofar as that stage  is  undertaken  by
    the  same  judge,  immediately  after  their  mistaken   grant.    This
    highlights  the  point,  emphasised  in  Isufaj,   that   it   is   the
    responsibility of the  permission  judge,  whether  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal or the Upper Tribunal, to make sure there is no  contradiction
    between their decision and the reasons for it.  Otherwise,  the  points
    made above in respect of the  rule  24  response  apply  also  in  this
    situation.

61. Where an Upper Tribunal Judge refuses permission to appeal,  when  they
    clearly meant to grant it, the  decision  is  an  "excluded  decision":
    section 13(8)(c) of  the  2007  Act  and  cannot  be  appealed  to  the
    appropriate appellate court.  A party should, therefore, apply for  the
    Upper Tribunal to exercise its power of correction under rule 42.


62. We emphasise that the process just  described  applies  only  to  those
    cases in which there is a clear and obvious contradiction  between  the
    intention of the judge who decided the application for  permission  and
    the order made on that application.  In any  other  case,  the  parties
    should proceed on the basis that the decision is that recorded  in  the
    relevant document and the Tribunal is likely to regard it as productive
    of delay and a waste of its resources to  engage  in  an  inter  partes
    process in order to determine whether the slip rule should be applied.



F. The present case

63. Mr Maqsood's submissions on the merits of  the  appellant's  individual
    case were as concise and precise as those he made on the application of
    the slip rule.  He made no  submissions  on  the  points  made  in  the
    grounds  of  appeal  about  the  appellant's  relationship   with   his
    girlfriend, presumably in recognition of the fact that this was a  'new
    matter' which the judge  had  been  unable  to  consider.   He  sought,
    however, to develop points which  were  made  at  paragraph  1  of  the
    grounds of appeal, in relation to  the  respondent's  conduct  and  the
    prejudice it had caused the appellant.


64. Mr Maqsood submitted that the judge had  failed,  despite  the  way  in
    which the appellant's case had been developed before her,  to  consider
    the detriment caused by the  respondent's  action  and  inaction.   Her
    conclusion at paragraphs 38-39 of her decision  -  that  the  appellant
    would merely have been granted a period of further leave after which he
    would have been expected to return to Pakistan - did  not  represent  a
    lawful assessment of the submissions made in relation to  Article  8(2)
    ECHR.  Mr Maqsood submitted that the judge failed to give any,  or  any
    adequate, consideration to the following four  points.   Firstly,  that
    the appellant failed to secure admission to a new academic course as  a
    result of the respondent's delay.  Secondly, that  the  respondent  had
    only withdrawn the allegation of ETS fraud on the day  of  the  hearing
    before the FtT and this had caused the appellant difficulty in securing
    a new place of study.  Thirdly, the appellant had been  prevented  from
    taking a new English language test, or securing a new place  of  study,
    because the respondent had  failed  to  return  his  passport  and  had
    provided him, instead, with  only  a  certified  copy.   Fourthly,  the
    respondent's conduct had resulted  in  a  detriment  to  the  appellant
    because he had been unable  to  complete  his  studies  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  In light of these multifaceted failings on the  part  of  the
    judge, Mr Maqsood  submitted  that  the  correct  course  was  for  her
    decision to be set aside and for the decision on the appeal to  be  the
    subject of further consideration.


65. Ms Isherwood submitted that there was no material error of law  in  the
    judge's decision.  This was a case in which the appellant was  required
    to establish that his removal would give rise  to  unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences because he was unable to meet the Immigration Rules.   The
    respondent's conduct had not been to his detriment.  He  had  not  been
    given 60 days to regularise his position; he had been given rather more
    than that as a result of the correspondence  exchanged  in  June  2018.
    The judge had taken the delay into account and had reached  a  reasoned
    conclusion upon it.  The assertions made  by  the  appellant  had  been
    recorded by the judge,  who  had  reached  a  lawful  decision  on  the
    proportionality of his removal.

66. In response, Mr Maqsood reiterated his submission  that  the  detriment
    caused  to  the  appellant  by  the  respondent's  inaction  had   been
    overlooked by the judge.


67. We accept Mr Maqsood's submission that the judge fell into legal  error
    in failing to give adequate consideration to the appellant's submission
    that he had been  caused  prejudice  by  the  respondent's  action  and
    inaction since his application for further leave  to  remain  in  2014.
    This was, on any view, an unusual case, characterised by  a  series  of
    mistakes on the  part  of  the  respondent.   The  appellant's  witness
    statement was  a  carefully  constructed  document,  which  was  cross-
    referenced to  various  sections  of  the  bundle.   Based  upon  those
    documents, the case presented to the FtT  was,  in  summary,  that  the
    respondent had effectively prevented the appellant from continuing with
    his course of studies in the  United  Kingdom  and  that  it  would  be
    disproportionate to remove him as a result.  We agree with  Mr  Maqsood
    that the  judge  failed  to  engage  adequately  or  at  all  with  the
    submissions made in reliance on those documents.  She  failed,  in  the
    circumstances, to engage with material matters or to  provide  adequate
    reasons for her decision to dismiss the appeal.


68. For the reasons which follow, however, we do not find those  errors  to
    have been material to the outcome of the appeal, and we decline to  set
    aside the judge's decision.


69. It is to be recalled that the appellant came to the United Kingdom  for
    a temporary purpose in June 2011.  Having completed  his  undergraduate
    degree in Pakistan, he had worked in the marketing department of a bank
    in Pakistan for three years.  He then came to  the  United  Kingdom  in
    2011 for further studies.  He completed a  post-graduate  qualification
    at level 7 of the National Qualifications Framework and  he  wished  to
    remain in the United Kingdom for the purpose of  further  studies.   In
    any such case, it is necessary to recall the  limited  jurisdiction  of
    the Immigration and Asylum Chambers  and  the  limited  application  of
    Article 8 ECHR.  As Lord Carnwath JSC stated at paragraph 57 of Patel v
    SSHD [2013] UKSC 72; [2014] AC 651, Article 8 ECHR is  'not  a  general
    dispensing power' and the  "opportunity  for  a  promising  student  to
    complete his course of study in this country ... is  not  in  itself  a
    right protected under Article 8."

70. In Nasim v SSHD [2014] UKUT 25 (IAC), the Upper Tribunal treated  these
    dicta as a significant exhortation 'to re-focus attention on the nature
    and purpose of Article 8': paragraph 20 refers.  Such cases lay, in the
    Tribunal's  view,  'at  the  outer  reaches  of  cases   requiring   an
    affirmative answer to the second of  the  five  Razgar  questions'  and
    that, even where an affirmative answer was reached on that question, it
    was likely that the issue  of  proportionality  would  be  resolved  in
    favour of the respondent, given her function as  the  guardian  of  the
    system of immigration controls, entrusted to her by  Parliament:  [21].
    At [41], the Tribunal said this:


         "Mr Jarvis urged  us  to  find  that  the  obiter  remarks  in  CDS
         regarding Article 8 were no longer good law, in the light of  Patel
         and Others. We find that would go too far.  It  is  true  that  the
         Tribunal in CDS made reference to the  particular  passage  of  the
         judgment of Sedley LJ in Pankina regarding the need  for  the  Home
         Office "to exercise some common sense",  which  drew  comment  from
         Lord Carnwath at [57] of Patel and Others (see above). The Tribunal
         did, however, expressly acknowledge that it was unlikely  a  person
         would be able to show an Article 8 right by coming  to  the  United
         Kingdom for  temporary  purposes.  The  chances  of  such  a  right
         carrying the day have, we  consider,  further  diminished,  in  the
         light of the judgments in Patel and Others. It would,  however,  be
         wrong to say that the point  has  been  reached  where  an  adverse
         immigration decision in the case of a person who is here for  study
         or  other  temporary  purposes   can   never   be   found   to   be
         disproportionate. But what is clear is that, on the  state  of  the
         present law, there is no justification  for  extending  the  obiter
         findings in CDS, so as to equate a person whose course of study has
         not yet ended with a person who, having finished their  course,  is
         precluded by the Immigration Rules from staying on to do  something
         else."

71. On any proper view, the chances of such a right  carrying  the  day  in
    2020 have diminished further still as a result of the enactment of  the
    Immigration  Act  2014  and  the  introduction  of  Part  5A  into  the
    Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.    The   system   of
    immigration  controls  which  had  previously  been  entrusted  to  the
    respondent by Parliament has received what Lord  Bingham  described  at
    paragraph 17 of Huang v SSHD [2007] UKHL 11; [2007] 2 AC  167  as  'the
    imprimatur of democratic approval'.  It would, we think, be an  unusual
    case in which a student  was  able  to  establish  that  administrative
    failings on the part of the respondent rendered it disproportionate  to
    remove him from the United Kingdom rather than providing  him  with  an
    opportunity to enrol  in  further  courses  of  study.   We  recognise,
    however, that it might just be possible for an applicant  to  establish
    that the weight statutorily accorded to immigration control in  such  a
    case should be reduced so as to be overcome as a result of delay on the
    part of the respondent if, as contended by this appellant, the delay is
    shown  to  be  the  result  of  a  dysfunctional  system  which  yields
    unpredictable, inconsistent and unfair outcomes:  EB  (Kosovo)  v  SSHD
    [2008] UKHL 41; [2009] 1 AC 1159, at paragraph 16, and Agyarko  v  SSHD
    [2017] UKSC 10; [2017] 1 WLR 823, at paragraph 52.


72. On close analysis, however, the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal
    was not capable of establishing that the appellant had been caused such
    prejudice by the action or inaction of the respondent.   The  judge  in
    the First-tier Tribunal was rightly critical of the delay  between  the
    decision reached by Judge Monson in June 2016 and the action  taken  by
    the respondent in May 2018.  That delay was unexplained before the FtT,
    as it was before us, and we consider it  to  be  wholly  unsatisfactory
    that it should have taken the respondent so long to issue a 'sixty  day
    letter'.


73. Be that as it may, there is no evidence  to  show  that  the  appellant
    suffered any material prejudice specifically as a result of this delay.
     The appellant claims at paragraph 16 of his witness statement that  he
    was unable to enrol on a new course because of the 'huge  gap'  in  his
    studies (and because he had no English Language certificate) but  there
    is nothing in any of the correspondence from education providers  which
    begins to support that contention.  The predominant  concern  was  that
    the appellant had already taken a course at level 7  of  the  NQF  (and
    would therefore be unable to show academic progression, as required  by
    paragraph  120A  of  the  Immigration  Rules).   Other  providers  were
    concerned by the appellant's immigration history, or were cautioned  by
    their compliance departments, which we take to be a  reference  to  the
    allegation of ETS fraud against the appellant.  There is nothing in any
    of the emails from academic institutions to show that the  gap  in  the
    appellant's studies played any part in their refusal to  entertain  his
    applications.


74. Mr Maqsood also submits, as did the appellant's solicitors in the early
    summer of 2018, that it  did  not  suffice  for  consideration  of  his
    application to be suspended for sixty days.  His life had been on  hold
    for so long that he needed additional time in which to get his  studies
    back on track.  That is to overlook the chronology, however.  As  noted
    at paragraphs 9-11 above, the appellant was sent a sixty day letter  on
    15 May 2018.  That was signed for on 18 May 2018.  In their letter of 8
    June 2018, the appellant's  solicitors  acknowledged  receipt  of  that
    letter and submitted that the appellant should be granted discretionary
    leave.  The respondent's response to that letter was prompt, if  rather
    oddly worded, and she indicated that the appellant would have a further
    sixty days' grace, ending on 18 August 2019.  The appellant  had  three
    clear months from the date of receipt of the first  letter,  therefore,
    in order to take an English test and acquire a  new  CAS.   We  see  no
    reason why this period should have been inadequate.  We note  that  the
    earliest documentary evidence we  have  of  the  appellant  taking  any
    action in response is dated 4 July 2018,  when  he  sent  a  number  of
    emails to education providers.  We also note that the appellant did not
    issue or threaten judicial review proceedings in an attempt  to  secure
    more time.


75. For those reasons, we do not consider it to  be  established  that  the
    appellant was prejudiced by the delay in  implementing  Judge  Monson's
    decision or the amount of time he was given by the respondent to find a
    new sponsor.  However, Mr Maqsood's best points were more focused  and,
    at first blush, more attractive.  He submitted that the  appellant  was
    prevented from taking a new English test  because  the  respondent  had
    retained his original passport and that  he  could  not  obtain  a  new
    academic sponsor whilst the spectre of ETS fraud followed  him,  as  it
    did until it was finally withdrawn before the FtT.  We take  those  two
    points in order.


76. As to the first, there can be no doubt that the respondent was entitled
    to retain the appellant's passport under section 17 of the  Asylum  and
    Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc) Act 2004.   She  was  plainly
    conscious that her decision to retain the  document  might  present  an
    obstacle to the  appellant  taking  another  English  test.   The  only
    English tests which are acceptable to the respondent  in  this  context
    are those which are administered by the Secure English Language Testing
    centres ("SELTs") listed in Appendix O of the Immigration Rules.  Those
    centres operate under strict licensing requirements, pursuant to  which
    they are ordinarily required to check an original identity document  of
    a specified type (one of which is a national passport).   In  order  to
    overcome that difficulty, the respondent provided the appellant with  a
    certified copy of his passport and with detailed advice  about  how  to
    book  an  English  language  test.   We  have  reproduced  the   letter
    containing that advice in full at paragraph 14  above.   The  appellant
    was told, firstly, that he needed to bring his precise circumstances to
    the attention of the provider.  Having considered the  emails  sent  to
    the various providers,  we  consider  the  appellant  appears  to  have
    followed that advice.  Indeed, we note that the appellant seems to have
    sent the providers a copy of the correspondence he  received  from  the
    Home Office.  Notwithstanding the fact that he had followed that aspect
    of the advice, the appellant received a  standard  response  from  each
    provider, stating that they were unable to accept a copied document and
    that only an original passport would suffice.


77. Thus far,  Mr  Maqsood's  submission  holds.   He  submitted  that  the
    appellant had ostensibly been given time to regularise his position but
    that he had, in reality, been deprived of the means with  which  to  do
    so.  Whether the appellant was given sixty or ninety  days'  grace,  Mr
    Maqsood submitted, the appellant could not have secured another English
    test and could not have  hoped  to  secure  further  leave  whilst  his
    passport  was  retained  by  the  respondent.   What  that   submission
    overlooks, though, is the remainder of the letter which  the  appellant
    was sent on 20 June 2018, as set out at paragraph  14  above.   It  was
    anticipated in that letter that the appellant might  have  difficulties
    in arranging a test and that, in the event  of  such  difficulties,  he
    should book the test online and notify the Home  Office,  via  a  given
    email address, so that consideration could be given to  the  respondent
    corresponding directly with the provider.   The  respondent  stated  in
    terms that 'this process has been agreed with the  test  centres'.   So
    much is clear from the terms of (4) and (5) of that letter.

78. Although the instructions to the appellant could not have been clearer,
    and although he had the benefit of legal advice at the time,  there  is
    nothing in the papers to show, or even to suggest, that he attempted to
    book a test online and to send an email  to  the  Home  Office  in  the
    manner suggested.  His witness statement describes his contact with the
    test centres but does not make reference to any attempt to book a  test
    online.  We note that the appellant also asserts in his statement  that
    he requested the return of his passport from the  respondent  but  that
    assertion is unsupported by any documentary evidence,  whether  in  the
    form of a Letter Before Action or otherwise.  In the circumstances,  we
    conclude  that  it  was  the  appellant  and  his  advisers  who   were
    responsible for his failing to secure an English Language test  booking
    with a new SELT provider.  The respondent had set out in  the  clearest
    possible terms what he was required to do to book a test  and  although
    he complied with the first part of those  instructions,  he  failed  to
    comply with the second part.

79. That was a significant failing on the part of the  appellant.   As  was
    clear from the respondent's letter of 20 June 2018, and from Appendix A
    of the Immigration Rules in any event, the appellant could not hope  to
    secure a CAS, or to make a successful application for leave to  remain,
    without proof that he had  passed  an  English  Language  test  at  the
    relevant level at a registered SELT provider.  Paragraph 116(f)(vi)  of
    Appendix A, as then in force, required a sponsor to enter onto the  CAS
    the details of how the sponsor has  assessed  the  applicant's  English
    language ability including, where  relevant,  the  applicant's  English
    language test scores in all four components (reading, writing, speaking
    and listening).  A future sponsor would be  unable  to  do  so  if  the
    appellant had not taken the test, and any CAS generated  without  those
    details would have been invalid, as is  clear  from  paragraph  116  of
    Appendix A.  Nor would the appellant have  been  able  to  satisfy  the
    requirements of Appendix A which expressly required  him  to  submit  a
    test result from a SELT provider listed in Appendix O.

80. Mr Maqsood's remaining complaint is to be considered in  light  of  the
    conclusion we have reached immediately above.  He  submitted  that  the
    appellant had been unfairly prejudiced by the allegation of  ETS  fraud
    which was first made, as  we  understand  it,  in  2018  and  was  only
    withdrawn at the hearing before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  October
    2019.   We  recall,  in  this  connection,  that  the  universities  of
    Roehampton  and  Greenwich  respectively  declined  to   entertain   an
    application from the appellant because of his 'immigration history' and
    because the compliance department had advised them to do so.   We  take
    both of these rather opaque replies to  refer  to  the  ETS  allegation
    against the appellant.  A Tier 4 sponsor might,  as  a  result  of  the
    obligations imposed upon them  by  the  respondent,  understandably  be
    reluctant to sponsor an individual whose copy book is said to contain a
    blot of that nature.

81. Had the incorrect allegation of ETS fraud been the only  impediment  to
    the appellant securing admission to an alternative  college,  it  might
    well have been difficult for the  respondent  to  submit  that  it  was
    nevertheless proportionate to remove him from the United Kingdom.   Had
    that been the reality of the appellant's situation, then he would  have
    shown that the only reason for his current predicament would have  been
    an allegation which was wrongly made.  But that is not the  reality  of
    the appellant's situation.  Even if the allegation  of  fraud  had  not
    been wrongly made, the appellant's  English  language  certificate  had
    been cancelled and he was required to obtain  a  replacement.   He  was
    informed about the process for doing so in clear terms but he  followed
    only half of the respondent's guidance.  Without a new English language
    certificate, he would have been unable to secure a new sponsor, whether
    or not there was an allegation of fraud against him.  Put  simply,  the
    ETS allegation was immaterial in light of the  appellant's  failure  to
    follow the respondent's instructions  regarding  the  English  Language
    Test.

82. There are two further difficulties with Mr Maqsood's submission that it
    was the respondent's action or inaction which prevented  the  appellant
    from continuing with his studies.  We get a glimpse of the  first  from
    the emails from the universities of St Mary's, Southampton and Salford.
     As suggested in those emails, it is difficult to see how the appellant
    could have satisfied the requirement  of  academic  progress  from  one
    course to the next, which is imposed (now, as  in  2018)  by  paragraph
    120A of Appendix A.  He had a Bachelor's degree from  Pakistan  and  he
    had completed a post-graduate qualification in the United Kingdom,  the
    certificate for  which  was  sent  to  various  universities  when  the
    appellant  made  enquiries.   It  was  unsurprising  that  the   Senior
    International Officer at the University of  Salford  replied  to  state
    that  it  would  be  difficult  for  the  appellant  to   commence   an
    undergraduate  degree  (which  is  at   level   6   of   the   National
    Qualifications  Framework)  when  he  had  already  gained  a  level  7
    qualification from the United Kingdom.


83. Nor was there any evidence before the First-tier Tribunal upon which it
    could properly have concluded that the appellant  was  in  a  position,
    between May and August 2018, to meet the requirements of Appendix C  of
    the Immigration Rules, concerning the funding for his studies.  If  the
    appellant sought to submit that it was only the prejudice caused by the
    Secretary of State's conduct that prevented him from  securing  further
    leave to remain as a student, it was for him to show that  there  would
    have been no further difficulties in satisfying the requirements of the
    Immigration Rules.  Had the appellant passed an English  Language  test
    and secured a CAS, he would still have been required to  show  that  he
    had access to at least the full course fees for the first academic year
    and �1015 per month for the first nine months (paragraph 11 of Appendix
    C refers, in respect of a course outside London).   There  was  nothing
    before the First-tier Tribunal to show that the appellant had access to
    such a sum, whether in the manner required by Appendix C or  otherwise.




84. In summary, therefore, we do not accept  that  the  appellant  suffered
    prejudice as a result of the respondent's conduct.  The  delay  of  two
    years between Judge Monson's decision and the  issuance  of  the  first
    sixty day letter was unexplained and regrettable but gave  rise  to  no
    demonstrable prejudice.  It has not been shown  that  the  three  month
    period that the appellant was finally given in which to regularise  his
    status was insufficient for him to do so.  Nor, critically, has it been
    established that the respondent's retention of the appellant's passport
    prevented him from taking an English Language test; it was instead  the
    appellant's failure to follow the respondent's clear instructions  that
    prevented him from doing so.   Nor,  for  the  reasons  we  have  given
    immediately above, has it been shown that the false allegation  of  ETS
    fraud operated to prevent  the  appellant  securing  further  leave  to
    remain.  Whilst two universities appeared to have been concerned by it,
    they could not have granted the appellant  a  CAS  without  an  English
    Language test and it is difficult to see how they could have  expressed
    themselves  to  be  satisfied  that  any  course  they  had  to   offer
    represented  genuine  academic  progress   in   accordance   with   the
    Immigration Rules.  In any event, the appellant failed to  present  any
    evidence to the First-tier Tribunal to show that he would have met  the
    requirements of Appendix C of the Immigration Rules.  He fell short  by
    some margin, therefore, of establishing  that  he  would  have  secured
    leave to remain but for the respondent's errors and delays.


85. Properly understood, this is not a case in  which  the  respondent  has
    improperly impeded the appellant's pursuit of his course of studies  in
    the UK.  It is a case  in  which  the  respondent's  conduct  has  been
    deserving of reproach but in which, ultimately,  the  appellant  cannot
    show that her conduct operated to his disadvantage.  Neither the  delay
    nor the errors gave rise to an inconsistent,  unpredictable  or  unfair
    outcome and there was nothing, therefore,  which  could  properly  have
    persuaded the judge that the public interest in immigration control was
    outweighed on the  facts  of  this  case.   In  the  circumstances,  we
    conclude that the judge erred in failing to consider adequately  or  at
    all the gravamen of the appellant's case under Article 8(2)  ECHR  but,
    having considered those arguments for ourselves, we conclude  that  her
    error was not material to the outcome of the appeal.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of law which  was
not material to the outcome of the appeal.  The appellant's  appeal  to  the
Upper Tribunal is accordingly dismissed.


                      Signed
                      Mr Justice Lane                     7 July 2020






                      The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                      President of the Upper Tribunal
                      Immigration and Asylum Chamber

        _____________________________________________________________

                           -----------------------
In the First-tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
             Appeal No: HU/09140/2019
Decision by:  Upper Tribunal Judge Martin


