
[pic]
ar

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

          SA (Divorced woman - illegitimate child) Bangladesh CG [2011] UKUT
                                                                  00254(IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 29th & 30th September 2010                 |                             |
|                                              |11 July 2011                 |


                                   Before

                      SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE SPENCER
                        SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE WARD
                      MS S E SINGER (Non Legal Member)

                                   Between

                                     SA

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Walsh, Counsel, instructed by IAS (Tribunal
Unit)
For the Respondent:    Mr K Kyriacou, Home Office Presenting Officer


    1) There is a high level of domestic violence in  Bangladesh.   Despite
       the efforts of the government to improve the situation, due  to  the
       disinclination of the police to act upon complaints, women subjected
       to domestic violence may not be able to obtain an effective  measure
       of state protection by reason of the fact that they  are  women  and
       may be able to show a risk of serious harm for a Refugee  Convention
       reason.  Each case, however, must be determined on its own facts.

    (2) Under Muslim law, as applicable in Bangladesh, the  mother,  or  in
       her absence her own family members, has the right to custody  of  an
       illegitimate child.

    3) In custody and contact disputes the decisions of the superior courts
       in Bangladesh indicate a  fairly  consistent  trend  to  invoke  the
       principle of the welfare of  the  child  as  an  overriding  factor,
       permitting departure from the applicable personal law but  a  mother
       may  be  disqualified  from  custody  or  contact   by   established
       allegations of immorality.

    4) The mother of an illegitimate child may face  social  prejudice  and
       discrimination if her circumstances and the fact of her  having  had
       an illegitimate child become known but she is not likely to be at  a
       real risk of serious  harm in urban centres by reason of  that  fact
       alone.

    5) The divorced mother of an illegitimate child without family  support
       on return to  Bangladesh  would  be  likely  to  have  to  endure  a
       significant degree of hardship but she may well be  able  to  obtain
       employment  in  the  garment  trade  and   obtain   some   sort   of
       accommodation, albeit of a low standard.  Some degree of rudimentary
       state aid would be available to her and she would be able  to  enrol
       her child in a state school.  If in need of  urgent  assistance  she
       would be able to seek temporary accommodation in a woman's  shelter.
       The conditions which she would have  to  endure  in  re-establishing
       herself in Bangladesh would  not  as  a  general  matter  amount  to
       persecution or a breach of her rights under article 3 of  the  ECHR.
       Each case, however, must be decided its own facts having  regard  to
       the particular circumstances and disabilities, if any, of the  woman
       and the child concerned. Of course if  such  a  woman  were  fleeing
       persecution in her own home area the test  for  internal  relocation
       would be that of undue harshness and not a breach of her  article  3
       rights.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    This is the determination of a panel of the Tribunal which all of  the
    members have agreed. Unfortunately Senior Immigration Judge  Ward  died
    before the determination could be put into its final  form  but  before
    her illness she made a substantial contribution to the writing  of  the
    determination and agreed with all of its conclusions both in  terms  of
    the outcome of the appeal and the country guidance given.

The background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh, born  on  10  December  1981.
    She arrived in the United Kingdom on 2 November 2002  and  was  granted
    leave to enter as a dependent of her student husband in  2004.  Further
    leave was granted in the same  capacity  on  3  November  2006  but  in
    December 2006 she left her husband.   She  returned  to  Bangladesh  in
    about August 2007.  On 13 September 2007 whilst in Bangladesh she  made
    a student visa application  to  the  UK  which  was  refused.  She  was
    informed on arrival back in the UK in September 2007 that her status as
    a  student  dependent  had  been  cancelled  because  the  couple   had
    separated. She was granted temporary admission to the UK although  that
    temporary admission expired in 2007.  She unsuccessfully  appealed  her
    student visa application refusal and the cancellation of her  leave  in
    October 2007. She thereafter claimed asylum  and  her  application  was
    refused on 23 July 2009.

 3. Thereafter the appellant appealed to the former Asylum and  Immigration
    Tribunal and her appeal was heard on 15 September 2009  by  Immigration
    Judge Kanagaratnam who dismissed the appeal.  The appellant sought  and
    was granted an order for reconsideration  and  by  the  decision  of  a
    senior immigration judge made on 20 January 2010 the  decision  of  the
    immigration judge was set aside and the  appeal  was  adjourned  for  a
    second  stage  reconsideration.   The  reasons  given  by  the   senior
    immigration judge were as follows:

      1. Reconsideration  was  ordered  on  both  grounds  for  review.   In
         relation to the second ground for review the order stated that  the
         issue of how the appellant would be treated by society as a  result
         of her younger illegitimate child had been inadequately dealt with.
          It was arguable that the immigration judge did not give sufficient
         reasons for his findings given the country information before him.

      2. It is true, as Ms Ramachandran argued, that the  immigration  judge
         set out the correct factual basis for his findings in paragraph  12
         of his determination, in which he said he bore  in  mind  that  the
         appellant was a single divorced female who had  a  dependent  child
         born out of wedlock but after her divorce from her husband.  It  is
         also true that he  made  a  general  reference  to  the  background
         material to which his  attention  had  been  drawn.  In  drawing  a
         distinction between how the appellant might be dealt with in Dhaka,
         her own home area of Bangladesh, and how she might be dealt with in
         a rural area, however, the immigration judge in my  view  misstated
         the effect of that evidence.  He said  that  according  to  the  US
         State Department report laws existed in Bangladesh to protect women
         from forms of discrimination although enforcement of those laws was
         weak in rural areas.  In fact in section 5  of  the  report  stated
         that enforcement of these laws was weak.  The Refworld report dated
         25 June 2001 and entitled "Bangldesh: Information on the  Situation
         of Women Who Have Children Who Are Born Out of Wedlock", a copy  of
         which was in the appellant's bundle before the  immigration  judge,
         stated that enforcement of the anti-discrimination laws  was  weak,
         particularly in rural areas.  The conclusion  that  enforcement  of
         anti-discrimination laws in favour of women was effective in  urban
         areas could not be reasonably drawn from  the  background  material
         before the immigration judge.

      3. Furthermore, as Mr Walsh argued,  the immigration judge  failed  to
         have regard to the background material in the Refworld report which
         stated that the status of women in  Bangladesh  was  very  low  and
         having children out of wedlock was against Islamic  law  and  might
         result in such a woman  and  her  child  being  treated  as  social
         outcasts.  If the woman was Muslim, as the appellant is,  the  very
         existence of the child proved her adultery and how she  would  fare
         would depend upon her immediate family and  her  class  background.
         Returning to Bangladesh with a child born out of wedlock  would  be
         "an enormous physical  and  social  risk  for  a  woman  to  take".
         Moreover it was crucial that the immigration judge should have made
         a finding, which he  failed  to  do,  on  whether  the  appellant's
         account of having been rejected by her immediate family on  account
         of having had an illegitimate child was true.

      4. In these circumstances I am satisfied that  the  immigration  judge
         made a material error of law in determining the appellant's  asylum
         grounds of appeal and her human  rights  grounds  of  appeal  under
         article 3 of the ECHR.

      5. Ms Ramachandram, conceded, and I am satisfied that the  immigration
         judge made a material error of law in finding that as the appellant
         had the benefit of contact rights to have her daughter,  her  child
         by her former husband, with her between Fridays  and  Sundays,  she
         would be able to maintain contact from  abroad  "as  expected"  and
         therefore there would not be a breach of her article 8 rights.  The
         immigration judge failed to analyse the effect of  the  appellant's
         removal on her relationship with her daughter.

      6. Therefore I adjourn the appeal for a second  stage  reconsideration
         hearing in  which  the  appellant's  appeal  is  to  be  determined
         completely afresh save that the positive finding of the immigration
         judge  as  to  the  appellant's  credibility  in  relation  to  the
         incidents  she  related  mentioned   in   paragraph   11   of   the
         determination is to be preserved.

4.     Subsequent  to  the  promulgation  of  the  reasons  of  the   senior
    immigration judge, the Asylum and Immigration  Tribunal  was  abolished
    and this appeal was transferred to the Upper Tribunal (Immigration  and
    Asylum Chamber) to be continued as an appeal to  this  Tribunal.   Thus
    the matter came before us.

5.    The hearing proceeded on the basis  that  the  immigration  judge  had
    made certain findings of fact that  which  were  not  affected  by  the
    material error of law made by her.  The following facts  are  therefore
    not in dispute in this appeal.

6.    The appellant is a Bangladeshi woman born 10 December  1981.   In  May
    2001 she married OFK in Bangladesh  and  they  lived  together  in  her
    family's home. In September 2002 the appellant's husband  went  to  the
    United Kingdom as a student sponsored by the  appellant's  father.   In
    November 2002 the appellant entered the United Kingdom as  a  dependent
    of her husband and lived in the United Kingdom  with  her  husband  and
    other relatives. While in the United Kingdom, on 18 June 2005, she gave
    birth to a daughter, ZK, a  child  by  her  husband.   She  experienced
    domestic violence at the hands of her husband  and  they  separated  in
    December 2006 when the appellant left the matrimonial home.  The  child
    remained with her father but the appellant enjoyed daily contact  until
    the end of January 2007 when there was an incident  which  resulted  in
    the police being called and the appellant being advised  not  to  visit
    the, by then, former matrimonial home.  Contact arrangements  elsewhere
    broke down as a result of which contact ceased. After about 18  months,
    the appellant secured a contact order from the  Family  Court.     That
    contact continued and has now been enlarged to  contact  every  weekend
    from each Friday after school to 10 am on Sunday  morning.  Z  and  her
    father had leave to remain in the United Kingdom until January 2010 and
    now have leave to remain in the United Kingdom until  10  August  2011.
    The father is the primary carer of Z and co-operates with  the  contact
    arrangements Z enjoys with the appellant.   The  appellant  obtained  a
    decree absolute of divorce from  her  husband  23  January  2008.   The
    appellant gave birth to a second child,  SK,  by  a  different  father,
    whose surname is similar but not identical to that of  the  appellant's
    former husband, in April 2009, of whom she is the primary  carer.  This
    second child was born out of wedlock.

7.    Most helpfully the parties were able to produce to  the  Tribunal  an
    agreed bundle of country specific information which we refer to as the
    "Country Bundle". A further  bundle  was  produced  by  the  appellant
    entitled  "  Supplementary  Bundle"  which  contained  the   following
    documents: a supplementary statement by the appellant, a report by  Ms
    Sara Hossain, a report by Dr Dina Siddiqi, a report by Ms Nina Goswami
    (Ain o Salish  Kenda),  copies  of  contact  orders  obtained  by  the
    appellant, documents relating to the appellant's divorce, a copy of an
    e-mail from the respondent regarding the  immigration  status  of  the
    appellant's former husband, a copy of the  respondent's  bundle  which
    was before the  immigration  judge  and  copies  of  various  Tribunal
    documents relating to the proceedings which have taken  place  in  the
    course of this appeal.

The evidence of the appellant

8.    The appellant gave oral evidence, initially with the assistance of  a
    Bengali  interpreter.  However  it  soon  became  apparent  that   the
    appellant, not surprisingly, spoke  good  English  and  was  at  times
    responding in English to questions which  had  been  put  to  her  and
    translated into Bengali. In the circumstances,  therefore  we  invited
    the appellant to consider whether she wished to give her  evidence  in
    English.  She replied that  she  would  do  so,  but  she  wished  the
    interpreter to be available should she be unable to find the  relevant
    English word herself.  The proceedings  therefore  continued  on  that
    basis that the evidence would be given in English, but with occasional
    assistance from the interpreter.

9.    The appellant gave  some  brief  initial  evidence  relating  to  her
    current circumstances, where  she  was  living  and  working  and  her
    income.  She also gave evidence regarding her family in Bangladesh and
    in particular regarding the divorce of  her  parents  which  she  said
    occurred in late 2001.  She also told the Tribunal how her mother  had
    a new partner in Bangladesh and  had  given  birth  to  three  further
    children, all boys, by her new partner.  She said that her mother  and
    her new partner had undergone a Muslim marriage, but this had not been
    registered under Bangladeshi law.  She said that her father  had  also
    married again and that he had a child, also a boy, with his new  wife.
    She explained that she had not disclosed these  circumstances  of  her
    parents until recently because she was shy to  speak  about  them  and
    embarrassed that her parents had children about the same  age  as  her
    daughter. She had been advised, she said, to reveal the truth  to  the
    Tribunal.

10. She was cross examined by Mr Kyriacou and the Tribunal  also  had  some
    questions to  ask.  We  do  not  propose  to  set  out  in  detail  the
    appellant's oral evidence here but we shall refer to it as relevant  in
    the course of our determination.

The expert evidence

11. The appellant relied upon the expert evidence of three witnesses,  only
    one of whom gave oral evidence before the Tribunal.  This was  Ms  Sara
    Hossain, Advocate of the Supreme Court of Bangladesh and a  partner  in
    the law firm of Dr Kamal Hossain & Associates  in  Dhaka.   Ms  Hossain
    obtained an MA (Hons) in Jurisprudence from Wadham College,  Oxford  in
    1988.  She was called to the Bar at the Middle Temple in 1989.  She was
    admitted to practice before the High  Court  Division  of  the  Supreme
    Court of Bangladesh in 1992 as a member of the  Dhaka  Bar  Association
    and admitted to practice before the Appellate Division, the Apex  court
    as she termed it, in 2008.    She  practises  mainly  in  the  area  of
    constitutional and administrative law but also advises  on  family  law
    matters including child custody, child abduction and  forced  marriage,
    as well as other matters.   We  had  Ms  Hossain's  report  dated  20th
    September 2010.

12. The second expert relied upon was Dr Dina Mahnaz Siddiqi who  describes
    herself in her report, dated 19th September  2010,  as  an  independent
    scholar and research consultant.  Dr Siddiqi has a BA  in  Anthropology
    and Economics from Wellesley  College,  Massachusetts  from  which  she
    graduated magna cum lauda and also has a PhD  in  Anthropology  at  the
    University of Michigan.  She  says  that  she  has  extensive  research
    experience in the areas of gender, Islam  and  human  rights,  informal
    justice systems and the politics of sexuality  in  Bangladesh.  In  her
    report she set out her numerous academic positions and publications.

13. The third report was from Ms Nina Goswami, an Advocate of  the  Supreme
    Court of Bangladesh and the Senior Deputy  Director  of  Ain  O  Salish
    Kendra (ASK).  Her undated report shows that she obtained an LLB (Hons)
    from Rajshahi University in 1989 and an LLM from the same university in
    1990. She describes herself as the author of many reports published  by
    ASK, such as Sex Workers Rights in Bangladesh and the annual report  of
    Asset Survivors Foundation (ASF) 2009.   She  says  that  she  has  had
    experience of working  for  more  than  sixteen  years  for  government
    shelter homes and other organisations' shelter homes.

14. Mr Kyriacou conceded the expertise of these witnesses and therefore  it
    is  not  necessary  for  us  to  undertake  an  assessment   of   their
    qualifications and experience in order to determine  whether  they  are
    persons who can properly be regarded as expert witnesses.

15. As Mr Walsh conceded in his skeleton argument, much  of  what  Ms  Sara
    Hossain said in her report is no longer  of  direct  relevance  to  the
    appellant's case because her former husband now has leave to remain  in
    the United Kingdom  as  a  student  until  10th  August  2011  and  the
    appellant's daughter Zara has leave to remain as  his  dependant  until
    the same date.  There is no prospect therefore of them  being  returned
    together with the appellant to Bangladesh.  The result of this is  that
    the questions whether or not the appellant would be denied  custody  or
    contact with her daughter in Bangladesh, whether the contact order that
    the appellant currently has in the United Kingdom could be enforced  in
    Bangladesh, whether in divorce cases children remain with their  father
    or their  mother  or  whether  the  fact  that  the  appellant  has  an
    illegitimate child would affect her right of access to her daughter  Z,
    which are all matters which Ms Hossain dealt  with  at  length  in  her
    report, no longer have any direct relevance to the appellant's case.

16. It seems to us that it would be convenient to set out a description  of
    the experts' reports in Annex A.

Ms Hossain's oral evidence

17. In her oral evidence Ms Hossain was asked by Mr Walsh how relevant  was
    the fact that, as the appellant had recently disclosed, her mother  had
    divorced her father and had set up  an  independent  household  with  a
    second husband.  She said it would not necessary improve the chances of
    the appellant getting support as divorce had a stigma  attached  to  it
    and that would be a reason not to add to  the  stigma  by  accepting  a
    grandchild born out of wedlock.  She  pointed  to  the  fact  that  the
    appellant herself indicated that  the  views  of  her  mother's  second
    husband would  be  relevant.   It  was  also  of  relevance  that  they
    themselves had young children.

18. Mr Walsh asked Ms Hossain how plausible it was that the appellant would
    be able to keep the existence of her illegitimate child a  secret.   Ms
    Hossain said it was likely to come out because there was not a  premium
    on privacy in Bangladesh.  She gave by way of an  example  an  anecdote
    that the Attorney General had indicated it would be very difficult  for
    terrorists to hide out in Bangladesh.  She said the appellant would  be
    questioned as to where she and her family were  from.  They  would  ask
    where the child's father was and she said it was not 100%  certain  but
    there was a good chance that the illegitimacy of her child  would  come
    out.  She said Dhaka was a large city but not an  anonymous  one.  With
    finance one could be more anonymous.  She said that as  a  young  woman
    with a child most private landlords would question her  as  to  whether
    she was married and whether her father or brother would  stand  surety.
    She would be asked questions intended to ensure the  respectability  of
    any potential tenant.  She gave an example  of  the  difficulties  that
    young academic staff females had in obtaining accommodation  unless  it
    was shared housing.

19. She repeated that the welfare principle  based  on  the  Guardians  and
    Wards Act of 1890 applied to custody cases and  overrode  the  personal
    law applicable to the parties.

20. When asked about whether domestic violence was a  discrete  offence  in
    Bangladesh, she said in her report that it was not and  there  were  no
    protective orders.  She said  that  offences  such  as  causing  actual
    bodily harm could be complained about but if complaint was made to  the
    police they would not take any notice as they treated domestic violence
    as a private  matter.  She  said  formally  it  was  possible  to  have
    protective orders but they were not available in practice. She did  not
    know of anyone obtaining an injunction except for cases where a  demand
    had been made for payment of a dowry.

21. In cross-examination by Mr Kyriacou, Ms Hossain repeated that there was
    no prospect of the appellant losing the  custody  of  her  illegitimate
    child to her former husband's family.  She agreed that it had  happened
    that despite allegations having been made, custody had been awarded  to
    the mother, but said that the birth of a child  out  of  wedlock  would
    prove  immorality.   Mr  Kyriacou  pointed  out  that  Ms  Hossain  had
    indicated that there were no precedents  involving  the  mother  of  an
    illegitimate child being refused custody of that child,  so  she  could
    not say that she would be refused.  She said she would  put  it  a  bit
    stronger than that. She would not advise any woman in that position  to
    even apply.  Mr  Kyriacou  pointed  out  that  she  had  conceded  that
    visitation rights could be granted to the other parent.  She said  that
    was so but it could be  limited  to  a  few  hours  and  to  supervised
    contact.  He suggested that there was a discrepancy  between  what  she
    had said about the enforceability of contact orders and  her  statement
    in paragraph 62 of her report that the order allowing access/visits  to
    the child by the appellant might  not  be  complied  with  by  her  ex-
    husband's family.  Ms Hossain said  that  there  was  no  inconsistency
    because if the order was an interim order there was  no  procedure  for
    enforcement except for contempt if it was in the High  Court  and  non-
    compliance would need to be shown over a period of time.

22. She agreed that the appellant's fear of extra-judicial  punishment  for
    having an illegitimate child was not well-founded.

23. Mr Kyriacou asked Ms Hossain about  the  proposal  for  legislation  on
    sexual harassment in educational institutions and work places mentioned
    in paragraph 68 of her report.  She said  that  draft  legislation  had
    been approved by the Cabinet which did criminalise  such  conduct.  She
    said it might take three or four  months  before  the  legislation  was
    passed and there would then be a question of when it would be  enacted.
    It had been suggested that time would be  needed  to  allow  sufficient
    training to be undertaken.  Ms Hossain was asked how effective  it  was
    likely to be.  She said it would take time to see an impact. She  hoped
    it would be effective but she said that they had previously  seen  that
    it took time for legislation to bed down.

24. Mr Kyriacou referred Ms Hossain to reports of the decision of the  High
    Court in Bangladesh ruling against all extra-judicial  punishments.  He
    asked her why she had not made more of this and she said  she  made  it
    clear that it was not likely to be relevant in an urban area.  She said
    the text of the judgment was not available. She  said  there  had  been
    further incidents of so-called fatwas and referred to  another  article
    on forced veiling.  She said that ten years ago there  was  a  judgment
    given as to what needed to be done when a person was arrested  but  the
    requirements were still not routinely carried out.  She said there  was
    a disparity between what was required by the law and what  happened  in
    practice.

25. She was asked what the non-registration  of  the  appellant's  mother's
    second marriage meant. She said that  in  Bangladeshi  law  there  were
    penalties for not registering a marriage but such a marriage  would  be
    valid under Islamic law.  She said that in the late 90s there was still
    a high percentage of unregistered marriages particularly in rural areas
    and it was not uncommon for a marriage not to be registered.  She  said
    usually the registrar would be present at the wedding ceremony  but  if
    not the necessary documents could be taken to the registry by witnesses
    and the marriage registered.

The background material

26. We set out items of background material that were  relied  upon  by  Mr
    Walsh and referred to in his skeleton argument in relation to  specific
    topics and adopt his system of headings and  also  refer  to  items  of
    background material relied upon by the respondent in Annex B.

The submissions made on behalf of the respondent

27. Mr Kyriacou relied upon his written skeleton argument. He conceded that
    Bangladesh had a long way to go before it  could  be  said  there  were
    equal rights as far as gender equality was concerned but the  objective
    evidence painted an increasingly positive picture.  He submitted  there
    was very little evidence to show that as a woman with a child born  out
    of wedlock the appellant would face persecution in  Bangladesh.   There
    was significant evidence which showed that there would be a sufficiency
    of protection in the Horvath sense.   He  conceded  that  the  COIR  on
    Bangladesh noted a number of negative points but  also  positive  ones.
    The picture of a predominantly male  dominated  society  was  changing.
    There were opportunities for women in government at the  highest  level
    and also in employment.  He submitted the starting point had to be  the
    Tribunal's determination in RA and Others (Particular  social  group  -
    women) Bangladesh [2005] UKIAT 00070 in which the Tribunal  found  that
    the objective evidence did not establish that women in Bangladesh  were
    a particular social group.  He conceded  that  the  decision  was  five
    years old but if anything the position had improved  since  then.   The
    COIR dealing with violence against women  said  that  there  were  laws
    relating to violence against women, although  he  conceded  that  there
    were no specific offences relating to domestic violence.  The fact that
    the Domestic Violence (Prevention and  Protection)  Bill  had  recently
    been approved by the cabinet, as indicated by Miss Hossain,  and  might
    be enacted during the course of 2010 was a relevant factor  showing  an
    improvement in the situation of women in Bangladesh.  He pointed to the
    efforts that had been made to deal with acid attacks and  the  evidence
    which showed a decrease in the number of such attacks.  He also pointed
    to the fact that the government and NGOs assisted victims  of  domestic
    violence.  He pointed to the  five  year  family  savings  certificates
    which the government had reintroduced, the improvement in the education
    of girls, the signs of the government's commitment to  assisting  women
    as well as the statement by Dr Dipu Moni, the  Foreign  Minister,  that
    women empowerment  was  one  of  the  top  priorities  of  the  present
    government.  It was significant that the High Court had recently  ruled
    that wearing a veil by Muslim women was a matter  of  personal  choice.
    The position of women was not so draconian and  medieval  as  had  been
    made out.  He submitted that the increase in the  number  of  women  in
    parliament was a sign that the position of women was improving although
    he also conceded that there were a number  of  problems  for  women  in
    Bangladesh.

28. Mr Kyriacou also submitted that the appellant could  avail  herself  of
    internal flight and it would not be unreasonable for  her  to  relocate
    within Bangladesh.  She had shown herself to  be  a  resourceful  woman
    under difficult circumstances and it was unlikely  that  she  would  be
    traced by relatives of her former husband. There was no reason why  the
    appellant should not be able to support herself on return to Bangladesh
    as she had a reasonable level of education, speaks English well  enough
    to have been employed as a  large  store  in  the  United  Kingdom  and
    therefore had transferable skills.   It  was  submitted  that  she  was
    resourceful enough to find a job and sort  out  somewhere  to  live  in
    England and this would assist her on her  return  to  her  own  country
    which was more familiar  to  her.   There  was  also  evidence  of  the
    Bangladeshi authorities' willingness to assist working women and  there
    were a large number of non-governmental  organisations  which  assisted
    women in Bangladesh. There was evidence that  certain  members  of  the
    appellant's  family  would  support  her,  the  appellant's  mother  in
    particular.

29. A new issue had arisen at this very late stage, namely the  divorce  of
    the appellant's parents.  Mr Kyriacou submitted that this was the first
    time the appellant had raised this even though the proceedings had been
    in the Tribunal and its  predecessor  for  sometime.   The  appellant's
    evidence was not credible that she was without support  in  Bangladesh.
    Credibility was impacted by the fact that she had concealed the divorce
    of her parents until now. The true nature of the circumstances  had  in
    fact been hidden.  He submitted that the appellant could  look  to  her
    mother for support upon return.  Her mother was a  divorced  woman  but
    she had managed to find alternative accommodation when she had left her
    husband and also found a new partner.  They had entered into an Islamic
    marriage albeit one that it was not  registered.   It  was  significant
    that the appellant referred to her mother's new partner  as  a  partner
    rather than husband.  Even if  the  appellant  was  frightened  of  her
    father, her mother lived three hours away from her father,  and  mother
    and father were not  in  contact  with  each  other.   She  could  find
    assistance from her mother in obtaining  accommodation  employment  and
    obtain access to the legal system should that be required.

30.  It  was  also  his  submission  that  the  appellant  lived  with  a
    Bangladeshi lady here in the United Kingdom whom she referred to as a
    sister and it was very likely that she would be  able  to  call  upon
    this lady to help her.  It was to be noted that the evidence was that
    this lady had family herself in Bangladesh and there was no reason to
    believe that these persons could not  assist  the  appellant  on  her
    return.  The father of the appellant's second child was in the United
    Kingdom but was without status here and  he  could  return  with  the
    appellant to Bangladesh, together with their son.

31. Mr Kyriacou conceded that Bangladesh had a long way to go  to  arrive
    at true gender equality but the objective evidence  was  increasingly
    positive.  There was little evidence of actual persecution and  there
    was evidence of protection.  He referred particularly to evidence  in
    the Country of Origin report at section 23 to  show  that  Bangladesh
    had made real efforts to address the problem of inequality for women.
    He took us to various other items of background material.

32. He then took the Tribunal to the various  expert  reports  which  had
    been produced on behalf of the appellant.  With regard to the  report
    of Ms Goswami he commented on her opinion that conditions in shelters
    were not all right for middle-class people.  He submitted  that  this
    could not be taken to mean that middle-class people  could  not  take
    advantage of them and clearly they would  not  be  ideal  conditions.
    Nevertheless the appellant could have access to a shelter  and  could
    stay there for three to  six  months  which  could  on  occasions  be
    extended to a year.

33. With regard to the report of Dr Siddiqui, he submitted that  she  had
    noted therein that there had been little sustained research on single
    women or women with illegitimate children.  He highlighted  parts  of
    the report where it was said that it was unlikely that the  appellant
    would come to any direct harm and that there were  the  possibilities
    for divorced women to live in the urban areas.  He  also  highlighted
    her comment that it was unlikely that the fact  of  her  child  being
    illegitimate would be made public by a middle-class family.

34. Mr Kyriacou also took the Tribunal to various other items of evidence
    which were in the country background bundle including a report in the
    New York Times regarding the employment  opportunities  available  to
    women in the garment industry and the possibility  of  women  sharing
    accommodation in Bangladesh.  Incomes in the  garment  industry  were
    shown by the country specific evidence to be good.  He  also  pointed
    to a report in the Independent newspaper which showed that fatwa as a
    punishment had now been outlawed.  With  regard  to  the  appellant's
    illegitimate child, he pointed to the amendment which had  been  made
    to the citizenship  laws  of  Bangladesh  in  2009,  the  Citizenship
    (Amendment Act) 2009 where a child could now  obtain  citizenship  by
    descent through his mother and not simply through his father. He also
    invited the Tribunal to consider the amount of research being carried
    out regarding the conditions of women in Bangladesh.

35. The  government  of  Bangladesh  had  demonstrated  a  commitment  to
    improving the lot of women and there was a rising level of protection
    for them.  Legislation had been brought into  place  to  assist  with
    this and the evidence showed a lowering of violence against women  in
    the form of acid attacks.  It was far from perfect but the state  did
    offer protection.  With regard to article 3,  Mr  Kyriacou  submitted
    that there was a very high threshold to be met and that the appellant
    had not shown and that that she would face comditions  which  reached
    this threshold.

36. Turning to article 8, Mr Kyriacou submitted that the appellant  would
    be returned to  Bangladesh  with  her  son  and  that,  although  her
    daughter would remain here with her ex-husband, she would be able  to
    continue her family life through modern methods of communication.  At
    the current time she only had limited contact with the  child  anyway
    and that limited contact  could  be  continued.   In  any  event,  he
    submitted, her ex-husband and her daughter only had leave  to  remain
    on a temporary basis until the middle of 2011.  It was impossible  to
    speculate on what the future would hold for her  ex-husband  and  her
    daughter and it could indeed be the  case  that  the  daughter  would
    return with her father to Bangladesh  next  year  and  the  appellant
    would be able to get a contact order in  that  event.   He  submitted
    that there would be no breach of article 8 in returning the appellant
    to Bangladesh.

The submissions made on behalf of the appellant


37. Mr Walsh submitted that the appellant feared  return  to  Bangladesh,
    Dhaka in particular, where the circumstances facing her  there  would
    be such as to be persecutory and  amount  to  inhuman  and  degrading
    treatment.  As a result of her having given birth to a child  outside
    of wedlock, the appellant's father had cut her off.   He  had  warned
    her that she would be treated  as  if  she  did  not  exist.    Other
    members  of  the  appellant's  family,  the  appellant's  mother   in
    particular, would not  go  against  her  father's  wishes  by  openly
    associating with the appellant if she returned to Dhaka.   She  would
    be returning to Bangladesh as a single mother with her son, SK.

38. Mr Walsh relied upon the  report  of  Ms  Hossain  showing  that  the
    appellant's son would  face  rejection  by  her  own  family,  social
    prejudice and social discrimination from  the  wider  community.   Ms
    Hossain suggested  that  gender  based  violence  was  widespread  in
    Bangladesh and there were real concerns over the appellant's  ability
    to access legal protection against  discrimination  due  to  resource
    issues and social stigma.   Enforcement  of  anti-discrimination  and
    domestic violence laws was weak.  He submitted that  the  report  was
    directed first of all to the issue of contact between  the  appellant
    and Z in Bangladesh.  While that issue was no longer so  central,  in
    view of the fact that it was now known that Z enjoyed leave to remain
    in line with her father until August 2011, the  issue  retained  some
    significance in assessing article 8.  The  father  had  been  in  the
    country with leave it seems  since  2002.   The  report  reached  the
    following conclusions:


         i. While it was possible that that the appellant would be  able  to
             gain access to Z (para.38), it was likely in practice that she
             would be denied contact or access (para.7),  in  view  of  the
             proven 'immorality' engaged in by the appellant (by  having  a
             child  out  of  wedlock-para.38),  the  expenses  involved  in
             applying for such access, the  prevalence  of  corruption  and
             prolonged delays (paras.39,41) and distinction between a court
             order and its enforcement (paras. 48ff ).




        ii The fact that the appellant had an illegitimate child was likely
             to affect adversely her  rights  of  access  and  custody  and
             ensuring compliance with any court order (para.58, 62).




        iii.     The appellant's child, her son, SK, might face threats  of
             violence  from  her  own  family,  and  certainly  would  face
             rejection by them  (para.64),  social  prejudice   and  social
             discrimination from the wider community (para.66,67).




        iv.       Gender  based  violence  was  widespread  in   Bangladesh
             (para.75(b)).




        v. There were 'real  concerns'  over  the  appellant's  ability  to
             access legal protection against discrimination  (para.71)  due
             to resources issues and social stigma (para.72).   Enforcement
             of anti-discrimination and domestic violence laws was weak.

39. Dr Siddiqi's opinion was that the appellant  and  her  son  would  be
    treated as social outcasts if returned to Bangladesh.  Women  in  the
    position of the appellant were highly  vulnerable  to  discrimination
    and ostracism.  Sanctions for transgressing social norms depended for
    their effect on the social  and  economic  background  of  the  woman
    involved.  There was much greater stigma associated  with  having  an
    illegitimate child than being divorced.  Single  women  without  male
    guardianship were particularly vulnerable to  violence  and  a  woman
    without a male guardian was considered socially suspect and  sexually
    available. The prospects facing the appellant without family  support
    or pre-existence would make it  very  difficult  for  her  to  access
    support of any kind.  Her conclusions were as follows:



           i. The appellant and her son would be treated as social outcasts
              if returned to Bangladesh (para.1.1).




          ii. There was a significant premium on marriage which meant  that
              women in the position of the appellant were highly vulnerable
              to discrimination and ostracisation (para.1.2; para.1.8).




         iii. The sanctions for transgressing  social  norms  depended  for
              their effect on the social and  economic  background  of  the
              woman involved (1.5).



          iv. There was much  greater  stigma  associated  with  having  an
              illegitimate child than divorce.



           v. Domestic violence was widespread while conviction  rates  for
              the same were low.



          vi. Single women, without  male  guardianship  were  particularly
              vulnerable to violence; 'A woman without a male guardian  was
              considered   socially   suspect   and   sexually   available'
              (para.1.1).



         vii. The economic prospects facing the  appellant  without  family
              support or pre-existing contacts would make it very difficult
              for her to access support of any kind.

40. Mr Walsh relied upon the background material to which  we  have  made
    reference.  In paragraph 17 of his skeleton argument which he adopted
    during  the  course  of  his  address  Mr  Walsh  asserted  that  the
    conditions facing the appellant and her son on removal to  Bangladesh
    were matters that fell within Article 3.  He relied upon the decision
    of the Court of Appeal in Limbuela v Secretary of State for the  Home
    Department [2003] EWCA Civ 364 for the  proposition  that  conditions
    imposed on a destitute immigrant (within the  United  Kingdom)  could
    engage article 3.  There were no  considerations  of  proportionality
    involved in relation to engagement of article  3.   Mr  Walsh  relied
    upon the decision of the ECtHR in Pretty v United Kingdom  -  2346/02
    [2002] ECHR 427.  He relied upon paragraph 52 which said  that  where
    treatment humiliated or debased an  individual,  showing  a  lack  of
    respect for, or diminishing, his or her  human  dignity,  or  aroused
    feelings of fear, anguish  or  inferiority  capable  of  breaking  an
    individual's moral and physical resistance, it might be characterised
    as degrading and also fall within the prohibition of article 3.   The
    suffering which flowed from naturally occurring illness, physical  or
    mental, might be covered by article 3, where it was, or risked being,
    exacerbated  by  treatment,  whether  flowing  from   conditions   of
    detention, expulsion or other measures,  for  which  the  authorities
    could be held responsible.

41. Mr Walsh also relied upon the decision of the House of Lords in Hoxha
    and Anor v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2003] UKHL 19.
     He relied in particular upon paragraphs 33 to 38 of the  opinion  of
    Baroness Hale, in  which  she  made  it  plain  that  discrimination,
    visited upon a woman who previously had been the victim of rape as  a
    weapon of war, if sufficiently severe, was capable  of  amounting  to
    persecution.  He submitted that the approach  of  Baroness  Hale  was
    significant as it was intended to put a gloss on Islam v Secretary of
    State for the Home Department, R v Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal  and
    Another, Ex parte Shah [1999] UKHL 20 (Shah and Islam) since in Hoxha
    there was no consideration of  any  discriminatory  laws  in  Kosovo.
    Baroness Hale was more concerned about the impact of the woman having
    previously been raped and the effect that that  would  have,  coupled
    with her rejection by society, if returned there.

42. In relation to article 3 of the ECHR he submitted that  the  position
    of the appellant and her child on return to Bangladesh  would  be  so
    precarious that her circumstances would reach  such  a  level  as  to
    involve the infringement of her rights under article 3.   While  laws
    protecting women were in place, nonetheless there was evidence of  an
    unwillingness or inability to enforce those laws on the part  of  the
    police and discrimination.  He  submitted  that  to  refuse  to  give
    consideration to someone because of their moral standing amounted  to
    discrimination and she could not look to the legal system to  protect
    her from discriminatory  acts.   In  paragraph  18  of  his  skeleton
    argument Mr Walsh suggested that the situation facing  the  appellant
    and her son on return to Dhaka without the support of her family  and
    without real prospects of support from government  or  non-government
    agencies  would  reach  the  article  3  threshold.   Discrimination,
    ostracism and the prospect of violence coupled with a lack  of  basic
    needs would follow her removal to Dhaka.  She and her son would be in
    a very vulnerable position.  The act of removing her there  would  be
    treatment within the meaning of article 3 that would  be  proscribed.
    It would be inhuman and/or degrading treatment and persecution within
    the meaning of the Refugee Convention.  He identified the  membership
    of a particular social group that the appellant would form  part  of,
    as single women with children born out of wedlock.

43. Mr Walsh also submitted that there was no internal flight option  for
    this appellant. The appellant would have with  her  a  one  year  old
    child and there was no suggestion of relatives or  other  sources  of
    help being available in the provinces outside Dhaka. He  referred  us
    to the relevant tests set out in Januzi v Secretary of State for  the
    Home Department [2006] 2 AC 426, (as clarified in AH  v  SSHD  [2007]
    UKHL 49)  namely:

         "The decision-maker, taking account of all  relevant  circumstances
         pertaining to the claimant and his country of origin,  must  decide
         whether it is reasonable to expect  the  claimant  to  relocate  or
         whether it would be unduly harsh to expect him to do so" (per  Lord
         Bingham at para 21).

44.   Turning to article 8, Mr Walsh submitted that the practical  impact
    of the appellant's  removal  would  be  frustration  of  the  present
    contact order and access to the daughter.  While the duty imposed  by
    article 8 on the State does not extend to permitting  family  members
    to choose the place of residence for the family (in the absence of  a
    free standing right to reside in the place of choice), family members
    are entitled to exercise the essence  of  the  right:  to  enjoy  one
    another's company and support.  There was a fundamental  obstacle  to
    the continuing of the family  life  between  the  appellant  and  her
    daughter other than in the UK in that while the appellant could  live
    in Bangladesh (subject to what is said above)  the  daughter  resided
    with her father in the UK who had  displayed  a  constant  desire  to
    remain in the United Kingdom, and showed no  intention  of  returning
    with his daughter to Bangladesh.  Indeed, Z could not be removed from
    the UK without the leave to the Court.  Both  the  daughter  and  her
    father had leave to remain to August 2011  and  the  only  reasonable
    inference that could be drawn from that was that the father  intended
    to remain in  the  UK  until  then  and  possibly  afterwards.    The
    decision to remove the appellant in the meantime was an  interference
    with the right to respect for the family life of  the  appellant  and
    the daughter. The impact of the removal of the appellant would on any
    proper  understanding  of  what  engages  article  8(1)  compel   the
    conclusion that it was engaged in the instant case.

45.   Mr Walsh referred us to the case of Keegan v Ireland  18  EHRR  342
    where the court concluded that  the  failure  to  consult  a  natural
    father (who had been party to a relationship within family life  with
    the mother) before placing his child for adoption did not respect his
    family life.  While the court held that there was no automatic  right
    to joint custody by both parents, it  did  emphasise  the  continuing
    rights of the separate parent to involvement in  important  decisions
    about the child.   The ECtHR in Ciliz v Netherlands [2001]  ECHR  365
    found that the exclusion of a father of a child, now  divorced,  from
    the  Netherlands  where  he  was  pursuing  contact  proceedings  was
    unlawful.

46.   Mr Walsh also referred us to section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship
    and Immigration Act 2009, which placed upon the Secretary of State  a
    duty regarding the  welfare  of  children.   He  submitted  that  the
    respondent had a heavy burden to justify the removal of  one  of  the
    parents of a child (namely, the child Z) who otherwise has  leave  to
    remain in the country. The impact of the removal would be  manifestly
    substantial as it would have draconian effects on the family life  of
    the appellant and her daughter.  The physical  distance  between  the
    appellant and her child would stand as a metaphor of  the  strain  on
    their family life.

47.   The prospects of the appellant and her daughter being able, at some
    undefined date in the future, to re-constitute their family life were
    so remote as to amount to no prospect at all.   From  the  report  of
    Sara Hossain, it was clear  that  the  appellant  would  have  little
    prospect of gaining access to her daughter if at some future date she
    (the daughter) returned to Bangladesh.   The steps the appellant  had
    to go to achieve contact in  the  UK  did  not  augur  well  for  the
    facilitation of  even  remote  contact  by  the  appellant  with  her
    daughter from Bangladesh.   Leave to remain in line  with  her  child
    would be a less onerous measure than removal and a proportionate  one
    to adopt.

Our conclusions

The legal framework


48.   The Tribunal must consider whether there  are  substantial  grounds
    for believing that the appellant satisfies the  requirements  of  the
    Refugee or Person in Need of international Protection (Qualification)
    Regulations 2006 and so is eligible for refugee protection, in  other
    words whether if returned to Bangladesh there would be  a  real  risk
    that the appellant would suffer persecution for a Refugee  Convention
    reason, or, alternatively, whether she is eligible  for  humanitarian
    protection.   The  appellant  also  claims  that  returning  her   to
    Bangladesh would cause the United Kingdom  to  breach  her  protected
    human rights under articles 3 and 8 of the 1950  European  Convention
    on Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (ECHR). In this  regard  the
    Tribunal must consider whether  there  are  substantial  grounds  for
    believing that the removal of the appellant to Bangladesh would cause
    the United Kingdom to breach the ECHR.

49.   We refer to the guidance given by the Court of Appeal in  the  case
    of SR (Iran) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2007] EWCA
    Civ 460. The question whether the appellant would be at a  real  risk
    on return is to be answered at  the  very  end  of  the  fact-finding
    process.  The fact finder will have more or less certainty about each
    fact that he finds but an overall assessment of risk  must  be  based
    upon the facts taken as a whole.  The establishment of each  fact  is
    not to be done by asking whether  there  is  a  real  risk  that  the
    proposed fact is true.

50.   In that case the Court of Appeal considered  whether  the  AIT  had
    erred in its approach to the evidence.  In paragraphs 8, 9 and 10  of
    his judgement Sedley LJ said:

    "8.     ...it was the AIT's task, first, to discard any evidence judged
         to be of no value at all: here, for example, the account which, for
         better or for worse had been disbelieved on an earlier hearing. For
         the rest, the AIT had to take each element of evidence into account
         for what it was worth...

    9.     There is nothing wrong with the differential levels of proof  or
         disproof of primary facts found by the Tribunal ...The law does not
         demand, at least in this field, that each finding of fact, whatever
         its degree of certainty or uncertainty, be  fitted  into  a  single
         matrix of risk.  The fact-finder's task  is,  to  the  extent  made
         possible by the evidence, to find facts and  some  facts  are  more
         certain than others.  It would have been as unjust to the appellant
         to treat as mere possibilities things which, on the AIT's  findings
         were highly likely as it would have been to the respondent to treat
         possibilities of hardship as probabilities.

    10. The critical task is to assemble these findings into an  evaluation
        which answers the questions posed by  law.   In  asylum  and  human
        rights claims, that is the question of real risk and it is  at  the
        point of decision, and not sooner, that it arises..."


  51. In paragraph 52 of their decision in Pretty the Court said this:

         'As regards the types of "treatment" which fall within the scope of
         Article 3 of the Convention, the Court's case-law refers  to  "ill-
         treatment" that attains a minimum level of  severity  and  involves
         actual bodily injury or intense physical or mental  suffering  (see
         Ireland v the United Kingdom, cited above, p.66, 167;  V.  v.  the
         United Kingdom (GC),  no.  24888/94,  71,  ECHR  1999-IX.).  Where
         treatment humiliates or debases an individual, showing  a  lack  of
         respect for, or diminishing, his or her human dignity,  or  arouses
         feelings of fear, anguish or inferiority  capable  of  breaking  an
         individual's moral and physical resistance, it may be characterised
         as degrading and also fall within the prohibition of Article 3 (see
         amongst  recent  authorities,  Price  v.  the  United  Kingdom  no.
         33394/96,  24-30, ECHR 2001-VII, and Vala?inas v.  Lithuania  no.
         44558/98,  117, ECHR 2001-VIII).  The suffering which  flows  from
         naturally occurring illness, physical or mental, may be covered  by
         Article 3, where it is, or risks being, exacerbated  by  treatment,
         whether flowing from conditions of detention,  expulsion  or  other
         measures, for which the authorities can be held responsible (see D.
         v. the United Kingdom and Keenan, both cited above, and Bensaid  v.
         the United Kingdom, no. 44599/98, ECHR 2001-I)."


52. It would be well to note that in the case of  Vala?inas  v  Lithuania
    and in Price v United  Kingdom  the  Court  was  concerned  with  the
    conditions in  which  the  applicant  was  detained  and  over  which
    necessarily the state in question had control.

53. The Tribunal accepted that in principle  a  claim  on  behalf  of  an
    appellant that she would be returned to  destitution  can  amount  to
    persecution and attract the operation of the Refugee Convention in AM
    and AM (Armed conflict - risk categories)  Somalia  CG  [2008]  UKAIT
    00091.  In paragraph 79 of its determination the Tribunal said  given
    that persecution  must  be  seen  as  harm  in  the  form  of  severe
    violations of basic human rights it could not be right "as  a  matter
    of principle" to exclude claims based on forced subsistence in an IDP
    camp unless  human  rights  law  precluded  it.   Albeit  claims  for
    protection based on dire socio-economic circumstances  were  normally
    not decisive when considering article 3 ill-treatment, the Strasbourg
    Court had not excluded that in certain  extreme  circumstances,  such
    circumstances could give rise  to  a  violation  of  a  non-derogable
    right, as had been made clear by the Court  on  many  occasions,  for
    example, in Kalashnikov v Russia [2002] ECHR 596.  The  Tribunal  did
    go on to say, however, that  there  would  always  be  heavy  factual
    obstacles in the way of a finding that  socio-economic  circumstances
    could constitute persecution.  The case of Kalashnikov v  Russia  was
    an instance where complaint was made as to the  conditions  in  which
    the applicant had been detained.

54. In his opinion in Shah and Islam Lord Steyn said that generalisations
    about the position of women in particular countries were out of place
    in regard to issues of refugee status.  Everything  depended  on  the
    evidence of findings of fact in the particular case.   There  it  had
    been found that the appellants  would  be  persecuted  if  they  were
    returned to Pakistan.  There was a finding that  the  authorities  in
    Pakistan would be unable and unwilling  to  protect  the  appellants.
    The issue to be determined was whether the appellants formed part  of
    a particular social group. In RA and Others (Particular Social  Group
    - Women) Bangladesh [2005] UKIAT 00070 the Tribunal, on the  evidence
    before it,  was  not  satisfied  that  women  in  Bangladesh  were  a
    particular social group.

The position of women in Bangladesh generally


55. We can readily agree  with  the  opinion  of  Dr  Saddiqi,  that  the
    situation of Bangladeshi women must be located in the  context  of  a
    rapidly shifting society and economy in which  social  transformation
    and instability had produced contradictory effects.  She  pointed  to
    progress in  gender  parity  and  primary  education,  reductions  in
    fertility and female mortality and the entry of women into  the  wage
    labour force on the one hand but on the other high  mortality  rates,
    the risk of serious violence  in  the  home  and  public  places  and
    enduring economic and socio-cultural discrimination.

56. The COIR  shows  that  the  Constitution  affirmed  gender  equality.
    According to the Constitution  women  enjoyed  the  same  status  and
    rights as men in  terms  of  education,  health,  political  process,
    employment, development processes and social welfare. Bangladesh  had
    acceded to  the  Convention  on  the  Elimination  of  All  Forms  of
    Discrimination against Women many  years  ago  on  6  December  1984.
    There were 64 women serving in Parliament, 19 of whom  were  directly
    elected. Women were eligible, to contest any number of the 345 seats,
    of which 45 were reserved for women. Six women  including  the  Prime
    Minister held the status of Cabinet Minister, including the Ministers
    of Home Affairs, Foreign Affairs and Agriculture.  The Leader of  the
    Opposition and the Deputy Leader of Parliament were women. Two  women
    were appointed as State Ministers and a third was serving as  a  Whip
    in Parliament with the status of a State  Minister.  Six  of  the  89
    Supreme Court Judges were women.

57. The Foreign Minister Dr Dipu Moni has been reported  as  saying  that
    women empowerment was one  of  the  top  priorities  of  the  present
    government and the government wanted to ensure a social, economic and
    political empowerment of women.  Dr  Moni  said  that  there  was  no
    restriction for women in Bangladesh in joining  any  profession.   At
    present women were involved  in  all  professions  including  defence
    services.  The government had plans to introduce free  education  for
    girls up to degree level, (New Nation, 16th May 2010). Bangladesh has
    made enormous reductions in maternal mortality  by  improving  girls'
    education.  The maternal mortality rate had more than halved in  less
    than a decade from 724 deaths per 100,000 live births in 1990 to  338
    per 100,000 in 2008 according to a  recent  study  published  in  The
    Lancet.  The report said that in 2001 the Bangladesh government began
    offering free education for  girls  up  to  the  twelfth  grade  with
    additional incentives like food for education.  Girls'  enrolment  in
    secondary schools jumped from 1.1 million in 1991 to 3.9  million  in
    2005.

58. Bangladesh has achieved one of its millennium development goals ahead
    of time, which was gender  parity  in  education.   Participation  in
    waged employment in the non-agricultural sector  rose  from  40.7  in
    1992 to 58.6 in 2003. Nearly 2 million women  worked  in  ready  made
    garment factories, the country's top export earning sector and 60% of
    the more than 35,000 government registered  primary  school  teachers
    were now women, (IRIN report, 21st January 2009).

59. The High Court in Bangladesh has outlawed punishments handed down  by
    Islamic edicts or fatwas after a  series  of  cases  of  women  being
    beaten, caned and whipped for "offences" they  were  judged  to  have
    committed by village elders (the Independent, 11th July 2010) and the
    High Court has ruled that wearing a  veil  by  Muslim  women  holding
    public office was a personal choice, (Big Message report, 12th  April
    2010). The penal code provides for sanctions  against  all  forms  of
    psychological violence and threats of physical injury and  there  are
    special laws designed to protect women, such as the Dowry Prohibition
    Act 1980, Women and Children Repression Prevention Act  2000  amended
    in 2003, the Acid Crime Prevention Act 2002 and the Acid Control  Act
    2002.  The Domestic Violence (Prevention  and  Protection)  Bill  has
    recently been approved by the Cabinet  and  was  enacted  in  October
    2010.

60. The  government  does  take  the  issue  of  violence  against  women
    seriously and has participated in a number of  initiatives  aimed  at
    reducing it.  These include a project  involving  the  Department  of
    Women's Affairs (DWA) and the MWCA (Ministry of Women and  Children's
    Affairs) with assistance from UNFPA to mobilise  communities  against
    violence and to change male family members'  and  in-laws'  attitudes
    about violence, mentioned in the World Bank Report, dated 13th  March
    2008.  Another initiative  in  the  series  of  steps  taken  by  the
    government was the  "Multi-Sectoral  Programme  on  Violence  against
    Women". This project was a joint initiative of the  GOB  and  Denmark
    under the MWCA, whose objectives were improved public  services  such
    as health, police assistance, criminal justice  and  social  services
    and increased public awareness  of  all  forms  of  violence  against
    women.  The MWCA had also initiated One-Stop Crisis Centres (OSCC) in
    Divisional level Medical College Hospitals, mainly to deal with  acid
    and rape victims so as to facilitate quick investigation and  medical
    and  legal  services.   The  OSCC  provided   health   care,   police
    assistance,  social   services,   legal   assistance,   psychological
    counselling and shelter services.  Two OSCCs had been established  in
    Dhaka and Rajshahi Medical College Hospitals during the  pilot  phase
    of the project.

61. Nevertheless despite these positive factors the COIR shows that state
    legislation and institutions frequently  disregarded  women's  rights
    and as a matter of practice women did not  enjoy  fundamental  rights
    and freedom to the extent that men did. This is largely due to  women
    having unequal status in the family  and  generally  being  of  lower
    socio-economic status,  having  lower  literacy  and  less  mobility.
    Bangladesh has entered a reservation against the requirement  of  the
    Convention to ensure equal rights for  women  and  men.  Despite  the
    representation of women in government and in Parliament, nevertheless
    women still have a long way  to  go  in  terms  of  gender  equality.
    Illiteracy, early  and  forced  marriage,  high  maternal  mortality,
    social and religious restrictions coupled with instances of  torture,
    abandonment and limited  job  opportunities  all  contribute  to  the
    plight of women according  to  women's  groups,  (IRIN  report,  27th
    January 2009).

62. Moreover domestic  violence  has  only  recently  been  criminalised.
    Although the Domestic Violence (Prevention and Protection)  Bill  was
    passed by the Bangladeshi Parliament after the hearing on 5th October
    2010 Ms Hossain was  of  the  opinion  that  it  would  not  have  an
    immediate effect and gave  an  example  of  legislation  relating  to
    suspects' rights which was passed some time ago but which  was  still
    disregarded by the police.

63. Dr Siddiqi said that according to a World Health Organisation  multi-
    country study on women's health and domestic violence against  women,
    Bangladesh had one of the highest rates of spousal  violence  in  the
    world. The study found that the percentage of women  who  experienced
    violence by an intimate partner, among partnered women aged 15 to  49
    years was 53% in Dhaka city  and  62%  in  an  adjacent  rural  area.
    Similarly the International  Centre  for  Research  on  Women  (ICRW)
    reported in 2009 that intimate partner  violence  against  women  was
    highly prevalent with 61% having experienced sexual violence in their
    lifetime. According to the WHO multi-country study  10%  of  pregnant
    women in Dhaka were physically abused during at least one  pregnancy.
    In her view these figures  were  extra  ordinarily  high,  especially
    given that family violence against  women  was  likely  to  be  under
    reported.

64. According to women's rights groups, domestic violence  is  widespread
    and increased during 2009.  At least 50% of women experience domestic
    violence at least once in their lives. Most efforts to combat it  are
    funded by NGOs with little assistance from the government.  There was
    an increase in the number of  dowry  related  killings  during  2009.
    Acid attacks remain a  serious  problem,  despite  the  existence  of
    special tribunals to deal with those accused, which according to  the
    Acid Survivors Foundation,  are  not  entirely  effective.   Lack  of
    awareness of the law and poor enforcement limits the  effect  of  the
    Women and Child Repression Control Act, (US State  Department  Report
    on Human Rights Bangladesh 2009, 11th March 2010).

65. The serious manifestation of violence against poor  women  in  Dhaka,
    which included physical and psychological violence inflicted  by  the
    husband or the husband's  family,  burning  of  wives,  acid  attack,
    suicide as a result of physical and psychological torture as well  as
    violence against women in the work place and on the way to  and  from
    work was noted in the survey by  the  World  Bank  and  reported  its
    report entitled "Improving Living  Conditions  for  the  Urban,  Poor
    Bangladesh Development Series Paper No. 17", dated 2007. Of the total
    sample of 50% female respondents, 30% were said to have been a victim
    of domestic violence in the previous twelve  months,  which  was  the
    highest reported incidence of  crime  or  violence  reported  in  the
    survey. These  findings  reflected  what  was  known  about  violence
    against  women  in  Bangladesh.   According  to  the   UNFPA   (2000)
    Bangladesh had the second highest incidence of violence against women
    in the world.  A survey carried out in 1997 by the Ministry of  Women
    and Children's Affairs, with the  assistance  of  the  government  of
    Denmark, found that not only was violence against  women  widespread,
    it was also widely accepted: 50% of the women interviewed thought  it
    was the husband's right to beat his wife; 80% felt it  was  right  to
    hit the wife if she was disobedient; 80%  of  the  women  respondents
    felt that if a man raped a woman the woman should marry the rapist.

66. So far as the issue of state protection against domestic violence  is
    concerned, despite legislation providing sanctions against all  forms
    of physical  violence,  some  forms  of  psychological  violence  and
    threats of physical  injury,  in  practice  if  a  husband  committed
    violence against his wife,  it  was  not  considered  as  an  offence
    punishable in the same way. The very special laws  to  protect  women
    from abuse have not proved as effective as they were designed  to  be
    and their deterrent value  has  been  diminished  by  low  conviction
    rates.  Owing to the prevalent patriarchal attitude towards women, in
    most cases complaints  are  not  recorded  properly  by  the  police,
    evidence is hard to produce or establish, there is a very slim chance
    of the perpetrator being punished and a study by the Family Court  in
    Dhaka showed that  husbands  rarely  appeared  and  thus  suits  were
    dismissed and wives were denied justice. (Dr Nusrat Ameen, quoted  in
    the COIR).

67. According to Dr Saddiqi deeply entrenched patriarchal attitudes which
    do not  take  women's  concerns  seriously  produces  procedural  and
    administrative indifference or bias.  Police are especially reluctant
    to become involved in marital disputes.  The police are over burdened
    and  therefore  few  cases  get  proper  attention.   Overworked  and
    underpaid, the police are open to various forms of corruption.  Women
    may be  unwilling  to  report  abuse  because  the  police  force  is
    overwhelmingly male and few women will feel comfortable confiding  in
    male police officers, especially if the crime is of a sexual  nature.
    The general public's faith in  the  police  justice  system  is  low.
    Further instances of violence tend to be hidden in middle  and  upper
    class families for fear of social stigma.  Class privilege provides a
    degree of protection for women and girls so  that  the  most  visible
    victims of violence  tend  to  be  women  from  poor  underprivileged
    backgrounds.  Access to justice  is  especially  difficult  for  poor
    people, especially women with little or no formal education who  find
    the system intimidating and impenetrable as well as costly and  time-
    consuming.  The  large  cultural  emphasis,  especially  in  disputes
    between couples, is on compromise through mediation  and  arbitration
    out of court. Moreover the political system in place offers the  most
    protection to those with requisite political and socio-economic  ties
    which simultaneously promotes a  culture  of  impunity  and  lack  of
    accountability for perpetrators, including law enforcement  agencies.
    Those without political protection have limited  access  to  justice.
    Cultures of impunity thrive, no matter which political  party  is  in
    power.

68.  Moreover  political  and  bureaucratic  interference  are  the  most
    significant impediments to police efficiency and have resulted in the
    worst forms of abuse including illegal detention, death  in  custody,
    torture and pervasive corruption.  The  result  is  almost  universal
    public disdain for the police force. All governments,  including  the
    current one, have used the police to crush  political  enemies  while
    many politicians have used them to advance their personal  interests.
    Low  police  salaries  and  government  control  of  promotions   and
    transfers all but  ensure  that  the  police  are  dependent  on  the
    political leadership, which prevents investigation of serious  issues
    of corruption, organised crime or other matters that  some  political
    leaders  would  prefer  remain  untouched.   The  police  are   often
    complicit in the crimes of government officials.  Corruption  in  the
    police is rampant and systemic.  It  will  be  nearly  impossible  to
    eliminate  until  the  poor  salaries  and  working  conditions   are
    improved, particularly for officers at and below  the  rank  of  sub-
    inspector.  Many police posts  are  bought  and  sold  (International
    Crisis Group, 11th December 2009).

69. Although the RAB (Rapid Action Battalion) has received  human  rights
    training  sponsored  by  foreign  governments,  the  UN   Development
    Programme, and a local NGO, the Bangladesh Society for Enforcement of
    Human Rights (BSEHR) and the number of  incidents  involving  it  has
    dropped from the year 2008, nonetheless the RAB continues  to  commit
    serious human rights violations.  Although the government  has  taken
    steps to address widespread police corruption and a  severe  lack  of
    training  and  discipline,  and  the  Inspector  General  of   Police
    continues  to  implement  a  new  strategy,   partially   funded   by
    international donors, for training police, addressing corruption  and
    creating a more responsible police force,  defendants  rarely  accuse
    police in criminal cases due to lengthy trial procedures and the fear
    of retribution. Reluctance to confront police perpetuates  a  climate
    of impunity (US State Department report, 11th March 2010).

70. The background material clearly shows that a very high proportion  of
    women in Bangladesh  experience  domestic  violence  and  the  police
    routinely fail to  report  and  investigate  complaints  of  domestic
    violence.  Dr Ameen makes it plain that there  are  several  agencies
    which assist women who are the  victims  of  domestic  violence.   An
    agency is able to serve on the husband a notice to at the premises of
    the agency for mediation following a written complaint by  the  wife.
    If he does not attend the agency has a right to issue a  warrant  and
    seek help from the police.  Given  the  high  incidence  of  domestic
    violence and the limited number of  agencies  dealing  with  domestic
    violence, however, we feel that the use of this procedure must be the
    exception rather than the rule.

Domestic violence and the adequacy of state protection


71. In this appeal the Tribunal has identified the  issue  of  return  to
    Bangladesh upon women who have  been  divorced,  with  a  child  born
    outside marriage, as being worthy of country guidance.   Although  we
    have not been asked to determine the issue of the return of women who
    have been subjected to domestic violence, in view of  the  up-to-date
    evidence which has been adduced before us it may  be  helpful  if  we
    were to express our view about that as well.

72. In Bagdananvicius & Anor, R (On the Application of)  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2003]  EWCA  Civ  1605  the  Court  of
    Appeal held that sufficiency of state protection, whether from  state
    agents or non-state actors, meant a willingness and  ability  on  the
    part of the receiving state to provide through  its  legal  system  a
    reasonable level  of  protection  from  ill-treatment  of  which  the
    claimant for asylum had a well founded fear and the effectiveness  of
    the system provided was to be judged normally by its systemic ability
    to deter and/or to prevent the form of persecution of which there was
    a risk, not just punishment of it after the event.

73. Since the determination of the Tribunal in RA and  Others  there  has
    been further guidance from the House of Lords as to the meaning of  a
    particular  social  group.  In  Secretary  of  State  for  the   Home
    Department  v  K  [2006]  UKHL  46  Lord  Bingham  quoted  the  UNHCR
    Guidelines on International Protection dated 7 May 2002 and  said  it
    appeared to him that the UNHCR Guidelines, clearly based on a careful
    reading of the international authorities, provided  a  very  accurate
    and helpful distillation of their effect. The  Guidelines  defined  a
    particular social group as a group of persons  who  shared  a  common
    characteristic other than their risk of being persecuted, or who were
    perceived as a group by society. The characteristic  would  often  be
    one  which  was  innate,  unchangeable,  or   which   was   otherwise
    fundamental to identity, conscience or the exercise  of  one's  human
    rights.  Lord Hope said that Miss  Fornah's  case  raised  again  the
    point that was discussed but did not have to be decided in  Shah  and
    Islam as to how  precise  the  definition  must  be  to  satisfy  the
    requirements  of  Article  1A(2)  of  the  Refugee  Convention.   The
    Secretary of State argued that a group which consisted of females  in
    Sierra Leone generally was too  widely  drawn  because  many  of  its
    members no longer  feared  female  genital  mutilation  as  they  had
    already been initiated and a group which was defined  more  precisely
    so as to include only those females who were still at  risk  resulted
    in the group being defined by the fact of persecution alone.  He,  in
    common with the other members of the Appellate Committee,  said  that
    it was well settled that not all members of  the  group  need  be  at
    risk.   Lord Hope went on to say that it was  well  established  that
    the persecution which was feared  could  not  be  used  to  define  a
    particular social group but that simply meant that there must be some
    characteristic other than the persecution  itself,  or  the  fear  of
    persecution, that set the group apart from the rest of society.  That
    may be because its members shared a common characteristic other  than
    their risk of being persecuted, or because they were perceived  as  a
    group by society.

74. Applying these principles to the circumstances of women in Bangladesh
    who are subjected to domestic violence, we are of  the  view  that  a
    woman who was able to show that she was at a real  risk  of  domestic
    violence on return to  Bangladesh  (to  which  there  was  no  viable
    internal relocation alternative) may well be able to  demonstrate  on
    the evidence which was adduced before us, that despite the efforts of
    the government to improve the situation of such women, on account  of
    the disinclination of the police to act upon complaints  of  domestic
    violence, she would not be able to obtain  an  effective  measure  of
    state protection by reason of the fact that she was a woman.  If  so,
    in these circumstances, the persecution to which she would fear being
    be subjected would be domestic violence against which she would  have
    no protection on account of the fact that she was a woman.  Therefore
    she may be able to  show  a  risk  of  serious  harm  for  a  Refugee
    Convention reason, i.e. membership  of  a  particular  social  group,
    namely women in Bangladesh.  Each case, however, must  be  determined
    on its own facts.

The mother's right to custody of her illegitimate child


75. In relation to the issue whether the mother of an illegitimate  child
    would risk losing the right to custody, according to the evidence  of
    Ms Hossain, which we accept,  under  Muslim  law,  as  applicable  in
    Bangladesh, the mother, or in her absence her relations has the right
    to custody of an illegitimate child.

The rights of the mother of an  illegitimate  child  to  custody  of/contact
with a child of a marriage or former marriage


76. So far is the question of the rights of the mother of an illegitimate
    child to custody of the child of a marriage  or  former  marriage  or
    contact with him/her is concerned, Ms Hossain said  that  the  Family
    Courts in Bangladesh in such matters  apply  the  provisions  of  the
    Guardians and Wards Act 1890 read together with the personal  law  of
    the parties. Under the Hanafi school of Muslim law, which would apply
    to Sunni Muslims, the father, if  alive,  is  considered  to  be  the
    natural and legal guardian of the person and property  of  his  minor
    child while the mother is entitled to the custody  (hizanat)  of  her
    male child until he has completed the age of 7 years and for a female
    child until she  has  attained  puberty,  unless  she  was  otherwise
    disqualified. Ms Hossain said, however, that  a  review  of  reported
    decisions of the superior courts in  Bangladesh  on  custody  matters
    indicated a fairly consistent trend to invoke the  principle  of  the
    welfare of the child as an overriding  factor,  permitting  departure
    from the applicable personal law.

77. It is clear from the evidence of Ms Hossain that that while a  mother
    who was otherwise entitled to the custody of her child would lose the
    right to such custody under Muslim law if she remarried  a  stranger,
    went and lived at a distance from the father, was leading an  immoral
    life as where she was a prostitute or if she neglected to take proper
    care of the child, the overriding principle of  the  welfare  of  the
    child in custody disputes is applied by the Family Courts  by  virtue
    of the operation of the Guardians and Wards Act.  Ms Hossain quoted a
    commentator, Fyzee, stating that loss of custody did not  necessarily
    follow merely because the wife was divorced or  separated.   Further,
    Syed Ameer Ali noted that the right to hizanat belonged to the mother
    "qua mother and nothing can take it away  from  her  except  her  own
    misconduct".   He also  stated  that  not  all  cases  of  misconduct
    necessarily destroyed the right to hizanat and that the question  was
    whether such misconduct was "detrimental to the child"  i.e.  "is  it
    likely to injure the child?", with  such  injury  being  physical  or
    moral and finally that "unchastity ... disqualifies [the woman]  from
    exercising the right of hizanat".

78. According to the authors of "The Guardians  and  Wards  and  Majority
    Act", Shaukat Mahmood and Nadeem Shaukat, quoted by Ms Hossain, where
    the mother was leading an immoral life or living in open adultery she
    should not be appointed guardian of her minor son. This was  so  even
    where the immorality was proved  from  indirect  evidence.  The  mere
    fact, however, that a mother gave birth to an illegitimate child  two
    years after the death of her husband was not  sufficient  reason  for
    not appointing  her  guardian  of  her  son's  person  and  property.
    Furthermore the decisions of the appellate division of Supreme  Court
    of Bangladesh, quoted by Ms Hossain in her report suggest that  there
    are cases where on proof of the  unfitness  of  the  father  to  have
    custody of a male child over the  age  of  seven  years,  the  courts
    exercise discretion in departing from  the  Hanafi  rule.   It  would
    therefore appear  that  the  Family  Courts  in  Bangladesh  take  an
    enlightened view of the situation in custody disputes.

79. Whether a Family Court in Bangladesh would deprive the  appellant  of
    custody of or access to her daughter solely on the basis of the  fact
    that she had given birth to an illegitimate child after her  divorce,
    is open to question.  On the basis of what has  been  said  above  it
    would seem unlikely, although Ms Hossain said that she would not even
    advise the appellant to apply, as her  illegitimate  child  would  be
    evidence of  immorality.   She  said  this  in  the  context  of  the
    expression  of  an  opinion  that  the  appellant  would  face   real
    difficulties in obtaining an order for custody of the older child  if
    (our underlining) the court  considered  her  'immoral'  conduct  and
    disregard for prevailing social norms regarding her  sexual  conduct,
    (as evidenced by her illegitimate son and her strained relations with
    her parents and her lack of financial means to maintain the child) to
    be factors relevant to the welfare of the child. She had to  concede,
    however, that the Bangladesh courts as yet had not refused custody to
    a mother in any case on grounds of 'immorality' and that  the  courts
    had allowed the mother to retain custody/contact,  even  where  there
    were allegations of her 'immoral behaviour' as long  as  it  appeared
    that the welfare of the child was best served by placing  him/in  the
    mother's custody. She qualified this, however, by stating  that  such
    decisions had been made in the context of allegations which  had  not
    been made out.

The risk of persecution of and/or serious harm to the divorced mother of  an
illegitimate child


80. So far as the question of risk of harm to a divorced  woman  with  an
    illegitimate child is concerned Ms Hossain discounted any risk to the
    appellant from her own family  or  other  persons.  Dr  Siddiqi  also
    discounted any such risk on the grounds that her family might  simply
    want to maintain a social distance from her.

81. In relation to the question of risk of  harm  generally,  Dr  Siddiqi
    indicated in her report that there was little research on  single  or
    divorced women.  Her opinion was that the  situation  of  Bangladeshi
    women must be located in the context of a  rapidly  shifting  society
    and economy  in  which  social  transformation  and  instability  had
    produced contradictory effects, examples of which  we  have  outlined
    above.

82. It is important in our view to make a  distinction  between  a  woman
    with  an  illegitimate  child  who  is  married  and  one,  like  the
    appellant, who is divorced.  The report by the United  States  Bureau
    of Citizenship and Immigration Services on the situation of women who
    have children who were born out of wedlock,  dated  25th  June  2001,
    referred to in the Refworld report which was  relied  on  before  the
    immigration judge but not referred to before us,  quoted  a  research
    fellow at Harvard University stating that the safety of  a  woman  in
    Bangladesh who had a child out of wedlock depended primarily  on  the
    woman's religion and secondarily on  her  economic  status.   If  the
    woman was Muslim the very existence of the child proved the  mother's
    adultery.  In contrast to other countries, such as Saudi  Arabia  and
    Pakistan, where such a woman would be imprisoned and  ostracised,  in
    Bangladesh the situation depended on the woman's immediate family and
    on her class background.  In the case of a married woman who  bore  a
    child out of wedlock there  was  the  possibility  of  sanctuary  for
    herself and her child if her own family was supportive  and  able  to
    offer her protection against the danger of reprisal  by  her  husband
    and her husband's family.  The opinions expressed in that report were
    postulated on the basis that the woman had a husband rather than  the
    woman  having  already  been  divorced.   An  ASK  representative  is
    reported as saying that a woman in Bangladesh who had an illegitimate
    child would most probably be treated as a social outcast depending on
    her social status or monetary condition.  She would be worse  off  if
    she came from a middle or lower middle income group as they were  the
    most vulnerable to societal pressure and bore the brunt of failing to
    keep up a social faade.

83. Ms Hossain's opinion was that the appellant might  (our  underlining)
    face social prejudice and discrimination from her own family  members
    as well as other members of the wider community if her  circumstances
    and the fact of her having had an illegitimate  child  became  known.
    Given the prevailing conservative social attitudes and prejudices, if
    the fact of the appellant's having a child out of wedlock were to  be
    known she might find it difficult  to  obtain  any  appropriate  (our
    underlining) employment.  In the absence of any  financial  means  or
    source of livelihood outside  her  family  or  of  any  state  social
    security system she might face extreme financial hardship.  It  would
    also likely to be difficult,  in  her  opinion,  to  obtain  adequate
    housing, given the absence of any state facilities or support in this
    regard and the fact that her parents and  her  extended  family  were
    unlikely  to  give  her  any  support  and  the  expense  of  private
    accommodation. The fact of her having an illegitimate child  and  the
    resulting lack of family support meant that  she  might  qualify  for
    emergency shelter  from  an  NGO,  but  such  shelter  might  not  be
    available for a long period and was unlikely to be suitable  for  her
    and her son given the conditions  prevailing  in  most  institutions,
    including restrictions on movement.  In her oral evidence Ms  Hossain
    expressed the view that having regard to the natural  inquisitiveness
    of Bangladeshi society it would be difficult  for  her  to  keep  the
    existence of her illegitimate child a secret.

84. We are not persuaded that this would be the case, however, since  the
    appellant could truthfully  say  that  she  was  separated  from  the
    child's father in the United Kingdom and there would be no reason why
    anyone should discover that he was illegitimate. Dr Siddiqi indicated
    abandoned women usually continued to claim marital status.

85. Although Dr Siddiqi was also of the opinion that  the  appellant  and
    her son would be treated as social outcasts, in our view it does  not
    inevitably follow that a divorced woman who has had a child conceived
    and born  after  a  divorce  would  become  a  social  outcast.   The
    evidence, taken as a whole, indicates that  factors  such  as  social
    class, level of education and urban location are  relevant.   A  good
    example of a person who escaped such a fate is the appellant's mother
    who,  on  the  appellant's  account,  notwithstanding  that  she  was
    divorced, married again and has three young children as a  result  of
    her second marriage. We do not know the circumstances  in  which  the
    appellant's mother came to  be  divorced.  In  answer  to  the  third
    question  Dr  Siddiqi  said  that  in  urban  areas  there  were  now
    increasing numbers of divorced women from the middle classes, many of
    whom had the support of their families. The families were less likely
    to reject divorced daughters if the marriage in question was arranged
    by them since they might feel partially responsible for the  outcome.
    For Muslim women divorce  was  allowed  under  specific  and  limited
    conditions; it might be frowned upon  but  it  could  not  be  wholly
    rejected. She said that sex outside marriage, on the other hand,  was
    a moral transgression of a higher  order.   In  Dhaka  city,  it  was
    unlikely that pregnancy out of wedlock would  be  allowed  to  become
    public in a middle or upper class family.

86. Dr Siddiqi expressed the view that a woman without the protection  of
    marriage or at least the shelter of her family would be subjected  to
    considerable social stigma. At the same time, however, on a number of
    occasions in the course of her report she said that  little  research
    existed on single or divorced women. She said that divorce rates were
    low in Bangladesh as  a  whole  although  rates  of  abandonment  and
    desertion were high. Dr Siddiqi said that natal families,  especially
    in impoverished households, tended to look on divorced  daughters  as
    economic if not symbolic burdens. For her to be able to express  such
    an opinion necessarily means that the concept of a divorced  daughter
    must be a fairly familiar one in Bangladesh despite the social stigma
    that it may bring. It also follows from what she said that there must
    be a high number of single women who have been abandoned/deserted  by
    their husbands.

87. In our view the expert evidence and the background material show that
    whether a female returnee who has been divorced and who has  a  child
    born out of wedlock runs the risk of falling  into  the  category  of
    being abandoned will depend on the attitude towards her of her family
    and the likelihood of family support, which in turn will depend  upon
    the facts of the particular case.

88. It is right, therefore that we should examine the issue of  the  risk
    of serious harm to a single  woman  with  an  illegitimate  child  on
    return to Bangladesh on the basis of  the  worst  possible  scenario,
    namely that she would not have the benefit of any family support.

89. As already stated, Dr Siddiqi's view was that a woman without a  male
    guardian was considered as socially suspect and  sexually  available.
    Without  symbolic  male  shelter  or  family  or   practical   family
    protection she would face a host  of  subtle  discriminatory  actions
    that in effect would make her a social outcast.  Her  resourcefulness
    would  be  extremely  limited.  Without   her   family   and   social
    connections,  it  would  be  extremely  difficult  for  her  to  find
    appropriate employment, housing and a proper school  for  her  child.
    Moreover she would be perceived as sexually suspect and available and
    therefore have to contend with the kind of sexual harassment faced by
    women perceived to be morally lax.

90. The background material paints a grim picture of conditions in  parts
    of the major urban areas of Bangladesh. Tens of thousands  of  people
    lived  in  overcrowded  slums  or  public  spaces  that  lack   basic
    facilities, such as safe water, sanitation and health  services.   In
    Dhaka city an estimated 37% of the total population  live  in  slums.
    Dhaka continues to grow as a  mega-city  with  approximately  320,000
    migrants arriving annually. More than three-quarters of migrants find
    shelter in urban slums or do not find shelter  at  all.   Employment,
    shelter and accessibility to basic services  for  the  growing  urban
    poor populations, those who lived in informal settlements  and  those
    who are homeless, are critical issues yet to be  fully  addressed  by
    policy-makers in Bangladesh.  Studies in Dhaka  city  have  found  an
    increase in the number and proportion of people living on the streets
    and in urban  public  places  due  to  the  increasing  pressures  of
    internal immigration and rapid urbanisation. The floating  population
    of street dwellers consists of thousands  of  people  with  no  fixed
    dwelling in the major towns and cities of Bangladesh. They are likely
    to be amongst the most deprived in urban  areas  in  terms  of  basic
    facilities and health indicators.  In Bangladesh  while  a  few  non-
    government organisations are providing health  related  services  for
    the urban homeless, there is no comprehensive  programme  and  little
    coordination of activities between agencies to address health  needs.
    Street dwellers report extremely high levels of illness and  disease.
    Access to maternal health care and family planning is poor  and  most
    street dwellers are not aware of the government services available to
    them and do not use any health care facilities.  83%  of  the  female
    street dwellers have been assaulted by their husbands and/or by other
    men while they were staying in the street and more than nine  in  ten
    street males have used some kind of drugs during the  previous  year.
    Homeless women are far less in number than men but  the  difficulties
    they face in meeting sanitation and shelter needs are severe, because
    the facilities simply do not exist for them (Right Vision  News,  8th
    April 2010).

91.  Urban  slums  have  the  worst  performance  regarding  women's  and
    children's well-being and access to basic services compared to  rural
    and non-slum urban areas.  The results of the 2009 Multiple Indicator
    Cluster Survey showed that urban slums were generally worse off  than
    most of the low performing rural areas (United Nations  International
    Children's Emergency Fund Report, 23rd June 2010).

92. The intense process of urbanisation has led to a  rapid  increase  in
    absolute terms of the poor population in urban areas,  especially  in
    urban slums.  Problems of people living in poverty  in  urban  areas,
    including their lack of access to water and sanitation, have received
    limited attention.  There are slums where raw sewage runs through the
    streets.  The people who live there have no  legal  access  to  water
    which means that they pay ten to twenty times more for it and in some
    cases they have to walk great distances to collect water.   The  lack
    of access to safe drinking water and sanitation in slums is  directly
    related to the lack of secure tenure of slum  dwellers  (OHCHR,  22nd
    July 2010).

93. Inhabitants of fast expanding slums in the urban areas are exposed to
    various preventable diseases and threat of  premature  death  due  to
    lack of safe drinking water, sanitation and health  care  facilities.
    Of the total population 30% live in urban areas, and if  the  current
    trend continues the figure will be 40% by 2020.  Of the  total  urban
    population, 35% live in  slums  where  basic  health  facilities  are
    missing. According to the Bangladesh Urban Health Survey Study 27% of
    women and 35% men were under- nourished in slums,  while  the  number
    was 30%  and  90%  respectively  in  non-slum  areas.   Skilled  care
    delivery is significantly high, around 36% in  urban  non-slum  areas
    while it is only 11% in slums (Right Vision News, 8th April 2010).

94. A report from the Journal of Health Population and  Nutrition,  dated
    1st August 2009, says that  a  1997  study  found  that  47%  of  the
    homeless in Dhaka lived on footpaths, 23%  in  the  city's  transport
    stations and 12% in front of major market centres.

95. For the estimated 28% of the city's poor, earning a living sufficient
    to meet the basic needs for  themselves,  and  their  families  is  a
    continual struggle. Low wages, under-employment, unemployment and low
    skills levels are all challenges faced by  the  poor  in  the  labour
    market.  Many migrants coming to Dhaka ended up in slums where living
    conditions are particularly grim. Despite these conditions  Dhaka  is
    regarded as a city of opportunity for many.  Migrants  flock  to  the
    city in search of jobs and better lives.  The appeal of  the  capital
    city is strong with prospects for employment in a range  of  sectors,
    particularly services and industry.  The labour  market  is  dynamic,
    with entrepreneurs arriving every day hoping to carve  out  a  decent
    living for themselves and their families.   In spite of the  negative
    factors, migrants do not  express  a  desire  to  go  back  to  their
    villages in most surveys.  In fact, evidence shows  that  on  average
    after migration monthly household expenditure of  migrant  households
    increases by 40%.  This substantial increase in  earnings  seemed  to
    compensate for most of the drawbacks of life in Dhaka. As long as job
    prospects in cities looked promising to the rural poor, many of those
    who can will continue to migrate (World Bank, June 2007).

96. The  background  material  shows  that  there  are  opportunities  of
    employment for women in the garment trade. The  US  State  Department
    Report of 2009 noted that employment  opportunities  increased  at  a
    greater rate for women than for men in the last decade,  largely  due
    to the growth of the  export  garment  industry.   Women  constituted
    approximately 80%  of  garment  factory  workers.   There  were  some
    disparities in pay in the overall economy between men and  women  but
    in the garment sector they were roughly comparable.

97. According to the author of an article  in  the  New  York  Times,  by
    giving  women  an  independent  source  of  livelihood  Bangladeshi's
    garment  industry  had  changed  the  conservative  Muslim  country's
    society in immeasurable  ways.   The  government  was  struggling  to
    improve the quality of hard infrastructure, such as  highways,  ports
    and electricity and soft infrastructure such as schools,  courts  and
    basic governance, but private forces unleashed  by  nascent  economic
    reforms and globalisation were changing the society and the  economy.
    More than 80% of the 3 million people who worked in the industry were
    women.  Mr Ahmed Mushfiq Mobarak, an economist at the Yale School  of
    Management who had conducted research found that girls who  lived  in
    villages with garment  factories  tended  to  marry  later  and  have
    children later than girls who grow up in villages without  factories.
    Though wages in Bangladesh's garment industry were among  the  lowest
    in the world hundreds of thousands of  women  flocked  to  Dhaka  and
    other garment hubs in Bangladesh every year  because  factories  paid
    more than the women could earn in villages (The New York Times,  21st
    July  2010).

98. The author of the report in the New York Times gave the example of  a
    woman worker in Dhaka who was single and lived with three other girls
    in a two bedroom apartment.  She sent home 3,000 taka every couple of
    months to help support her parents.  She said she wanted to wait  for
    two or three years before she got married and  had  children  because
    she wanted to save up some money first. Although it may have been the
    case that in 1992 a  Bangladeshi  anthropologist  said  that  from  a
    cultural point of view ideally unmarried women should remain at  home
    under male protection and control until they were able to marry,  the
    position in 2010 seems to be different.

99. Research by Professor Kathryn Ward of  Southern  Illinois  University
    Carbondale found that garment workers and some groups of sex-workers,
    those based in hotels or houses, rather than in brothels  or  on  the
    streets, had more control over the circumstances of their lives  than
    other Bangladeshi women did.  They usually had more education.   They
    had more income.  Garment workers made about twice what maids did and
    sex workers made five or six times what garment workers did.  Garment
    workers had better access to health  care  and  education  for  their
    children.  They were more independent and more mobile, able to go out
    by themselves in society.  Garment workers (though  not  sex-workers)
    were less likely to be abused by husbands or in-laws and they took  a
    more equal part in household decisions.  They were,  to  use  a  buzz
    word, more empowered.  Despite its shortcomings factory work  allowed
    Bangladeshi women to make inroads into the mainstream of society in a
    country where women were often secluded  in  the  household  (Marilyn
    Davis, "Made in Bangladesh" 2005).

100. It is apparent from the article by Marylin Davies that micro-credit,
    advertised as a solution to the problem of  women's  poverty  in  the
    Third World, enabling poor women to borrow money to start  their  own
    businesses, has become readily  available  in  Bangladesh.  Moreover,
    according to the BD  News  24  report,  dated  23rd  June  2010,  the
    government  has  decided  to  reintroduce  five-year  family  savings
    certificates to make women financially self-reliant project is mainly
    geared  towards  destitute,  widowed  and   divorced   women   though
    economically  well-off  women  would  also  be  allowed  to  buy  the
    certificates.

101. Dr Siddiqi was asked the question whether  the  appellant  would  be
    able to provide for herself, her son and her daughter.  It  is  clear
    that  a  more  appropriate  question  would  have  been  whether  the
    appellant would be able to provide for herself and her son. Her  view
    was that secure and decent employment was a  difficult  prospect  for
    anyone without pre-existing system social economic protection  as  in
    the city. We note  that  she  did  not  use  the  word  "impossible".
    Secondly employment prospects were much more limited for  women  than
    for men because of gender norms and institutionalised discrimination.
    While it was true that employment rates increased at a  greater  rate
    for women rather than  men  in  the  last  decade,  this  growth  was
    concentrated in the garment export industry where over his 70% of the
    work force was female. She said the appellant would be over qualified
    for most garment work and even if she were able to get  a  job  at  a
    supervisor level she would barely earn enough to support herself  and
    her two children without a steep fall  in  her  standard  of  living.
    Bangladeshi garment workers were the lowest paid  in  the  world  and
    most had difficulty in meeting  the  basic  needs  on  their  monthly
    income. Most garment workers lived in the  many  slums  and  squatter
    settlements scattered across Dhaka. She  said  that  the  World  Bank
    noted that secure shelter was a major challenge for  Dhaka's  earning
    poor, most of whom ended up  in  illegal  settlements  on  precarious
    land.  The appellant's profile, single, divorced, with a child of out
    wedlock and disowned  by  her  father,  would  work  against  her  in
    obtaining any decent housing even  if  she  could  afford  it.   Most
    landlords, drawing on long-standing assumptions about single  women's
    lax sexuality, refused to  rent  to  women  who  did  not  have  male
    guardians even when money was not at issue.

102. In relation to the  question  whether  returning  the  appellant  to
    Bangladesh  will  result  in  a  real  risk  of  persecution   and/or
    infringement of her rights under article 3 of the ECHR the  question,
    of course, is not whether a woman might have to take  employment  for
    which she was over qualified or whether she would barely earn  enough
    to support herself and her child without a steep fall in her standard
    of living.

103. In her report in answer to the ninth  question  posed,  namely  what
    were the typical backgrounds of  women  who  lived  in  shelters,  Ms
    Goswami said that very poor women  were  given  priority  in  shelter
    homes in Bangladesh. She said in  an  emergency  middle  class  women
    might also live in the shelter homes for a short  period.  The  tenth
    question was whether the appellant's background (i.e. she was from  a
    middle class family, she was educated and lived in the United Kingdom
    since 2002) would prevent her from being given accommodation by  NGOs
    in Dhaka. Ms Goswami said that these conditions would not entitle her
    to accommodation in NGO shelters in Dhaka unless she was  in  a  much
    direr situation. If the appellant would be entitled to  accommodation
    in a NGO shelter if she were in a dire situation, it could hardly  be
    said that returning her to Bangladesh would amount to a breach of her
    rights under article 3  of  the  ECHR.  In  answer  to  the  eleventh
    question is to what kind of financial support would be  available  to
    the appellant and her children Ms Goswami said  that  Bangladesh  did
    not provide quality free education and health care services  nor  did
    it provide any kind of welfare support for women in  the  appellant's
    position. She did indicate,  however,  that  some  minimal  financial
    support  might  be  at  available  for  women  who  were   completely
    destitute. This suggests that she was  making  a  comparison  between
    what would be available for the appellant in the  United  Kingdom  if
    she was otherwise without support with what would  be  available  for
    her in Bangladesh in similar circumstances.  That  is  not  a  proper
    comparison, see Januzi v Secretary of State for the Home Department &
    Ors [2006] UKHL 5 and Secretary of State for the Home Department v AH
    (Sudan) & Ors [2007] UKHL 49 in connection  with  the  issue  of  the
    reasonableness  of  internal  relocation.    Dr  Siddiqi's   evidence
    suffered from the same fault. In answer to  the  first  question  she
    said that without her family  and  social  connections  it  would  be
    extremely difficult for the appellant to find appropriate employment,
    housing and a proper school for her child. That that  might  well  be
    the case but the real issue is whether  of  the  appellant  would  be
    unable to obtain any employment, housing or education for  her  child
    so that she would be in a situation which would  fall  so  far  below
    acceptable standards that it would amount to persecution or a  breach
    of her rights under article 3 of the ECHR.

104. The OHCHR report, dated 22 July 2010, said that  certain  programmes
    such as cash  and  assets  transfers  and  micro-credit  specifically
    targeted women. Other  programmes  directed  at  women  included  the
    Allowances Programme for widowed, deserted and  destitute  women  and
    the Vulnerable Group Development programme  for  "ultra-poor"  women,
    which had relatively limited coverage, reaching  920,000  and  80,000
    women respectively. The level of transfers under the latter programme
    was TK 400 per month over two years,  which  was  significantly  more
    than the usual level of benefits.

105. The report in Right Vision News dated 23rd of January 2010 mentioned
    that most street dwellers were not aware of the  government  services
    available to them and did not use any health  care  facilities.  This
    suggests that government services  and  health  care  facilities  are
    available, even if to a limited extent.

106. In relation to the question of discrimination against children  born
    out of wedlock Dr Siddiqi  said  that  it  was  widespread  and  such
    discrimination was institutionalised. She said, by  way  of  example,
    that orphanages run by  the  Department  of  Social  Services  barred
    children  who  could  not  produce  a  father's  name,   which   many
    illegitimate children could not do. In this  particular  case  it  is
    apparent that the name of the appellant's son's father does appear on
    his birth certificate.  She  said  until  recently  children  of  sex
    workers were not allowed to enrol  in  public  schools  because  they
    could not produce their father's name.  In our  view  the  fact  that
    that was done until recently does demonstrate a change  in  attitude.
    If it is the case that now children of sex workers  can  enrolled  in
    public schools without producing their  father's  name,  it  is  very
    likely that the child of a woman in the appellant's position,  having
    a birth certificate naming the father, would be  able  to  do  so  as
    well.

107. Dr Siddiqi also said  that  the  appellant  would  be  perceived  as
    "sexually suspect and available" and therefore would have to  contend
    with the kind of sexual harassment faced by  women  perceived  to  be
    morally  lax.  On  her  account  women's  heightened   mobility   and
    visibility had challenged culturally dominated ideals of the male  as
    breadwinner, producing a backlash in the  form  of  increased  sexual
    harassment and public violence. She said that according to the  human
    rights organisation Odhikar 450 women and girls were raped  in  2009.
    The Odhikar report dated 1 July 2010, dealing with  the  period  from
    January to June 2010, said that it had been reported that a total  of
    291 females were raped,  of  which  124  were  adults  and  167  were
    children. A strong cultural presumption which  worked  to  legitimate
    harassment was that unescorted women who appeared in  public  spaces,
    especially after dark, were socially and sexually suspect.  In recent
    years the sexual stalking of working women and  college  and  school-
    going girls, in both rural  and  urban  areas  had  become  an  acute
    problem.  According to the  Right  Vision  News  report,  dated  23rd
    January 2010 83% of the female street dwellers had been assaulted  by
    their husbands and/or by other men while they  were  staying  in  the
    street.

108. It goes without saying that a  single  woman  with  an  illegitimate
    child who would be returning to  Bangladesh  without  family  support
    would not be going into a domestic situation and therefore would  not
    run the risk of domestic violence. Although the incidence  of  sexual
    harassment and violence against women in  the  street  are  extremely
    reprehensible, nevertheless we take the view that in the light of the
    population of Bangladesh as a whole, namely  130.5  million  and  the
    population of Dhaka, in particular, namely 9.7 million, it cannot  be
    said that the appellant would run a real risk of being  subjected  to
    such harassment and/or violence on return to Bangladesh.

109. We have had regard to the evidence as a whole  and  the  submissions
    made on behalf of the parties.  We take the view  that  the  divorced
    mother of an illegitimate child without family support on  return  to
    Bangladesh would be likely to have to endure a significant degree  of
    hardship.  We take the view, however, that she may well  be  able  to
    obtain employment in the  garment  trade  and  obtain  some  sort  of
    accommodation, albeit of a low standard.  Some degree of  rudimentary
    state aid would be available to her and she would be  able  to  enrol
    her child in a state school.  If in need  of  urgent  assistance  she
    would be able to seek temporary accommodation in a  woman's  shelter.
    We are not satisfied that the conditions  which  she  would  have  to
    endure in re-establishing  herself  in  Bangladesh  would  amount  to
    persecution or a breach of her rights under article 3  of  the  ECHR.
    Each case, however, must be decided its own facts  having  regard  to
    the particular circumstances and disabilities, if any  of  the  woman
    and her child concerned.

Country guidance conclusions

 110. Our conclusions on the  country  situation  in  Bangladesh  may  be
      summarised as follows:

    (a)     There is a high level of  domestic  violence  in  Bangladesh.
    Despite the efforts of the government to improve the  situation,  due
    to the disinclination of the police to  act  upon  complaints,  women
    subjected to domestic violence may not be able to obtain an effective
    measure of state protection by reason of the fact that they are women
    and may be able to  show  a  risk  of  serious  harm  for  a  Refugee
    Convention reason.  Each case, however, must be determined on its own
    facts.

    (b)     Under Muslim law, as applicable in Bangladesh, the mother, or
    in her absence her own family members, has the right to custody of an
    illegitimate child.

    (c)     In custody and contact disputes the decisions of the superior
    courts in Bangladesh indicate a fairly consistent trend to invoke the
    principle of the welfare  of  the  child  as  an  overriding  factor,
    permitting departure from the applicable personal law  but  a  mother
    may  be  disqualified  from  custody  or   contact   by   established
    allegations of immorality.

    (d)     The mother of an illegitimate child may face social prejudice
    and discrimination if her circumstances and the fact  of  her  having
    had an illegitimate child become known but she is not likely to be at
    a real risk of physical harm in urban centres by reason of that  fact
    alone.

    (e)     The divorced mother of an illegitimate child  without  family
    support on return to Bangladesh would be likely to have to  endure  a
    significant degree of hardship but she may well  be  able  to  obtain
    employment  in  the  garment  trade   and   obtain   some   sort   of
    accommodation, albeit of a low standard.  Some degree of  rudimentary
    state aid would be available to her and she would be  able  to  enrol
    her child in a state school.  If in need  of  urgent  assistance  she
    would be able to seek temporary accommodation in a  woman's  shelter.
    The conditions which she would  have  to  endure  in  re-establishing
    herself in Bangladesh  would  not  as  a  general  matter  amount  to
    persecution or a breach of her rights under article 3  of  the  ECHR.
    Each case, however, must be decided its own facts  having  regard  to
    the particular circumstances and disabilities, if any  of  the  woman
    and the child concerned. Of course  if  such  a  woman  were  fleeing
    persecution in her own home area the  test  for  internal  relocation
    would be that of undue harshness and not a breach of  her  article  3
    rights.

The position of the appellant


111.  Applying  those  general  conclusions  to  the  situation  of  this
    particular appellant,  we  must  begin  with  an  assessment  of  the
    credibility of the appellant.  We note the finding of the immigration
    judge as set out in paragraph 11 of her determination as follows:

         "...Having  heard  the  evidence  of  the  appellant   and   having
         considered the birth certificates of  the  appellant's  children...
         and the contact order of the Epsom County Court produced a  hearing
         today, I am able to accept the appellant's account of the incidents
         which I find credible."

112. Clearly the  immigration  judge  accepted  and  found  credible  the
    appellant's account of her marriage and the incidents leading  up  to
    her separation from her husband and indeed  the  birth  of  her  son.
    Since that hearing, however, some further evidence has come to  light
    which in our view casts something of  a  shadow  on  the  appellant's
    credibility. This is the evidence  of  the  appellant  regarding  the
    divorce of her parents. The appellant has made two written statements
    in the course of these proceedings, the first dated 1 September 20099
    and the second dated 21 September 2010 and yet in  neither  of  these
    documents has the appellant made mention of the fact that her parents
    had separated and divorced.  As recently as in her  latest  statement
    she said that when she returned to Bangladesh  in  August  2007,  she
    stayed in her family home, where she told her father and mother about
    her problems with her husband.  Furthermore  the  appellant  was  not
    truthful at interview when asked about where the  family  lived.  The
    interview took place in June 2009 and, when asked where  her  parents
    lived at question 4 of the interview, she gave one address of  namely
    284 Elephant Road.  Furthermore when asked at question  45  whom  she
    lived with in Bangladesh, the appellant replied  "My  parents".  When
    asked at question 50 whom she had stayed with when  she  returned  to
    Bangladesh in 2007, again the appellant  replied  "My  parents".  She
    told us in oral evidence, however, that her parents had separated  in
    2001 and had divorced in late 2001. When asked to explain why she had
    had not been candid about her parents' situation the  appellant  said
    that she was shy and this prevented her saying so.  She also said she
    was embarrassed because her parents had now children the same age  as
    her daughter.  She disclosed the information to  the  Tribunal  after
    having been advised by her  representative  that  she  needed  to  be
    candid with the Tribunal.

113. We do not find the appellant's explanation for this to be  credible.
    This is a lady who has been educated to tertiary education level. She
    did not appear to us to  have  been  particularly  shy  in  terms  of
    reporting her matrimonial problems to the police nor did  she  appear
    particularly shy in giving her evidence to us. This appellant  struck
    us as a lady who was prepared to stand up for what she  wanted.   She
    has actively pursued Family Court proceedings to gain access  to  her
    daughter and she has pursued appeals firstly against the  refusal  of
    entry clearance as a student and also against the cancellation of her
    entry clearance, both in the event unsuccessful.  She must have  been
    aware from the questions that were asked of her and the case she  put
    forward in claiming asylum that the circumstances of her  parents  in
    Bangladesh were particularly pertinent to the question of whether  or
    not she could return there. We have no doubt that she  was  aware  of
    the relevance of her parents' situation and we do not accept that she
    was too shy to mention their divorce. The appellant  also  said  that
    she was embarrassed by the fact that her parents had  young  children
    the same age as her daughter.  This may be the case  but  we  do  not
    accept that any such embarrassment was the cause of  the  failure  to
    mention her parents' divorce to the Tribunal. The appellant has  been
    fairly forthcoming with details  of  her  marital  problems,  details
    which are no doubt equally embarrassing to her. However she has  been
    able to give a lucid and articulate evidence of these problems and we
    do  not  believe  that  any  embarrassment  regarding  her   parents'
    situation would have been such as to prevent her giving  evidence  to
    the Tribunal of it. Although we accept that her parents are  divorced
    we take the view that it is much more likely that the  appellant  did
    not disclose the situation of her parents to the Tribunal because she
    wished to conceal the true circumstances of her family in  Bangladesh
    and that her parents' divorce was something  which  had  not  created
    problems for them, rather than because she was embarrassed about it.

114. We also have some concerns regarding the appellant's  oral  evidence
    of her recent contacts  with  her  mother.  She  said  that  she  had
    telephoned her mother on Eid recently and she  had  had  one  further
    call beforehand, but she found her mother did not seem interested  in
    talking.  Until this time the appellant has always  stated  that  she
    has had no contact with her parents since she  told  them  about  the
    birth of her son. She was asked whether her mother would help her  if
    she were to return to Bangladesh and she replied  that  she  did  not
    think so as her mother's partner would not allow it.  She  said  that
    the partner would not want his wife's divorced  daughter  becoming  a
    burden upon them.

115. When cross-examined about the reasons why her mother would not  help
    her, she also said that her mother feared her father might  not  give
    her the due share of the profits from the business and  also  because
    her mother's current partner's position had to be taken into account.
     She said that she did not think he would accept her and that she had
    no relationship with him.  She also added that her mother was  having
    problems with her  partner,  who  also  had  another  wife  and  four
    children.  She added that she did not  know  the  reasons  for  their
    problem but she found out from an old school friend that they  argued
    a lot. When asked about the school friend the appellant said that she
    had had no contact with her for the  last  five  years  but  she  had
    telephoned her to send Eid greetings and it was then that her  friend
    had told her. She confirmed that this was  the  first  time  she  had
    spoken with her friend in five years and, when asked, she  said  that
    she did not tell her friend anything about  her  illegitimate  child.
    She had told her that she had a daughter and was married but she  had
    not told her about her son.  She denied having seen this friend  when
    she returned to Bangladesh in 2007.

116. We do not find it credible that the appellant would have  telephoned
    a friend in  Bangladesh  out  of  the  blue  in  order  to  send  Eid
    greetings, and, even if she did,  it  is  highly  unlikely  that  the
    conversation would have turned to discussing the appellant's mother's
    marital problems when the appellant had not seen this friend for five
    years,  had not made contact with her in 2007 when  she  returned  to
    Bangladesh, and had not in that telephone conversation even told  her
    friend about the birth of her own son.

117. It seems to us that the appellant's evidence of  her  mother  having
    her own recent marital problems is unreliable and that the  appellant
    has not been truthful  about  the  telephone  conversation  with  her
    friend in Bangladesh which has been put forward to  explain  how  she
    would have such knowledge, given that her evidence had been that  she
    had had no contact with her mother since she told her father  of  the
    birth of her son in April 2009, other than telephone calls  when  her
    mother did not  appear interested in talking.

118.  We  also  find  the  appellant's  evidence  somewhat   inconsistent
    regarding when and how her  parents  found  out  about  her  son.  At
    question 61 of her interview the appellant was  asked  what  happened
    when her parents found out about her son.  In response she said "They
    came to know about my pregnancy after the birth of  my  son.  When  I
    told them I was pregnant they told me not to go back  to  them".  She
    was then asked in the next question when she told them and her  reply
    was "last year maybe July or August". She was asked how she had  told
    them and she replied "By phone. That was the last  time  I  spoke  to
    them". As her interview occurred  on  6  May  2009,  the  appellant's
    answer would therefore place the last conversation which she had with
    her parents as having occurred in July or August 2008.  Her  son  was
    born on 2 April 2009.

119. We find this evidence not to be entirely  consistent.  It  is  clear
    that at question 71,  the appellant stated that her parents  came  to
    know about her pregnancy after the birth of her son; however  if  she
    spoke to them in July or August 2008 she could have been only  barely
    pregnant with him at the time.  Furthermore, we note that earlier  in
    the interview at question 8, when asked when she last  spoke  to  her
    parents, she replied that it was more than a year, and when asked  to
    remember the date, she replied that it was around March  or  February
    2008.

120. There is now an increasing number of divorced women from the  middle
    classes in urban centres so that the appellant would not be unique as
    a divorced woman.  We take the view that the appellant does not  come
    from a particularly strict family so far as the question  of  divorce
    and new relationships is concerned.  The appellant,  herself,  rather
    surprisingly has been prepared to embark upon a relationship  outside
    marriage  as  a  result  of  which  she  conceived  a  child.  It  is
    significant that she was divorced from her husband when the child was
    conceived so that there  is  no  question  of  her  having  committed
    adultery.  In all the circumstances we do not believe that her father
    has disowned her or she would lack the support of her parents if  she
    were to be returned to Bangladesh.

121. Under Muslim law, which is the appellant's personal law,  she  would
    have the right to custody  of  her  illegitimate  child.  Ms  Hossain
    discounted any risk of serious harm to the  appellant  from  her  own
    family or other persons. Dr Siddiqi also at discounted any such  risk
    on the grounds that her family might simply want to maintain a social
    distance from her. So that even if we were wrong in  our  conclusions
    about the availability of support from her father and mother we would
    not be satisfied that the appellant  would  be  at  a  real  risk  of
    serious harm at their hands.  We also take the view  that  since  the
    appellant is now divorced from her husband, he has custody  of  their
    child and there is no evidence of him making threats  or  seeking  to
    harm her in the United Kingdom since their separation,  there  is  no
    basis for thinking that the appellant would be  at  a  real  risk  of
    serious harm at the hands of her former  husband's  family,  even  if
    they were to become aware of her return to Bangladesh.

122. As pointed out earlier, in relation  to  the  appellant's  son,  the
    appellant could truthfully  say  that  she  was  separated  from  the
    child's father in the United Kingdom and there would be no reason why
    anyone should discover that he was illegitimate.  His  father's  name
    appears on his birth certificate.  In our view it  is  unlikely  that
    the child's illegitimacy would be discovered and this would  make  it
    more likely that the appellant's parents would be prepared to  assist
    her.   By  the  same  token  she  would  avoid  the  general   social
    discrimination shown towards  women  with  illegitimate  children  in
    Bangladesh.

123. The worst case scenario for the appellant would be  to  be  returned
    without the support of her parents.   We  do  not  underestimate  the
    difficulties which this would present to a young woman from a middle-
    class background.  The purpose of the Refugee Convention and that  of
    the ECHR, however, is not to assist persons to live at  the  economic
    level to which they have become accustomed.  As pointed out  earlier,
    the real issue is whether the appellant would be unable to obtain any
    employment, housing or education for her child, so that she would  be
    in a situation which would fall so  far  below  acceptable  standards
    that it would amount to persecution or a breach of her  rights  under
    article 3 of the ECHR.   At the hearing  the  appellant  demonstrated
    her ability in English, which would give  her  an  advantage  in  the
    employment market in Bangladesh.  We think that at the very least she
    would be likely to be able to obtain employment in the garment trade,
    and obtain some sort of accommodation,  albeit  of  a  low  standard.
    Some degree of rudimentary state aid would be available  to  her  and
    she would be able to enrol her child  in  a  state  school.   In  the
    second of her Annexes Ms Goswami set out two shelters for  which  she
    said that the appellant and her son satisfied the criteria, the Ain o
    Salish Kendra and the SSP, in the latter of which a  prolonged  would
    be possible. In addition we note that the  shelter  provided  by  the
    Bangladesh National Women Lawyers Association (BNWLA) is said  to  be
    for any  destitute  children  and  women,  notwithstanding  that  the
    criteria for staying are said  to  be  specifically  for  trafficking
    victims and other special cases.  If in need of urgent assistance the
    appellant ands her son would be  able  to  seek  accommodation  in  a
    woman's shelter.  We are not satisfied that the conditions which  the
    appellant  would  have  to  endure  in  re-establishing  herself   in
    Bangladesh would amount to persecution or  a  breach  of  her  rights
    under article 3 of the ECHR.

124. There remains the question of  whether  the  appellant's  return  to
    Bangladesh would amount to a disproportionate interference  with  her
    right to respect for her private and family life under article  8  of
    the ECHR.   In paragraph 7 of his opinion in EB (Kosovo) v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2008] UKHL 41 Lord Bingham said:
       "In R (Razgar) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2004]
       UKHL 27, [2004] 2 AC 368, para 17, the House summarised, in terms  to
       which all members  of  the  committee  assented  and  which  are  not
       understood to be controversial, the  questions  to  be  asked  by  an
       adjudicator hearing an appeal against removal on article  8  grounds.
       It said:
           "In a case where removal is resisted in reliance on  article  8,
           these questions are likely to be: (1) will the proposed  removal
           be an interference by a public authority with  the  exercise  of
           the applicant's right to respect for his private or (as the case
           may be) family life? (2) If  so,  will  such  interference  have
           consequences of  such  gravity  as  potentially  to  engage  the
           operation of article 8? (3)  If  so,  is  such  interference  in
           accordance with  the  law?  (4)  If  so,  is  such  interference
           necessary in a democratic society in the interests  of  national
           security, public  safety  or  the  economic  well-being  of  the
           country, for the  prevention  of  disorder  or  crime,  for  the
           protection of health or morals, or for  the  protection  of  the
           rights and freedoms of others? (5) If so, is  such  interference
           proportionate  to  the  legitimate  public  end  sought  to   be
           achieved?"
       In  practice  the  fourth  and  fifth  questions  are  usually,  and
       unobjectionably, taken together, but as expressed they  reflect  the
       approach of the Strasbourg court which is (see Boultif v Switzerland
       (2001) 33 EHRR 50, para 46; Mokrani v France (2005) 40 EHRR 5,  para
       27; Sezen v Netherlands (2006) 43 EHRR 621, para 41) that
           "decisions in this field must, in so far as they  may  interfere
           with a right protected  under  paragraph  1  of  Article  8,  be
           necessary in a democratic society, that is to say justified by a
           pressing social need and, in particular,  proportionate  to  the
           legitimate aim pursued."

    He went on to quote from the decision of the House of Lords in  Huang
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2007] UKHL  11  and  in
    paragraph 12 said:

           "Thus the appellate immigration  authority  must  make  its  own
           judgment and that judgment will be strongly  influenced  by  the
           particular facts and circumstances of the particular  case.  The
           authority will, of course, take note of factors which  have,  or
           have not, weighed  with  the  Strasbourg  court.  It  will,  for
           example, recognise that  it  will  rarely  be  proportionate  to
           uphold an order for removal of a spouse if there is a close  and
           genuine bond with  the  other  spouse  and  that  spouse  cannot
           reasonably be expected to  follow  the  removed  spouse  to  the
           country of removal, or if the effect of the order is to sever  a
           genuine and subsisting relationship between  parent  and  child.
           But cases will not ordinarily  raise  such  stark  choices,  and
           there is in general no  alternative  to  making  a  careful  and
           informed evaluation of the facts of  the  particular  case.  The
           search for a hard-edged or bright-line rule to be applied to the
           generality  of  cases  is  incompatible   with   the   difficult
           evaluative exercise which article 8 requires".


125. We bear these considerations in mind in reaching  our  decision.  It
    goes without saying that the decision of the House of Lords in Beoku-
    Betts v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2008]  UKHL  39
    obliges us to consider the article 8 rights of each and  all  of  the
    family members, which in this case particularly involve those  of  Z.
    We note that the appellant has been in the United  Kingdom  for  more
    than 8 years.  Her daughter, who was born in the United  Kingdom,  on
    18 June 2005, is now more than five and a half years of age.  She  is
    in the custody of the appellant's former husband  and  has  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom with him until 10 August 2011. Therefore
    it would be impossible for her to return  with  the  appellant.   The
    appellant has contact with the child every weekend from Friday  after
    school to 10 am on Sunday morning.  We observe  that  in  her  latest
    witness statement the appellant said that Z had been  diagnosed  with
    Global Developmental Delay and a communication  disorder.   This  has
    been  confirmed  by  a  report  which  had  been  included   in   the
    Supplementary Bundle. It is plain in our view that the appellant  has
    established  private  and  family  life  in  the  United  Kingdom  in
    circumstances where her removal would interfere  with  her  right  to
    respect for it with consequences of such gravity  as  to  potentially
    engage  the  operation  of  article  8.   Her  removal  would  be  in
    accordance with the law.

126.  We  take  the  issues  of  whether  it  would  be   necessary   and
    proportionate together.  In LD (Article 8 - best interests of  child)
    Zimbabwe [2010] UKUT 278 (IAC) the Tribunal  said  that  family  life
    consisted in the inter-dependent bonds  between  spouses  and  stable
    partners and between parents and children  with  particular  strength
    being placed upon the interests and welfare of  minor  children.   In
    this case it is clearly in the child's best interests to  have  close
    contact and regular contact with her mother, particularly  since  the
    normal situation of a child so young being with its mother  does  not
    obtain. In LD the Tribunal said that it was  not  normal  for  family
    life to be enjoyed by  correspondence  and  occasional  visits  (even
    assuming that there were no obstacles to such  visits  following  the
    immigration decision).

127. In paragraph 46 of his  judgment  in  the  recent  decision  of  the
    Supreme Court in ZH (Tanzania) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2011] UKSC 4 Lord Kerr said:

         "It is a universal theme of the various international and  domestic
         instruments to which Lady  Hale  has  referred  that,  in  reaching
         decisions that will affect a child, a primacy of importance must be
         accorded to his or her best interests. This is not, it is agreed, a
         factor of limitless importance in the sense that  it  will  prevail
         over all other considerations. It is a factor, however,  that  must
         rank higher than any other. It is not merely one consideration that
         weighs in the balance alongside other competing factors. Where  the
         best interests of the child clearly favour a certain  course,  that
         course  should  be  followed  unless  countervailing   reasons   of
         considerable force displace them. It is not  necessary  to  express
         this  in  terms  of  a  presumption  but  the   primacy   of   this
         consideration needs to be made clear in  emphatic  terms.  What  is
         determined to be in a child's  best  interests  should  customarily
         dictate the outcome of cases such as the present, therefore, and it
         will require considerations  of  substantial  moment  to  permit  a
         different result."


128. The legitimate aim here in favour of removal is the public  interest
    in preserving the economic well-being of the country  by  controlling
    immigration. It is the case, however, that  appellant  would  have  a
    right under the paragraph 246 of HC 395, as amended,  to  seek  entry
    clearance to the United Kingdom for the purpose of exercising  rights
    of access to her daughter.  There is no reason to  believe  that  she
    would  be  unsuccessful  in  such  an  application.  In  Chikwamba  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008] UKHL 40 Lord  Brown
    said that it was only comparatively rarely, certainly in family cases
    involving children, that an article 8 appeal should be  dismissed  on
    the basis that it would be proportionate and more appropriate for the
    appellant to apply for leave from abroad.

129. In these circumstances we take the view that to remove the appellant
    from the United Kingdom  at  the  present  time  would  amount  to  a
    disproportionate interference with  her  right  to  respect  for  her
    private and family life under article 8 of the ECHR.  It  will  be  a
    matter for the respondent to determine  the  length  of  leave  which
    should follow this finding.  We would expect  it  to  be  coterminous
    with that of Z.

130. Accordingly, for the reasons which we have given, we set  aside  the
    determination of the appeal by the immigration judge.  We remake  the
    decision by dismissing the appeal on asylum, humanitarian  protection
    and human rights grounds under article 3 of the ECHR but we allow the
    appeal on human rights grounds under article 8 of the ECHR.




Signed                                             Date


Senior Immigration Judge Spencer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                   Annex A



The report of Ms Hossain

 1. The form of Ms Hossain's report involved a summary of the  facts  taken
    from the documents with which she had been  supplied  followed  by  her
    opinion in answer to a number of questions which she had  been  invited
    to answer by the appellant's representatives.

 2. The first question was whether, assuming the appellant, her  ex-husband
    and their daughter returned to  Bangladesh,  it  was  likely  that  the
    appellant would be denied custody of or contact with her daughter.   It
    is not necessary to deal with her  opinion  at  length  as  it  is  not
    relevant to the issues which we have to decide save  to  say  that  she
    said that rather than to attempting to  enforce  the  judgment  of  the
    County Court in England in Bangladesh it would be more likely that  the
    appellant's  husband  would  take  legal  action   to   establish   his
    guardianship or custody of the child and for  the  appellant  to  claim
    custody or contact with the child by starting  proceedings  before  the
    Family Court in Bangladesh, with the order of the United Kingdom  court
    being adduced in evidence.

 3. The second question was whether, as the appellant and the father of her
    son were no longer in a relationship,  the  appellant  could  lose  the
    right to full custody of her illegitimate son to her  husband's  family
    if they were returned to Bangladesh.  Ms  Hossain's  opinion  was  that
    under Muslim law as applicable in Bangladesh  the  mother,  or  in  her
    absence her relations, had the right  to  custody  of  an  illegitimate
    child.  While there was no reported Bangladesh judgment on this  issue,
    the Supreme Court of India had affirmed that under Muslim law a  mother
    would have custody of an illegitimate child in the case of Gohar  Begum
    v Suggi alias Nazma [1960] AIR SC 93, Manupatra Manu/SC/0026/1959.

 4. The third question was whether, if the appellant was denied custody  of
    or contact with either of her children she could pursue a legal  remedy
    in Bangladesh and whether it would it be difficult  for  her  pursue  a
    legal remedy if she did not  have  the  necessary  finances  to  pay  a
    lawyer/court fees.  She was also asked whether she was likely to have a
    fair hearing.   The  answer  to  this  question  is  of  only  indirect
    relevance to the appeal but it is helpful to consider her  evidence  as
    it casts light on the position of women  in  Bangladesh.  Ms  Hossain's
    opinion was that there were three ways in  which  the  appellant  could
    pursue a legal remedy.  First she could make an application before  the
    Family Court under the Family Courts Act 1985 read with  the  Guardians
    and Wards Act of 1890.  Secondly she could make an  application  before
    the High Court Division of the Supreme Court of Bangladesh under either
    Article 102 of the Constitution or Section 491 of the Code of  Criminal
    Procedure of 1898.  Thirdly she could  or  lodge  a  First  Information
    Report (FIR) with the police or make a complaint before a magistrate.

 5. She went on to say that the Family Courts in Bangladesh  had  exclusive
    jurisdiction to settle disputes regarding, inter alia, guardianship and
    custody and a Family  Court  might  make  orders  for  guardianship  or
    custody of a minor child applying the provisions of the  Guardians  and
    Wards Act read together with the personal law of the parties.  She said
    that the court might consider  the  provisions  of  the  applicable  or
    personal law, Muslim law in this case, given that both parties and  the
    children in question were Muslim.   She  said  that  under  the  Hanafi
    school of Muslim law, which would apply, as it did to the  majority  of
    the Sunni Muslims of Bangladesh, the father, if alive,  was  considered
    to be the natural and legal guardian of the person and property of  his
    minor child while the mother was entitled to the custody  (hizanat)  of
    her male child until he had completed the age of  7  years  and  for  a
    female child until she had attained puberty, unless she  was  otherwise
    disqualified.  If the mother was unable,  being  disqualified  for  any
    reason, or willing to take custody of the child, the maternal relatives
    would take custody and only then the father or paternal relatives.

 6. Under Muslim law a mother who was otherwise entitled to the custody  of
    her child would lose the right to such custody on  among  other  things
    the following grounds:

         "(1) if she  married a person not related to the child  within  the
             prohibited degrees e.g. a stranger, but the right  revived  on
             the dissolution of the marriage by death of divorce;

         (2)      if she went and resided, during  the  subsistence  of  the
             marriage, at a distance from the father's place of residence;

         (3)      if she was leading an immoral life, as  where  she  was  a
             prostitute; or

         (4)      if she neglected to take proper care of the child."

 7. She said that one commentator,  Fyzee,  made  it  clear  that  loss  of
    custody did not necessarily follow merely because the wife was divorced
    or separated.  Further, Syed Ameer Ali noted that the right to  hizanat
    belonged to the mother "qua mother and nothing can take  it  away  from
    her except her own misconduct".   He also stated that not all cases  of
    misconduct necessarily destroyed the right  to  hizanat  and  that  the
    question was whether such misconduct was  "detrimental  to  the  child"
    i.e. "is it likely to  injure  the  child?",  with  such  injury  being
    physical or moral and finally that "unchastity  ...  disqualifies  [the
    woman] from exercising the right of hizanat".

 8. Ms Hossain said that other commentators took the  view  that  a  mother
    lost her right to the custody of her child where immoral character  and
    conduct  was  proved  against  her,  taking  evidence  of  adultery  or
    'unchastity' as proof of 'immorality'.  She quoted from a work entitled
    "The Guardians and Wards and  Majority  Act"  by  Shaukat  Mahmood  and
    Nadeem Shaukat, published in Lahore in 2006, to the effect  that  where
    the mother was leading an immoral life or living in open  adultery  she
    should not be appointed guardian of her minor son.  This  was  so  even
    where the immorality was proved from indirect evidence. The mere  fact,
    however, that a mother gave birth to an illegitimate  child  two  years
    after the death of her  husband  was  not  sufficient  reason  for  not
    appointing her guardian of her son's person and property.  Even if  the
    child had been taken out of her custody  because  she  was  leading  an
    irregular life, she did not permanently forfeit all her natural  rights
    to the custody of the child.

 9. Ms Hossain went on to say that a review of reported  decisions  of  the
    superior courts in Bangladesh on custody  matters  indicated  a  fairly
    consistent trend to invoke the principle of welfare  as  an  overriding
    factor, permitting departure from the  applicable  personal  law.   She
    quoted  from  one  of  the  leading  cases  of  the  highest  court  in
    Bangladesh, namely the Appellate  Division  of  the  Supreme  Court  of
    Bangladesh, where custody was granted  to  the  divorced  mother  of  a
    severely ill 8 year old boy whom she had looked after for years and who
    had expressed a preference for living with her, Md. Abu Baker  Siddique
    v SMA Bakar 38 DLR (AD) (1986) 107.  One  of  the  passages  from  that
    decision which she quoted made it clear that although according to  the
    Hanafi school the father was entitled to hizanat or custody  of  a  son
    over 7 years of age this rule did not have any  claim  to  immutability
    such that it could not be departed from even if circumstances justified
    such a departure.  This means that on proof of  the  unfitness  of  the
    father to the custody of such a child, courts  were  seen  to  exercise
    discretion against this entitlement according to the Hanafi rule.

10. She also quoted the decision in the case of Abdul Jalil v Sharon  Laily
    Begum Jalil (no reference given) where  the  same  court  said  it  was
    settled that the term 'welfare' must be read in  the  largest  possible
    sense  as  meaning  that  every  circumstance  must   be   taken   into
    consideration and the court must do what under the circumstances a wise
    parent acting for the true interests of the child would or ought to do.
     The moral and religious welfare of the child  must  be  considered  as
    well as its well-being and ties of affection could not be  disregarded.
    Ms Hossain said that  taking  this  approach  the  courts  had  awarded
    custody to a mother against whom allegations  of  immorality  had  been
    levelled, although not made out, but had observed  that  the  situation
    might  be  reviewed  if  the  mother   remarried   or   was   otherwise
    disqualified. She said recent decisions held  the  fact  of  remarriage
    would simply take away the mother's preferential right to  hizanat  but
    not remove her right  to  custody  altogether  and  that  the  ultimate
    decision regarding custody would be determined on overall consideration
    of the welfare principle.  She said  that  applying  the  same  welfare
    criterion the courts had denied custody to a divorced mother citing her
    'past conduct' among  others,  particularly  where  she  had  not  been
    looking after the child continuously. In one case  the  court  referred
    both to the mother's remarriage and her evidence that she  had  not  in
    fact taken care of the child, which had been in the custody and care of
    the father for some time.  In another case the court denied custody  to
    a mother on finding that the children in question had been settled with
    their father for over a year.  In yet another the  court  referring  to
    the mother's character, conduct and way of life on which her own mother
    and brother had deposed her, noting in particular her failure  to  take
    care of the child.

11.  Ms  Hossain  pointed  to  the  fact  that   there   was   no   similar
    disqualification regarding  fathers  remarrying  and  becoming  thereby
    unfit for the guardianship of the child.   Nonetheless  she  said  that
    superior courts in both Bangladesh and Pakistan in awarding custody  of
    a child to a mother had taken into account the  factor  of  the  father
    having  remarried,  particularly  where  the  mother  herself  had  not
    remarried and could otherwise prove that the welfare of the  child  lay
    in her care and there was nothing on record to establish that  she  had
    failed to look after her son.

12. Ms Hossain went  on  to  say  there  was  little  information  or  data
    available on decisions in the trial courts for custody  disputes,  that
    was to say the Family Courts. She said  one  of  the  few  commentaries
    available which reviewed selected trial courts  judgments  on  custody,
    that by Taslima Monsoor, noted:

         "The judiciary in Bangladesh is not giving enlightened judgments on
         guardianship. They are mainly following the  conservative  line  of
         interpretation of not recognising a woman as the  natural  guardian
         of her children. But the cases on  custody  in  Bangladesh  protect
         women more, as they exhibit the mother's right to custody of  young
         children as almost an absolute right.   Enlightened  pronouncements
         in the cases of custody of young children have  encouraged  mothers
         to claim custody beyond the  conventional  limitations  relying  on
         arguments about the welfare of the child."

13. Ms Hossain went on to mention another quotation  from  a  statement  by
    Taslima Monsoor:

         "...  the  situation  seems  favourable  in  the  lower  courts  as
         reflected in four  unreported  custody  cases  collected  from  the
         Family Courts of Dhaka city.  A mother is usually given custody  of
         the child during his or her infancy or  tender  age  in  accordance
         with the Muslim law.  Moreover in the lower court i.e.  the  Family
         Court, there is a case where the mother is also  given  custody  of
         minors even above their tender  years.  This  seems  to  reflect  a
         sensitisation of the judiciary to give greater rights to women."

14. It is unnecessary to deal with what Ms Hossain said about  applications
    to the High Court or FIRs alleging kidnapping or abduction

15. Ms Hossain dealt with the question of  the  difficulty  pursuing  legal
    remedies and in the absence of funds.  She  said  the  actual  cost  of
    pursuing remedies before the Family Court or High Court  would  not  be
    particularly  high,  but  these  varied  greatly  and  would  be  quite
    extensive if the proceedings were protracted, as they  were  likely  to
    be.  She said that the National Legal Services  Organisation  (NLSO)  a
    statutory body established pursuant to the Legal Aid Services Act 2000,
    and its District Legal Aid Committees (DLAC) had powers  and  functions
    including establishing guidelines for determining the  eligibility  for
    legal  aid  for  persons  who  were  "economically   disadvantaged   or
    destitute" and to consider applications for legal assistance  in  civil
    and  criminal  matters  and  to  undertake   ADR   or   provide   legal
    representation at every tier of the court system. She  said  that  this
    government scheme, however, was still very  much  in  its  infancy  and
    there were concerns regarding the  extent  to  which  it  was  able  to
    effectively provide legal aid and the quality of the service provision.
    She said she had not been able to  access  any  information  about  the
    extent, if any, to which it had provided legal aid for custody  matters
    before the Family Courts.

16. She said that in the absence of  effective  state  legal  aid  services
    several NGOs provided legal services to women in Dhaka such as ASK, the
    Bangladesh Legal Aid and Services Trust  and  the  Bangladesh  National
    Women Lawyers Association. She said women's organisations also provided
    additional legal advice, or made  referrals,  such  as  the  Bangladesh
    Mohila Porishod (Bangladesh Women's Council) or Naripokkho (For Women).
     She said that while all  such  organisations  had  assisted  women  in
    relation to custody matters, their ability to sustain such support over
    a protracted period, and  to  ensure  consistent  and  effective  legal
    advice and representation, was a real concern, particularly  where  the
    individual concerned had no family or other social support of their own
    and no means.  Her opinion was that the absence of legal aid,  combined
    with the absence of any social security,  and  the  limited  scope  for
    other means of livelihood, meant that family support could be  critical
    to enabling litigants, particularly women, to pursue legal action.

17. Ms Hossain went on to deal with the likelihood of a fair hearing.   She
    said that under Muslim law different and discriminatory legal standards
    applied with respect to determining the rights of the mother and father
    to custody and access to or visitation of their children. In particular
    a mother may be disqualified from obtaining custody or contact if there
    was evidence of her 'immorality' but a father was not  subject  to  any
    similar disqualification.   Within  the  Family  Court  the  applicable
    procedure was summary in  nature  and  intended  to  strike  a  balance
    between efficiency and fairness in order  to  minimise  the  scope  for
    protracted proceedings.  She said in her opinion while these procedures
    would not in themselves result in the appellant  being  denied  a  fair
    hearing, in  practice,  there  was  a  real  risk  that  she  might  be
    prejudiced when the court came to learn of her having  an  illegitimate
    child, given that it may take this into  consideration  as  a  relevant
    factor (evidencing 'immorality' or 'bad character') in determining  the
    issue of custody/contact, in applying  'the  welfare  checklist'.   She
    said although the Family Courts had a wide  discretion  not  to  submit
    questions which were 'indecent' or 'intended  to  insult'  in  practice
    there was considerable divergence in traditional  attitudes  and  there
    was every possibility  that  many  judges  would  reflect  conservative
    social attitudes and prejudices in which extra-marital  relations  were
    considered to be evidence of 'immorality' and that such attitudes would
    affect the nature of the hearing given to the appellant.

18. The fourth question which Ms Hossain was asked concerned whether  there
    were equivalent orders to the contact order issued by the County  Court
    which the appellant currently had in the United Kingdom  in  Bangladesh
    and whether they would be enforceable.  Ms Hossain said that  both  the
    Family Court and the High Court frequently issued directions  that  the
    non-custodial parent might have access  or  visitation  rights  to  the
    child and frequently did so in  pending  custody  proceedings  or  upon
    their disposal.  The orders were similar  to  contact  orders  although
    they might be quite restrictive in particular  circumstances,  allowing
    only supervised access for a very limited period. She said if an  order
    of access or visitation was made as part of the judgment  in  the  suit
    before the Family Court, a separate execution proceeding would have  to
    be instituted to ensure enforcement of the decree.  If an interim order
    for access/visitation was made by the Family Court, no separate process
    for  enforcement  was  envisaged.  She  said   exceptionally,   if   an
    application by the  High  Court  for  access/visitation  needed  to  be
    enforced, an application might be made for directions upon  the  police
    to produce the child in question before the court.   She  said  if  any
    party was in breach of an interim order or a final decree made  by  the
    Family Court or the High  Court, then a notice might be issued  on  the
    party in breach to show cause as to  why  he  should  not  be  held  in
    contempt of court.  If found in contempt the party  in  breach  may  be
    liable to pay a fine or to imprisonment for such a period as the  court
    directed.

19. The fifth question that Ms Hossain was asked was whether it was  common
    for men in Bangladesh to deny their ex-wives access to their  children.
    She said as far as she was aware there was  no  research  available  to
    analyse whether it was common for them  to  do  so.  She  said  on  the
    limited basis of her review  of  reported  decisions  of  the  superior
    courts and experience in  advising  on  custody  disputes  it  was  her
    opinion that it was not uncommon for men to try to deny their  ex-wives
    access to their children in some cases  by  removing  them  from  their
    mother's custody without her knowledge/consent, with  the  mother  then
    being compelled to apply to the court  and  endure  protracted  lengthy
    proceedings in an attempt to recover custody of their children.

20. The sixth question was  whether  in  divorce  cases  children  normally
    remain  with  their  fathers  and  what  was  the  normal  practice  in
    Bangladesh.  She said as far as she was aware  there  was  no  research
    available on whether in divorce cases children normally  remained  with
    their fathers.  It should be noted that under Muslim law applicable  in
    Bangladesh divorce was  usually  affected  extra-judicially,  that  was
    without any legal proceedings or case as such. Even where a divorce was
    effected through legal proceedings, such proceedings were separate from
    those relating to custody.

21. The seventh question was what the usual arrangements in  divorce  cases
    were where the children remained with the father.  What was the  normal
    practice with regard to contact with the  children  by  the  mother  in
    these cases.  Ms Hossain said again as far as she was aware  there  was
    no research available regarding these topics. In  the  absence  of  any
    such information it was her opinion based on her  experience  that  the
    arrangements would vary depending on the socio-economic  background  of
    the family, including their religion, ethnicity and location,  as  well
    as their class and educational background.

22. The eighth question was whether the fact  that  the  appellant  had  an
    illegitimate child could affect her right of access to her older child.
     Her opinion was that the fact that the appellant had  an  illegitimate
    child was likely to affect her rights of access both to custody of  and
    contact with her older child not only in terms of  them  obtaining  the
    necessary legal remedies from the court but also in ensuring compliance
    with any such order by her ex-husband or his family.  She said that the
    courts in considering whether to grant her contact with her older child
    might consider the fact of her having an illegitimate  child  from  the
    subsequent relationship to be a relevant criterion in relation  to  her
    character, also in terms of establishing  her  immorality,  a  specific
    disqualification under Muslim personal law.  She said  that  while  the
    Bangladesh courts had not as yet refused custody to the mother  in  any
    case on grounds of 'immorality' they had done so  in  cases  where  the
    mother had remarried and noted with respect to her conduct that she was
    'undeserving' and 'had failed to establish that as the  mother  of  the
    child she had reared up from birth, gave her love and affection and  in
    all respects cared for him throughout'. She also said that  the  courts
    had allowed the mother to retain custody/contact, even where there were
    allegations of her 'immoral behaviour' as long as it appeared that  the
    welfare of the child would be best served by  placing  him/her  in  the
    mother's custody.  She said such decisions, however, had been  made  in
    the context of allegations which had not been made out.  In her opinion
    the appellant would face real difficulties in obtaining  an  order  for
    custody of the older  child  if  the  court  considered  her  'immoral'
    conduct and disregard for prevailing social norms regarding her  sexual
    conduct, as evidenced by her illegitimate son, her  strained  relations
    with her parents and her lack of financial means to maintain the child,
    to be factors relevant to the welfare of the child.  She  said  it  was
    very likely that any order allowing access/visits to the child  by  the
    appellant might not be complied with by her ex-husband's family,  given
    that the fact of her having an illegitimate child would be perceived as
    a serious stigma on the entire family and they would be likely to  seek
    to prevent contact with the child.

23. The ninth question was an invitation to address any other legal  issues
    arising from the case that she believed to be relevant.  She said  that
    in relation to  domestic  violence  there  was  very  little  empirical
    research available and the risk of  violence  faced  by  women  in  the
    appellant's particular situation, (i.e. women who had had children  out
    of wedlock), but there was increasing research on the pervasiveness  of
    domestic violence and on the issue of the lack of response of  the  law
    enforcing agencies in such cases, with one study showing  that  60%  of
    women facing domestic violence received no help or response.

24. In relation to the apprehension of the appellant being exposed  to  any
    form of extra-judicial punishment by her own family or  other  persons,
    in her opinion such  an  apprehension  was  not  well-founded  as  such
    incidents were usually reported as occurring in  rural  areas,  in  the
    course of traditional dispute resolution  (shalish)  processes.   While
    various forms of shalish in the form of alternative dispute  resolution
    involving the extended family or community were also  used  to  resolve
    domestic and other disputes in urban areas including among middle class
    families, she was not aware of any such extrajudicial  penalties  being
    imposed in this context.  She referred to the most recent pronouncement
    of the High Court Division in writ petition no. 5863 of 2009  declaring
    all kinds of extra-judicial punishment issued in the name of  fatwa  to
    be illegal and persons meting out such punishment  liable  to  criminal
    prosecution.

25. She went on to say, however, that there was a risk that  the  appellant
    might face social prejudice and  discrimination  from  her  own  family
    members as well  as  other  members  of  the  wider  community  if  her
    circumstances and the fact of her  having  had  an  illegitimate  child
    became known. Given the prevailing conservative  social  attitudes  and
    prejudices, if the fact of  the  appellant's  having  a  child  out  of
    wedlock were to be known she might find  it  difficult  to  obtain  any
    appropriate employment.  In the  absence  of  any  financial  means  or
    source of livelihood outside her family or of any state social security
    system she might face extreme financial hardship.   It  would  also  be
    likely to be difficult, in her opinion,  to  obtain  adequate  housing,
    given the absence of any state facilities or support in this regard and
    the fact that her parents and her extended family were unlikely to give
    her any support and the expense of private accommodation. The  fact  of
    her having an illegitimate child  and  the  resulting  lack  of  family
    support meant that she might qualify for emergency shelter from an NGO,
    but such shelter might not be available  for  a  long  period  and  was
    unlikely to be suitable for  her  and  her  son  given  the  conditions
    prevailing in most institutions, including restrictions on movement.

26. She said that under Bangladesh law various forms  of  violence  against
    women were penalised both under  the  Penal  Code  of  1860  and  other
    special laws such as the Suppression  of  Violence  Against  Women  and
    Children Act 2000, as amended in 2003,  provided  for  prosecution  for
    acid attacks, rape, trafficking, outraging modesty (sexual  harassment)
    and dowry-related violence, among others. She said  domestic  violence,
    however, was not criminalised as such  and  there  were  no  protective
    orders that could be invoked in such cases.  Although remedies such  as
    injunctions and declarations could arguably be sought  to  protect  the
    appellant from the threat of violence, these were not easily  available
    in practice and were rarely sought from the courts in such cases.   She
    said that although  there  was  an  ongoing  government  initiative  to
    address violence against women, the existing mechanisms were limited in
    scope and unable to  address  the  level  of  need  due  to  issues  of
    capacity.

27. The tenth question was an invitation to  address  any  relevant  points
    relating to the  background  material  and  give  her  opinion  of  the
    respondent's analysis. It is not necessary to give  a  summary  of  her
    comments except in one or two instances.  In relation to the US   State
    Department  Human  Rights  Report  2009,  which  stated  that  the  law
    prohibited discrimination but the government did not  strongly  enforce
    laws aimed at eliminating discrimination, she said the report failed to
    mention there  was  no  express  legal  protection  (other  than  broad
    constitutional provisions prohibiting discrimination 'by the state  and
    in public  life'  in  the  Constitution  of  Bangladesh  1972)  against
    discrimination by private actors, in terms of employment,  housing,  or
    rights within the family.  She  reiterated  that  the  continuation  of
    discriminatory personal laws, together with prevailing laws  on  sexual
    behaviour, and the lack of any comprehensive programme to  change  such
    attitudes and norms meant that a woman who had a child out  of  wedlock
    would be particularly vulnerable to facing  discrimination  within  the
    community, and also to family violence.

28.  In  her  comments  on  the  Refworld  report   entitled   "Bangladesh:
    Information on the Situation of Women Who Have  Children  Born  Out  of
    Wedlock" (25 June 2001)  she  said  the  discussion  on  extra-judicial
    penalties imposed and executed upon women  in  the  course  of  shalish
    following pre- or extra-marital relationships  or  incidents  of  rape,
    where the woman's pregnancy was considered to be proof of her  'immoral
    acts', were all with reference to incidents affecting  poor  women  and
    occurring in rural areas and therefore not in her opinion of particular
    relevance to the situation under consideration in  this  appeal,  which
    related to a woman from a middle class background in an urban area,  in
    the capital city Dhaka, in which context incidents of such violence had
    not been reported  to  date.   She  said  the  reference  to  the  weak
    enforcement  of  laws  to  protect  women   from   certain   forms   of
    discrimination and to spousal abuse being widespread, was supported  by
    other reports including  an  influential  study  by  the  World  Health
    Organisation on the prevalence of domestic violence and the absence  of
    effective remedies, which indicated that 60% of urban and 51% of  rural
    abused women never received any help from others  and  another  related
    study by the same author, both of which drew  from  empirical  research
    and surveys of women facing domestic violence.  She said  with  respect
    to the statement by a Harvard Research Fellow  that  the  safety  of  a
    woman in Bangladesh who had a child out of  wedlock,  depended  on  her
    'religion and secondarily on her economic status', a  woman's  economic
    and social status would be the determinative factors.  She agreed  with
    the statement by ASK that a woman in Bangladesh  with  an  illegitimate
    child could face both legal  and  social  problems,  being  faced  with
    losing custody of her child, and being treated as a social  outcast  or
    being subject to societal pressures to differing degrees, depending  on
    her own social or economic status for the reasons that she had set out.

The report of Dr Siddiqi

29. In her report Dr Siddiqi prefaced her findings by saying that there was
    little sustained research, whether academic or human  rights  reporting
    on single women, especially with regard to the lives of divorced  women
    or women who bore children out of wedlock in urban areas.  She said  in
    the absence of other sources she had drawn to a great extent on her own
    expertise, as someone who had researched the lives of Bangladeshi women
    for almost twenty years, to  write  the  report.   It  also  relied  on
    anthropological scholarship on marriage and  sexuality  in  Bangladeshi
    society. She said in recent years the entry of large numbers  of  young
    women into the urban industrial labour force had produced a significant
    body of literature on these garment workers, about half  of  whom  were
    single.

30. Dr Siddiqi said the situation of  Bangladeshi  women,  across  classes,
    religions and ethnicities, must be located in the context of a  rapidly
    shifting society and economy, one in which social  transformations  and
    instabilities had produced contradictory effects.  She said on the  one
    hand,  statistics  showed  progress  in  certain  social  and  economic
    indicators, such as gender parity in primary education,  reductions  in
    fertility and female mortality and the entry of  women  into  the  wage
    labour force.  On the  other,  most  women's  lives  were  systemically
    undervalued in practice as  indicated  by  persistently  high  maternal
    mortality rates, the risk of serious violence in the  home  and  public
    places and enduring economic and  socio-cultural  discrimination.   She
    said that while a number of women had gained access to  high  political
    office, women's voices were generally weak in decision-making processes
    in either the public or private domains.   Income  generation  did  not
    necessarily translate into  greater  autonomy  within  the  family;  as
    symbolic heads of  households,  husbands  and  fathers  often  retained
    control  over  wages  and  major  decision-making.   She  said  women's
    heightened mobility and visibility had challenged culturally  dominated
    ideals of the male as breadwinner, producing a backlash in the form  of
    increased sexual harassment and public  violence.   Although  not  well
    documented,  rates  of  desertion  and  abandonment  appeared   to   be
    increasing.  She said it was  also  important  not  to  exaggerate  the
    differences between urban and rural environments.  Urbanisation  was  a
    fairly new process in Bangladesh and many  urban  areas,  such  as  the
    slums that made up a third of Dhaka city, reproduced  social  relations
    and norms found in the countryside.  Slums were densely  populated  and
    slum environments afforded little anonymity.  The difference  in  slums
    was that rather  than  elders,  it  was  mostly  young  males,  usually
    associated with criminal gangs or political  parties  who  yielded  the
    most influence.  She said that a World Bank  study  on  perceptions  of
    gender and safety found that women, especially younger women, in  urban
    areas were half as likely as those in rural areas to feel safe in their
    community at any time.

31. Dr Siddiqi's report consisted of a series of answers to  questions  she
    was invited to reply to.  The first was whether it was likely that  the
    appellant and her  illegitimate  child  would  be  treated  as  'social
    outcasts' and be  subjected  to  discrimination  and/or  harm  if  they
    returned to Bangladesh.  Dr Siddiqi's  view  was  that  it  was  highly
    likely that they would  be  treated  as  social  outcasts.   The  first
    important factor was the near universality of marriage  in  Bangladeshi
    society which held across class and rural  -urban  divides.  For  women
    marriage was a cultural  imperative,  an  essential  step  required  to
    achieve the status of  full  social  adulthood.  A  woman  without  the
    protection of marriage - or at least the shelter of her  family  -  was
    subject to considerable social stigma. A woman without a male  guardian
    was considered as socially suspect and  sexually  available.  She  said
    little research existed on single or divorced women. The premium placed
    on marriage, and the social protection it  conferred  on  women,  meant
    that abandoned women usually continued to claim marital  status.  Hence
    the difficulty in acquiring information on abandonment through surveys.
     She thought that the appellant would be  in  an  extremely  vulnerable
    position if she returned because she had transgressed multiple  social/
    sexual norms.

32. Rural communities had social mechanisms to sanction women who  did  not
    conform to established moral codes.  She said they  were  by  no  means
    absent in urban areas.  Two key considerations were  the  economic  and
    social status of the woman/family and the support  extended  by  family
    and close relations.  She concurred with the  opinion  of  the  Harvard
    Research Fellow who stated that the situation depended on  the  woman's
    "immediate family and on her class background" (as quoted in  the  2001
    United States Bureau Citizenship and Immigration Services Report).  She
    said that for different reasons the extreme poor and  very  rich  might
    well escape social censure.  In urban areas, it was  the  lower  middle
    and  middle  classes  for  whom  social  strictures   were   the   most
    constraining.  In fact it was rare to find middle class women who  were
    in the appellant's situation, that is a woman  who  had  openly  had  a
    child out of wedlock.  It was simply not socially acceptable.

33. Dr Siddiqi said that since the appellant had  neither  'symbolic'  male
    shelter nor practical family protection she would face a host of subtle
    discriminatory actions that in effect would make her a social  outcast.
    Her opinion was based on the proposition that her mother had  indicated
    she would not go against the wishes of  her  husband,  the  appellant's
    father.  The fact that the  appellant's  mother  was  divorced  already
    placed her in a precarious social position and one that presumably  she
    did not want to compromise further by supporting  the  actions  of  her
    divorced and "fallen"  daughter.   Further,  the  appellant  could  not
    expect to inherit any of her father's  property.   The  fear  of  being
    "tainted  by  association"  would  discourage  friends   and   extended
    relatives  from  mixing  with  her.  Her  "resourcefulness"  would   be
    extremely limited in the circumstances.  Without her family and  social
    connections,  it  would  be  extremely  difficult  for  her   to   find
    appropriate employment, housing and a  proper  school  for  her  child.
    Moreover she would be perceived as "sexually suspect and available" and
    therefore would have to contend with  the  kind  of  sexual  harassment
    faced by women perceived to be morally lax.

34. She said discrimination  against  children  born  out  of  wedlock  was
    widespread, though rarely documented and such discrimination  was  also
    institutionalised. For instance orphanages run  by  the  Department  of
    Social Services barred children who could not produce a father's  name,
    which many "illegitimate" children could not do.  The law was meant  to
    keep  out  the  children  of  sex  workers,  thought  to  be   socially
    undesirable and not deserving of public  assistance.   Until  recently,
    children of sex-workers were not allowed to  enrol  in  public  schools
    because they could not produce their father's  name.   She  said  given
    that her ex-husband's family were settled in Dhaka it  seemed  unlikely
    that the appellant would be able to hide the fact that  her  child  was
    born out of wedlock. Once his origins became  public  he  would  almost
    certainly face social rejection from peers and relatives.

35. The second question was whether a woman  in  the  appellant's  position
    would be at risk of harm in Bangladesh as a  result  of  her  perceived
    adultery.  Dr Siddiqi said that the most obvious harm she would  be  at
    risk of was persistent social and economic exclusion and she would most
    certainly be perceived  to  be  sexually  lax/available  and  therefore
    subject to constant unwanted sexual  advances/harassment/abuse  in  her
    social transactions with landlords, employers,  shopkeepers  etc.   She
    said it was unlikely she would face any  great  harm  from  her  family
    which might simply want to maintain a social distance from her.  Should
    there be a tussle over custody of her daughter, if she were  forced  to
    return she might risk harm from her ex-husband or his family who  would
    consider her daughter as their property and insist on wresting her from
    her mother should she be granted custody of her daughter in Bangladesh.
    The fact that her ex-husband refused to allow the appellant to see  her
    daughter for eighteen months suggested that he felt  quite  proprietary
    about his daughter and he might resort to intimidation/violence if  his
    daughter were taken to Bangladesh to be with her mother.

36. The third question was whether it was common for families in Bangladesh
    to reject women who were divorced/had illegitimate children.  She  said
    that divorce rates were low in Bangladesh as a whole although rates  of
    abandonment and desertion were high.  Neither divorce nor desertion was
    well-documented.  For both social and economic reasons, the pressure on
    women to remain married was great,  regardless  of  the  conditions  of
    married life.  Natal families, especially in  impoverished  households,
    tended to look on  divorced  daughters  as  economic  if  not  symbolic
    burdens.  Although families may not always reject  divorced  daughters,
    the latter  were  not  embraced  either.  The  situation  was  changing
    somewhat.  In urban areas there were now increasing numbers of divorced
    women from the middle classes, many of whom had the  support  of  their
    families. The families were less likely to reject divorced daughters if
    the marriage in question was arranged by them  since  they  might  feel
    partially responsible for the outcome.  If  the  marriage  was  one  of
    choice, especially if the parents actively  disapproved  of  the  match
    originally, as happened with the appellant,  family  support  was  much
    less likely to be forthcoming.  Across classes  and  communities  there
    was much greater stigma associated with having  an  illegitimate  child
    than in being divorced.  For Muslim women  divorce  was  allowed  under
    specific and limited conditions; it might be frowned upon but it  could
    not be wholly rejected.  Sex outside marriage, on the other hand, was a
    moral transgression of a higher order. She said that in Dhaka city,  it
    was unlikely that pregnancy out of wedlock would be allowed  to  become
    public in a middle or upper class family.

37. The fourth question related to violence against women.  Dr Siddiqi said
    that the pervasiveness of violence against women and girls in both  the
    public and private domains was  well-documented  and  reflected  gender
    inequality which was entrenched  in  social,  legal  and  institutional
    cultures.  In recent years reports of  public  and  community  violence
    including rapes,  acid  attacks,  extra-judicial  punishments  and  the
    rampant social harassment-stalking against women in public places,  had
    increased  considerably.   In  spite  of  a  host  of  laws,  including
    specialised criminal laws for the protection  of  women,  instances  of
    violence had remained fairly  constant.   Spousal  and  other  violence
    within the family was generally condoned as part of the maintenance  of
    social/gender hierarchy. According to a World Health Organisation (WHO)
    multi-country study on women's health  and  domestic  violence  against
    women, Bangladesh had one of the highest rates of spousal  violence  in
    the  world.   The  study  found  that  the  percentage  of  women   who
    experienced violence by an intimate partner, among partnered women aged
    15 to 49 years, was 53% in Dhaka city and  62%  in  an  adjacent  rural
    area.   Similarly the International Centre for Research on Women (ICRW)
    reported in 2009 that  intimate  partner  violence  against  women  was
    highly prevalent with 61% having experienced sexual violence  in  their
    lifetime.  According to the WHO multi-country  study  10%  of  pregnant
    women in Dhaka were physically abused during at least one pregnancy.

38.  Dr  Siddiqi  said  that  these  figures  were  extraordinarily   high,
    especially given that family violence against women was  likely  to  be
    under reported.  The  reasons  for  under  reporting  included  women's
    overall social and economic dependence on  the  men  of  families  that
    abused them, the fear of reprisal, a general lack of access to  justice
    and the widespread acceptance  of  physical  violence  as  a  means  of
    disciplining women who transgressed their, "appropriate" roles.   Dowry
    demands were a relatively recent phenomenon in Bangladeshi society  but
    dowry-related domestic violence incidences were also on the rise.

39. Dr Siddiqi said that it was not likely that a  fatwa  would  be  issued
    against a woman who had a child out of wedlock in urban areas.

40. In relation to the attitude of police towards allegations  of  violence
    she said, as mentioned in the COIR of 2010, the  Constitution  affirmed
    female gender equality in the public sphere and the  Bangladeshi  state
    had acceded to the Convention  on  the  Elimination  of  all  Forms  of
    Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) in 1984 and ratified the  optional
    protocol  on  the  Convention  in  2000.   She  said,   however,   that
    reservations against specific  CEDAW  articles  allowed  discriminatory
    "personal  laws"  that  governed  the  realms  of  marriage,   divorce,
    inheritance,  maintenance  and  accommodation  and  child  custody   to
    persist.  In response to feminist demands  successive  governments  had
    passed legislation to deal with violence against women.  These included
    the Women and Children Repression Prevention Act 2000, amended in 2003,
    the 1980 Dowry Prohibition Act and the 2002  Acid  Crime  Control  Act.
    She  said  that  a  Domestic  Violence  Prevention   Bill   was   under
    consideration by Parliament.

41. Dr Siddiqi quoted from the US State Department Country Report on  Human
    Rights Practices of 2009  which  said  that  the  enforcement  of  laws
    specifically prohibiting certain forms of discrimination against  women
    were weak.  She said there were many reasons why that was so.   In  the
    first place deeply entrenched patriarchal attitudes which did not  take
    women's  concerns  seriously  produced  procedural  and  administrative
    indifference or bias.   Police  were  especially  reluctant  to  become
    involved in marital disputes. Second the police were over burdened  and
    therefore few cases got proper attention.   Overworked  and  underpaid,
    the police were open to various forms of  corruption.   Thirdly,  women
    might be unwilling  to  report  abuse  because  the  police  force  was
    overwhelmingly male and few women would feel comfortable  confiding  in
    male police officers, especially if the crime was of a  sexual  nature.
    The general public's faith  in  the  police  justice  system  was  low.
    Further instances of violence tended to be hidden in middle  and  upper
    class families for fear of social stigma.  Class privilege  provided  a
    degree of protection for women and  girls  so  that  the  most  visible
    victims of violence  tended  to  be  women  from  poor  underprivileged
    backgrounds.  Access to  justice  was  especially  difficult  for  poor
    people, especially women with little or no formal education  who  found
    the system intimidating and impenetrable as well as  costly  and  time-
    consuming.  Finally the large cultural emphasis, especially in disputes
    between couples, was on compromise through  mediation  and  arbitration
    out of court.

42. She said there were other significant factors.  The political system in
    place offered the most protection to those with requisite political and
    socio-economic  ties  which  simultaneously  promoted  the  culture  of
    impunity and lack of accountability  for  perpetrators,  including  law
    enforcement agencies.  Those without political protection  had  limited
    access to justice.  Cultures  of  impunity  thrived,  no  matter  which
    political  party  was  in  power.  According  to   the   human   rights
    organisation Odhikar, 450  women  and  girls  were  raped  in  2009,  a
    significant number of which were "politically sheltered"  instances  of
    rape in which the perpetrators were protection from prosecution because
    of influence.

43. The fifth question was whether the appellant would be able  to  provide
    for herself and son and daughter. Dr Siddiqi  said  she  would  have  a
    difficult time providing  adequately  for  herself  and  two  children.
    Secure and decent  employment  was  a  difficult  prospect  for  anyone
    without pre-existing social or economic  protection  as  in  the  city.
    Secondly employment prospects were much more limited for women than for
    men because of gender norms and institutionalised discrimination. While
    it was true that employment rates increased at a greater rate for women
    rather than men in the last decade, this growth was concentrated in the
    garment export industry where over 70% of the workforce was female. She
    would be over qualified for most garment work and even if she were able
    to get a job at a supervisor level she  would  barely  earn  enough  to
    support herself and her two  children  without  a  steep  fall  in  her
    standard of living. Bangladeshi garment workers were the lowest paid in
    the world and most had difficulty in meeting the basic needs  on  their
    monthly income. Most garment  workers  lived  in  the  many  slums  and
    squatter settlements scattered across Dhaka. The World Bank noted  that
    secure shelter was a major challenge for Dhaka's earning poor, most  of
    whom  ended  up  in  illegal  settlements  on  precarious  land.    The
    appellant's profile, single, divorced, with a child of out wedlock  and
    disowned by her father, would work against her in obtaining any  decent
    housing even if she could afford it.  Most landlords, drawing on  long-
    standing assumptions about single women's  lax  sexuality,  refused  to
    rent to women who did not have male guardians even when money  was  not
    at issue.  A strong cultural presumption  which  worked  to  legitimate
    harassment was that unescorted women who  appeared  in  public  spaces,
    especially after dark, were socially and sexually suspect.   In  recent
    years the sexual stalking of working women and college and school-going
    girls, in both rural and urban areas had become an acute problem.

The report of Ms Goswami

44. The third report, that of Ms Goswami, also took the form for answers to
    questions which had been asked of her.  She was asked  whether  if  the
    appellant's family refused to help her she would be able to live  in  a
    women's shelter in Dhaka.  She said shelter homes  in  Bangladesh  were
    used to meet women's emergency  needs  for  shelter  and  it  would  be
    difficult to arrange for a long term stay for  the  appellant  and  her
    children.  It would be difficult for her to find  shelter  because  her
    situation  did  not  meet  the  criteria  used  by  shelter  homes   in
    Bangladesh. She set out the criteria used by Ain o Salish Kendra  (ASK)
    and Shishu Polli Plus (SPP) in relation to their facilities.  Those  of
    ASK were for women victims of violence or  women  in  need  of  shelter
    during a court trial, whose sons were allowed to  stay  if  under  five
    years old. She said the conditions were not suitable for a person  from
    a middle  class   background.  The  criteria  for  SSP  were  that  the
    appellant and her son could stay for their safety if they were referred
    by other organisations but the  conditions  were  not  suitable  for  a
    middle class person and the shelter was not in the city.

45. In answer to the question what were the criteria for acceptance into  a
    shelter, she said shelter homes in Bangladesh run by NGOs  usually  met
    the emergency needs of women for security during a  transition  period,
    for example women and children rescued from  trafficking  stayed  there
    upon release. Rape victims, female victims of  acid  attacks  or  other
    forms of violence could stay in these shelters until the conclusion  of
    the trial. Those running the shelters tried to re-integrate  them  with
    their families, which could take  several  weeks.  Unfortunately  these
    social attitudes were an obstacle to  their  re-integration.  In  these
    cases  the  shelter  home  authorities  might  use  family  and  social
    counselling methods to rehabilitate them with their family and society.
    She said that the government-run shelter homes acted upon  court  order
    to provide safe shelter to meet the emergency needs of  women  victims.
    These homes were also  used  as  "safe  custody"  for  the  victims  of
    violence, rehabilitation for sex workers and homes for vagrants.

46. Ms Goswami very helpfully  appended  to  her  report  an  Annex,  which
    contained a list of shelters and information relating to them. She said
    that the sources of  information  were  from  some  organisations  (not
    published in any form) as well as from  the  publication  Directory  of
    Shelter Homes compiled by SPP.

47. The third question was how many shelters there were in Dhaka. She  said
    that there were two government shelter homes, one was  managed  by  the
    Department of Women's Affairs and the other by the Department of Social
    Services.  She said there were thirteen NGO shelter homes and  referred
    to the Annex for further details.

48. The fourth question was whether the appellant would be able to live  in
    a shelter with her two children.  Ms Goswami said it would be difficult
    for the appellant to find a shelter home  that  would  keep  her  since
    priority  was  always  given  to  poor  women  and  her  socio-economic
    background suggested she was fairly well off.  She said  shelter  homes
    did not have communication facilities (i.e. phone, internet, etc.). Her
    child might  have  difficulty  with  his  education  as  shelter  homes
    maintained strict security and restricted movements of  all  residents.
    The child would not be able to attend school regularly as he would  not
    be able to leave the shelter at different  times.  Some  shelter  homes
    were strictly for women and male children over the age of 7 years  were
    not allowed to live there.

49. The fifth question was whether the  fact  that  the  appellant  had  an
    illegitimate child affected her ability to live  in  a  shelter  or  in
    other accommodation.   She  said  the  social  stigma  attached  to  an
    illegitimate child in Bangladesh would probably make it  difficult  for
    her to be accepted in a shelter or to find other accommodation.

50. The sixth question was what the shelters were like and she referred  to
    Annexes (A & B) to her report for detailed information.

51. The seventh question was how long could the appellant stay in a shelter
    and whether there was a time limit. She said that residents of  shelter
    homes could remain at any shelter for up to three  to  six  months  and
    exceptionally their stay might be extended to one year on the basis  of
    need.

52. The eighth question was what other accommodation  would  be  available.
    The answer was  that  the  appellant  would  have  to  arrange  private
    accommodation by renting an apartment or sharing an apartment or living
    in a guest house. In Dhaka house rents were very high.   She  gave  the
    example of a middle  class  area  where  the  rent  of  a  one  bedroom
    apartment without all facilities  would  be  approximately  USD300  per
    month.  With one or two children and no child care it  would  be  quite
    difficult for the appellant to seek or continue in a  job.   There  was
    very limited scope for getting a part-time job in Bangladesh.

53. The ninth question was what were the typical backgrounds of  women  who
    lived in shelters. The answer was  that  very  poor  women  were  given
    priority in shelter homes in Bangladesh.  Most of them had  fathers  or
    husbands who were rickshaw pullers and earned under TK.3,000 ($50)  per
    month.  In the case of an emergency such as a security threat,  attacks
    etc. middle class women might also live in  the  shelter  homes  for  a
    short period.

54. The tenth question was whether the appellant's background (i.e. she was
    from a middle class family, educated and had  lived  in  the  UK  since
    2002) would prevent her from being given accommodation by NGOs etc.  in
    Dhaka.  Ms Goswami said that these conditions would not entitle her  to
    accommodation in NGO shelters in Dhaka unless she was in a  much  direr
    situation, for example, if she was under threat, attack etc.   Even  if
    she were accepted in an NGO shelter this would be for  a  short  period
    and not for the length of time she required.  She  said  the  fact  was
    there was no shelter home in Bangladesh where women could  stay  for  a
    long period.

55. The eleventh question was what  kind  of  financial  support  would  be
    available to the appellant  and  her  children.  The  answer  was  that
    Bangladesh did not provide  quality  free  education  and  health  care
    services nor did it provide any kind of welfare support  for  women  in
    the appellant's position.  Whilst some minimal financial support  might
    be available for women who were completely destitute,  in  her  opinion
    the appellant would not be able to obtain  any  financial  support  for
    herself or her two children from the government or NGOs.

                                   Annex B



Violence against women

 1. Mr Walsh referred to a passage in  a  report  by  Odhikar  (Bangladesh)
    entitled "Human Rights Monitoring Report" January, 01 - June 30,  2010,
    which was dated 1st July 2010.  It said that  during  January  to  June
    2010 many women and children were raped, were victims of  acid  attacks
    and dowry demands were made, often resulting  in  violence.   During  a
    period of six months it had been reported that a total of  291  females
    were raped, of which 124 were adults and 167  were  children.   Of  the
    adult females 31 were killed after being raped and 59 were gang  raped.
    Of the 167 female children who were raped fourteen of them were  killed
    after being raped and 49 were victims of gang rape.  Of these women and
    children it was alleged that a housewife from Chuadanga was raped by an
    Assistant Sub-Inspector of Police, a housewife from Jessore  was  raped
    by an Ansar member, a housewife was raped by an Assistant Sub-Inspector
    at Jhenaidah, a housewife was raped by an SI at  Bagerhat  while  an  8
    year old girl from Joypurhat was raped  by  a  member  of  the  village
    police. The extract said that during the last  six  months  63  persons
    were victims of acid violence of which 38 were  women,  seventeen  were
    men, three were boys and five were girls.

 2. We were referred to a report by Amnesty  International  on  Bangladesh,
    dated 27th May 2010, which said that newspapers reported  at  least  21
    cases where a husband had killed his wife because her family could  not
    afford to give them dowry money. The report said that they received  at
    least 3,413 complaints of beating and other abuse of women  over  dowry
    disputes between January and October.  In  many  of  the  known  cases,
    prosecution led to conviction, but the authorities failed  to  develop,
    fund and implement an action programme  to  actively  prevent  violence
    against women. Several human rights  groups  said  that  many  case  of
    violence against women, such as the alleged  rape  of  sex  workers  in
    police custody, were not reported for fear  of  reprisal  and  lack  of
    protection.

 3. The US State Department Report on Human Rights Bangladesh  2009,  dated
    11th March 2010, said that  domestic  violence  was  not  criminalised.
    According to women's rights groups  it  was  widespread  and  increased
    during the year, although data quantifying  was  difficult  to  obtain.
    The 2000 study by the UN Population Fund indicated that at least 50% of
    women experienced domestic violence at least once in their  lives.  The
    Bangladesh National Women Lawyers Association  (BNWLA)  reported  3,502
    incidents of domestic violence and received 3,495 complaints related to
    domestic violence issues.  Domestic violence was  not  criminalised  in
    the country and most efforts to combat it  were  funded  by  NGOs  with
    little assistance from the government.  There was an  increase  in  the
    number of  dowry  related  killings  during  the  year.   Acid  attacks
    remained a serious problem. Assailants  threw  acid  in  the  faces  of
    victims, usually women, which left them  disfigured  and  often  blind.
    Acid attacks often related to allegations of  spousal  infidelity.  The
    law provided for speedy prosecution of acid throwing cases and  special
    tribunals and generally did  not  allow  bail.   The  Women  and  Child
    Repression Control Act sought to control the availability of  acid  and
    reduce acid related  violence  directed  towards  women,  but  lack  of
    awareness of the law and poor enforcement  limited  the  law's  effect.
    According to the Acid Survivors Foundation, the special tribunals  were
    not  entirely  effective,  but  prosecutors  were  able  to  obtain  an
    unspecified number of convictions during the year.

 4. An excerpt from the Odhikar (Bangladesh) Human Rights Report 2009 dated
    1st January 2010  said  that  the  most  common  reasons  for  domestic
    violence in Bangladesh occurred due to dowry demands.  A total  of  319
    reportedly became  victims  of  dowry  demands  during  this  reporting
    period.  Odhikar believe that the actual number was  greater  as  there
    were a lot of incidents which were not  taken  into  account  and  many
    women did not talk about dowry-related abuse.  Women in Bangladesh  had
    to live with dowry-related violence due to socio-political pressure and
    a lack of legal support.  Due to dowry-related violence, a total of 227
    women were reportedly killed, 81 were  tortured  and  eleven  allegedly
    committed suicide after failing to tolerate the dowry-related  torture.
    A number of incidents of rape  took  place  under  "political  shelter"
    during this reporting  period.   Rape  was  another  form  of  violence
    perpetrated against women in Bangladesh.  In most cases the victims  or
    their family members remained silent due to the  social  stigma  or  in
    fear of the rapist.  The report said one of the most dangerous forms of
    violence against women was acid attack.  In most cases the  perpetrator
    threw acid on women when they did not agree to marry the perpetrator or
    refused to have sexual or illicit relations with him.  According  to  a
    Report of the Ministry of Women and Children Affairs 172  women  became
    victims of acid violence in 2009.  Acid violence continued due to  lack
    of implementation of the Acid Control Act of 2002 and  the  Acid  Crime
    Control Act of 2002.  Acid was frequently sold, ignoring  the  law  and
    without a licence.

 5. A report from the World Bank Office, Dhaka entitled  "Improving  Living
    Conditions for the Urban, Poor Bangladesh Development Series Paper  No.
    17", dated 2007, said that violence against women was repeatedly raised
    during focus group discussions (FGDs) and the qualitative  field  work,
    as one of the most serious manifestations of  violence  affecting  poor
    women in Dhaka, which  included  physical  and  psychological  violence
    inflicted by the husband or the husband's  family,  burning  of  wives,
    acid attack, suicide as a result of physical and psychological  torture
    as well as violence against women in the work place and on the  way  to
    and from work. Of the total sample of 50% female respondents, 30%  were
    said to have been a victim of domestic  violence  in  the  past  twelve
    months, which was the highest reported incidence of crime  or  violence
    reported in the survey. These findings reflected what was  known  about
    violence against women in Bangladesh.  According to  the  UNFPA  (2000)
    Bangladesh had the second highest incidence of violence  against  women
    in the world.  A survey carried out in 1997 by the  Ministry  of  Women
    and Children's Affairs,  with  the  assistance  of  the  government  of
    Denmark, found that not only was violence against women widespread,  it
    was also widely accepted: 50% of the women interviewed thought  it  was
    the husband's right to beat his wife; 80% felt it was right to hit  the
    wife if she was disobedient; 80% of the women respondents felt that  if
    a man raped a woman the woman should marry the rapist.

 6. A passage  from  the  International  Crisis  Group,  Bangladesh  report
    entitled "Getting Police Reform on Track" dated 11th December 2009 said
    that violence against women was one of the common forms of human rights
    abuses in Bangladesh.  Women and girls faced manifold  problems  within
    the  domestic  setting  as  well  as  in  the  community.  Molestation,
    abductions followed by rape and forced marriage were widespread. Deaths
    of wives due to the failure of their families in making dowry  payments
    to the husband's and their in-laws were also numerous.

The inferior status of women and access to greater material benefits

 7. We were referred to a joint report of  two  experts  published  by  the
    Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR)
    relating to a mission to Bangladesh from 3-10 December 2009, dated 22nd
    July 2010, in which  it  was  said  that  women  and  girls,  who  were
    disproportionately represented among the poor, were negatively affected
    by the lack of access to sanitation and safe  drinking  water,  further
    exposing them to the likelihood  of  continued  poverty.  Although  the
    Constitution guaranteed women equal rights, discriminatory social norms
    often prevailed, denying them the effective enjoyment of  their  rights
    and perpetuating their experience of poverty. Adverse cultural patterns
    related to violence against women, property  rights,  inheritance  law,
    dowry and early marriages prevented women from fully  participating  in
    society and enjoying their human rights.

 8. Reference was also made to the US State Department Human Rights Report,
    dated  11th  March  2010,  which   said   that   the   law   prohibited
    discrimination, but the government did not strongly enforce laws  aimed
    at eliminating discrimination. Women,  children,  minority  groups  and
    persons  with  disabilities  often  confronted  social   and   economic
    disadvantages.

Urbanisation and poverty in Bangladesh

 9. We were referred to the report of the  OHCHR,  dated  22nd  July  2010,
    which said that the intense process of urbanisation had led to a  rapid
    increase in absolute terms of  the  poor  population  in  urban  areas,
    especially in urban slums.  Problems of people  living  in  poverty  in
    urban areas, including their lack of access to  water  and  sanitation,
    had received limited attention.  The experts urged  the  government  to
    adopt a comprehensive urban strategy, with special  attention  paid  to
    vulnerable groups and full regard for human rights.  A further  passage
    in the same report said that the  situation  of  access  to  water  and
    sanitation in urban slums in Bangladesh, particularly in Dhaka,  was  a
    special concern.  The independent expert visited slums where raw sewage
    ran through the streets.  The people who live there had no legal access
    to water which meant that they paid ten to twenty times more for it and
    in some cases they had to walk great distances to collect  water.   The
    lack of access to safe drinking  water  and  sanitation  in  slums  was
    directly related to the lack of secure tenure of slum dwellers.

10. A news release of the United Nations International Children's Emergency
    Fund Report reported by Targeted News Service dated 23rd June 2010 said
    that urban slums  had  the  worst  performance  regarding  women's  and
    children's well-being and access to basic services  compared  to  rural
    and non-slum urban areas.  The results of the 2009  Multiple  Indicator
    Cluster Survey showed that urban slums were generally  worse  off  than
    most of the low performing rural areas.

11. A report in Right Vision News dated 8th April 2010 said that rapid  and
    uncontrolled urbanisation was not only causing concern among the  urban
    planners but  also  among  experts  in  the  field  of  public  health.
    Inhabitants of fast expanding slums in the urban areas were exposed  to
    various preventable diseases and threat of premature death due to  lack
    of safe drinking water, sanitation and health care facilities.  Of  the
    total population 30% live in urban areas,  and  if  the  current  trend
    continues the  figure  will  be  40%  by  2020.   Of  the  total  urban
    population, 35% lived in  slums  where  basic  health  facilities  were
    missing. According to the Bangladesh Urban Health Survey Study  27%  of
    women and 35% men were under- nourished in slums, while the number  was
    30% and 90% respectively in non-slum areas.  Skilled care delivery  was
    significantly high, around 36% in urban non-slum  areas  while  it  was
    only 11% in slums.

12. The report in Right Vision News, dated 23rd January 2010, said that  in
    almost every major urban centre of Bangladesh,  tens  of  thousands  of
    people lived in overcrowded slums or public spaces  that  lacked  basic
    facilities, such as safe water, sanitation  and  health  services.   In
    Dhaka city an estimated 37% of the total  population  lived  in  slums.
    Dhaka continued to grow  as  a  mega-city  with  approximately  320,000
    migrants arriving annually. More than three-quarters of migrants  found
    shelter in urban slums or did not find  shelter  at  all.   Employment,
    shelter and accessibility to basic services for the growing urban  poor
    populations, those who lived in informal settlements and those who were
    homeless, were critical issues yet to be  fully  addressed  by  policy-
    makers in Bangladesh.  Studies in Dhaka city had found an  increase  in
    the number and proportion of people living on the streets and in  urban
    public places due to the increasing pressures of  internal  immigration
    and rapid urbanisation. The  floating  population  of  street  dwellers
    consisted of thousands of people with no fixed dwelling  in  the  major
    towns and cities of Bangladesh. They were likely to be amongst the most
    deprived in urban  areas  in  terms  of  basic  facilities  and  health
    indicators.  In Bangladesh while  a  few  non-government  organisations
    were providing health related services for the  urban  homeless,  there
    was no comprehensive programme and little  coordination  of  activities
    between agencies to address  health  needs.  Street  dwellers  reported
    extremely high levels of  illness  and  disease.   Access  to  maternal
    health care and family planning was poor and most street dwellers  were
    not aware of the government services available to them and did not  use
    any health care facilities.  83% of the female street dwellers had been
    assaulted by their husbands and/or by other men while they were staying
    in the street and more than nine in ten street dwelling males had  used
    some kind of drugs during the previous year.  Homeless women  were  far
    less in number than men but the  difficulties  they  faced  in  meeting
    sanitation and shelter needs were severe, because the facilities simply
    did not exist for them. Sexual harassment was the common experience  of
    the women, including unwanted  physical  contact,  sexual  flirtations,
    touching, being solicited, leering, rude gestures and rape.

13. A report from the Journal of Health Population and Nutrition, dated 1st
    August 2009, repeated information given above and went on to  say  that
    the 1997 census count of the homeless population of Dhaka  was  14,999,
    with an additional 17,082 in other metropolitan  areas  of  Bangladesh.
    A 1997 study  found  that  47%  of  the  homeless  in  Dhaka  lived  on
    footpaths, 23% in the city's transport stations and  12%  in  front  of
    major market centres.

14. The report from the World Bank  Office,  dated  June  2007,  said  that
    secure shelter was a major challenge for Dhaka's urban poor. The  slums
    were located throughout the city with  few  services  offered  at  high
    prices through middle men, also called muscle men  or  mastaans,  using
    illegal methods.   Slum  evictions  took  place  periodically  with  no
    resettlement  plans.  The  report  said  that  Dhaka  was  a  city   of
    opportunity for many.  Migrants flocked to the city in search  of  jobs
    and better lives.  The appeal of  the  capital  city  was  strong  with
    prospects for employment in a range of sectors,  particularly  services
    and industry.   The  labour  market  was  dynamic,  with  entrepreneurs
    arriving every day hoping to carve out a decent living  for  themselves
    and their families.  Yet for the estimated  28%  of  the  city's  poor,
    earning a living sufficient to meet the basic needs for themselves, and
    their families was a continual struggle. Low  wages,  under-employment,
    unemployment and low skills levels were all  challenges  faced  by  the
    poor in the labour market.  Many migrants coming to Dhaka ended  up  in
    slums where living conditions  were  particularly  grim.   However,  in
    spite of these negative factors, migrants did not express a  desire  to
    go back to their villages in most surveys.  In  fact,  evidence  showed
    that on  average  after  migration  monthly  household  expenditure  of
    migrant households increased by  40%.   This  substantial  increase  in
    earnings seemed to compensate for most of  the  drawbacks  of  life  in
    Dhaka. As long as job prospects in cities looked promising to the rural
    poor, many of these who could would continue to migrate.

Steps taken to ameliorate the worst effects of poverty

15. We were referred to a passage in the  OHCHR  report,  dated  22nd  July
    2010, which said that certain  programmes,  such  as  cash  and  assets
    transfers  and  micro-credit   specifically   targeted   women.   Other
    programmes directed at women  included  the  Allowances  Programme  for
    Widowed,  Deserted  and  Destitute  Women  and  the  Vulnerable   Group
    Development Programme for  "ultra-poor"  women,  which  had  relatively
    limited coverage, reaching 920,000 and 80,000 women respectively.   The
    level of transfers under the latter programme was TK400 per month  over
    two years  which  was  significantly  more  than  the  usual  level  of
    benefits.  The independent expert was concerned about  the  programme's
    sustainability.  The independent expert welcomed the fact that  several
    programmes targeted women; nonetheless, she encouraged  the  government
    to refine the gender approach and evaluate comprehensively  the  impact
    of programmes on the enjoyment of  human  rights  by  women  living  in
    extreme poverty.  Bangladesh had  developed  models  for  micro-finance
    that had been replicated around  the  world.   The  independent  expert
    recognised that micro-credit also greatly benefited  women  but  called
    upon the government to ensure that micro-finance programmes reached the
    poorest.

 Police corruption and impunity

16. We were referred to a passage in the US State Department report,  dated
    11th March 2010, which said that under recent governments  police  were
    generally ineffective and reluctant to investigate  persons  affiliated
    with the ruling party.  The government  ended  its  use  of  the  joint
    forces security structure formed in 2007 under the state  of  emergency
    and composed of police, the RAB (Rapid Action  Battalion),  members  of
    the military and other security agencies. Unlike the previous year, the
    military  intelligence   agency,   the   Directorate   General   Forces
    Intelligence (DGFI) did not take the lead in maintaining law and  order
    as it had under the state of emergency.  The RAB received human  rights
    training  sponsored  by  foreign  governments,   the   UN   Development
    Programme, and a local NGO, the Bangladesh Society for  Enforcement  of
    Human Rights (BSEHR).  Although the RAB  continued  to  commit  serious
    human rights violations, the number  of  incidents  involving  the  RAB
    dropped from the previous year.  The government took steps  to  address
    widespread  police  corruption  and  a  severe  lack  of  training  and
    discipline. The Inspector General of Police continued  to  implement  a
    new strategy, partially funded by international  donors,  for  training
    police, addressing corruption and creating a  more  responsible  police
    force. Plaintiffs rarely  accused  police  in  criminal  cases  due  to
    lengthy trial procedures and the fear  of  retribution.  Reluctance  to
    confront police perpetuated a climate of impunity.

17. The report said that in September 2008 the Appellate  Division  resumed
    the practice of overturning politically charged decisions, by the  High
    Court Division, usually to the benefit of the current AL (Awami League)
    government. Corruption and the substantive backlog  of  cases  hindered
    the  court  system,  and  trials  were  typically  marked  by  extended
    continuance, effectively preventing many from obtaining  a  fair  trial
    due to witness tampering, victim intimidation and missing evidence. The
    law  provided  criminal  penalties  for  official  corruption  but  the
    government  did  not  implement  the  law  effectively  and   officials
    frequently engaged in corrupt practices with impunity.  The report said
    that  government  corruption  greatly  facilitated   the   process   of
    trafficking.  Police  and  local  government  officials  often  ignored
    trafficking in women and children for  commercial  sexual  exploitation
    and accepted bribes from brothel owners and pimps.

18. The report of the International Crisis Group, dated 11th December 2009,
    said  that  political  and  bureaucratic  interference  were  the  most
    significant impediments to police efficiency and have resulted  in  the
    worst forms of abuse including illegal  detention,  death  in  custody,
    torture and pervasive  corruption.  The  result  was  almost  universal
    public disdain for the police force.  All  governments,  including  the
    current one, had used the police to crush political enemies while  many
    politicians had used them to advance  their  personal  interests.   Low
    police salaries and government control of promotions and transfers  all
    but ensured that the police were dependent on the political leadership,
    which  prevented  investigation  of  serious  issues   of   corruption,
    organised crime or other matters  that  some  political  leaders  would
    prefer remain untouched.  The police were often complicit in the crimes
    of government officials. Corruption  in  the  police  was  rampant  and
    systemic.  It would be nearly impossible to eliminate  until  the  poor
    salaries  and  working  conditions  were  improved,  particularly   for
    officers at and below the rank of  sub-inspector.   Many  police  posts
    were bought and sold.

19. A report of the Asian Human  Rights  Commission,  dated  12th  November
    2008, referred to a scandalous incident where a 13 year  old  girl  had
    been subjected to sexual abuse and confinement in a hotel which had the
    reputation for providing sexual services. It said the  episode  brought
    to light a scandal of large magnitude which involved the second wife of
    the father of the girl, police  officers  at  Pikjachaa  who  had  made
    strenuous  efforts  to  fabricate  charges  against  innocent  persons,
    including a well-known human rights activist and also  extracted  heavy
    bribes from the families of those  concerned.   Innocent  suspects  had
    also been tortured.

20. The report from the Asian Human Rights Commission, dated  24th  October
    2008, reported upon a case where it was alleged a police officer  raped
    a woman on  7th  October  2008  but  due  to  tardy  action  by  police
    authorities the officer was able to escape arrest and  a  colleague  of
    the accused had been assigned as the investigating officer.

Limited assistance to destitute  persons  in  Dhaka  and  steps  to  address
violence against women

21. We were referred to the Right Vision News report,  dated  23rd  January
    2010, referred to in paragraph 12 above  We were also  referred  to  an
    excerpt from the World Bank Report, dated 13th March 2008,  which  said
    that through its implementing agency the Department of Women's  Affairs
    (DWA) and the MWCA (Ministry of  Women  and  Children's  Affairs)  with
    assistance from UNFPA had launched a project  to  mobilise  communities
    against violence and  to  change  male  family  members'  and  in-laws'
    attitudes about violence. Another initiative in  the  series  of  steps
    taken  by  GOB  (Government  of  Bangladesh)  was  the  "Multi-Sectoral
    Programme  on  Violence  against  Women".  This  project  was  a  joint
    initiative of the GOB and Denmark under the MWCA.   The  programme  was
    then in its first phase and would continue until  December  2007.   The
    objectives of the programme  were  improved  public  services  such  as
    health, police assistance, criminal justice  and  social  services  and
    increased public awareness of all forms of violence against women.  The
    MWCA had also initiated One-Stop Crisis Centres  (OSCC)  in  Divisional
    level Medical College Hospitals, mainly to  deal  with  acid  and  rape
    victims so as to facilitate quick investigation and medical  and  legal
    services.  The OSCC provided health  care,  police  assistance,  social
    services,  legal  assistance,  psychological  counselling  and  shelter
    services.  Two OSCCs had been established in Dhaka and Rajshahi Medical
    College Hospitals during the pilot phase of the project.

22.  Both parties relied upon the Country of Origin Information  Report  on
    Bangladesh dated 20th  August  2010.   The  respondent  relied  upon  a
    passage at  23.01  which  said  that  Bangladesh  had  acceded  to  the
    Convention on the Elimination of All Forms  of  Discrimination  against
    Women on 6th December 1984 and ratified the Optional  Protocol  on  the
    Convention on 22nd December 2000  while  the  appellant  pointed  to  a
    passage at 23.04 quoting the  Human  Rights  Watch  World  Report  2010
    issued on 20th January 2010 stating that while women  occupied  several
    key positions in  the  government,  discrimination  against  women  was
    common  in  both  the  public  and   private   spheres.    Bangladesh's
    reservations  against  the  requirement  in  the  Convention   on   the
    Elimination of All Forms of  Discrimination  against  Women  to  ensure
    equal rights for women and men remained in effect.  The appellant  also
    relied upon a passage  at  23.01  which  said  that  according  to  the
    Constitution women enjoyed the same status and rights as men  in  terms
    of  education,  health,  political  process,  employment,   development
    processes and social  welfare  but  in  practice  they  did  not  enjoy
    fundamental rights and freedom to the extent that men did.  The unequal
    status of women in society and in public life was largely  due  to  the
    fact of having an unequal status in the family.  Women's  lower  socio-
    economic status, lower literacy, and lesser mobility were some  of  the
    practical obstacles to the establishment of their  fundamental  rights.
    The appellant relied upon a passage at  23.02  which  stated  that  the
    United  Nations  Convention  on  the  Elimination  of  All   Forms   of
    Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) expressed concern over the unequal
    status of Bangladeshi  women  within  the  family  and  the  fact  that
    personal   laws,   derived   from   religious   precepts   which   were
    discriminatory to  women,  continue  to  exist  in  the  country.   The
    appellant also relied upon 23.03  which  quoted  the  Organisation  for
    Economic Co-operation and Development Social  Institutions  and  Gender
    Index Profile of Bangladesh accessed on 11th  June  2010  stating  that
    Bangladesh was a highly patriarchal society and  gender  discrimination
    was evident across all levels.  Women were dependent on men  throughout
    their lives, from their fathers through to husbands, brothers or  sons.
    The Constitution affirmed gender equality, but  state  legislation  and
    institutions frequently disregarded women's rights.  For example, women
    and young girls were more disadvantaged than men  in  their  access  to
    education, healthcare and financial assets.  The respondent relied upon
    a quotation from the same source due to increased  poverty  and  demand
    for labour, female employment had risen since the mid-1980s.

23. The appellant relied upon quotations from a book entitled  "Wife  abuse
    in Bangladesh" published in 2005 by Dr  Nusrat  Ameen,  quoted  in  the
    COIR, who argued that both substantive  and  procedural  law  were  not
    gender-neutral and  the  laws  governing  women's  private  lives  were
    discriminatory, for example there was differential treatment  of  women
    in divorce proceedings.  There was also  discrimination  against  women
    from different religious groups, since there  were  different  sets  of
    family laws in place for the Muslim, Hindu and  Christian  communities.
    Legal solutions made available  to  women  were  often  constrained  by
    practical factors, such as the weak economic situation  of  women,  the
    reluctance of the police to become involved in  marital  disputes,  the
    difficulty  of  enforcing  and  sometimes  obtaining  injunctions,  the
    emphasis on mediation, arbitration and shalish by legal aid workers and
    professionals, as well as illiteracy and family pressures.

24. The respondent relied upon a passage at 23.07  which  said  that  there
    were 64 women serving in parliament, nineteen  of  them  were  directly
    elected.  According to the law  women  were  eligible  to  contest  any
    number of seats among the 345 members of parliament but 45  seats  were
    reserved for women.  Six women including the Prime  Minister  held  the
    status of Cabinet Minister including the  Ministers  of  Home  Affairs,
    Foreign Affairs and Agriculture.  The leader of the opposition and  the
    deputy leader of parliament were women.  Two women  were  appointed  as
    state ministers and a third was serving as a whip  in  parliament  with
    the status of a state minister.  Six of the  89  Supreme  Court  Judges
    were women.  The respondent  relied  upon  a  passage  at  23.09  which
    reported the US State Department Report of 2009 noting that  employment
    opportunities increased at a greater rate for women than for men in the
    last decade, largely due to the growth of the export garment  industry.
    Women constituted approximately 80% of garment factory workers.   There
    were some disparities in pay in the overall  economy  between  men  and
    women but in the garment sector they were roughly comparable.

25. The respondent relied on a passage at 23.13 which quoted from Dr Nusrat
    Ameen saying that there was no specific  law  on  wife  abuse  although
    there were several special laws to deal with  violence  against  women.
    She said that the penal code provided sanctions against  all  forms  of
    physical violence, some forms of psychological violence and threats  of
    physical injury.  The appellant relied upon a passage from  Dr  Ameen's
    report in which she said in practice, however, when such an  event  was
    committed against his  wife,  it  was  not  considered  as  an  offence
    punishable in the same way.

26. The appellant relied upon a  passage  at  23.14  which  said  the  very
    special laws to protect women from abuse had not proved as effective as
    they were designed to be and their deterrent value had been  diminished
    by low conviction rates.  Dr Ameen said that  owing  to  the  prevalent
    patriarchal attitude towards women, in most cases complaints  were  not
    recorded properly by the  police,  evidence  was  hard  to  produce  or
    establish, there was a  very  slim  chance  of  the  perpetrator  being
    punished and a study by the Family Court in Dhaka showed that  husbands
    rarely appeared and thus suits were dismissed  and  wives  were  denied
    justice.

27. The respondent relied upon a passage at  23.32  which  quoted  from  Dr
    Ameen's book to the effect that there were several agencies  to  assist
    women in abuse situations.  Particularly an agency would serve a notice
    to the husband to appear  at  the  agency  for  mediation  following  a
    written complaint made by the wife.  If he did not  attend  the  agency
    had a right to issue a warrant and  seek  help  from  the  police.   If
    mediation failed to work the case could be taken up in court by  family
    lawyers provided by the agency who normally handled the  case  free  of
    charge.  At 23.33 it was said that the US State  Department  Report  of
    2006 recorded that the Women Affairs Department ran six  shelters,  one
    each in the six divisional headquarters for abused women and  children.
    NGOs such as Bangladesh National Women Lawyers (BNWLA)  ran  facilities
    to provide shelter  to  destitute  persons  and  distressed  women  and
    children.   According  to  the  Bangladesh   National   Women   Lawyers
    Association (BSEHR) persons in safe custody were no  longer  housed  in
    prisons.  Courts sent most of them to shelter homes.  In  a  few  cases
    they were sent to prison as a transit for short periods.

28. The respondent relied upon the section of the report dealing with  acid
    attacks at 23.23 to 23.30 from which it  appears  that  two  laws  were
    introduced in 2002, the Acid Crime Prevention Act  2002  and  the  Acid
    Control Act 2002 to restrict the  import  and  sale  of  acid  in  open
    markets, allow for trials in acid-throwing cases by a special  tribunal
    (with a right of  appeal  to  a  higher  court)  to  make  the  maximum
    punishment for acid-throwing offences the death penalty and to  provide
    for the treatment and rehabilitation of victims.   Statistics  provided
    by the Acid Survivors Foundation (ASF) on its website accessed on  15th
    June 2009 showed that the number of recorded attacks peaked in 2002 and
    then declined.  In its Human Rights Report  2008  Odhika  recorded  133
    acid attacks: 73 women; 34 men; 15 girls and 11 boys.

29. The respondent relied upon an article from the New York Times  of  21st
    July 2010 entitled "Garment factories, change in women's roles in  poor
    countries" which suggested that by giving women an  independent  source
    of  livelihood  Bangladeshi's  garment   industry   had   changed   the
    conservative  Muslim  country  society  in   immeasurable   ways.   The
    government  was   struggling   to   improve   the   quality   of   hard
    infrastructure, such  as  highways,  ports  and  electricity  and  soft
    infrastructure such  as  schools,  courts  and  basic  governance,  but
    private forces unleashed by nascent economic reforms and  globalisation
    were changing society and the economy.  More than 80% of the 3  million
    people who worked  in  the  industry  were  women.   Mr  Ahmed  Mushfiq
    Mobarak, an  economist  at  the  Yale  School  of  Management  who  had
    conducted research found that girls who lived in villages with  garment
    factories tended to marry later and have children later than girls  who
    grow up in villages without factories.  Though  wages  in  Bangladesh's
    garment industry were  among  the  lowest  in  the  world  hundreds  of
    thousands  of  women  flocked  to  Dhaka  and  other  garment  hubs  in
    Bangladesh every year because factories paid more than the women  could
    earn in villages.  An example of a woman worker in Dhaka who was single
    and lived with three  other  girls  in  a  two  bedroom  apartment  was
    mentioned.  She sent home 3,000 taka every couple  of  months  to  help
    support her parents.  She said she wanted to  wait  for  two  or  three
    years before she got married and had children  because  she  wanted  to
    save up some money first.

30. The respondent also relied upon a report in the Independent dated  11th
    July 2010 which reported that the High Court in Bangladesh had outlawed
    punishments handed down by Islamic edicts or fatwas after a  series  of
    cases of women being beaten, caned and whipped for "offences" they were
    judged to have committed by village elders.

31. The respondent relied upon a BD News 24 report  dated  23rd  June  2010
    which said that the government had  decided  to  reintroduce  five-year
    family savings certificates to  make  women  financially  self-reliant.
    The project was mainly geared towards destitute, widowed  and  divorced
    women though economically well-off women would also be allowed  to  buy
    the certificates.

32. The respondent relied upon an Integrated Regional Information  Networks
    (IRIN) news report on Bangladesh dated 11th June 2010 which  said  that
    Bangladesh had  made  enormous  reductions  in  maternal  mortality  by
    improving girls' education.  The maternal mortality rate had more  than
    halved in less than a decade from 724 deaths per 100,000 live births in
    1990 to 338 per 100,000 in 2008 according to a recent  study  published
    in the British medical journal The Lancet.  The report said in 2001 the
    Bangladesh government began offering free education for girls up to the
    twelfth grade with  additional  incentives  like  food  for  education.
    Girls' enrolment in secondary schools jumped from 1.1 million  in  1991
    to 3.9 million in 2005.  The respondent relied upon the report  in  the
    New Nation dated 16th May 2010 which reported Foreign Minister Dr  Dipu
    Moni saying that women empowerment was one of the top priorities of the
    present government and  the  government  wanted  to  ensure  a  social,
    economic and political empowerment of women.  Dr Moni said  that  there
    was no restriction for women in Bangladesh in joining  any  profession.
    At present women were involved in  all  professions  including  defence
    services.  The government had plans to  introduce  free  education  for
    girls up to degree level.

33. The respondent also relied upon a passage in a Big Message report dated
    12th April 2010 entitled "Yessir, Wearing a Veil (Hijab)  is  a  Muslim
    Woman's Personal Choice".  It noted a  ruling  of  the  High  Court  in
    Bangladesh that wearing a veil by Muslim women  holding  public  office
    was a personal choice.  This was as a result of a High Court writ filed
    by a headmistress of a school as a  result  of  being  insulted  by  an
    education officer for not wearing a veil.

34. The respondent relied upon an IRIN report dated 27th January 2009 which
    said that women in Bangladesh had  taken  a  significant  step  towards
    greater equality, chalking up a parliamentary milestone as  nearly  20%
    of seats were to be filled by women.  Nevertheless women  still  had  a
    long way to go in terms of  gender  equality.   Illiteracy,  early  and
    forced  marriage,  high  maternal  mortality,  social   and   religious
    restrictions coupled with instances of torture, abandonment and limited
    job opportunities all contributed to the plight of women  according  to
    women's  groups.   Bangladesh  had  achieved  one  of  its   millennium
    development goals ahead of time, which was gender parity in  education.
    Participation in waged employment in the non-agricultural  sector  rose
    from 40.7 in 1992 to 58.6 in 2003. Nearly 2  million  women  worked  in
    ready made garment factories, the country's top export  earning  sector
    and 60% of the more than 35,000 government  registered  primary  school
    teachers were now women.

35. The respondent relied upon an article from Marilyn Davis entitled "Made
    in Bangladesh" 2005 which said that sociology  professor  Kathryn  Ward
    had undertaken research into Bangladesh's garment  manufacturing  which
    brought  in  three-quarters  of  the  nation's  export  earnings.   The
    project, housed at the Independent University of Bangladesh, found that
    garment workers and some groups of sex-workers, those based  in  hotels
    or houses, rather than in brothels or on the streets, had more  control
    over the circumstances of their lives than other Bangladeshi women did.
     They usually had more  education.   They  had  more  income.   Garment
    workers made about twice what maids did and sex workers  made  five  or
    six times what garment workers did.  Garment workers had better  access
    to health care and  education  for  their  children.   They  were  more
    independent and more mobile, able to go out by themselves  in  society.
    Garment workers (though not sex-workers) were less likely to be  abused
    by husbands or in-laws and they took a more  equal  part  in  household
    decisions.  They were, to use a buzz word, more empowered.  Despite its
    shortcomings factory work allowed Bangladeshi  women  to  make  inroads
    into the mainstream of society in a  country  where  women  were  often
    secluded in the household.  When a factory closed women lost more  than
    just income.  Micro-credit, the making of small loans that allowed poor
    women to start their own businesses,  such  as  tea  stalls,  tailoring
    shops or rickshaw rentals had been widely touted as a solution  to  the
    problem of women's poverty in the third world  and  had  become  a  big
    business in Bangladesh.  Professor Ward of Southern Illinois University
    Carbondale, the leader of the project, was a critic of  NGOs  that  had
    gone into  the  micro-credit  business.   Women  did  not  want  to  be
    indebted.  They would prefer to have a job.

















                       SCHEDULE OF BACKGROUND MATERIAL


|1    |Undated          |SIGI (Social Institutions and Gender Index),   |
|     |                 |Gender Equality and Social Institutions in     |
|     |                 |Bangladesh                                     |
|2    |Undated          |LexisNexis Source Information, Right Vision    |
|     |                 |News, accessed 9 September 2010                |
|3    |Undated          |International Crisis Group website (accessed 9 |
|     |                 |September 2010)                                |
|4    |Undated          |IRIN website (accessed 9 September 2010)       |
|5    |Undated          |South Illinois University Carbondale, Nari     |
|     |                 |Jibon School, undated (accessed 20.9.2010)     |
|6    |Undated          |Govt of The People's Republic of Bangladesh,   |
|     |                 |Grant No. 25 30 - Ministry of Women and        |
|     |                 |Children Affairs Medium Term Expenditure       |
|     |                 |[accessed: 20.0.2010]                          |
|7    |Undated          |Social Institutions and Gender Index, Gender   |
|     |                 |Equality and Social Institutions in Bangladesh |
|     |                 |(accessed 2 June 2010)                         |
|8    |Undated          |The Social Sciences, Women's Empowerment       |
|     |                 |through the  Development of Micro              |
|     |                 |Entrepreneurship in Rural Bangladesh, 2010,    |
|     |                 |Vol. 5 Issue 1                                 |
|9    |13 April 1951    |Pakistan Citizenship Act 1951, (Bangladesh)    |
|10   |25 June 2001     |Refworld: United States Bureau of citizenship  |
|     |                 |and Immigration Services, Bangladesh:          |
|     |                 |Information on the  situation of women who have|
|     |                 |children who are born out of wedlock           |
|11   |1 November 2003  |Journal of International Women's Studies, In   |
|     |                 |search of Equality: marriage related laws for  |
|     |                 |Muslim Women in Bangladesh                     |
|12   |27 June 2004     |Adhunika, Women's Housing Needs and Rights     |
|13   |2005             |Hurrights Osaka Violence Against: Bangladesh   |
|     |                 |Context                                        |
|14   |11-14 April 2005 |UN Division for the Advancement of Women.      |
|     |                 |Expert paper on Violence against women: A      |
|     |                 |statistical over view, challenges and gaps in  |
|     |                 |data collection and methodology and approaches |
|     |                 |for overcoming them.                           |
|15   |8 May 2005       |WSWS, An eye for sale: Poverty forces          |
|     |                 |Bangladeshi woman to turn to organ trade       |
|16   |Autumn 2005      |Marilyn  Davis, ed. South Illinois University  |
|     |                 |Carbondale, Made in Bangladesh                 |
|17   |June 2007        |The World Bank Office, Dhaka Dhaka: Improving  |
|     |                 |Living Conditions for the Urban Poor Bangladesh|
|     |                 |Development Series Paper No. 17                |
|18   |20 October 2007  |The New Nation: 40 pc women fall victim to     |
|     |                 |domestic violence: Bangladesh ranks 4th highest|
|     |                 |in violence against women                      |
|19   |21 October 2007  |The New Nation: Women and domestic violence    |
|20   |22 October 2007  |HJT  Research: Violence against women in       |
|     |                 |Bangladesh ranked 4th highest in world         |
|21   |7 March 2008     |Global Human Rights defence (Netherlands),     |
|     |                 |Bangladesh: Women's rights in Bangladesh       |
|22   |13 March 2008    |World Bank: Whispers to Voices: Gender and     |
|     |                 |Social Transformation in Bangladesh            |
|23   |16 May 2008      |The New Nation, Govt for social, economic,     |
|     |                 |political empowerment of women: Dipu Mon:      |
|24   |20 June 2008     |International Federation for Human Rights      |
|     |                 |(FIDH), Bangladesh: Labour Rights in the Supply|
|     |                 |Chain and Corporate Social Responsibility      |
|25   |15 July 2008     |IRIN, Bangladesh: Moving towards universal     |
|     |                 |birth registration                             |
|26   |24 October 2008  |Asian Human Rights Commission, Bangladesh :    |
|     |                 |Investigating officer of a rape case is        |
|     |                 |colleague of the accused                       |
|27   |12 November 2008 |Asian Human Rights Commission, Bangladesh: the |
|     |                 |second wife of the father sends a 13 year old  |
|     |                 |girl to a hotel where sex services are provided|
|     |                 |and files a complaint about others with the    |
|     |                 |collaboration of the police                    |
|28   |19 November 2008 |IRIN News: Children and women suffer severe    |
|     |                 |malnutrition                                   |
|29   |26 November 2008 |Safeen (blog): The Urban Women in Dhaka City   |
|30   |2009             |Table showing Social Institutions and Gender   |
|     |                 |Index (SIGI) ranking                           |
|31   |24 January 2009  |The Daily Star Magazine, Human rights: Laws of |
|     |                 |Discrimination                                 |
|32   |27 January 2009  |IRIN, Bangladesh: Women move forward but       |
|     |                 |challenges remain                              |
|33   |3 February 2009  |OneWorld South Asia, Long road ahead for       |
|     |                 |Bangladesh                                     |
|34   |6 February 2009  |UKBA Operational Guidance Note (OGN) Bangladesh|
|35   |25 February 2009 |US Department of State, 2008 Human Rights      |
|     |                 |Report : Bangladesh                            |
|36   |5 March 2009     |The Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2009          |
|     |                 |[Bangladesh]                                   |
|37   |13 March 2009    |International Centre for Research on Women     |
|     |                 |(ICRW)/United National Population Fund         |
|     |                 |(UNFPAS), Intimate Partner Violence: High Costs|
|     |                 |to Household and Communities                   |
|38   |1 June 2009      |Odhikar (Bangladesh) Human Rights Monitoring   |
|     |                 |Report                                         |
|39   |1 June 2009      |Asian Legal Resource Centre, Bangladesh:       |
|     |                 |Extra-judicial killings, torture, violence     |
|     |                 |against women, media freedoms  and the lack of |
|     |                 |an independent judiciary                       |
|40   |8 June 2009      |Asian Human Rights Commission, Bangladesh:     |
|     |                 |Rights groups urged the government to probe    |
|     |                 |human rights abuses and reform institutions    |
|41   |1 July 2009      |Odhikar (Bangladesh), Half-Yearly Report of    |
|     |                 |Odhikar (January-June) 2009                    |
|42   |1 August 2009    |Journal of Health Population and nutrition:    |
|     |                 |Koehlmoos,  Tascey Perez; Uddin, Jasim; Ashraf,|
|     |                 |Ali; Rashid, Mashida, Homeless in Dhaka:       |
|     |                 |violence, sexual harassment, and drug-abuse    |
|43   |3 August 2009    |JAMA, Violence against mothers in Bangladesh   |
|     |                 |associated with health problems in young       |
|     |                 |children                                       |
|44   |11 September 2009|Integrated Regional Information Networks News  |
|     |                 |(IRIN), Bangladesh: Dowry violence continues   |
|     |                 |unabated                                       |
|45   |3 December 2009  |Integrated Regional Information Networks News  |
|     |                 |(IRIN, Bangladesh: Over half of all children   |
|     |                 |living in poverty)                             |
|46   |11 December 2009 |International Crisis  Group Bangladesh: Getting|
|     |                 |Police Reform on Track                         |
|47   |1 January 2010   |Odhikar (Bangladesh), Human Rights Report 2009 |
|48   |23 January 2010  |Right Vision News, Bangladesh : Dhaka's        |
|     |                 |Floating Population                            |
|49   |27 January 2010  |CNS News, Bangladesh: 16 year old girl raped,  |
|     |                 |pregnant, flogged 101 times. High Court now    |
|     |                 |order protection.                              |
|50   |11 March 2010    |US Department of State, 2009 Human Rights      |
|     |                 |Report: Bangladesh                             |
|51   |8 April 2010     |Right Vision News Bangladesh: Urbanisation     |
|     |                 |driven diseases get focus on Health Day today  |
|52   |12 April 2010    |A Big Message: Yessir, Wearing a Veil (Hijab)  |
|     |                 |is a Muslim's Woman's Personal Choice          |
|53   |27 May 2010      |Amnesty International, Amnesty International   |
|     |                 |Report 2010: Bangladesh                        |
|54   |11 June 2010     |Integrated Regional Information Networks       |
|     |                 |(IRIN), Bangladesh: Educating girls lowers     |
|     |                 |maternal death rate                            |
|55   |23 June 2010     |Targeted News, Children and Women in Urban     |
|     |                 |Slums Worse off than Rest of the Country,      |
|     |                 |Reveals BBS-UNICEF Survey                      |
|56   |23 June 2010     |BD News 24: Government reintroduces 5 yr       |
|     |                 |women's savings                                |
|57   |1 July 2010      |Odhikar (Bangladesh) Human Rights Monitoring   |
|     |                 |Report                                         |
|58   |9 July 2010      |Daily Star: Fatwa illegal                      |
|59   |11 July 2010     |The Independent: Bangladeshi court outlaws     |
|     |                 |fatwa punishment                               |
|60   |16 July 2010     |Deutsche Welle: Programs in Bangladesh offer   |
|     |                 |women the chance  at a decent day's work       |
|61   |21 July 2010     |The New York Times: Garment Factories, Changing|
|     |                 |Women's Roles in Poor Countries                |
|62   |22 July 2010     |Office of the United Nations High Commissioner |
|     |                 |for Human Rights (OHCHR): Joint report of the  |
|     |                 |independent expert on the question of human    |
|     |                 |rights and extreme poverty and the independent |
|     |                 |expert on the issue of human rights obligations|
|     |                 |related to access to safe drinking water and   |
|     |                 |sanitation: Mission to Bangladesh              |
|63   |20 August 2010   |UK Home Office Country of Origin Information   |
|     |                 |Service, Bangladesh COI Report August 2010     |
|64   |4 September 2010 |Foreign Policy  Blogs, Faheem Haider, PM       |
|     |                 |Reiterates Promise for Free Higher Education   |
|     |                 |for Children with Needs (year assumed from URL)|
|65   |9 September 2010 |Odhikar website                                |






