
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


MJ (Singh v Belgium : Tanveer Ahmed unaffected) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT
00253 (IAC)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 5 February 2013                            |On 26 April 2013             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN

                                   Between

                                     MJ

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms V Laughton, instructed by Lawrence & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

The conclusions of the European Court of Human Rights  in  Singh  v  Belgium
(Application No. 33210/2011) neither justify nor require any departure  from
the guidance set out in Tanveer Ahmed  [2002]  Imm  AR  318  (starred).  The
Tribunal in Tanveer Ahmed envisaged the existence of particular cases  where
it may be appropriate for enquiries to be made.   On  its  facts  Singh  can
properly be regarded as such a particular case.  The documentation  in  that
case was clearly of a nature where  verification  would  be  easy,  and  the
documentation came from an unimpeachable source.




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant, who was a national of Afghanistan born on 5  June  1975,
    appealed to a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal against  a  decision  of
    the Secretary of State of 23 August 2012 to remove him  as  an  illegal
    entrant.  The judge dismissed the appeal,  making  adverse  credibility
    findings with respect to material aspects  of  the  appellant's  claim.
    The appellant sought and was granted permission to appeal on the  basis
    of five main points, first that he had applied the  wrong  standard  of
    proof, secondly that he had failed to consider or to consider  properly
    expert evidence, thirdly that he had adopted the respondent's  reliance
    upon an allegation that the appellant had  submitted  forged  documents
    without applying the proper standard of proof,  fourthly  that  he  had
    failed to have regard to relevant evidence  and  fifthly  that  he  had
    failed to verify verifiable documents.

2.   In her submissions, Ms Laughton relied upon and  developed  the  points
    made in the grounds.

3.   She argued that the judge had never set  out  the  proper  standard  of
    proof but at various points had rejected aspects of the evidence on the
    basis that they were intrinsically unlikely.  Reading the determination
    as a whole it was not clear whether the judge  had  applied  the  right
    standard of proof.  It was a matter of taking together a failure to set
    out the proper standard and the reliance on inherent likelihood.  Cases
    such as Ghesari [2004] EWCA Civ 1854 and HK [2006] EWCA  Civ  1037  set
    out the concerns with regard to the use of plausibility as a basis  for
    adverse credibility findings.  It was the  case  that  unlikely  things
    happened all the time.  The question was whether the event in  question
    happened and it was necessary to consider that, even if it  was  stated
    that it was unlikely.

4.   In this regard, ground 1  was  linked  to  ground  2  with  respect  to
    matters which the judge had found to be  inherently  implausible  which
    were in fact explained by the expert.   The  first  of  these  was  the
    reason why the appellant had been left alone by  Hizb-i-Islami  for  so
    long.  As regards the tone of the letters, which the  judge  considered
    at paragraph 97 of the determination, it did not mean  that  they  were
    not genuine because they were not threatening and the expert's view was
    that Hizb-i-Islami tried to cajole and did not forcibly  recruit.   The
    appellant had not said that they tried to force him in 2007.  Far  from
    being inherently unlikely, the  expert  report  showed  that  this  was
    plausible.  The judge had not referred to the expert's  views  on  this
    nor with regard to the  unlikelihood  of  the  cousins  contriving  his
    arrest in the way in which it was claimed that they had.   The  cousins
    were working their way up government ranks in 2007  to  2008,  and  the
    appellant believed he was arrested because they had identified  him  as
    being a member of Hizb-i-Islami and this was  an  ongoing  risk  factor
    throughout the case.  Again the judge had thought this  was  inherently
    unlikely and again the matter was dealt with by the expert.  It did not
    make a difference whether the people concerned were close to or  within
    the security agency.

5.   Also with regard to the expert report there was evidence about  bribery
    and the judge had said it could not be important if he was able  to  be
    released on payment of a bribe, but that did  not  mean  that  was  the
    position in every country, and it was the case that the  rule  of  law,
    even in Kabul, was so limited and the expert commented on this and gave
    examples of the kind of people who had been released on  the  basis  of
    payments of bribes  including  many  Taliban.   The  judge  could  have
    rejected the expert evidence but  if  he  did  so  he  needed  to  give
    adequate reasons and had not done so.   He  was  wrong  in  saying  the
    report was generic.

6.   There was also an error with regard to considering  relevant  evidence,
    at paragraph 100 where the judge was wrong in saying as he did that the
    issue of the claimed land dispute was not said  to  have  affected  the
    appellant in any way until he was within weeks of leaving the  country.
    The matter was dealt with at paragraph 17 of the  grounds,  noting  the
    evidence that he had been stabbed by the cousins and that even now  his
    father lived in Pakistan with his family.

7.   The issues with regard to documentary evidence  could  be  broken  down
    into three points.  The first of these was the use of the  term  "self-
    serving".  It was unclear what that meant  and  if  it  only  meant  it
    supported the appellant's claim then it was unsurprising that  evidence
    would be provided to do that.

8.   The second was the allegation of forgery in contrast to the  assessment
    that could be made of evidence  as  unreliable.   With  regard  to  the
    latter, the burden was on the appellant.  With regard to the former the
    burden was on the  Secretary  of  State.   It  was  apparent  from  the
    determination that an allegation of  forgery  had  been  made  and  the
    judge's findings were that the documents had been  forged  in  that  he
    said that they were created to assist the appellant's claim.  There was
    a difference between finding a document unreliable, which was a neutral
    factor, and finding it  was  a  forgery.   Attaching  no  weight  to  a
    document was not the same as finding it was a forgery,  as  in  such  a
    case there would have been a positive fabrication of evidence and  that
    was why the burden of proof was on the  Secretary  of  State.   It  was
    clear from paragraph 70 that fraud was  alleged  by  the  Secretary  of
    State but the judge having also made  a  finding  of  forgery  had  not
    placed the burden where it should have been placed.

9.   The third point related to what had been said by  the  Court  of  Human
    Rights in Singh v Belgium (Application No. 33210/11).  The particularly
    relevant paragraphs were 101 to 104.  If a document was verifiable  and
    the investigating authority, the Secretary of State or whoever  in  the
    relevant state, chose not to verify it, it was a breach of  Article  13
    in conjunction with Article 3.  The nature of the  documents  in  Singh
    was set out at paragraph 13 (the second paragraph 13) in the  judgment.
    They were identity documents and emails from the UNHCR.  It was clearly
    the case that not every document was verifiable and  indeed  many  were
    not.  The ruling here related to those documents that  were  verifiable
    and at least one of the documents in the instant case  was,  being  the
    letter from the faction of Hizb-i-Islami which  was  aligned  with  the
    government and which had provided contact details and a number.  If  it
    was accepted that it was a verifiable document, then the  Secretary  of
    State had breached her duty to verify it and weight should be  attached
    to that.

10.  In conclusion, there were multiple flaws in the determination,  several
    of which overlapped.  Those adverse matters left  were  not  enough  by
    themselves to maintain an adverse credibility finding.

11.  In his  submissions,  Mr  Kandola  argued,  with  respect  to  Singh  v
    Belgium, that the letters were considered  in  the  refusal  letter  at
    paragraph 35 onwards and were said not to be reliable and to be lacking
    in weight.  Forgery had not been asserted.  Cases  such  as  RP  [2006]
    UKIAT 00086 dealt with the  situation  where  the  Secretary  of  State
    asserted forgery on examination of a document, but Tanveer Ahmed [2002]
    IAT 00439 was the appropriate authority in  asylum  proceedings.   This
    was referred to at paragraph 38 of the refusal letter.

12.  If the appellant's submission was  accepted,  then  it  would  be  very
    difficult if the burden was on the Secretary of State to  discharge  it
    in this context especially when the letters came from a non-state actor
    of persecution.  The documents in Singh related to UNHCR  documentation
    which were easily verifiable and with no  room  for  forgery  in  those
    circumstances.  There was a very obvious source to the  documents.   In
    contrast, in this case the position was very different.  Even if  there
    were a general duty, Singh v Belgium did  not  apply  in  such  a  case
    involving putting  the  appellant  at  risk  and  there  had  to  be  a
    commonsense approach compatible with the Convention.

13.  With regard to the use of the term  "intrinsically  unlikely",  it  was
    argued that there was the possibility that the balance of probabilities
    test was being employed but equally, since the  word  "likelihood"  was
    within the standard test anyway of a reasonable degree  of  likelihood,
    it was particularly compatible  with  that.   This  did  not  take  the
    wording used outside the proper standard of proof.  The fact that there
    was said to be no reason not to believe certain matters  in  the  claim
    was equally not an improper formulation.   Also,  prior  to  the  judge
    finding as he did about Hizb-i-Islami at paragraph 96, what he said  at
    paragraphs 93 and 94 needed to be borne in mind, considering the actual
    facts of the case, for example the answer to question 86 at  interview.
    Paragraph  94  identified  an  inconsistency.   There  was  an  overall
    credibility assessment on a proper basis.   Proper  findings  had  been
    made at paragraphs 93 and 94.  The judge had made  appropriate  comment
    on the expert report at paragraph 107 and dealt with the conclusions of
    the expert at paragraph 108.  The history  was  accepted  at  paragraph
    110.

14.  By way of reply, Ms Laughton argued  that  whatever  was  said  in  the
    refusal letter, the Presenting  Officer  had  alleged  forgery  at  the
    hearing.  It was not enough to say the burden could not  be  satisfied.
    If that were the case, then the Secretary of State  should  be  careful
    what words she used.  The same point could be made with respect to  the
    Singh v Belgium argument.  It was not being argued  that  there  was  a
    duty to verify every document but only if the document was  verifiable,
    as some documents were in this case.  Paragraph 107 was not an adequate
    assessment of the expert evidence.  Cases such as Mibanga  [2005]  EWCA
    Civ 367 and FS & AA (Sudan) made clear that if an expert's evidence was
    rejected it was necessary to say clearly why.  It had to go beyond  the
    spectrum of a reasonable holding of such views.  There was an aspect of
    specific risk that had not been considered in this case.

15.  If we were with Ms Laughton we were asked to remit the  matter  to  the
    First-tier, given the nature of the findings  that  would  have  to  be
    made.  Mr Kandola had no objection to that course of  action,  were  an
    error of law to be found.

16.  We reserved our determination.

17.  The appellant claimed to have been  involved  with  Hizb-i-Islami  from
    the age of 18 until 2001 when he reverted to being a farmer.  He  would
    therefore have been a member for some  eight  years.   His  father  had
    previously  been  a  member.   The  judge  accepted   the   appellant's
    membership of Hizb-i-Islami during that period.

18.  The appellant said that after he left Hizb-i-Islami he  had  been  sent
    letters by them from time to time to come and join them  again  but  he
    did not want to  go  back.   He  said  that  he  was  arrested  by  the
    intelligence services about three and a  half  months  before  he  left
    Afghanistan and was taken to the police station where he was beaten and
    asked questions about Hizb-i-Islami.  He believed that  this  had  come
    about as a result of a land dispute with his cousins, one  of  whom  at
    least was a senior police figure.  He believed that this man had caused
    his arrest.  He had previously been knifed by younger  members  of  the
    family as a result of the land dispute and said that  he  had  problems
    with them every day and he felt they had caused his arrest because they
    had wanted to kill him.

19.  He said he was detained for 49 days and escaped when a  man  approached
    him, took him outside, and he got away on a lorry.  The agent  he  used
    said his family had arranged for  him  to  go  to  a  safe  place.   He
    believed that his cousins had taken over the land that had belonged  to
    his family.  Since arrival in the United Kingdom he  claimed  that  his
    wife had received a letter from Hizb-i-Islami accusing him of defecting
    from them and supporting the collaboration forces and  that  meant  his
    life was at risk.  He also had a letter from  the  authorities  stating
    that because he escaped he needed to be re-arrested.

20.  He said that since leaving Hizb-i-Islami in  2001  he  had  never  been
    arrested or questioned until the three and a half months before he left
    the country.  He suggested that this was due to Hizb-i-Islami not being
    active during this period of time although he said they had become more
    so recently.  He claimed to have been beaten and  tortured  in  custody
    and to have been accused of working for  Hizb-i-Islami.   He  said  his
    captors were trying to kill him.  He provided three  letters  which  he
    said had been sent to him by Hizb-i-Islami.  The last one was  sent  to
    his wife.  He said that the  rest  of  his  immediate  family  had  now
    relocated to Peshawar in Pakistan, including his father.  Evidence  was
    given on his behalf by Mohammad Jabarkhel who said he had worked at the
    same base in Kabul as the appellant as a trainer of members of  Hizb-i-
    Islami in the use of weapons.

21.  At the hearing the appellant was asked why he had no problems for  some
    seven years after leaving Hizb-i-Islami in 2001, and he said he had had
    some trouble all the time.  He was asked why he  had  not  been  killed
    when he was in detention if they had wanted to do that to  him  and  he
    said "God protected me".  He said they were going to beat him first and
    then "kill him gradually" and he had eventually been allowed to  escape
    as a result of a bribe of $10,000 being paid.

22.  As we have noted above, the judge accepted that the appellant had  been
    a member of Hizb-i-Islami for a number of years when he was young.  The
    judge noted that when the appellant made his  application  he  did  not
    claim to  have  had  any  significant  difficulties  to  deal  with  in
    Afghanistan between 2001 and 2007.  At interview he was  asked  "Before
    arrest had you been questioned by police/Afghan authorities about  role
    in Hizb-i-Islami?" and he said, "No I was a farmer wasn't questioned at
    that time only when I was arrested".  The judge considered that he  had
    tried to go back on that at the hearing by suggesting in  very  general
    terms that there had been ongoing problems during this period, but  the
    judge found that to be contradictory and adverse  to  his  credibility,
    the answer at interview being conclusive in the judge's view.

23.  The judge went on to say at paragraph 96 of the determination  that  he
    found it intrinsically unlikely that Hizb-i-Islami would suddenly start
    to show interest again in a man they had left entirely alone for such a
    long period of time, particularly as clearly no effort at all was  made
    to stop him leaving in the first place  and  settling  down  to  family
    life.  He went on to note the two  letters  from  Hizb-i-Islami  of  23
    August 2007 and 3 November of that year.  He considered the content and
    timing to be curious.  The first letter appeared to invite a discussion
    about military operations in "the summer of the current year"  and  the
    later letter again referred to military operations  in  the  summer  of
    that year and said "It has been a long time but I did not hear any news
    from you ... obey the order and meet me  as  soon  as  possible".   The
    judge noted that neither letter was written in even a threatening  tone
    and that even if they were genuine it  was  far  from  clear  that  the
    appellant could not simply make it clear that he was no longer  willing
    to be actively involved in any way because of his  family  commitments.
    He said however that his primary finding was that they were  inherently
    unlikely to have been written at all and to have been created simply to
    boost the asylum claim.

24.  The judge was  of  the  same  view  in  respect  of  the  Hizb-i-Islami
    document said to have come into the possession of the appellant's  wife
    and dated 14 February 2012.  He noted that there had been a  five  year
    gap since the previous letters and considered it somewhat  odd  in  the
    context for it to say "Contact us quickly and clarify your position  to
    us".  He considered that it did not really make any sense  at  all  and
    that although it was written in suitably threatening terms  it  clearly
    betrayed how little contact or knowledge Hizb-i-Islami had  of  him  if
    they could write such a letter when he  had  been  out  of  Afghanistan
    altogether for some four years.  He gave no weight to that  letter  and
    did not believe that it was ever sent.

25.  The judge noted the absence of any independent evidence concerning  the
    claimed land dispute with the cousins.  He said it was curious that  it
    was not claimed to have affected the appellant in any way until he  was
    within weeks of leaving the country altogether, even though the dispute
    was said to  go  many  years  back.   He  went  on  to  note  that  the
    appellant's family were said no longer to be in possession of the  land
    anyway and that he himself had obviously not challenged that or  become
    directly involved in any confrontation about it.  He said that  it  was
    therefore inherently unlikely  that  trouble  would  be  made  for  the
    appellant in that respect and at what might  be  described  as  a  very
    convenient moment when an asylum  claim  was  about  to  be  made.   He
    considered that if anyone  really  wanted  to  cause  trouble  for  the
    appellant it was hardly likely that  he  would  be  politely  asked  to
    attend the police headquarters in the notice to  that  effect  dated  4
    March 2008.

26.  He also went on to note that in the context of  his  claim  that  those
    who had him detained wanted to kill him that when it was suggested that
    it was hardly likely they would have failed to do so during the claimed
    49 day period of detention he  then  said  they  wanted  to  "kill  him
    slowly" and in the end the position was that he was released on payment
    of a bribe in what the judge described as the standard fashion  and  as
    being a clear  indication  that  his  detention  would  not  have  been
    particularly important anyway if it had occurred  at  all.   The  judge
    went on to make a primary finding that the appellant was  not  affected
    by any longstanding land dispute if there ever was  one.   He  did  not
    find it credible that police  officers  attended  his  house  with  the
    claimed document.  He did not accept that  the  arrest  warrant  was  a
    genuine document.  He noted another letter, said to have come into  the
    possession of the appellant's wife from the police dated 26 March 2012,
    stating "We have sent you warrant letters before to surrender and I  am
    not sure where those may have gone".  It was not related in  any  sense
    to the current situation which was one where he had  been  out  of  the
    country for nearly four years and  the  judge  considered  the  letters
    suggested that their writer knew absolutely nothing of the  appellant's
    circumstances and he considered that this  was  further  evidence  that
    they were not genuine and had been manufactured for the purpose of this
    claim.

27.  He went on to comment that it  was  in  no  way  inconsistent  to  give
    weight to the documents suggesting that the appellant was a  member  of
    Hizb-i-Islami historically and little or no weight to later  documents,
    bearing in mind that the latter bore all the hallmarks of  self-serving
    documentation produced for  the  purposes  of  the  appeal  and  noting
    further discrepancies referred to at paragraphs 35 to 37 of the refusal
    letter where it is noted among  other  things  that  the  first  letter
    provided no details of how or when he had to contact  Hizb-i-Islami  by
    which time the aim of the letter was unclear, the  letters  never  told
    him whom to respond to and he was unaware from whom they came, and that
    it lacked internal consistency that the latest letter would locate  his
    wife and not realise he had not been living with  her  for  over  three
    years and again there was no way of knowing whom to contact,  where  to
    contact them or  who  was  responsible  for  the  letters.   The  judge
    considered that these points added further weight to  the  unlikelihood
    of these documents being genuine, particularly  in  relation  to  their
    vagueness and the sheer unlikelihood of the later ones having been sent
    long after the appellant  left  the  country.   The  judge  noted  that
    complaint was made about the view  taken  of  those  documents  by  the
    respondent in the context of Tanveer Ahmed [2002] IAT  00439,  but  the
    judge was of the view that it was in practical terms impossible for the
    Home Office to verify such vague and informal documentation  from  such
    distant countries and that it  was  entitled  to  take  the  view  that
    surrounding circumstances made the contents of the documents themselves
    inherently unlikely and therefore to be given little or no  weight.  He
    noted submissions in respect of Singh v Belgium (Application  33210/11)
    but considered the suggestion that the Home Office could contact Hizb-i-
    Islami officers in Kabul and police headquarters in Nangarhar  Province
    to be wholly unrealistic.  He  said  that  dealing  with  documents  on
    Tanveer Ahmed principles was an essential part of the legal process  in
    this area of the law and he did not accept that  Singh  v  Belgium  was
    saying that it was  necessary  to  make  contact  with  obscure  police
    stations in Afghanistan or indeed a militant organisation there.

28.  The judge went on to say that the findings he  had  made  in  preceding
    paragraphs of course followed a careful perusal of  the  report  of  Dr
    Giustozzi.  He considered that the report was almost  entirely  generic
    with only the occasional reference to the appellant himself and that it
    really said little more in relation to his case than what he  had  said
    was  reasonably  consistent  with  known  background   evidence   about
    Afghanistan and that was a long way from saying  that  it  was  a  true
    reflection  of  his  own  experiences.   It  was  clearly  based   upon
    everything the appellant said being true and he considered  that  there
    was little more than a recital of the obvious such as "The  police  are
    widely reported to extract bribes  from  individuals  in  exchange  for
    their release or for avoiding arrest".

29.  The judge went on to note two entirely  speculative  assertions  as  he
    found them to be in Dr  Giustozzi's  report  and  considered  that  the
    report, although it made interesting reading, added little in his  view
    to the particular case.

30.  Ms Laughton's first ground concerns, as we have seen,  the  failure  by
    the judge to state the correct standard of proof and  to  have  applied
    the wrong standard of proof in using terminology  such  as  "inherently
    unlikely" and "intrinsically unlikely".

31.  We do  not  consider  it  to  be  necessary  for  a  First-tier  Judge,
    particularly a judge as experienced as  this  judge,  to  set  out  the
    proper standard of proof in the determination, although it  is  clearly
    desirable to do so.  Nor do we consider that the terminology criticised
    by Ms Laughton is such as to display  use  of  the  wrong  standard  of
    proof.  We  consider  that  it  was  open  to  the  judge  to  find  it
    "intrinsically unlikely" that Hizb-i-Islami  would  suddenly  start  to
    show interest again in a man they had left entirely alone  for  such  a
    long period.  As Mr Kandola pointed out,  very  much  a  part  of  this
    terminology  is  the  use  of  the  concept  of  likelihood  itself,  a
    fundamental part of the reasonable degree of likelihood  test.   It  is
    relevant also to note that  the  judge  had  previously  to  this,  two
    paragraphs earlier, found a discrepancy in the appellant's evidence  as
    to the extent to which interest in him had been shown.  Likewise,  with
    regard to the use of the term "inherently unlikely" at paragraph 98  of
    the determination, this has to be seen in the context  of  the  judge's
    concerns at paragraph 97 about both the content and the timing of those
    letters.  We consider that the views he expressed at paragraph 97  were
    proper views for him to have come to and that there is no error in  the
    application of the correct standard of proof in his assessment of  that
    part of the evidence.  Again with regard  to  the  use  of  the  phrase
    "inherently unlikely" at paragraph 100 of the determination  concerning
    the claimed dispute with the cousins,  this  has  to  be  seen  in  the
    context of the evidence that the appellant's family was said no  longer
    to be in possession of the land and that he himself had  obviously  not
    challenged that or become directly involved in any confrontation  about
    it and again we consider it was open to the judge  to  find  it  to  be
    inherently unlikely that trouble would be made for him in that  respect
    at what might be described as a very convenient moment in time when  an
    asylum claim was about to be made.  This is reinforced by  the  further
    point in that paragraph that if anyone really wanted to  cause  trouble
    for the appellant it was hardly likely that he would be politely  asked
    to attend police headquarters in the notice to that effect of  4  March
    2008.

32.  Again, with regard to the use of  the  term  "inherently  unlikely"  at
    paragraph 105, this is in the context of the judge's view that the Home
    Office was entitled to take the view that the surrounding circumstances
    made the contents  of  the  documents  themselves  inherently  unlikely
    bearing in mind the vagueness and informality of the documentation  and
    that this meant the documents were to be given  little  or  no  weight.
    This has to be seen in the context of the  findings  at  paragraph  104
    concerning the judge's own concerns about  the  documentation  together
    with the discrepancies identified at paragraphs 35 to 37 of the refusal
    letter.

33.  We should say in passing that we  agree  with  the  point  made  by  Ms
    Laughton in submissions concerning the use of the term  "self-serving".
    If that were the only basis upon which the judge had rejected  evidence
    then we would find it to be lacking in proper reasoning.  No  doubt  an
    appellant will generally, if not always, find it of assistance  to  put
    forward evidence that assists his case and to that extent such evidence
    may be regarded as "self-serving", but that cannot in any sense be said
    to be a reason for marginalising it.  The  use  of  this  term  is,  in
    general, unhelpful, but in this case it does not in our view materially
    flaw the determination because of the other matters we have  identified
    above which justified the judge in coming to the findings that he did.

34.  These matters though are,  as  Mr  Laughton  argued,  linked  with  the
    judge's views on the report of  Dr  Giustozzi.   In  particular  it  is
    argued that the judge's conclusion that the letters from  Hizb-i-Islami
    lack credibility because  of  the  length  of  time  during  which  the
    appellant had heard nothing from them  gave  no  consideration  to  the
    evidence of Dr Giustozzi that from 2001 Hizb-i-Islami had struggled  to
    recruit but from 2006  they  started  to  re-emerge  as  a  significant
    political player and by 2008 they were becoming more significant in the
    insurgency.

35.  Dr Giustozzi did not however link  this  into  the  appellant's  claim.
    Having looked at his report, we consider that the judge was entitled to
    regard the report as being almost entirely generic.  The fact that Hizb-
    i-Islami began to emerge as a significant political player  since  2006
    (and there is no suggestion that Hizb-i-Islami wanted the appellant for
    his  political  skills)  and  that  it  had  started  becoming  a  more
    significant player in  the  insurgency  as  of  2008  is  in  no  sense
    compelling evidence supporting the credibility of the appellant's claim
    to have been approached effectively out of the  blue  by  Hizb-i-Islami
    after several years' silence.  The point has to be seen  also  as  tied
    into the proper concerns of the judge expressed at paragraph 97 of  the
    determination about the content as  well  as  the  timing  of  the  two
    letters from Hizb-i-Islami of 2007.  Again, with respect  to  the  2012
    document, the criticisms of the credibility of that made by  the  judge
    at paragraph 99 again in our view were entirely open  to  him.   It  is
    true that at paragraph 11 of his report, having set out a good deal  of
    evidence concerning the situation in Afghanistan generally and then  in
    Nangargar Province, Dr Giustozzi says the chronology of  the  expansion
    of the insurgency helps to explain why until  2007  the  appellant  was
    left alone by Hizb-i-Islami and the authorities.  That is  one  of  the
    few specific references to the appellant.  But as we  say,  we  see  no
    material error in the judge's failure to advert  specifically  to  this
    point given the concerns that he otherwise had about the  Hizb-i-Islami
    letters and the generality otherwise of Dr Giustozzi's evidence in this
    regard.

36.  The other issue in respect of which Ms Laughton argued that  the  judge
    had not taken proper or any consideration of Dr Giustozzi's evidence is
    the point at paragraph 13 of his report concerning "bad tips" which  he
    said are often used in Afghanistan  to  eliminate  personal  rivals  by
    people close to the Americans or to the security agencies.  This, it is
    said, provides an explanation which the judge should  have  considered,
    concerning the likelihood of the appellant's cousins giving his name to
    the authorities.  Again, the judge's consideration of the  evidence  at
    paragraph 100 of the determination is of significance.  Dr  Giustozzi's
    evidence is  again  not  linked  to  the  particular  position  of  the
    appellant, and the judge's point as to the timing  of  this,  the  fact
    that his family were no longer in possession of the land and he had not
    challenged that or become directly involved in any confrontation  about
    it and in particular the fact that if  anybody  had  really  wanted  to
    cause trouble for him it was hardly likely that he  would  be  politely
    asked to attend the police headquarters in the notice  are  matters  of
    weight.   The  judge  was  also  entitled  at  paragraph  101  of   the
    determination to note inconsistencies in the appellant's  evidence  and
    the fact that in the end he was released on payment of a bribe.

37.  In this regard, there  is  the  point  on  which  Ms  Laughton  relies,
    building on paragraph 10 of the grounds of appeal, where it  is  argued
    that the implication  of  what  the  judge  says  is  that  only  those
    implicated in minor incidents could be released by payment of a  bribe,
    whereas at paragraph 39 of his report  Dr  Giustozzi  states  that  the
    police are widely  reported  to  extract  bribes  from  individuals  in
    exchange for their release or for avoiding  arrest,  including  a  case
    where the kidnappers of three UN electoral workers in autumn 2004  were
    freed from their prison by a General of the Ministry  of  the  Interior
    without authorisation of the judiciary.  He also says that many Taliban
    have been able to bribe their way out of prison.

38.  We do not think that that  detracts  from  the  force  of  the  judge's
    conclusions and again the failure specifically to address what is  said
    by Dr Giustozzi there materially mars  the  determination.   The  judge
    had, as we say, noted the discrepancy in the  evidence,  and  the  fact
    that the appellant was released on payment of a bribe  is  clearly  not
    irrelevant  to  the  degree  of  interest  that  there  was   in   him,
    particularly bearing in mind the matters that are set out at  paragraph
    100 in any event.

39.  It is relevant to  go  on  also  and  to  note  paragraph  108  of  the
    determination commenting on two entirely speculative assertions as  the
    judge described them by Dr Giustozzi that on the one  hand  the  threat
    from Hizb-i-Islami to the appellant was unlikely  to  derive  from  his
    refusal to join the party but could be motivated by rumours  about  him
    perhaps again spread by his relatives in the NDS, and, in  relation  to
    the receipt of letters from the police, that the long  time  span  over
    which they had been distributed might relate to reports received by the
    police concerning his presence in his home area.  As the judge  rightly
    commented, there was no evidence for those assertions  at  all  and  of
    course the appellant was not in his home area at any  time  during  the
    period in question.

40.  Bringing these particular matters together, we consider that the  judge
    did not materially err in not specifically adverting to the  points  in
    Dr Giustozzi's report that  it  is  said  he  should  have  taken  into
    account.  He made it clear that he had come to his findings following a
    careful perusal of Dr Giustozzi's report, and, though  that  is  in  no
    sense a saving provision, it is also not without relevance  bearing  in
    mind the further points that we have made above.

41.  The next issue is the allegation of forgery.  Ms Laughton is  obviously
    right to argue that the fact that the  refusal  letter  only  spoke  in
    terms of unreliability of documentation cannot be the final point.   It
    seems from paragraph 70 of the determination  that  in  submissions  on
    behalf of the Secretary of State the point was made that  many  of  the
    documents produced could easily be forgeries.  However  saying  that  a
    document could easily be a forgery is some distance from  an  assertion
    that it is a forgery, in our view,  and  the  comments  of  the  judge,
    quoted in the grounds, from paragraph 98 of the determination, that the
    Hizb-i-Islami letters had been created simply to boost the  appellant's
    asylum claim, and what he said at  paragraph  110  that  the  appellant
    "would be easily able enough to contrive the supportive  evidence  that
    has been produced in relation to the issue of risk" are not in our view
    properly to be interpreted as  assertions  of  forgery.   No  doubt  an
    allegation of forgery must be proved by the person who asserts it,  but
    in this case we do not  consider  that  forgery  was  asserted  by  the
    Secretary of State and nor was it asserted by the  judge.   He  clearly
    had concerns about the reliability of the documentation  for  the  many
    reasons that he set out in his determination, and it is a matter  where
    the burden remains on the appellant.

42.  This is tied in also with the final point which is the reliance  placed
    in the grounds and indeed before the  judge  of  the  decision  of  the
    European Court of Human Rights in Singh v Belgium.  We do not  have  an
    official translation of the judgment in this  case  from  the  original
    French, but we have been provided with a helpful  translation  prepared
    for Howe & Co Solicitors by  an  organisation.   The  case  involved  a
    family of Afghan nationals, who had come to Belgium from Russia and who
    argued that their  deportation  to   Russia  would  entail  a  risk  of
    repatriation to Afghanistan in breach of their rights under  Article  3
    of the European Convention on Human Rights.  At the  stage  where  they
    appealed against the initial refusal decisions,  (to  the  CGRA,  which
    rejected their claims) they provided documentation in the form first of
    emails between their solicitor and a representative  from  the  Belgian
    Committee for the Support of Refugees (CBAR), an operational partner of
    the UNHCR, who was sending emails from an  official  of  UNHCR  in  New
    Delhi which had as  attachments  attestations  which  stated  that  the
    petitioners had been recorded as  refugees  under  the  UNHCR  mandate.
    Emails  also  stated  that  the  second  petitioner  had  asked  for  a
    naturalisation in India at the end of 2009 and that  the  investigation
    of her petition was just beginning and that  she  had  a  valid  Afghan
    passport issued by the Afghan Embassy in New Delhi.

43.  At the appeal hearing it was deemed that the petitioners had failed  to
    prove their Afghan nationality as well as the reality of the protection
    of UNHCR.  The appeal court (the CCE) believed that  the  documents  of
    the UNHCR were easy to falsify and because the petitioners  had  failed
    to provide originals they were of no convincing value.

44.  At paragraph 101 the European Court of  Human  Rights  considered  that
    the documents provided were not insignificant since  they  were  emails
    sent by the intermediary of CBAR a partner of the UNHCR in Belgium  and
    after the CGRA decision by UNHCR official in New Delhi.   These  emails
    had attachments  which  were  attestations  from  the  UNHCR  that  the
    petitioners had been recorded as refugees under the UNHCR  mandate  and
    which confirmed the dates declared by the petitioners to support  their
    journey during their interviews  by  the  OE  (the  Belgian  Bureau  of
    Foreigners).  The Belgian Court had  not  given  any  weight  to  these
    documents because they were easily falsified and the petitioners failed
    to provide originals.

45.   The court went on at paragraph 103 to note the importance  of  Article
    3 and the irreversible nature of the harm likely to be caused in a case
    of the  realisation  of  the  risk  of  ill-treatment  and  that  as  a
    consequence it was the responsibility of the  national  authorities  to
    show that they were as rigorous as possible and  carry  out  a  careful
    investigation of the grounds of appeal drawn from Article  3  and  that
    such an investigation must remove all doubt, legitimate as it  may  be,
    as to the invalidity of the request for protection  regardless  of  the
    competences of the authority responsible for the control.

46.  At paragraph 104  the  court  went  on  to  say  that  the  removal  of
    documents which were at the heart of the request  for  protection,  not
    only by the  CGRA  but  also  the  CCE,  by  judging  them  not  to  be
    convincing, without previously checking  their  authenticity,  when  it
    would have been easy to do this at the UNHCR, could not be viewed as  a
    careful and rigorous investigation  expected  of  national  authorities
    within the meaning of Article 13 of the Convention and did not give  an
    effective protection against any treatment contrary to Article 3 of the
    Convention.

47.  In Tanveer  Ahmed  [2002]  Imm  AR  318,  a  starred  decision  of  the
    Immigration Appeal Tribunal, the  following  principles  were  set  out
    after a careful assessment of the case law.

         "37. In summary the principles set out in this determination are:


             1.   In asylum and human rights cases it is for an  individual
                  claimant to show that a document on which he seeks to rely
                  can be relied on.


             2.   The decision maker should consider whether a document  is
                  one on which reliance  should  properly  be  placed  after
                  looking at all the evidence in the round.


             3.   Only very rarely will  there  be  the  need  to  make  an
                  allegation  of  forgery,  or  evidence  strong  enough  to
                  support it.  The allegation should  not  be  made  without
                  such evidence.  Failure to establish the allegation on the
                  balance of probabilities to the higher civil standard does
                  not show that a document is reliable.  The decision  maker
                  still needs to apply principles 1 and 2."

48.  It is clear from paragraph 36 of the determination that the  respondent
    alleged forgery, though it was not clear whether  the  Adjudicator  had
    found that the documents were forgeries.  The Tribunal said that he did
    not state in terms that they were and that it was a case where  it  was
    not necessary for the Adjudicator to make  a  specific  finding  as  to
    whether the documents were forgeries.  He had commented that there  was
    not a reasonable likelihood that either the warrant or the FIR  in  the
    case was genuine  and  went  further  and  found  that  they  had  been
    "manufactured".  On the evidence it was  said  that  these  conclusions
    were open to him.

49.  At paragraph  35  the  Tribunal  made  the  point  that  there  was  no
    obligation  on  the  Home  Office  to  make  detailed  enquiries  about
    documents produced by individual claimants.  It was said that doubtless
    there were cost and logistical difficulties in the light of the  number
    of documents submitted by many asylum claimants.  The Tribunal went  on
    to say as follows:

         "In the  absence  of  a  particular  reason  on  the  facts  of  an
         individual case,  a  decision  by  the  Home  Office  not  to  make
         enquiries, produce in-country evidence  relating  to  a  particular
         document or  scientific  evidence  should  not  give  rise  to  any
         presumption in favour of an individual claimant or against the Home
         Office."

50.  This is a starred decision of the IAT and we are bound by  it.   It  is
    relevant however to consider it in the context  of  what  was  said  in
    Singh v Belgium.  Upon consideration  we do not  think  that  what  was
    said in Singh is inconsistent with the quotation we have set out  above
    from paragraph 35 of Tanveer Ahmed.  Tanveer Ahmed  does  not  entirely
    preclude the existence of an obligation on  the  Home  Office  to  make
    enquiries.  It envisages, as can be seen, the existence  of  particular
    cases where it may be appropriate for enquiries to be made.  Clearly on
    its facts Singh can properly be regarded as  such  a  particular  case.
    The  documentation  in  that  case  was  clearly  of  a  nature   where
    verification  would  be  easy,  and  the  documentation  came  from  an
    unimpeachable source.  We do not think that Ms  Laughton  has  entirely
    correctly characterised what was said in Singh in  suggesting  that  in
    any case where evidence was verifiable there was an obligation  on  the
    decision maker to seek to verify.  What is said  at  paragraph  104  is
    rather in terms of a case where documents  are  at  the  heart  of  the
    request for protection where it would have been  easy  to  check  their
    authenticity as in that case with the UNHCR.  That is a very  long  way
    indeed from the difficulties that would have been involved in this case
    in attempted verification by the Home  Office  of  documents  emanating
    from Hizb-i-Islami.  We do not think that  what  is  said  in  Singh  v
    Belgium in any sense justifies  or  requires  any  departure  from  the
    guidance in Tanveer Ahmed which is binding on us and which we  consider
    to remain entirely sound.

51.  In conclusion, therefore, we do not find an error of law in any of  the
    respects in which it has been argued in this case, and  our  conclusion
    is that the decision of the judge dismissing the appeal on all  grounds
    is to be maintained.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

