
   [pic]
Upper Tribunal
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

AB and Others (internet activity - state of evidence) Iran [2015] UKUT 0257
(IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 28 January 2014, 29 January 2014, 30       |On 19 March 2015             |
|January 2014 and 31 January 2014              |Re-Promulgated on 30 April   |
|                                              |2015                         |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                                     AB
                                     CD
                                     EF
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellants:
AB   Mr P Haywood, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis Solicitors
CD   Mr T Hodson, Counsel acting for Elder Rahimi Solicitors
EF   Ms S Harrison, Solicitor from Halliday Reeves
For the Respondent:    Mr B Rawat, Counsel instructed by the Treasury
Solicitors

The material put before the tribunal did  not  disclose  a  sufficient
evidential basis for giving  country  or  other  guidance  upon  what,
reliably, can be expected in terms of the reception in Iran for  those
returning otherwise than with a "regular" passport in relation to whom
interest may be excited from the authorities into internet activity as
might be revealed by an examination of blogging activity or a Facebook
account. However, this determination is reported so that the  evidence
considered by the Upper Tribunal is available in the public domain.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants in this case are citizens of Iran.  In very broad  terms
    they each claim they are refugees because of their "blogging"  activity
    on the internet. The word "blogging" will be readily  understood  by  a
    contemporary  reader  but   for   the   avoidance   of   any   possible
    misunderstanding we mean the practice of  publishing  on  the  internet
    written articles, reports, film clips, pictures, or links to the  same,
    whether produced by the person responsible for  the  blog  or  another.
    They each appeal against decisions of the Secretary  of  State  on  the
    grounds that they are refugees or otherwise entitled  to  international
    protection.

 2. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 we make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any
    matter likely to lead members of the public to identify any or  all  of
    the appellants. Their cases depend in part on their risking persecution
    because of things that they have done  since  leaving  Iran,  including
    criticising  the  government  of  Iran.  The  significance   of   their
    activities is disputed by the  respondent.  Publicity  that  identified
    them to the Iranian authorities might lead  to  the  absurd  result  of
    their needing protection solely because an  otherwise  unfounded  claim
    for asylum had  attracted  attention.  Breach  of  this  order  can  be
    punished as a contempt of court. Although the order  must  be  followed
    strictly it is not intended to stifle reporting of the  issues  in  the
    case and our findings on them.

 3. As well as determining the three separate appeals that are before us we
    have endeavoured to give general guidance on a range of related issues.
    In an effort to make our decision easier to read  we  do  not  consider
    below each strand of evidence or argument in  the  order  in  which  we
    heard it. For similar reasons  we  identify  the  appellants  by  their
    initials rather than their place in the title.

 4. We confirm that we have  considered  all  of  the  several  volumes  of
    evidence before us even though we  do  not  mention  each  document  or
    submission specifically. We reached no  conclusion  before  considering
    the evidence as a whole. We have decided each appeal on its own  merits
    and we have reminded ourselves that although the appellant in each case
    must prove his or her  case  the  standard  of  proof  is  low.  It  is
    sufficient to show only a real risk of persecution or other serious ill
    treatment in the event of return to Iran to qualify for protection.

 5. The appellant, AB, was born in 1989.  He  appeals  a  decision  of  the
    respondent on 25 March 2011 to remove him as an  illegal  entrant.   He
    entered the United Kingdom on 3 March 2011.

 6. His appeal was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal in a decision dated
    11 May 2011. He appealed to the Upper Tribunal  which  found  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal had erred in law and made fresh findings  of  fact.
    The Upper Tribunal dismissed the appeal  on  20  August  2012  but  the
    appeal comes before us pursuant to an order of the Court of  Appeal  on
    27 June 2013. The Court of Appeal ordered by consent that the appeal be
    remitted to this Tribunal to be decided again with  the  other  appeals
    determined here, on a particular basis. This was explained at paragraph
    1 of the consent order dated 27 June 2013 where the Court said:

         "The Appellant's appeal be  allowed  by  remittal  of  the  limited
         grounds of appeal on which permission was granted  by  Sir  Richard
         Buxton in his Court Order of 7 February 2013  (identified  in  sub-
         paragraph 2 of the "Events in the UK" paragraph,  relating  to  the
         blogging in the UK) to the Upper Tribunal of  the  Immigration  and
         Asylum Chamber for reconsideration  pursuant  to  paragraph  12  of
         Schedule  4  to  the  Transfer  of  Functions  of  the  Asylum  and
         Immigration Tribunal Order 2010 (SI 2010/21) and section 14 of  the
         Tribunal, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007".

 7. The appellant, CD, was born in 1975 and so is now 39  years  old.   She
    appeals a decision of the respondent of 25 March 2011 to refuse to vary
    her leave to remain in the United Kingdom.  She arrived in  the  United
    Kingdom in September 2010 with permission to enter  as  a  student  and
    claimed asylum on 4 March 2011. Her appeal was dismissed by the  First-
    tier Tribunal but permission to appeal  was  given  by  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Gleeson because she found it arguable  that  insufficient  weight
    had been given to  the  appellant's  blogging  activities,  the  expert
    evidence on which she relied about how bloggers might be identified and
    treated in Iran and her political activities.

 8. Before us there was little argument on the point and we  are  satisfied
    that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law for the reasons identified by
    Judge Gleeson as arguable.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  engage
    adequately with the background and expert evidence presented to it.  We
    therefore set aside its  determination  and  decide  the  appeal  again
    ourselves.

 9. The appellant, EF, was born in 1972.  He appealed  a  decision  of  the
    respondent on 22 November 2011 to remove him from the  United  Kingdom.
    His appeal against  that  decision  was  dismissed  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal but the Upper Tribunal, in a determination promulgated  on  12
    May 2013, found that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law  and  set
    aside the decision in that case. Although the reasons have already been
    sent to the parties we formally  incorporate  the  decision  into  this
    determination and set it out at Appendix 3.

10. These cases raise common questions and  the  parties  had  suggested  a
    "list of issues" to be determined in  the  appeal  which  the  Tribunal
    agreed to adopt.  We set these out below:

         List of Issues

         (1)  The use of social and other  internet-based  media  (including
         the posting of articles,  comments  or  web  links  on  a  website;
         maintaining  or  contributing  to   a   blog;   uploading/streaming
         photographs or videos; the use of  Facebook  by  Iranian  nationals
         located  in  the  United  Kingdom  to  make  actual  or   perceived
         criticisms of the Iranian state)

         (2)  Whether such use is reasonably likely to come to the attention
         of the Iranian  authorities  because  those  authorities  have  the
         capability to detect and monitor such activity

             (a)  the capability of  the  Iranian  authorities  to  monitor
                  and/or restrict the use within Iran  social  and/or  other
                  internet-based media;

             (b)  the capability of the  Iranian  authorities  to  identify
                  individuals in Iran who use (as  in  (1)),  above,  social
                  and/or  other  internet-based  media  in  a  way  that  is
                  critical or perceived as being  critical  of  the  Iranian
                  authorities;

             (c)  the capability of the Iranian authorities to monitor  the
                  use social  and  other  internet-based  media  by  Iranian
                  nationals based outside of Iran;

             (d)  the capability of the  Iranian  authorities  to  identify
                  Iranian nationals based  outside  Iran  who  make  use  of
                  social and/or other internet-based media to criticise  the
                  Iranian government and/or express views which  are  likely
                  to be considered critical of the Iranian state;

             (e)  the level of public interest within Iran in views  posted
                  on  social  or  other  internet-based  media  by   Iranian
                  nationals living in the United Kingdom and  which  may  be
                  considered critical of the Iranian state;

             (f)  the capability of the  Iranian  authorities  to  restrict
                  access to social/internet-based media operated by Iranians
                  in the United Kingdom and is  critical  or  deemed  to  be
                  critical of the Iranian state.

         (3)  The additional factors that may be relevant to  an  assessment
         of the risk on return to an Iranian  national  who,  while  in  the
         United Kingdom, has used social and/or other  internet-based  media
         to express views that are, or are deemed by the Iranian authorities
         to be critical of the Iranian state, including:

             (a)  the use of  social  and/or  other  internet-based  media,
                  prior to departure from Iran, in a manner considered to be
                  critical of the Iranian state;

             (b)  the nature of any "profile" with the authorities that the
                  returnee might have had before leaving Iran;

             (c)  other "sur place" activities in the UK;

             (d)   the  immigration  history  of  the  returnee,  including
                  whether the returnee has left Iran illegally;

             (e)  the possession of a laptop and/or  other  equipment  that
                  may be used across the internet.

         (4)  Whether and by what means the  Iranian  authorities  would  be
         able to link a returnee to social media and/or other internet-based
         activity conducted in the United Kingdom.

         (5)  Would the treatment received by an  individual  on  return  be
         affected by the nature and extent of their use of social and  other
         internet-based media?

         (6)  The relevance, if any, of  the  opportunistic  use  of  social
         and/or other internet-based media.

11. Each of the parties has provided us with a skeleton argument  which  we
    have found very helpful.

12. The appellants CD and EF each gave evidence before  us.  In  each  case
    their evidence is summarised in the appendices. Our  findings  on  that
    evidence are obvious from the case summaries below.

13. We consider Mr Rawat's closing  submissions  later  but  we  found  his
    skeleton argument  a  particularly  helpful  guide  to  the  points  of
    contention in these appeals and we summarize it now as an introduction.
    Unsurprisingly it outlined the respondent's case  in  respect  of  each
    appellant.

14. He was careful to emphasise that adverse credibility findings had  been
    made in the case of AB and these had not been disturbed  by  reason  of
    the Court of Appeal's decision.  Both Mr Rawat and Mr Haywood (for  AB)
    accepted that the Court of Appeal did not  regard  the  anonymous  blog
    attributed to AB as being significant because it could not be traced to
    him.

15. Concerning AB, the respondent says that AB is a male  Iranian  national
    of Kurdish ethnicity born in 1989.  He entered the  United  Kingdom  in
    March 2011 and claimed asylum the same day.  He said  he  had  attended
    four demonstrations in favour of a Kurdish self-government and had been
    a member of the Kurdish Democratic Party and the authorities had raided
    his home and shop and taken his laptop.  This  had  political  writings
    that he had placed on the website and a picture of an Iranian  banknote
    defaced with a political slogan.  He left Iran  and  made  his  way  to
    Turkey on foot.  His claim for asylum was refused.

16. The respondent accepted that AB had recorded a rap  album  released  on
    the internet in 2008.

17. The First-tier Tribunal did not believe part of AB's evidence. It found
    that AB could not be identified  from  the  website  on  which  he  had
    uploaded his rap album.  It found that AB had not proved  that  he  was
    the author of the contents of the blogs of which he claimed  ownership.
    Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted on a very narrow
    ground but the Upper Tribunal conducted a  full  re-hearing  and  heard
    evidence.  It did not accept that AB had told the truth about  what  he
    had done in Iran and that there was nothing about  AB's  activities  in
    the United Kingdom to  bring  him  to  the  attention  of  the  Iranian
    authorities.  His online activities were conducted under pseudonyms and
    the blog was  only  accessible  with  his  permission.   There  was  no
    original material.  The Tribunal decided that his activities  had  been
    conducted to bolster an asylum claim.  The Court of  Appeal  set  aside
    the decision by consent  because  the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to
    engage with the material about the consequences of blogging.

18. In the case of AB we were directed to consider how the appellant  might
    be at risk  as  a  consequence  of  his  UK-based  activities  and,  by
    implication, if his activities were  opportunistic.   Evidence  of  his
    conduct in Iran was rejected.  There is evidence before us from the KDP-
    I. It was not before the First-tier Tribunal and it  confirms  that  he
    was an active member of the party and remains an active member  in  the
    United Kingdom.

19. The Secretary of State has accepted that AB put music  on  his  website
    (its name was given in evidence) and the songs clearly have a political
    content.

20. Before leaving Iran he had "blogged" and had blogged  since  coming  to
    the United Kingdom via a web site he used first posted  in  2011.   The
    second of the blogs bears his photograph and full name and shows him to
    be in the United Kingdom.  He also has a Facebook account and  hosts  a
    room on Facebook known as [name redacted]  which  includes  videos  and
    satires of the Iranian regime.  Copies of some of the appellant's songs
    and photographs were on YouTube.  In the United  Kingdom  he  has  been
    involved with the KDP-I and  attends  meetings  but  does  not  play  a
    prominent part.  A search in Google against his name  brings  up  music
    that he has posted including YouTube links, his Facebook page  and  his
    blog.

21. We were shown "Mr AB's YouTube" handouts.  These appear  to  have  been
    found by searching for the appellant's name.  The response  was  headed
    "did you mean: AB".  Of particular interest was a song identified as  a
    political song about the situation in Iran  and  about  the  system  of
    government being a dictatorship.  Another was identified as a  song  in
    Kurdish, also a political song, translating roughly as "for the sake of
    my homeland".  One was identified particularly as a song  by  "TT"  (we
    have disguised the name), described as a Kurdish  and  English  rapper.
    AB said that he wrote the song and music with the help of the Welsh guy
    who was one of the three singers identified elsewhere from the website.

22. Concerning CD the respondent said that she is a female national of Iran
    who was born in 1975. She is  a  political  science  graduate  who  was
    employed in various positions before getting a permanent job in Iran as
    a translator with  the  state  broadcaster.   She  entered  the  United
    Kingdom in 2010 on her own passport with valid  entry  clearance  as  a
    student and claimed asylum about three months before her leave  lapsed.
    The appeal was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal and  permission  to
    appeal was given to the appellant because:

         "insufficient weight had been given  to  her  blogging  activities;
         that she was a genuine political activist;  and  that  insufficient
         weight had been given to her expert evidence about blogging and the
         way bloggers are identified and treated in Iran".

23. Although we received, and noted, additional evidence we have no  reason
    to go behind the findings of the First-tier Tribunal.  It follows  that
    this is a case of a person who was awarded a first-class masters degree
    at [university redacted] in Tehran in political  science  in  the  year
    2000.  She started work as a teacher but she was stopped working  as  a
    teacher because she objected to the contents of some of the books  from
    which she was required to teach and she was not  sufficiently  diligent
    in  promoting  and  encouraging  students  in  the   ways   of   Islam.
    Nevertheless she was able to get a series of short-term jobs  with  the
    Islamic Republic of Iran Broadcasting  Corporation  with  a  particular
    interest in the analysis of the political news and events in the Middle
    East.  She was stopped getting  a  full-time  job  by  the  actions  of
    Herasat because she was not thought to be  sufficiently  loyal  to  the
    supreme leader or to Islam and in the presidential election of 2009 she
    campaigned for the Green Movement.

24. In the case of EF the respondent says that he is  a  male  national  of
    Iran born in 1972.  He travelled from Iran to Turkey where his passport
    was stamped and  returned  to  him.   He  entered  the  United  Kingdom
    illegally in September 2011 and claimed asylum on arrival.   He  relied
    on his having co-founded a Facebook group called [WEBSITE].  The  group
    had 1,500 members.  Before the First-tier Tribunal  he  relied  on  his
    interview   given   to   [company    redacted],    an    internet-based
    telecommunications company which was placed on YouTube.   The  Tribunal
    granted permission to appeal and an error of law was found and  it  was
    observed that none of the findings about his activities  in  Iran  were
    directed to stand.

25. We have reflected carefully  on  EF's  evidence  and  the  way  it  was
    challenged.  We found him a substantially truthful witness.   He  makes
    no claims that are extravagant or otherwise  inherently  beyond  belief
    and the reasons for disbelieving him do not, we find,  amount  to  very
    much.  The point most energetically pursued against him was that he was
    unable to identify  the  make  of  his  computer.   He  has  given  two
    different explanations but they are not inconsistent.  At interview  he
    said that the computer was given him by his  brother  and  on  a  later
    occasion in his statements he explained that computers in Iran tend not
    to be bought as an entire unit from one manufacturer but assembled from
    parts.  It is within our knowledge that computers tend to  have  common
    design  features  and  the   manufacturers   put   much   emphasis   on
    interchangeability and compatibility of components.

26. We really cannot accept that EF is unbelievable  because  he  does  not
    know the name of the main maker of his computer or because he has given
    different but not inconsistent explanations for his ignorance.

27. We accept that EF had helped establish a group called  [name  redacted]
    with the help of four friends and this group  expressed  opposition  to
    the Islamic regime.  The group  is  identified  on  Facebook  and  they
    showed some discernment before they allowed someone to be a member.  We
    accept that a cofounder of [name redacted] was arrested, that this  was
    seen by a friend who warned the appellant who  decided  to  leave.   He
    left Iran irregularly for Turkey.  After he had gone he had  been  told
    his computer had been seized.  We accept  that  he  had  saved  illicit
    material on his computer of a kind that would concern the  authorities.
    His explanation of being able to obtain news filter codes from Voice of
    America is, we find, wholly consistent with the background material and
    inherently believable.

28. We accept further that he has established the website [WEBSITE] in late
    2009 or 2010 and had used  no  privacy  settings.   He  did  have  some
    security in that a person joining the account  was,  usually,  checked.
    That account was hacked  by  "Soldiers  of  Islam".  This  is  apparent
    because of a posting in that name  purporting  to  close  the  account.
    They also established a new group [new group redacted] but this  was  a
    closed group and had at the time of writing over 5,000 members.  He had
    used YouTube as a means of broadcasting  his  activities  and  uploaded
    twelve videos onto that site.  He was  twice  interviewed  by  [company
    redacted] which is accessible via the YouTube account and so recordings
    of the interviews could be seen.  These interviews were when he was  in
    the United Kingdom.

29. The appellants called expert evidence.

Mr K G

30. Mr "KG" gave evidence before us. His identity is known to  the  parties
    and the Tribunal but is disguised here to protect his safety.  Although
    called by appellant CD  he  gave  substantially  unchallenged  evidence
    about the internet in Iran and we set out his evidence first because it
    illuminates the rest. We set out his evidence first because he was  the
    witness best able to describe the  ways  in  which  the  Iranian  state
    monitors computer activities and how some computer users respond.

31. He adopted his report dated December 2013.  It includes  the  customary
    expert direction and an  explanation  that  he  had  worked  as  an  IT
    specialist with knowledge of computer forensics  for  more  than  eight
    years.  He had worked in Iran for five years in that capacity  and  had
    some experience working for governmental organisations as a contractor.
     He had personal experience of setting up a  small  network  to  bypass
    Iranian filtering systems.  He had also read the statements from  other
    papers provided by CD about her case.

32. His curriculum vitae showed that he had worked as a forensic specialist
    and a network administrator and has designed  computer  systems  for  a
    major  insurance  company  in  Tehran  and  has  worked  as  a  network
    administrator involved with the transport industry in Iran.  He holds a
    university degree  and  he  has  been  a  Microsoft  Certified  Systems
    engineer since 2002.  We  regard  these  as  the  qualifications  of  a
    graduate level computer technician and we found his  evidence  helpful,
    clear and in accordance with his experience.

33. He had answered written questions arising from his  statement.   We  do
    not find them particularly significant in themselves but we have  noted
    them and evaluated them with the rest of his evidence.

34. He said that internet censorship began in  Iran  in  May  2001  at  the
    initiative of the then supreme leader Ayatollah Khomeini  who  dictated
    the  policies  of  the  Iranian  Ministry  of   Telecommunication   and
    Information Technology.  President Khatami  opposed  adopting  measures
    without the approval of parliament  but  the  Supreme  Council  of  the
    Cultural Revolution mandated Regulations concerning internet  use,  the
    most important of which concerned filtering.

35. In the early days the operation of the filtering and monitoring systems
    was neither substantial nor  extensive  but  it  developed  over  time.
    Filtering is a process whereby activity on the  web  is  electronically
    checked for particular content, typically but not exclusively,  certain
    words or patterns of  words  that  interest  the  body  organising  the
    filter.

36. Ayatollah Khomeini introduced the  Supreme  Council  of  Virtual  Space
    which was taxed with safeguarding the revolution against potential harm
    in  the  growing  distribution   of   information   and   communication
    technology.  The report then included a  detailed  explanation  of  how
    filtering can work.  The internet service in Iran is unusual,  probably
    unique, in that the  design  priority  is  ease  of  interception.  The
    quality and speed of service provided are not important.

37. There were at the time of writing over 600 internet  service  providers
    in Iran offering various subscription services.  These included  a  few
    internet service providers run by the Iranian government.  The rest are
    private companies, chiefly parsonline.com, phishgaman.net and laser.ir.

38. However, one of the major internet service providers is TCI.ir operated
    by Iranian Telecommunications Company.  The internet  service  provided
    by TCI (Iranian Telecommunications Company) is slow and expensive.  For
    example, in the United Kingdom a typical internet service  provided  by
    British Telecom of 16 megabytes per second is available to the end user
    for �16 a month.  In Iran a service offering  half  that  speed  (8mps)
    would cost the end user the equivalent of  �600  per  month.   This  is
    approximately six times the minimum monthly wage in Iran but even  then
    additional payments would be needed to get a meaningful  service.   TCI
    provides infrastructure and cabling to the end user but charges  for  a
    faster service than it has any intention of  providing.   It  owns  and
    operates   the   entire   Iranian   telecommunication   and    internet
    infrastructure and allocates bandwidth to ISPs.   It  is  a  government
    agency affiliated to the Ministry of Telecommunication and  Information
    Technology.

39. All internet traffic converges at TCI  before  being  routed  into  the
    worldwide internet.  The most common kind of internet access was  "dial
    up" using an ordinary telephone line.

40. The maximum permitted internet speed  was  set  at  128  kilobytes  per
    second for home users.  This  compares  with  a  UK  average  of  8,601
    kilobytes per second.  The Iranian parliament in January 2011 announced
    that it would not increase the maximum internet speed for  householders
    and a maximum internet speed  of  128  kilobytes  per  second  gives  a
    download speed of only 16 kilobytes per second.  The minimum needed  to
    watch low quality television on line is 52 kilobytes  per  second.   He
    suggested that this was done quite  deliberately  to  facilitate  state
    control.

41. Nevertheless by 2012 Iran had 42,000,000 internet users.

42. The Iranian parliament has prohibited  websites  carrying  a  range  of
    content from political and social subjects  to  pornographic  material.
    However, there are many different government organisations involved  in
    filtering and controlling the  internet.   These  include  the  Supreme
    Council of Virtual Space, the Committee for Determining the Criminality
    of Web Content, the Iranian Cyber Army  and  the  Information  Exchange
    Police. The  Iranian  supreme  leader  has  authority  over  appointing
    officials to all  of  the  aforementioned  government  bodies.   It  is
    believed that the  Supreme  Council  of  Virtual  Space  has  the  most
    important role in devising internet management strategies.

43. However, the Committee for Determining the Criminality of  Web  Content
    is the ultimate decision-maker on what is legally permissible and  what
    is not and is responsible for  creating  a  list  of  banned  websites.
    Sites can be banned  because,  for  example,  they  have  inappropriate
    social content, being against Islamic principles,  being  a  threat  to
    national security  or  having  taken  any  action  to  bypass  internet
    filtering.  The Supreme Council of Virtual Space and the Committee  for
    Determining the Criminality of Web Content have  a  close  relationship
    and share committee members including the  intelligence  minister,  the
    minister of science, research  and  technology  and  the  head  of  the
    Islamic Republic of Iran Broadcasting.  The Iranian prosecutor  general
    monitors all the bodies  involved  in  controlling  and  filtering  the
    internet in Iran and is responsible for submitting the list  of  banned
    websites  to  the  Iranian   Telecommunications   Company   and   other
    organisations in charge of distributing web content.

44. In 2007 a new law required all website owners and  blog  publishers  to
    register and  in  the  same  year  the  Iranian  parliament  enacted  a
    provision  that  all  web  content  contrary  to  Islamic  values   and
    traditions is  prohibited  and  banned.   The  Regulating  of  Internet
    Websites Act introduced a total of  sixteen  categories  of  restricted
    content.  Some of these were directed to restricting criminal  activity
    such as  money  laundering  or  disclosing  military  secrets.   Others
    restrain the distribution of pornographic  material.   However,  others
    were  vague  and  to  western  ears  rather  sinister.   For   example,
    "insulting  the  supreme  leader  or  the  late  Ayatollah   Khomeini",
    "misinterpreting the revolution", "encouraging pessimism and  weakening
    popular confidence in the government", "showing  methods  of  bypassing
    internet  filters"  and  "atheistic  assertions"  are  all  restricted.
    Punishment for violating the consequent Rules can attract a fine of  up
    to �20,000 and a maximum prison sentence of  fifteen  years.   Web  use
    known to have attracted filtering includes peer to peer communications,
    websites serving foreign media and conservative  websites  as  well  as
    active critics in the domestic  media.   The  following  are  given  as
    examples of undesirable content: Voice of America, the  BBC,  web  blog
    and websites reflecting news,  pictures  and  videos  such  as  YouTube
    relating to political protest as well as sites with immoral content and
    guidance on  anti-filter  utilities,  proxy  servers,  Virtual  Private
    Networks servers,  sites  dealing  with  gold  valuation  and  currency
    exchange  and  even  websites  connected  to   the   former   President
    Rafsanjani, President Khatami and the British Embassy.

45. Notwithstanding the high degree of Regulation, web content filtering is
    an arbitrary affair so that even registered unauthorised  websites  can
    be closed  down  or  filtered  without  notice.   For  example,  during
    President Ahmadinejad's re-election campaign many opposition  activists
    turned to social network and internet news websites and the  government
    responded by filtering and then banning almost all social network sites
    and disabling all instant messaging ports such as Yahoo Messengers  and
    Google Talk.

46. The report then explains the methods of filtering in Iran.  It  is  not
    for us to comment on the mechanisms involved.  The point is that it  is
    possible to block IP addresses so that traffic  is  stopped,  to  limit
    internet bandwidth, to permit detailed scrutiny, to pick up  key  words
    such as "anti-filter", and to classify certain traffic as unacceptable.
    Thus, for example, all activity with "Skype" could be stopped, and data
    could be subject to both deep  packet  inspection  and  shallow  packet
    inspection as it is transferred.  Shallow packet inspection could throw
    up  something  of  interest  and  divert  the  data  for  deep   packet
    inspection. In this way a relatively quick  and  broad  examination  of
    data can be used to identify areas of  particular  interest  which  can
    then be examined still more thoroughly.

47. All filtering and monitoring in Iran was done through a single location
    in Tehran using a combination of different local and imported filtering
    and monitoring appliances  from  major  manufacturers.   Much  of  this
    equipment  has  been  obtained   through   third   parties   to   avoid
    international sanctions.  The equipment  has  the  ability  to  oversee
    traffic from instant messaging such as Yahoo, MSN and  others,  emails,
    internet telephoning, receiving and sending email, transferring  files,
    web traffic and secure web traffic.  The filtering could be  done  very
    quickly and make a record which can be inspected later.

48. There are ways around  this  equipment.   The  most  common  method  is
    "tunnelling".  It is not necessary to understand it in detail  for  the
    purposes of this determination.  It essentially depends on  the  little
    parcels of data that have been transferred  being  encrypted  at  their
    source and decoded at their destination so there is  only  nonsense  to
    intercept between delivery and arrival.  Commonly the tunnelling server
    is outside Iran so filtering systems within Iran cannot know  both  the
    source and destination of a particular piece of  data.   However,  such
    systems are imperfect.

49. Further it is believed that individuals  associated  with  the  Iranian
    security apparatus have deceitfully provided Virtual  Private  Networks
    with anti-filtering tools so that people who think that they are making
    their data secure are actually sending it directly to  the  government.
    By using devious means the government agencies  have  managed  to  hack
    into servers and decode user names and passwords for Google, Yahoo  and
    Skype users.

50. The Iranian government are also believed to have been involved in  "DNS
    spoofing and phishing".  These are ways of copying the log-in pages  of
    well-known websites  and  so  deceiving  users  into  disclosing  their
    identities to the Iranian state when the user thinks that he or she  is
    logging into the real product.  In a similar  way  government-sponsored
    hackers present themselves on the web as attractive women in an  effort
    to stimulate a  victim's  sexual  interest  and  so  disclose  personal
    details to the hacker, thinking that they are attempting to contact the
    woman.

51. In 2004 a number  of  bloggers  in  Iran  were  detained  and  held  in
    isolation and then interrogated with the result  that  they  gave  away
    information about their own websites and the people who  use  them.  In
    response to pre-hearing written questions from the  respondent,  Mr  KG
    referred          to          the          following          websites:
    http://resources.infosecinstitute.com/social-engineering-a-hacking-
    story/ and http://www.symantec.com/connect/articles/social-engineering-
    fundamantals-part-i-hacker-tactics. The "infosecinstitute"  appears  to
    link to a serious website dealing with internet security. Symantec is a
    well known supplier of internet security and although we could not find
    the particular link relied  upon  we  regard  this  as  a  serious  and
    responsible source of information and the link give weight to  Mr  KG's
    views.

52. Government agents also feign support for anti-regime  political  groups
    in an effort to be allowed access to their websites.   Techniques  such
    as this can reveal information which individually, or collectively, can
    be used to trace the identity of bloggers.  It is  believed  that  many
    Iranian pornographers were deceitfully convinced to return to  Iran  by
    Iranian officials and then arrested on arrival.

53. It was Mr KG's strong opinion that the Iranian security  apparatus  was
    capable  of  tracking  down  individual  internet  users  and  bloggers
    operating in Iran to their IT address and then positively identify them
    to get their full home address, national identity card number and  even
    telephone numbers in Iran.  All Iranian internet service providers  had
    to disclose the identity of any given subscriber on request.

54. Additionally the authorities will lure bloggers back to Iran to  arrest
    them.  Skilled Russian hackers and Chinese security equipment has  been
    made available so  that  US  Navy  computer  networks  were  hacked  in
    September 2013 and SSL certificates from Comodo were  stolen  in  2011.
    This claim was sourced by reference to an article on Gizmodo  which  is
    an international technology based website which we find  is  worthy  of
    respect. All of this was disclosed before the hearing and considered by
    the respondent. KG was not cross-examined on  the  basis  that  he  was
    making up his evidence or depending on notorious sources.

55. Mr KG then considered CD's case specifically.

56. He believed she had done several things to increase the  likelihood  of
    her coming to the attention of the authorities.

57. Some of her shared posts on [website redacted] were matters of  intense
    public interest in Iran so some might have attracted the  attention  of
    officials.  The presence of keywords and phrases such as [X],  [Y]  and
    [Z] may come to light during monitoring of the internet traffic to  and
    from Iran.

58. The publication of her web blog name and link on the [journal redacted]
    along with other well-known web logs such as [redacted]  and  links  to
    [redacted] and the murdered web blogger Sattar  Beheshti  may  well  be
    grounds for detection.

59. Finally the sharing of her web blog links on Facebook  called  "Amazing
    Videos" holds 145,000 members.  He listed ten ways in  which  detection
    was possible.  These are listed as follows:
         (1)  any attempt to log onto the admin page of a web blog from Iran
             without using a secure connection;
         (2)  any comment concerning the web blog or the sending of links to
             web blogs on IM (instant messaging) software  such  as  Yahoo,
             Messenger, to an individual in Iran would enable  the  Iranian
             authorities to identify her email address and the  address  of
             anyone with whom she communicated on IM, typically her friends
             and family;
         (3)  any comment concerning the web blog or the sending of links to
             the web blog through SMS to an  individual  would  enable  the
             Iranian authorities to identify her telephone number and  that
             of her family;
         (4)  any comment concerning the web blog or the sending of links on
             chat  and  internet  telephone  software  would   enable   the
             authorities to identify her telephone number and that  of  her
             friends and family;
         (5)  any  response  to  emails  from  an  unrecognised  source  may
             disclose the  geographical  location  by  passing  on  her  IP
             address to the receiver;
         (6)  chatting with unrecognised individuals or sources can disclose
             her geographical location;
         (7)  opening infected links may  introduce  spying  and  monitoring
         software;
         (8)  opening emails that were infected  by  spying  and  monitoring
         software;
         (9)  establishing friendships  with  unrecognised  individuals  and
             sharing personal data;
         (10)  sending  personal  information  by  the  website  manager  of
             blogdoon.com at the request of the Iranian authorities.

60. He had examined CD's web blog and  described  the  security  as  "quite
    low".  He was particularly concerned that there was  no  encryption  on
    the link during the sending and receiving of data so it would  be  easy
    to monitor and check internet traffic from Iranian  users  on  the  web
    blog.

61. It would also be possible to hack into the web blog.  He explained  how
    he had managed to  capture  a  packet  of  data  which  contained  user
    credentials belonging to the web blog administration who wanted to  log
    into the web blog.  He explained that this was done by arrangement with
    permission and had not as far as he was aware  been  done  in  any  way
    unlawfully.  He was able to set a trap so that when http  communication
    was detected it was captured and the packet contained the sender's  and
    receiver's IP addresses.  Also the contents of the body were  seen  and
    it was possible to obtain the user word and password necessary  to  log
    in.

62. Additionally she had explained to him that she had been sending her web
    blog link through SMS using free text websites to friends in Iran.  The
    websites were using her real telephone numbers to send a message to the
    recipient address.  If she used the same telephone number to  call  her
    friends and family it would be easier for officials  to  intercept  her
    phone conversations and thus identify her.  She  had  also  been  using
    instant messaging (IM) software to promote her  web  blog  but  all  IM
    communications were monitored in Iran and  incorporated  into  database
    records.  Officials can search keywords by  phrases  and  the  database
    records can be searched for keywords and if she had ever used  her  web
    blog link in any conversation, for example to update  or  check  a  web
    blog with anyone in Iran officials would be able to detect the web blog
    on the database records and get her email address and  view  its  whole
    contents.   He  regarded  her  real  identity  as  "highly   prone   to
    detection".

63. In conclusion he believed that people who were  not  well-informed  and
    astute about internet operations in Iran would find it difficult to  be
    aware of all the necessary security measures or to remember to use them
    every time.  He said that even individuals with considerable  knowledge
    of internet security had  eventually  identified  themselves  and  been
    arrested.  He said by way of example one Shaygan  Esfandiari  operating
    in Vandar Abbas who was the web blog manager  of  gameron.wordpress.com
    had his identity detected by security officials because of  one  simple
    mistake which brought him to their attention.  After purchasing an item
    from a television channel  from  abroad  and  having  had  a  telephone
    conversation with the company he  expressed  his  discontent  with  the
    product  on  his  web  blog  and  was  eventually  traced  back.   This
    illustrated the ability and  determination  of  the  Iranian  state  to
    identify bloggers of whom it did not approve.

64. Having identified his report he was asked questions by Mr Hodson.

65. He confirmed that filtering a website is  "really  easy  to  do".   The
    Virtual Private Networks created a supply of encrypted and decoded data
    and the word "Private" in VPN could be properly understood  as  virtual
    encrypted network.   He  described  the  constant  battle  between  the
    government and the people as encryption and interception software  vied
    for supremacy.  He believed that the  Iranian  authorities  could  find
    anything because they have full access to all communications.

66. He was taken to page 21 of 22 of his report under the heading  "Summary
    on Filtering" and the example of the web blog in CD's case.  Under  the
    heading "A Web Blog" he listed four ways in which  her  blog  would  be
    attracting the attention of the Iranian officials.  He  explained  that
    those four things were things he identified from the web blog  name  by
    intercepting and examining the web blog.

67. He was then cross-examined.

68. He confirmed that he had never worked for a government  body  gathering
    data and was not involved in purchasing software for the Iranian state.
     But he did know what software the Iranian government had and  arranged
    with a friend to enable him to test the security.

69. He said that the Virtual Private Network connections are a common  tool
    in Iran.  It is not something that is bought but is something  that  is
    paid for as a service.  He explained that the Virtual  Private  Network
    was a way  of  bypassing  the  Iranian  internet  service.  Essentially
    computers are linked together so that they communicate with each  other
    but without using the services of an internet service provider in a way
    that can be detected easily.

70. He had explained in his  answers  to  written  questions  that  he  had
    produced a screenshot of an instant messaging monitoring tool.  He  did
    not mean to imply that the tool he had used is the one  that  would  be
    used by the Iranian authorities.   Rather  he  had  used  one  commonly
    available to illustrate how easily it intercepted things.

71. His report referred to an article on a Reuters website dated  10  March
    2013.  This explained how the  Iranian  authorities  had  blocked  most
    Virtual Private Networks so that  only  legal  and  registered  Virtual
    Private Networks could be used.  This theme was picked up from a report
    from Cenet.  Virtual Private Networks were still  allowed  to  operate.
    He had not accepted that it was simply  a  case  of  them  having  been
    infiltrated and operated as a lure.  Rather it was  a  constant  battle
    between people and the government.  The government could not shut  down
    everything.

72. He was shown a report entitled "Freedom on the Net 13" at  tab  17  and
    page 622 of the respondent's bundle.  This confirmed that customers  of
    cyber caf�s must provide personal information before using  a  computer
    and that the caf� owners were required to keep such information as well
    as browsing histories for six months.

73. The report continued:

         "In addition, the CCL obliges ISPs to record all the data exchanged
         by their users for a period of six months,  but  it  is  not  clear
         whether the security services have the technical ability to process
         all this data.  When purchasing  a  mobile  phone  subscription  or
         prepaid SIM card, users must present  identification,  facilitating
         the authorities' ability to track down the authors  and  recipients
         of specific messages."

74. He explained that the data that would  be  kept  would  be  of  limited
    value.  For example, if he was ordering a Digital Video Disc the record
    would not show the film that he had  ordered  but  it  would  show  the
    address he had contacted.  The information would be stored at least for
    a time so that it could be searched later. He was then shown  a  report
    entitled "Enemies of the Internet" dated 12 March 2013.  In the section
    on Iran it noted that Virtual Private Network technology can be used to
    circumvent content blocking and censorship in Iran.  Indeed the Iranian
    state sells that kind of technology in order to profit from the  demand
    but the report advised people not to use Iranian VPNs and  also  warned
    that the Iranian government's  surveillance  resources  are  constantly
    changing, so advice which might be good when given will not be good for
    long.

75. However, the report said  that  the  regime  "does  not  yet  have  the
    resources for keeping millions of internet users  under  surveillance".
    He was asked if he agreed.  He believed  that  all  activity  could  be
    recorded although not all could be constantly analysed.

76. He was then asked about social engineering  techniques.   He  said  the
    example of Mr Esfandiari was an example  of  a  person  who  was  well-
    informed getting caught because of a momentary act of carelessness.  It
    illustrated the extent of the monitoring and how easy it  was  to  come
    unstuck.

77. In re-examination he  corrected  a  minor  mistake  in  his  antecedent
    history which did not seem to have concerned anyone.  He then  referred
    to a screenshot at page 24 of the bundle (23 of the report)  indicating
    how easy it was to access a web blog and net information.  It was  easy
    to extract a password and get an email address and profile.

78. He was asked questions  arising  from  that.   He  confirmed  that  the
    evidence was that the internet was slowed down in Iran.  If you  bypass
    it you could not surf the web except very slowly. A person who bypasses
    filtering gets a better speed.

ANNA ENAYAT

79. Ms Anna Enayat then gave evidence principally adopting her report dated
    8 December 2013.

80. Ms Enayat's short curriculum vitae was included in the papers.  She has
    given evidence about conditions in Iran on several  occasions  and  her
    evidence has generally been well received. From 1966 until his death in
    1982 she was married  to  an  Iranian  and  has  lectured  in  economic
    sociology at Tehran University.  She is presently a Senior Common  Room
    Member at St Anthony's College, Oxford University.

81. Her report is supported by published material which it identifies fully
    and  is  frequently   supported   with   detailed   extracts.   A   few
    inconsequential errors were discovered by written  questions  posed  by
    the respondent before the hearing and these were corrected.

82. She began by reflecting on how  the  use  of  electronic  media  hugely
    facilitated the social unrest following the  revolt  against  the  2009
    election  coup.   She  described  a  "heroic  exercise  in   grassroots
    organisation/mobilisation/citizen   journalism".     The    authorities
    understood very well the potential power of the internet  to  frustrate
    social control and determined to curtail it.  The  government  of  Iran
    has set out to censor and restrict internet  activity  by  increasingly
    sophisticated surveillance and legislation.  It declared itself  intent
    on constructing an "intranet" on the Chinese model but  implementation,
    although much talked about, has not happened.

83. Iran had also been damaged by the Stuxnet  Trojan  which  did  much  to
    damage Iran's nuclear installation in 2009 and 2010. Here the  internet
    was used by an  enemy  of  Iran  to  infiltrate,  control  and  destroy
    apparatus used in Iran's nuclear programme so that  the  programme  was
    significantly delayed. Thus forewarned the government set out to  limit
    the impact of globalisation on Iranian society and  culture,  described
    by the regime as the "soft war waged by the West" and to stop opponents
    taking advantage of the internet to further their own ends.

84. An Israeli study concluded that Iran had allocated US$1,000,000,000  to
    develop technology and expertise in using and controlling the internet.
      Considerable  resources  were  being  invested   in   designing   the
    architecture of the Iranian internet to make it particularly  conducive
    to widespread surveillance.  Considerable business was being done  with
    a joint venture between Finnish and German companies trading  as  Nokia
    Siemens Networks.

85. Ms Enayat  referred  particularly  to  an  article  published  in  "The
    Atlantic" by Chris Good entitled "Internet  Surveillance  and  Iran:  a
    Primer".  The article posed a conundrum:

         "If Iran puts so much effort into monitoring its citizens, how come
         we keep seeing cell phone videos of protests and violence;  how  is
         so much information coming to us via Twitter?"

86. The simple answer was that the Iranian groups who use the internet were
    themselves very "tech-savvy" who were well-versed in  using  decryption
    and proxies and other devices and there was a considerable gap  between
    identifying an IP address and tracing that to a particular known user.

87. Ms Enayat was inclined to accept the view that at  least  in  2009  the
    authorities did not  have  the  resources  to  tackle  every  net-based
    activist.  Nevertheless the 2009 demonstration spurred the  authorities
    to be still more vigilant.  In 2010 Nokia Siemens Networks acknowledged
    it had sold equipment capable of tapping telephone calls to the Iranian
    Telecommunications Company but said it had not  provided  the  software
    necessary to intercept and monitor internet  usage.   That  denial  was
    contested.

88. Creativity Software Limited (UK) and Ericsson AB had provided  location
    monitoring assistance.  AdaptiveMobile Security Limited  (Ireland)  had
    provided equipment capable of intercepting text messages at the rate of
    10,000 messages per second and storing them for  six  months.   Further
    the government had  acquired  via  Denmark  Israeli-supplied  filtering
    software and in December 2010 a US$130,000,000 deal was concluded  with
    a Chinese corporation to supply telephone and web surveillance  systems
    described as "extremely powerful".  According to  a  Reuters  report  a
    former telecommunications project manager in Iran said that the Chinese-
    made system was "countrywide"  and  "far  more  capable  of  monitoring
    citizens than I have ever seen in other equipment".  It claimed  to  be
    able to locate users by  their  voice,  text  messaging,  emails,  chat
    conversations or web access.

89. As well as necessary equipment the Iranian authorities had  established
    appropriate bureaucracy.  The Centre for the Surveillance of  Organised
    Crime was, from its inception in 2007, effective at actively  tracking,
    identifying and then arresting "netizens".  Having operated  discreetly
    in March 2009  it  broke  the  news  that  it  had  destroyed  over  90
    pornographic websites and 45 people were detained  in  connection  with
    that operation.  Photographs and  alleged  confessions  of  the  people
    detained were posted and some broadcast on state television.   Five  of
    the group were sentenced to death.

90. In late 2009 there was another round  of  arrests  of  cyber  activists
    including one Hossein Ronaghi Maleki, who was reputed to be  expert  at
    setting up proxies to bypass filtering.  He was  sentenced  to  fifteen
    years' imprisonment for spreading propaganda  against  the  regime  and
    allied offences.  These arrests were all attributable to  the  work  of
    the Centre for the Surveillance of Organised  Crime,  which  is  better
    known by its website "Gerdab".

91. In 2012 Gerdab initiated a  project  called  "Eye  of  the  Fox".   Its
    declared purpose was to punish alleged BBC  Persia  contacts  operating
    clandestinely in Iran and several journalists were arrested  and  later
    confessions appeared.  In 2009 and  2010  Gerdab's  commanding  officer
    boasted of the organisation's technical skills.

92. The Revolutionary Guard also controlled the "Cyber Army" established in
    2009.  Its function was to destroy  networks  and  arrest  hundreds  of
    netizens.  Originally  it  was  comprised  of  highly  skilled  Iranian
    hackers.  There is some uncertainty about its precise organisation.  It
    may be a rather loose arrangement of computer technocrats  working  for
    IRCGC or Basij units.  According to the Wall Street  Journal  in  March
    2012 the Cyber Army  was  far  larger  than  previously  believed.   It
    claimed to have trained 120,000 "cultural soldiers  to  combat  a  soft
    cyber war against Iran".  Their function was to monitor online activity
    of opposition groups and dissidents and bombard websites with  comments
    supporting the regime.  It also hacked into emails and computers.

93. Ms Enayat then  quoted  one  Ali  Jamshidi  whom  she  described  as  a
    Malaysian-based telecommunications expert working  for  the  opposition
    Green Movement. He said:

         "These strong measures to confront the internet recently prove  two
         things: the  internet  has  been  an  extremely  effective  way  of
         distributing information and the regime is frightened by it".

94. He said that the strong  measures  proved  both  the  efficacy  of  the
    clampdown and the government's fear of internet activity.

95. From 2011 the Iranian authorities have announced the formation  of  the
    Cyber Police generally known by  the  Persian  language  acronym  Fata.
    This was conceived as an  anti-revolutionary  organisation  that  would
    oppose dissident groups on the internet.  The organisation  was  raised
    because of the effective use made by dissidents and  anti-revolutionary
    groups contacting each other both within Iran and other countries.  The
    Cyber Police have  announced  their  successes  reporting  arrests  and
    crackdowns on virtual private networks.

96. Ms Enayat quoted a March 2013 report of the UN Special  Rapporteur  for
    Human Rights in Iran dealing  with  the  case  of  the  blogger  Sattar
    Beheshti.  According to this report:

         "Mr Beheshti was reportedly arrested by the  Iranian  Cyber  Police
         Unit on 30 October 2012 on charges  of  'actions  against  national
         security  on  social  networks  and  Facebook.'   His  family   was
         reportedly summoned to collect his body seven days  later.   During
         an interview for this report, an informed source communicated  that
         Mr Beheshti was tortured for the purpose of retrieving his Facebook
         user name and password, that  he  was  repeatedly  threatened  with
         death during his interrogation, and that he was beaten in the  face
         and torso with a baton.  The source also stated  that  Mr  Beheshti
         reported chest pain to other prisoners and  that  authorities  were
         made aware of his complaints, but no action was taken.  A  domestic
         report released in January 2013 by the  Majles'  National  Security
         and Foreign Policy Commission criticised the  Tehran  Cyber  Crimes
         Police Unit for holding  Mr  Beheshti  in  its  own  (unrecognised)
         detention centre, but fell short of alleging direct  wrongdoing  in
         his death or of calling for  an  investigation  into  the  apparent
         widespread maintenance of illegal detention  centres,  operated  by
         branches of Intelligence  services,  in  contravention  of  Iranian
         law."

97. In December 2008 the Special Prosecutor's Office  for  Computer  Crimes
    was established in anticipation of ratifying the computer  crimes  law.
    It was intended to be dedicated to the further restriction of  internet
    freedom and was part of a "broader project".  The  July  2009  Computer
    Crime Law was said to be "saturated with provisions  that  criminalised
    legitimate  expectation".   Further  the  government   was   given   an
    unfettered discretion.  The  range  of  activities  were  objectionable
    including content which offends public virtue, content offensive to the
    sanctities of Islam, content undermining security and  "social  peace",
    content against state officials and institutions,  content  encouraging
    the commission of cyber crime, and "content encouraging other  crimes".
    Clearly these things are widely drawn.  Insults to Imam Khomeini  would
    be offensive to the  sanctities  of  Islam.   Republication  of  banned
    material or providing links to other sites would come under the heading
    of encouraging other  crimes.   Content  against  state  officials  and
    institutions included mocking public officials.   Other  offences  were
    extremely vaguely worded and included "disturbing public opinion".

98. Ms Enayat could not provide data  on  the  number  of  sites  currently
    blocked by  Iranian  government  filtering  processes  but  extravagant
    phrases such as "tens of thousands" or even "millions" were  frequently
    used.

99. Ms Enayat drew attention to the tension between  the  determination  of
    the Iran authorities to restrict the internet and the extensive use  of
    the internet made by Iranian citizens.  Notwithstanding this  extensive
    use, Iran is believed to have the most sophisticated  form  of  website
    filtering available using a "key word" system currently  used  only  by
    China, Iran and Tunisia. Of the estimated 25,200,000  Iranian  citizens
    who have access to the  internet  about  30%  of  internet  users  were
    thought  to  use  Virtual  Private  Networks  ("VPNs")  to   circumvent
    controls.  Tor and Hotspot Shield were  also  frequently  used.   Until
    March 2013 when it was discontinued extensive use was made of  Google's
    RSS reader but that has now stopped.

100. VPNs are necessary for Iran to remain connected with  the  internet  to
    conduct commercial and financial transactions and it is understood that
    VPNs  are  used  extensively  by  government  agencies,  banks,   media
    companies, research institutions and  even  the  Islamic  Revolutionary
    Guard Corps ("IRGC").  From time to time the government  rails  against
    VPNs.  Gmail from Google was regarded as the only secure email  service
    and it has been blocked by the government on occasions.  However,  when
    it is blocked there is vehement protest, not only from  ordinary  users
    but from parliament and government officials.  However, the  government
    has made extensive use of phishing and it is thought that in the summer
    of  2011  as  many  as  300,000  computers,  primarily  in  Iran,  were
    penetrated.

101. At part 2 of her report Ms Enayat looked particularly  at  the  use  of
    social media by Iranian nationals  in  the  United  Kingdom.   Although
    radio and television broadcasts  remained  important  the  overwhelming
    proportion of writing critical about the Islamic Republic of  Iran  was
    produced on the web.  Save for a few sites  such  as  www.iranianuk.com
    and www.stockholmian.com which are determinedly parochial  serving  the
    needs of local Iranians, diaspora web activity is transnational.

102. There have been three  particularly  respected  studies  (two  of  them
    academic, one by a journalist) concerning the use made by  the  Iranian
    people of the internet and the overall picture  is  of  widespread  and
    diverse use.  Every conceivable topic appears to be  covered  including
    cooking, sport, poetry and religiously conservative views  as  well  as
    secular and reformist views.  A study by  Harvard  University  in  2008
    showed that notwithstanding the use of the internet by secularists  and
    reformers internet blogs on the  whole  were  not  blocked.   Although,
    perhaps unsurprisingly, blogs by secular reformists were more likely to
    be blocked than ones that were clearly benign.

103. There is also significant interaction between  political  blogs  inside
    and outside Iran.  Following crackdowns within Iran a "high  value"  is
    placed on maintaining the flow of cross-border information.   There  is
    clear evidence of numerous arrests for unacceptable  comments  made  on
    blogs within Iran and at the end of 2010  and  the  beginning  of  2011
    around 70 Christians were arrested in  coordinated  dawn  raids  within
    Iran.  These were all people who had  converted  to  Christianity  from
    Islam under the influence of the UK-based "Elam  Ministries"  and  they
    were believed to have been exposed by way  of  Facebook.   Perhaps  the
    mechanism of their being exposed is unimportant.  It is clear  evidence
    that the authorities  were  able  to  link  people  to  their  Facebook
    activities.

104. Certainly in 2011 eight people  were  sentenced  to  between  five  and
    eight years' imprisonment for engaging in unacceptable religious debate
    in  an  internet  social  network.   They  were  detained  in  solitary
    confinement for prolonged periods as intelligence agents tried to  link
    them to European embassies and countries even  though  the  discussions
    that had attracted attention had been purely religious.

105. A report by Freedom  House  in  April  2011  referred  to  the  Iranian
    authorities interrogating protesters and activists and confronting them
    with copies of their emails and asking  them  for  passwords  to  their
    Facebook accounts. They were also asked about their "friends".

106. A later report from a journalist confirmed the  first  thing  that  the
    Iranian forces seek when a person is detained is the  password  to  the
    email and Facebook accounts.  As a countermeasure such  information  is
    now shared with trusted friends who have a duty to change the passwords
    in the event of a person being arrested.

107. There are also reported cases  of  Iranians  returning  to  Iran  being
    interrogated at the airport and asked to give their Facebook passwords.
     One person who claimed untruthfully not to  have  a  Facebook  account
    watched his guard conduct a Google search which revealed he did have an
    account.  His passport was confiscated but he was allowed to leave  the
    country after several rounds of interrogation in a month.

108. Although the authorities are believed to  have  sophisticated  software
    for the surveillance of Facebook activity some observers  believe  that
    the most common method of tracking identities  is  to  become  a  false
    friend.  Several student activists had reported approaches from  people
    with identities that turned out to be spurious.  One reporter explained
    how his interrogator during detention demanded to be made a  friend  on
    release.  He was threatened with further imprisonment  if  he  did  not
    cooperate  and  had  to  advise  his  real  friends  not  to  make  any
    contributions to the website.  He speculated that many people  did  not
    know of the risks posed by false friends.  Ms Enayat pointed  out  that
    there is little enthusiasm to return to Iran amongst the  diaspora  and
    particularly  not  amongst  those  who  have  views  critical  of   the
    government.  She referred to two  cases  of  people  who  had  returned
    believing things would be all right and finding that they were not.

109. Thus Rojin Mohammadi, a Kurdish medical student  at  Manila  University
    in the Philippines, described herself as a human  rights  activist  who
    kept a blog.  She was arrested on her arrival in Iran in November  2011
    and taken to Evin Prison.  She was released on bail after 24 hours  but
    five days later security agents attended her father's house seeking  to
    re-arrest her.  She was  not  there.   Two  days  after  that  she  was
    summoned by telephone to attend Shahid Moghadisi Revolutionary Court in
    Evin Prison.  Her belongings including her computer  were  confiscated.
    She was interrogated over three days and arrested again on 23  November
    2011.  She was eventually charged and then released after  five  months
    awaiting trial.  She fled the country  in  2013.   She  said  that  the
    authorities seemed interested in her contact with the  Green  Movement.
    Ms Enayat was unable to say exactly what had  caused  the  difficulties
    but pointed out that the complainant was an educated woman who returned
    to Iran not expecting any difficulty.

110. The second concerned Bahar Alinia, who was arrested a  week  after  she
    arrived at Tehran.  She fled the country.

111. Ms Enayat made the  point  that  although  censoring  has  to  be  done
    instantaneously surveillance can be done stealthily.   It  is  easy  to
    record electronic data and peruse it later.  In  that  way  it  is  not
    difficult to assimilate  a  great  deal  of  material  which  might  on
    scrutiny  incriminate  someone.   Although  it  is  not  difficult   to
    establish a blog or Facebook page without a name or using  a  pen  name
    the author can often be identified by  friends  and  acquaintances  and
    also on a background investigation in the event of a  person's  return.
    Questions about internet activity are part of  the  standard  stock  of
    questions speaking to someone at the airport.

112. Ms  Enayat  was  emphatic  that  the  evidence  does  not  support  the
    conclusion that only people with a big following outside  Iran  attract
    attention on return.  According to  an  Associated  Press  article  one
    Beheshti was on the fringe of Iranian online opposition.  His blog  had
    fewer than 30 followers in October 2012, yet  he  was  warned  the  day
    before his arrest that if he did not stop communicating information  he
    would be killed.  He was described by Radio Free  Europe  as  a  "minor
    figure of the blogger sphere" but he was tortured and killed.

113. Secondly one Omidreza Mirsayafi was seen as a minor figure of no  known
    influence, yet he was so ill-treated that he died.  He was arrested for
    his blog in April 2008 and sentenced to  30  months'  imprisonment  for
    "insulting religious leaders and engaging  in  propaganda  against  the
    Islamic Republic".  He suffered a complete nervous breakdown  and  died
    as a result of medical neglect  in  prison.   He  was  a  middle  class
    intellectual whose blog was primarily  devoted  to  cultural  subjects,
    particularly traditional Persian music.  Occasionally he included posts
    of a political nature.  He described himself as a cultural rather  than
    a political blogger.  He had no intention to insult anyone and did post
    perhaps as many as three to six satirical comments  over  a  number  of
    years.  His blogs were in his minds "completely  private".   They  were
    read by only a few of his friends.  According to his lawyer  there  was
    insufficient  interest  in  his  writing  for  it  to  be  regarded  as
    publication.  The Computer Crime Law allows for mitigation only  if  it
    can be shown that less than ten people have seen  something  complained
    of.  In short, the Iranian state might be  fearful  of  something  that
    seems to attract little popular attention.

114. The authorities appear to be concerned by the  influence  of  satellite
    television  channels  broadcasting  into  Iran.   Although  there   are
    occasional raids resulting in mass confiscation of equipment  at  least
    25% and possibly as much as 60% of Iranians watch satellite television.
     Satellite television is provided not  only  by  internationally  known
    major organisations, such as BBC Persian, but also  by  smaller  groups
    supported by members of the  diaspora.   Thus  an  academic  running  a
    serious website with a few followers might be perceived as the kind  of
    person who would support "damaging" satellite TV.

115. It was reported that  members  of  the  BBC  Persian  staff  had  false
    Facebook accounts created in their name which contained  blogs  wrongly
    attributed to the real journalists  and  used  to  discredit  them  and
    present them as spies.  The director of Voice of  America  described  a
    similar  pattern.   It  was  said  to  be  a  source  of   considerable
    frustration to the Iranian authorities that they  spend  "millions,  if
    not billions" of dollars every year to perpetuate the regime's official
    story only to see it undermined very swiftly by  independent  internet-
    savvy dissident journalists.  The website did not need to be  based  in
    Iran to attract attention or to be blocked.   Anything  that  could  be
    accessed from Iran (bearing in mind  that  circumvention  software  and
    proxies are commonly available) could be seen as a threat to Iran.

116. There was considerable uncertainty in the diaspora about  the  kind  of
    conduct that could create difficulty.  The example  was  given  of  one
    Mohammad Reza Pourshajari who wrote under the assumed  name  of  Siamak
    Nehr.  He was arrested in Iran in September  2010.   He  had  used  the
    Google blog spot platform to post serious articles,  many  critical  on
    religion and politics.  This attracted no obvious sign of concern  from
    the authorities until he attacked  the  ruling  of  Shia  clergy  in  a
    particular matter.  He was quickly identified  and  arrested.   He  was
    sentenced to four years' imprisonment for insulting the supreme leader,
    actions against national security and blasphemy.  It is not  known  how
    the authorities identified Siamak Nehr as Pourshajari.

117. This suggested  that  anyone  engaging  with  political  activity  may,
    potentially, be punished on that account.  Activities (to western eyes)
    as trivial as attending meetings, distributing fliers in the street  or
    taking part in demonstrations could be enough.  Human  rights  activity
    is seen as propaganda against the state.  Dissenting religious activity
    such as that carried out by evangelical Christian communities is also a
    route  to  persecution.   A  web  blog  or  Facebook  page  or  similar
    activities supporting any of these things can give rise to persecution.

118. Ms Enayat had detected a sea change in attitudes to returnees in  about
    2009.  Before then there was a policy of encouraging Iranians  overseas
    to return but after the 2009 presidential elections and  the  following
    political  crisis  there  was  a   "marked   shift   in   the   Iranian
    establishment's attitude to the Diaspora of refugees".

119. A retired Iranian High Court Judge explained how  there  were  existing
    laws that enabled the judiciary to bring charges against  Iranians  for
    conduct committed outside Iran and another unnamed Iranian judge  spoke
    of the need to stop people who would try to destroy the  reputation  of
    Iran.  Essentially returnees were held for  a  few  days  awaiting  the
    police to prove they had done nothing political.   An  unnamed  airport
    official said that all  returned  Iranians  would  be  interviewed  and
    detained.  A person who had not been involved in helping foreign powers
    or engaged in propaganda against the Islamic Republic would be  allowed
    home but these things can take time to determine.   These  things  were
    not new but were more overt since 2009.   Several  cases  of  returnees
    being detained and interrogated  are  documented  in  detail.   Airport
    security is the responsibility  of  the  Ministry  of  Information  and
    Security  (thought  of  as  the  Intelligence  Ministry)  rather   than
    Immigration Officers.  The Revolutionary Guard also has a  presence  at
    the airport and there is an apparently efficient  watch  list  so  that
    people known to be of interest to the authorities  are  intercepted  on
    return.

120. The report referred to the Gozinesh  records  which  are  state-managed
    files containing information about a citizen.  These include  notes  on
    the person's political and ideological profile and that of  his  family
    members.  Any activity  on  the  web  that  has  come  to  the  adverse
    attention of the Revolutionary Guards monitoring  unit  would  be  made
    available to Ministry of Information and Security officials.

121. The interest of Iranian security organisations in  email  and  Facebook
    accounts has been frequently reported.  An  interest  in  Facebook  and
    email passwords has been reported during security checks.

122. If it comes to the attention of the authorities in Iran that  a  person
    has been returned there is "a near certainty" that the person  will  be
    interviewed.  A person returned without travel documents would have  to
    obtain them from the Iranian  Consulate  before  return  was  possible.
    Clearly this would attract attention.  Similarly a person travelling on
    temporary travel documents of a kind that could be obtained voluntarily
    without the involvement  of,  for  example,  British  officials,  would
    attract  attention  on  return.   There  are   Regulations   concerning
    enquiries to be made of documents produced when a person seeks a travel
    document to return to Iran.   This  will  require  an  account  of  the
    applicant's last exit from Iran and the basis of entry into the  United
    Kingdom.  In reality it will emerge if the applicant has sought asylum.
     There was anecdotal evidence that the Iranian  Consulate  specifically
    asked for a letter of confirmation from the Home Office that the person
    returned had asked for asylum in the United  Kingdom.   Ms  Enayat  was
    satisfied that this echoed practices from other countries and  she  was
    inclined to think that the anecdotes were well-founded.

123. Further, although the rules provided for a person  who  had  status  in
    another country but who had exited Iran illegally  to  atone  for  that
    error by payment of a small fine before return there were no  analogous
    provisions for those without status.

124. Ms Enayat was not able to establish what happened to  people  who  were
    returned to Iran  having  left  illegally  without  making  good  their
    position before departure.  The offence of illegal  departure  appeared
    to be compounded with other matters for the purpose of  punishment  and
    much appeared to depend on the discretion of a  particular  judge.   By
    way  of  example  she  drew  attention  to  cases,  typically  but  not
    exclusively of Kurds who were sent to prison for  illegal  exit  and  a
    political offence.

125. A returnee arriving at airport security with a  computer  can  expected
    to be examined.

126. Ms Enayat referred to the "high likelihood" of internet activity  being
    discovered during background investigations even if  the  person  being
    returned was not already known to the authorities.  The Iranian  regime
    would expect asylum seekers to have "spread lies" and such behaviour is
    taken seriously and would attract punishment.

127. The report then turned its attention directly to AB's  case.   She  had
    seen evidence from senior KDPI officials  in  the  UK  confirming  AB's
    claim to be a member of the  Kurdish  Democratic  Party  of  Iran  both
    before and after he left Iran.   AB's  blog  written  in  Iran  between
    November 2009 and January 2010 identifies him as a KDPI supporter.

128. This  included  a  post  published  on  22  January  2010  marking  the
    anniversary of the foundation of the short-lived Mahabad Republic on 12
    February 1946.  The post is a statement from the new youth of  struggle
    and resistance in Kurdistan which is a pro-KDPI youth  group  which  AB
    recognised in his screening statement.  The same blog includes  a  link
    to pictures of the persecution of the  Kurds  in  late  1979  including
    executions at Sanandaj Airport.   There  are  also  photographs  of  AB
    attending two meetings in the United Kingdom which were posted  on  the
    KDPI website.  AB was clearly visible in several other photographs.

129. Ms Enayat believed that it was "likely" that  these  photographs  would
    have been seen and archived by the Iranian security forces.

130. Since arriving in the United Kingdom AB  has  used  a  second  blog  to
    publish KDPI statements and events.

131. Ms Enayat profoundly disagreed with the finding  in  the  determination
    that his attendance at KDPI meetings in  the  United  Kingdom  was  not
    sufficiently threatening for his presence to be  noted.   In  Iran  low
    level KDPI activists like other pro-Kurdish  activists,  are  regularly
    arrested in Iran and often severely ill-treated.  Ms Enayat  could  see
    no reason why people active in the United Kingdom should not be just as
    interesting to the authorities in Iran who, presumably, would  be  keen
    to know who was joining the KDPI.   The  current  regime  regards  even
    peaceful Kurdish activists as  dangerous  separatists  threatening  the
    Iranian state.  She believed there were "many  cases"  of  Kurds  being
    arrested and convicted of offences simply because of  contact  with  or
    cooperation with an opposition party.  It is  not  necessary  to  be  a
    member of a party to attract  persecution  in  Iran.   Even  low  level
    activities such as demonstrating or distributing leaflets and  no  more
    can attract punishment.

132. The report then drew attention to a fact-finding report by  the  Danish
    Immigration Service published in 2009 about low level activism  amongst
    Kurds.  This refuted completely any suggestion that low level  activism
    was somehow safe or tolerated by the authorities.  An example was given
    of a person acting as a courier without any understanding of the  items
    being carried but carrying them  out  of  family  obligation.   Such  a
    person may well know nothing about a  political  opponent  organisation
    but would still  be  treated  as  a  political  opponent.   The  report
    recognised that a high profile activist was "sure to be persecuted" but
    there was a prospect of persecution for a low level  activist  innocent
    of any political commitment.

133. Amnesty International had reached a similar  conclusion,  again  giving
    the example of a person carrying leaflets in Kurdish that could be seen
    as opposing the government risking maximum penalties available  to  the
    judge.

134. The appellant AB had authored two blogs.  One used from  November  2009
    to January 2010 had 22 entries and another used  from  March  2011  had
    over 400 entries.  They were written in Persian and Kurdish.  Ms Enayat
    had read all of those written in Persian and some of those  written  in
    Kurdish.  All that she had read contained political subjects, including
    many political cartoons and occasional social problems.  The first blog
    written in Iran was  particularly  critical  of  the  Islamic  Republic
    depicting it as "cruel, dictatorial, self-serving  and  corrupt".   The
    blogs particularly rejected the theocratic political order  and  called
    for its overthrow by peaceful means.  The blog showed a good  knowledge
    of politics but also expressed a childlike  rhetoric  which  Ms  Enayat
    found to be characteristic of Iranian political satire.   The  cartoons
    were of a kind widely available on Iranian opposition website  but  the
    content of the blog could not be tracked to another source  causing  Ms
    Enayat to conclude they were indeed written by AB as he  claimed.   She
    suggested that the tone  of  the  blogs  and  particularly  the  strong
    criticism of Ayatollah Khomeini put AB at the risk of facing the  death
    penalty.

135. AB's criticisms of the Iranian regime are wide-ranging and severe.   He
    attacks the Constitution,  foreign  policy,  the  truthfulness  of  the
    leaders and accuses them of bloody  suppression  of  demonstrators  and
    mass murder of Kurds.  One posting included an image said to have  been
    created by AB of  an  Iranian  banknote  with  obscenities  written  in
    English and Persian on the forehead of  Khomeini.   There  was  also  a
    slogan "death to the Velayat-e  Faqih"  which  she  translated  as  the
    "guardianship of the religious jurisprudence".

136. The second blog was a collection of  over  400  items  in  Persian  and
    Kurdish.  The content was exclusively political consisting  largely  of
    statements and reports and notices from the Kurdish Democratic Party of
    Iran but also including Amnesty International and  Human  Rights  Watch
    Reports on Iran, some of them translated into Kurdish.  There were also
    a  number  of  political  cartoons.   Unlike  the  first  blog  it   is
    predominantly a collection of existing material but exhibits  the  same
    themes of anti-clericalism,  a  commitment  to  the  overthrow  of  the
    government, a commitment to a freely democratic future for Iran as well
    as Kurdistan, a desire to expose rights violations and so on.

137. The appellant AB's Google Plus account was linked to one of his  blogs.
     When his proper name is typed into Google the Google Plus page appears
    with AB's photograph and his blog immediately afterwards.

138. He had a Facebook page in the name of [FB  redacted]  which  translates
    as [FB redacted].  The Facebook room was devoted to satire  and  mainly
    comprised  cartoons,  jokes  and  videos  making  fun  of  the  Islamic
    Republic.  There were also links to satirical comedy videos which  were
    clever and professional in their content.  Many of the clips came  from
    a comedy channel run by "Iran National TV".  The link  was  obvious  to
    anyone with an interest in Iranian affairs because of  the  distinctive
    logo and this would attract the attention of intelligence  agents.   It
    was produced by the Mujahedin which the  Islamic  Republic  had  always
    seen as its archenemy.  It is severe in  its  punishment  of  those  it
    regards as Mujahedin supporters.  Reposting of Mujahedin  material  may
    not lead to AB being suspected of being a Mujahedin activist or  member
    but it would reinforce the conclusion that  he  actively  promotes  the
    overthrow of the state.

139. The Facebook page is linked to one of the  blogs  and  the  appellant's
    hip hop albums with the result that any regime monitor who came  across
    it will have access to the rest of the internet profile.

140. The report then considered AB's YouTube channel.

141. When his name was keyed into Google the appellant's  music  albums  and
    photographs appeared even though he uses different names on his  albums
    and photograph.  There were eighteen items on his YouTube account.  One
    was a 1980s marching  song  of  Kurdish  guerrillas.   The  description
    refers to the "Islamic Republic of Iran's holy  war  against  Kurdistan
    and the Kurdish people".  Use of Yahoo and MSN search engines  produced
    similar results.

142. She then considered AB's rap/hip hop album on the internet.   AB  sings
    in Kurdish but the song was described by Sheri Laizer as a "very  deep-
    rooted political song against Iran mullahs' regime of over  30  years".
    Ms  Enayat  believed  that  the  musical  genre  would   be   just   as
    objectionable as the content.  Rap/hip hop is immensely popular amongst
    young Iranians as an underground musical genre.  Rap groups cannot sell
    their music on the open market and  release  them  over  the  internet.
    They can of course be blocked by filters.  Performance is always secret
    and recording studio is underground.  The state-owned media mention rap
    only to criticise it and often describes it to followers as a  "satanic
    cult".  Rappers are depicted as morally corrupt.  In the  eyes  of  the
    authorities rap music is part of the "soft war" promoted by the West.

143. She regarded it  as  "uncontroversial"  that  the  Iranian  authorities
    attempted to suppress rap.  She then gave examples of the  difficulties
    faced by rap artists.  One Aria Aramnejad, whom she described as a "pop
    singer", was held  in  solitary  confinement  for  44  days,  tortured,
    sexually humiliated and, inter alia, obliged to walk barefooted on  the
    blood of AIDS patients.  He was sentenced to nine months'  imprisonment
    and then a further twelve months for other songs.  Other examples  were
    given.

144. She believed that the appellant AB had been a political,  cultural  and
    internet activist.  He had produced a regularly updated  blog  carrying
    "explosive political material" and resumed activity when he came to the
    United Kingdom.  He has composed and performed hip hop songs  which  he
    has placed on the internet.  One of the  songs  has  obvious  political
    content.  This form of music is reviled.

145. Ms Enayat suggested that there was a "considerable likelihood" that  he
    would have come to the attention of the authorities already  by  reason
    of his internet activities, especially the second blog that carries his
    full name and by observation of his Facebook page which is  public  and
    leads to the blog and music uploaded and by observation of the music on
    the internet and identifying him as a  Kurdish  dissident  and  by  his
    presence at KDPI meetings.  Certainly for a time there  was  reason  to
    believe that the Iranian authorities could not access the  Google  blog
    spot platform but she did not know if that was still the case.

146. In any event the blog would come to light during interrogation.

147. The report then listed a variety of offences  that  might  be  used  to
    prosecute the conduct identified.  Punishments  included  imprisonment,
    in extreme cases for up to ten years, and his being lashed.

148. The report then drew attention to cases of known persecution.

149. One Sonayeh Tohidlou described as a blogger and activist was  given  50
    lashes for insulting the president.  A twelve month prison sentence was
    not enforced.  It was reported that her blogs were printed out and  put
    to her during interrogation.

150. Then Laleh Hassanpour was sentenced to  five  years'  imprisonment  for
    "weighty crimes and social conspiracy, propaganda against  the  regime,
    blasphemy and insulting the president".   Sakhi  Rigi,  a  blogger  and
    political activist and  member  of  the  opposition  leader's  campaign
    staff, was sentenced to twenty years' imprisonment by  a  revolutionary
    court.  Deyman Aref was sentenced in March 2010 to a year in  jail  for
    propaganda against the regime by speaking to  foreign  media.   He  was
    also lashed 74 times for insulting Ahma Dinejad.

151. Under the heading "General Conclusion" Ms Enayat explains that Iran  is
    unashamedly an Islamic state.  It follows that criticism of  the  state
    is criticism of Islam and any  political  party  advocating  a  secular
    state is proscribed.  The legal mechanisms used to  enforce  oppression
    including peaceful dissent are typically vaguely phrased offences  such
    as conduct incompatible with Islam.  The Iranian government has set its
    face firmly against independent civil society  organisations  including
    student organisations,  women's  right  organisations,  trades  unions,
    journalists, lawyers and human rights defenders so such  people  cannot
    meet or otherwise advocate their cause.  Religious  groups  other  than
    their own are regarded as deviant and thus Sufis, Bahais  and  converts
    to Christianity as well as Shia Muslims who advocate an  interpretation
    of Islam other than that approved by the government are denied a  right
    to associate and express themselves freely.

152. Anyone arrested for  having  crossed  one  of  these  ill-defined  "red
    lines" faces incommunicado detention often in solitary confinement  and
    no access to a lawyer until investigation is complete.

153. The internet is seen as an instrument of  cultural  invasion  which  is
    part of the soft war conducted by  the  West  and  although  there  are
    clearly many in the Iranian establishment who believe in  the  benefits
    of a more open policy there is little sign of any change.

154. The mindset of the state officials is that anyone who has  fled  abroad
    and applied for asylum should be treated with  deep  suspicion  because
    they are potentially agents of a foreign power.

155. We find paragraph 156(iii) of Ms Enayat's report particularly  apposite
    and we set it out below:

         "An enforced return means that there is a high likelihood that  the
         returnee will be  'interviewed'/interrogated  at  the  airport  and
         that, given the interest in determining whether or  not  they  have
         engaged in political or another form of  critical  activity,  their
         internet presence will be investigated (2b and 3d)  -  There  is  a
         high risk that critical web activity will be picked up  on  return,
         given statements by IRI  officials  and  current  practice  by  the
         security forces where detainees are concerned."

156. She also opined that there was "a reasonable likelihood" that  websites
    carrying substantial criticism or religious provocation would have been
    monitored.  Understandably there was uncertainty about  the  extent  of
    surveillance of Iranian nationals outside Iran but  the  government  of
    Iran was proud of there being no opposition  politics  in  the  western
    sense and in 1996 a court in Berlin was  satisfied  that  there  was  a
    deliberate  policy  of  murdering  political  opponents  outside  Iran.
    However, there are no confirmed reports of assassinations  in  European
    cities since 1997.  The German authorities are concerned  that  Iranian
    citizens were  being  watched  when  they  attended  demonstrations  in
    Germany and issued a warning in 2009.  There was a case in Norway of an
    Iranian diplomat who had defected after the election.  He said that  he
    had been approached by Iranian intelligence agents who  threatened  him
    for certifying results favouring an opposition candidate and asked  him
    to be an informant on Iranian ex-patriots including his own son.   When
    accused of making tape recordings of demonstrators in Norway an Iranian
    official said "there is no need to record them.  We  already  know  who
    they are."

157. According to a  statement  reported  in  April  2010  the  minister  of
    justice,  Morteza  Bakhtiari,  announced  that   the   overall   policy
    concerning Iranians abroad was to create the means for them to  return.
    Individuals who  did  not  have  a  political  file  in  Iran  who  had
    introduced themselves as a political activist solely to  get  residence
    abroad would be investigated by the office.  In 2011 it  was  confirmed
    that charges could be brought against  returned  Iranians  for  conduct
    outside Iran and that included  the  criminal  offence  of  "propaganda
    against the system".  Amnesty International's Middle  East  adviser  in
    London found it in keeping with what was known about the Iranian  state
    not to  publish  any  formalised  policy  to  deal  with  such  people.
    However, the prosecutor general, Gholamhossein Mohseni E'jei, said  her
    people who were "shamefully cooperating  with  the  Americans  and  the
    British and act against their own people, which is  a  dark  stain  for
    them".  Such people could be pursued  and  punished  in  the  event  of
    return.  270 people were officially executed in 2013 and Iran continues
    to be one of the world's biggest prisons for journalists and netizens.

158. Ms Enayat then explained  how  the  Iranian  president  has  no  direct
    control of the armed forces or the security apparatus,  the  radio  and
    television network or the judiciary and all is under the  direction  of
    the  supreme  leader  which   at   the   time   of   writing   remained
    uncompromising.

159. Ms Enayat then responded to questions brought by the  respondent.   She
    dealt courteously with the implied criticism for giving opinions beyond
    the scope of the appeal ordered by the Court of Appeal.  She emphasised
    that it was her view that AB was at risk of persecution in the event of
    his return to Iran because of his electronic media  activities  in  the
    United Kingdom apart from any other consideration.

160. The answers consisted essentially of detailed  responses  to  questions
    raised for clarification.  We have considered them and see no  need  to
    say more about them here.

161. After adopting the report into her evidence Ms  Enayat  was  asked  for
    any further recent evidence postdating the report (self-dated  December
    2013).

162. She referred briefly to the case of an Iranian student studying  for  a
    PhD at the University of Liege in Belgium and being arrested in Iran on
    return and being sentenced to several years' imprisonment for espionage
    although as  far  as  she  could  ascertain  he  was  not  in  any  way
    politically active.   The  account  included  reference  to  his  being
    detained in solitary confinement and pressurised  to  produce  Facebook
    and email passwords.  She believed it was very common for there  to  be
    coercive requests for passwords.

163. She was cross-examined extensively.

164. She did not agree it was possible to draw a sharp  distinction  between
    journalists and netizens.  For example, many people who were  paid  for
    their reports as journalists also wrote as netizens on their own blogs.
     She was also satisfied that people were arrested for private  comments
    made on their blogs and often things they had said publicly.   However,
    she was happy to describe a "blogger" as someone who wrote a web blog.

165. Her attention was drawn specifically to  paragraph  23  of  her  report
    under  the  heading  "The  Cyber  Army".   The  IRGC  public  relations
    department had announced it had trained and recruited 120,000  cultural
    soldiers to combat a soft cyber war against Iran.  She was asked if the
    figure was an exaggeration.  Ms  Enayat  could  not  elaborate  on  the
    figure.  She was quite satisfied that something called the  Cyber  Army
    clearly existed although it seemed to have different skill bases.   Her
    point was that there was a Cyber Army and  it  was  controlled  by  the
    Revolutionary Guard.  Initially the Revolutionary Guard did not want to
    admit that it existed.

166. She did not regard the IRGC as the most accurate source of  information
    on activity in Iran.  She also accepted that there were bloggers active
    in Iran in non-political ways, for example, writing  about  cooking  or
    gardening.  She referred to a study done.  She accepted that a  Harvard
    University study had commented on the  "exceptional  flowering  of  the
    media numerically and its exceptionally rich  content".   However,  she
    also said that the  blogger  sphere  had  changed  since  the  reported
    studies had been completed.  This was a result of the 2009  crackdowns,
    "Freedom House" reporting that widespread arrests and  harsh  sentences
    on  reporters,  activists  as  well   as   perceptions   of   pervasive
    surveillance had made journalists and bloggers more afraid.   Many  had
    abandoned online activities or used pseudonyms.

167. Ms Enayat accepted that there was no reason to  think  that  the  state
    had the ability to monitor all internet users in Iran.  However, it did
    not wish to do that.  It wanted to monitor dissenters  and  there  were
    fewer of  them  to  watch.   She  emphasised  again  that  governmental
    sensibilities extended to banning poetry and music of certain kinds and
    social and cultural activities would be labelled "political" in Iran in
    a way that they would not normally be so called in western countries.

168. She accepted that millions of Iranians use the internet  and  that  the
    use of Virtual Private Networks had spread.  Ms Enayat did not know the
    extent to which  the  Iranian  authorities  could  carry  out  internet
    surveillance.  She understood there was  a  Reporters  Without  Borders
    report suggesting the state can monitor a million activists.

169. She was asked about people passing through Tehran Airport but  she  did
    not know the number.  She was nevertheless satisfied from  the  sources
    that asylum seekers who  are  returned  are  interrogated.   This  came
    particularly from the Country of  Origin  Information  Service  quoting
    Amnesty International Reports.  She accepted the evidence did not refer
    to all asylum seekers but just "asylum seekers" being questioned.   She
    said that there had been very few returns from the  United  Kingdom  in
    recent years and so very little chance of producing data about how many
    of them were detained.  She accepted that her reports were based on  29
    returns over a twelve year period.  We just do not know how many  other
    people have been returned safely in that time,  if  any.   Nevertheless
    she maintained that all people who were removed with  temporary  travel
    documents were interviewed.  She pointed out that there  seemed  to  be
    similar procedures, possibly centrally controlled and  guided,  at  all
    embassies about obtaining travel documents and she believed these would
    create interest leading to scrutiny, and  she  had  anecdotal  evidence
    passed on by someone who was returned  on  a  special  travel  document
    because he or she had lost his or her passport and they  were  detained
    on arrival and rescued by an important  person  who  was  organising  a
    conference.

170. The Ministry of the Interior would be  suspicious  and  interested  for
    example to see if someone had converted to Christianity.  The spur  was
    return on a temporary travel  document.   Attempts  had  been  made  to
    return people on Iranian identity cards but the Iranian authorities did
    not accept them.  That is why returns are only possible with a passport
    and passports lead to enquiries that could lead  to  interrogation  and
    persecution.

171. She was asked to comment particularly on  the  examples  that  she  had
    used to illustrate her report.  It  was  possible  that  the  Christian
    couple removed from Norway were in trouble  because  they  possessed  a
    Bible.  It was possible that the man removed from Norway was in trouble
    because he had a false identity document.  None of this  undermined  Ms
    Enayat's opinion that people returned to Iran will by reason  of  their
    return attract attention and  it  is  only  a  short  step  from  being
    returned to being seriously ill-treated.

172. She was then asked to explain  a  footnote  to  paragraph  103  in  her
    report from the Christian Science Monitor of 7  January  2010  entitled
    "How Iranian Dissidents  slipped  through  Tehran's  Airport  Dragnet".
    This article appears at page 600 in the bundle of reference  materials.
    Ms Enayat was quick to explain that  the  article  referred  to  people
    leaving Iran and how several people believed to be on a watch list were
    able to leave Iran because of bureaucratic inefficiencies.   Ms  Enayat
    said the article showed the extent of interest by  the  authorities  in
    the activities of its citizens.  The fact that several people were able
    to leave despite the interest the authorities appeared to have in  them
    was not an indicator that people would be  all  right  on  return  when
    different  procedures  operated.   She  was  then  asked   to   comment
    particularly on the appellant AB.  She agreed, as was plainly the case,
    that much of the material on his blog was not original but was reposted
    material.  She accepted that the records indicated that  the  blog  had
    only been looked at 81 times in a whole year.   In  re-examination  she
    reminded us that the penal code required proof of only 10 views for web
    posting to be sufficiently well published to be  capable  of  being  an
    offence.

ROYA KASHEFI

173. We have reports from Roya Kashefi dated 9 December 2013 and a  response
    of the same date.  We refused  an  opposed  application  to  produce  a
    further report because it was produced too late.

174. Ms Kashefi has studied Iran since 1989 and is the  head  of  the  Human
    Rights  Committee  and  works  as  an  associated  researcher  for  the
    association Description Chercheurs Iraniens (ACI) which she  identifies
    as an international non-profit organisation dedicated to  the  unbiased
    study and objective study of Iranian issues.  She built  her  expertise
    particularly  from  studying  daily  newspapers  from  Iran  and   from
    consulting an extensive and regularly updated library and archive.

175.  In  her  capacity  as  head  of  ACI  she  has  presented  papers   at
    international conferences and seminars  including  the  United  Kingdom
    Parliament, the United Nations and  the  European  Union.   Her  report
    begins by appropriate reference to the Ikarian Reefer guidelines.   She
    has also read the papers in the case.  Helpfully her report is  divided
    into three parts.  Section 1 looks at the Islamic Republic's  governing
    structure and ideology.  That is helpful  but  probably  not  the  most
    important part of the report as far as this case is concerned.  Section
    2 looks at  the  Islamic  Republic's  attempt  to  curb  free  flow  of
    information.  This is potentially the most useful part of  her  report.
    Section 3 concentrates on this appellant's case.

176. She begins  by  explaining  that  the  Islamic  Republic  of  Iran  was
    established by popular mandate after the overthrow of the Shah.   There
    was 98% popular approval although little  prerequisite  debate  on  the
    nature and meaning of an Islamic Republic.

177. Iran follows the Shi'a form of Islam which,  although  making  up  only
    about 10% of the world's Muslims, is emphatically  the  form  of  Islam
    adopted in Iran.  The President is an elected office but is the  second
    highest office in Iran.  The highest is  the  absolute  supreme  leader
    which is a clerical appointment.

178. The revolutionary guard are seen as the guardian army  of  the  Islamic
    Republic.  The Islamic Revolutionary Courts still operate and  seek  to
    safeguard the  revolutionary  ideals  of  the  Islamic  regime.   Anti-
    revolutionary activities carry long custodial sentences  and  sometimes
    even the death sentence.  The regime fears  cultural  invasion  and  is
    particularly suspicious of intrusion from the United States of  America
    or the United Kingdom.  Any action against the Islamic Republic in  any
    form is punishable by three months to a  year  in  custody  and  longer
    sentences await those who insult Islam or disseminate false information
    or rumours.  It is very firmly her view that  "anything  is  considered
    low-level dissent".

179. Further the Islamic Courts are  the  personal  domains  of  judges  and
    there is no interest in consistency of sentencing with the result  that
    people who have committed apparently similar offences might  face  very
    different punishments.  Cyber crimes have been  particularly  addressed
    by Article 19 of the Criminal Code and are  described  as  "the  latest
    edition to the Islamic Republic of Iran's vast  censorship  apparatus".
    It is targeted particularly  at  bloggers  and  journalists  expressing
    themselves through electronic media.  The computer crimes  law  is  not
    necessary to punish dissidents who can be dealt with adequately by  the
    existing law.  Rather it provides a  legal  mechanism  for  restraining
    internet activity and  thereby  minimising  legitimate  discussion  and
    criticism.

180. Illegal access to data, computers  and  telecommunications  systems  is
    punishable by 91 days to a year's imprisonment, a  cash  fine  of  five
    million to twenty millions Rials or both.  There are other offences for
    other activities.  Press Law  Article  6  prohibits  a  huge  range  of
    activity including publishing atheistic  articles,  publishing  reports
    against the constitution, spreading rumours or  untruths,  objectifying
    men or women, creating discord  between  people,  insulting  Islam  and
    other matters.  It is broadly and imprecisely drawn.

181. In the section of a report "Freedom of  opinion  and  expression"  Miss
    Kashefi explains that one of the most important tools  of  the  Islamic
    Revolution was the  audio  cassette.   These  could  be  mass  produced
    cheaply and distributed easily in a society where freedom of speech and
    freedom of the press were extremely limited.   Persian  language  radio
    broadcasts into Iran were also respected and useful  in  informing  the
    public  about  the  growing  revolutionary  movement.   It  is   hardly
    surprising that a regime brought into power by the exploitation of such
    methods should be very sensitive to others using them or  their  modern
    equivalents  against  them.   Thus  at   different   times   in   post-
    revolutionary Iran fax  machines,  video  recorders  and  players  were
    banned or licensed or their use restricted.

182. Satellite dishes and receivers met a similar fate.   In  November  2012
    it was understood there were at least 120 Persian language satellite TV
    channels broadcasting into Iran.  Censors sought to  jam  the  signals.
    This shows both the determined efforts of the Islamic regime to  impose
    censorship and restrict  its  population  but  also  its  inability  to
    achieve that end.

183. Unsurprisingly the arrival of the internet compounded the  government's
    difficulties.  The first internet service provided began  operating  in
    Iran in 1994 and it is thought there were in  excess  of  150  ISBS  by
    2013.  However they are all subject to a degree of  government  control
    and the leading firms are closely linked to the government  and  remain
    accountable to it.  All  private  ISPs  must  be  vetted  by  the  Data
    Communication Company of Iran (DCI) and the  Ministry  of  Culture  and
    Islamic Guidance (MICG) before they can be considered  for  a  licence.
    The DCI is the largest ISP in  Iran  and  most  other  ISPs  get  their
    internet connection through the DCI.  The DCI is a  subsidiary  of  the
    Telecommunication Company of Iran (DCI) which is owned by  the  Islamic
    Republic Revolutionary Guards and run by the  Ministry  of  Information
    and Communication Technology (MICT).  It is a level  of  centralisation
    that allows the government to monitor, filter, slow down  or  shut  off
    all internet use in the country.

184. Nevertheless Iran has one of the most  vibrant  "webs"  in  the  world.
    Research in 2009 estimated there were as many as 700,000 Iranian  blogs
    and websites so that some scholars referred to Iran as "blogistan".

185. The report then gives a detailed account about one  Hossein  Derakhsahn
    who was credited with setting up  the  Unicode  framework  for  Persian
    language blogging in 2001 after he had moved to Canada from  Iran.   He
    visited Iran in 2008 and was arrested from his home and later sentenced
    to nineteen and a  half  years'  imprisonment.   This  was  reduced  to
    seventeen years on appeal.  The offences were vague but accused him  of
    cooperating with hostile states and insulting the  holy  sanctities  as
    well as spreading propaganda.

186. Similarly one Hossein Ronaghi Maleki, an Iranian  computer  expert  who
    had been supporting the Persian blogger sphere by beating filters while
    living inside Iran was convicted of similar-sounding offences and  sent
    to fifteen years' imprisonment.

187. In  the  2005  elections  surveillance  of  the  internet  was  tightly
    monitored but she gave an account  of  how  the  wife  of  a  prominent
    blogger and journalist was able to  use  the  internet  to  arrange  an
    online petition when she became concerned about her husband's absence.

188. The Ministry of Islamic Culture and Guidance required all  bloggers  to
    register with the ministry and this was met with a resistance  movement
    of people refusing to register.  By  July  2007  many  blogs  had  been
    hacked, destroyed or closed by the ministry.

189. The arrival of Facebook, which was available to anyone  over  13  years
    of age with a valid email  address  in  September  2006,  provided  yet
    another way for even complete strangers to  share  and  exchange  ideas
    almost instantaneously.  It is the nature  of  Facebook  that  national
    boundaries become irrelevant  and  membership  of  Facebook  opens  the
    possibility  of  accessing  up  to  4,000,000,000  people.   This  easy
    exchange of information and free expression is  perceived  as  worrying
    for authoritarian dictatorships.

190. Much of the use made of Facebook in Iran would  be  described  as  non-
    political in western countries.

191. As well as the Cyber Crimes Law  criminalising  a  great  deal  of  web
    activity the law recognised the need for a working group to assess  the
    contents of websites, blogs and social networking sites to make sure it
    conformed to required standards.

192. Although denied officially, a Wall Street Journal report  claimed  that
    there was a cyber army of such people with  120,000  cultural  soldiers
    established in 2009.  It seems uncontroversial that the  working  group
    for determining criminal content comprised six ministers,  two  members
    of parliament and was headed by the office of the  prosecutor  general.
    The group  decides  what  it  acceptable  to  the  Islamic  regime  and
    prosecutes anyone who does anything that is not.   It  also  identifies
    sites that should be filtered or censored to protect the user in Iran.

193. Following the disputed 2009 elections the website of the Cyber  Defence
    Command of Sepah Pasdaran repeatedly  posted  images  of  demonstrators
    taken by traffic and security cameras and asked members of  the  public
    to identify them.

194. Since 2002  the  committee  responsible  for  determining  unauthorised
    sites has been established to identify unauthorised websites and  block
    specific domains without judicial authority.  In  May  2001  the  first
    official order to censor the internet was given by  Ayatollah  Khomeini
    bypassing both president and parliament.

195. The cyber police known as Fata have been  responsible  for  the  arrest
    and detention of various bloggers  and  Facebook  users.   One,  Sattar
    Beheshti, died after sustaining serious injuries  during  interrogation
    in November 2012.  The chief of disciplinary forces described Google as
    not merely a search engine but a tool for spying.

196. She then gave examples of the death sentence  being  imposed  (although
    not apparently carried out) against a person who had developed a photo-
    sharing tool that had been used by pornographers and against  a  person
    categorised as a web developer and humorist.  Reporters Without Borders
    had counted 27 arrests between March 2011 until March 2012.  Eleven had
    been sentenced to periods of imprisonment  of  between  three  and  six
    years.

197. The internet was slowed down in times of national  tension  or  leading
    up to election, presumably with the intention of frustrating  the  free
    exchange of information.

198. Miss Khashefi then explained how the growing influence of social  media
    was a growing perceived threat to the government of Iran.   By  way  of
    example, President Obama had  asked  "Twitter"  to  reschedule  planned
    maintenance so that its sites remained open  at  a  time  when  Iranian
    people could be expected to be awake.

199. She then gave an account of her own use of  Facebook.   She  maintained
    two Facebook accounts.  The  one  she  described  as  her  professional
    account attracted just over 1,000 friends.  She had  not  met  many  of
    them but they were bound by a common interest, in her case women's  and
    minority rights.  For their safety she would  only  accept  friends  in
    Iran who had been recommended to her.  This was  because  she  believed
    that security agents posed as activists with fake identities  in  order
    to gain access.  They used closed groups as well as open  groups.   She
    explained that she used Facebook to gather  firsthand  information  for
    the reports submitted to for example the United  Nations  Human  Rights
    Council.  She believed that everyone in Iran who had any  contact  with
    her Facebook page risked prosecution for threatening national security,
    disturbing public order, disseminating propaganda or similar  offences.
    She explained that Fata arrested people throughout Iran and not just in
    Tehran.

200. Those in Iran who used anti-filtering system and VPN  (virtual  private
    networks) could be charged with additional offences.

201. Miss Khashefi certainly risked prosecution in the event of  her  return
    to Iran.

202. She asked herself directly if Facebook was legal.  It was not  possible
    to give a simple answer to  that  question  because  of  the  imprecise
    nature  of  internet-based  crime.   However,  it  was  her  view  that
    accessing Facebook is an offence but having a Facebook page or  profile
    is not of itself an offence.  However, she said again in her report how
    in Iran pages devoted to fashion or  music,  for  example,  could  very
    easily  be  seen  as  political  statements  and  attract   punishment.
    Notwithstanding  that  prominent  Iranian  figures  including   cabinet
    members and the president have Facebook pages it is very easy  for  all
    but the most anodyne of content to attract sanctions.

203. She was  aware  of  the  tension  between  her  belief  that  accessing
    Facebook was always considered  to  be  illegal  and  the  practice  of
    Iranian cabinet ministers,  for  example,  running  Facebook  accounts.
    This appears to be  a  tension  in  Iranian  society  that  has  to  be
    recognised.

204. Efforts to establish the acceptable alternative  to  Facebook  had  met
    with little success.  Nevertheless she was  satisfied  the  authorities
    did create false sites to identify those using anti-filtering software.
     In November 2013  the  Islamic  culture  and  guidance  minister,  Ali
    Janati, called for the  removal  of  filtering  from  Facebook.   High-
    ranking officials and religious leaders spoke out against his  request.
    No major changes could come without the approval of the supreme  leader
    who had shown no inclination whatsoever to reduce his opposition.

205. The government remained active in its opposition.  In her report  dated
    9 December 2013 she said how 24 people had been arrested by Fata  since
    26 November 2013.  Clearly that may not  have  been  representative  of
    every two  week  period  throughout  the  year  but  is  indicative  of
    continuing serious opposition to Facebook and similar activity.

206. She then addressed her report specifically to the question  of  whether
    the use of social media  and  similar  internet-based  activities  were
    reasonably likely to come to the attention of the Iranian  authorities.
    There was no doubt that  there  was  will  and  capability  to  set  up
    surveillance systems that monitor, control and  censor.   That  is  why
    specific offences had been created and why  a  specific  police  force,
    Fata, had been  created.   Nevertheless  the  greater  control  of  the
    internet seemed to come  through  limiting  access  by  slow  speed  or
    filtering sites.  According to  the  UNSR's  most  recent  report  made
    available in October 2013 67 internet caf�s had  been  closed  in  July
    2013 and the authorities announced that 5,000,000 websites are blocked.
     In April  2013  officials  estimated  that  some  1,500  antireligious
    websites were blocked per month as well as  those  dedicated  to  news,
    music and women's rights.  Some  936  pages  in  the  Persian  language
    version of Wikipedia were blocked.  It was believed that  much  of  the
    removed material was critical of Iran's human rights record.

207. She also explained that since 2012 internet caf� users had to  register
    their full personal details every time they used  a  computer  and  the
    internet caf� was responsible for monitoring their online activities.

208. She explained that the use of virtual private networks and  anti-filter
    software made identifying internet users a difficult and time-consuming
    task but it was clear that some  people  were  detected  and  punished.
    Further  it  took  only  "the  smallest  lapse  in  security"  to  make
    identification possible.  At 99.2 she explained how the operator  of  a
    popular website, "Gameroon", Shaygan Esfandiari,  had  posted  critical
    items for many years but gave themselves away because of a minor  slip.
    It appeared that Esfandiari  posted  on  his  blog  a  criticism  of  a
    satellite station that had supplied him  with  a  defective  component.
    The authorities were prompted  to  make  enquiries  and  were  able  to
    identify the supplier who identified the customer and this led  to  his
    being discovered.  She explained that identifying  "internetizems"  was
    not just a matter of using technology but also monitoring  content  and
    thinking about what was said.

209. By way of example she told how a Christian group  had  been  discovered
    because it made contact by Facebook leading to the arrest of about  300
    people.

210. Further the regime's equipment was getting  better.   It  had  upgraded
    its filtering technology and was blocking particular types of traffic.

211. Iran's diplomatic missions were  known  to  have  operatives  from  the
    Ministry of Information and Security attached to them.  This  was  seen
    as proof that the  Iranian  authorities  were  interested  in  internet
    activity outside Iran's borders.  She related how a young male  student
    working for the Embassy of the Islamic Republic of Iran had  approached
    her and explained how  the  unit  searched  the  net  for  intelligence
    purposes checking up on local Iranian sites  and  international  groups
    with a UK presence to stay informed about dissident activities.   There
    is a large Iranian community in  the  United  Kingdom  and  the  United
    Kingdom is viewed with  particular  suspicion  by  Iran.   The  Islamic
    Republic also has a presence in London through the  Islamic  Centre  in
    Kilburn and the mosque network in the UK.

212. She did not refer to any specific evidence but pointed out how  it  was
    a clear incentive for security officials to get  into  closed  Facebook
    groups by deceit because it could be seen as  a  way  of  opening  many
    doors.  She believed that setting up fake  identities  by  intelligence
    and security agents was common practice.  It did  not  much  matter  if
    they were eventually discovered.  Much could be discovered before then.
     She described it as a "running joke among Iranian Facebook  users"  to
    attribute any technical glitch on the site to the activities of Iranian
    government officials.

213. She was asked to consider the  capability  of  Iranian  authorities  to
    identify Iranian nationals outside Iran who make use of  the  internet.
    She suggested that the Facebook circle of friends was an obvious route.
     Further some public figures had public fan pages which were  open  and
    could be read easily.  She was aware from her own experience  how  many
    of her "friends" would only accept friendship requests from people  who
    used identifiable real names.  This was a step against infiltration.

214. She found it difficult to comment  on  the  level  of  public  interest
    within Iran in views posted on social media and similar places but  she
    was aware of the significant  level  of  public  trust  shown  by  high
    audience figures extended to the BBC Persian Television and BBC Persian
    website and the regime's overt criticism in the BBC and UK  government.
    She  referred  to  a  slightly  self-congratulatory  article  by  Peter
    Horrocks, the World Service director who thought it "clear  that  crude
    attempts to discredit our journalists are failing and ordinary Iranians
    are increasingly turning to the  BBC  and  independent  news  they  can
    trust".

215. He went on to say how the audience reach of BBC Persian TV had gone  up
    to 11,400,000 and Persian TV had a weekly reach of 19% of  the  overall
    population of Iran.

216.  She  was  quite  satisfied  that  the  Iranian  authorities  have  the
    capability to block access for  Iranians  inside  Iran  to  undesirable
    sites.  There seemed to be an ongoing  battle.   For  example,  Persian
    language satellite and internet sites such  as  Voice  of  America  and
    Radio Farda offered daily proxy addresses to circumvent censors.   Many
    other sites did the same thing.

217. Miss Khashefi then dealt with the risks faced by a person returning  to
    Iran who had been involved in internet use in a way  that  annoyed  the
    authorities.

218. It was pointed out that since 2006 or 2007 many blogs had  been  closed
    down on judicial orders because of unacceptable content.  She suggested
    that anyone who had come to the adverse attention  of  the  authorities
    through such activities would  not  be  forgotten.   If  a  person  was
    "wanted" a file would be opened and remain  open  until  investigations
    were complete.  A period of inactivity would not bring to  an  end  the
    interest.  She also pointed out that it was easy to get a profile  that
    was of  interest  to  the  regime.   There  was  a  heavy  presence  of
    intelligence and security agents and their associates  in  universities
    and public sector spaces in Iran.  It was not difficult  for  a  person
    who is in any way critical of the government to  say  something  or  do
    something which sparks interest.  Even discussing human  rights  issues
    can be enough.  She was confident from her own contacts in women's  and
    minority rights activists that such people  are  often  contacted  when
    they have settled out of Iran.  Typically if  they  have  already  been
    interrogated in Iran  the  interrogator  makes  contact  in  their  new
    country of residence.  Contact typically is through Facebook  or  email
    but occasionally by telephone.  Similarly those legitimately present in
    the United Kingdom on student visas can be the subject of  interest  if
    they  are  known  to  the  security  forces  for  their  human   rights
    activities.  She gave a detailed example of a person  known  personally
    to her who had been studying in Manila on a government grant paying her
    tuition fees.  This was suspended until she agreed  to  cooperate  with
    the agent contacting her for information  about  other  women's  rights
    activists.  She  was  frightened  (the  word  used  was  petrified)  of
    returning to Iran because she had been feeding them false  information.
    She deactivated and then deleted her Facebook account about two  months
    before she was due to return and changed her email address.  It made no
    difference.  On her return to Iran in August 2013 she was arrested  and
    detained.  She was then confronted with printed copies of her  Facebook
    posts and threatened again that she must cooperate  or  be  imprisoned.
    The person concerned remained free but under pressure and was  required
    to make weekly reports to agents  who  contacted  her.   She  presently
    lived in a small village away from her previous contacts and so had  no
    information that would be of interest if it was passed  on.   This  was
    described as "not an isolated  case"  and  the  writer  was  aware  for
    another fifteen people who had chosen to return to Iran  and  who  were
    now being subject to surveillance.

219. Any contact with the media in the United Kingdom on for  example  radio
    or satellite television or newspapers or internet news sites receivable
    in Iran would be likely to have come to the attention of the  embassy's
    agents as  would  attendance  at  dissident  activities  such  as  even
    participating in, never mind organising or leading  demonstrations  and
    rallies and attending meetings.

220. Leaving Iran illegally is not of itself a reason to  risk  persecution.
    If false documents were used that would be taken more  seriously.   The
    problem was that if a person who had left Iran in  those  circumstances
    had a profile then there was in her view a  real  risk  of  arrest  and
    detention at port.  Merely leaving without permission was a  punishable
    offence.

221. This point was made emphatically in the  January  2013  COI  Report  at
    paragraph 32.22 in the following terms:

         "If an Iranian arrives in the country, without a  passport  or  any
         valid travel documents, the official will arrest them and take them
         to  this  court.   The  court  assesses  the  background   of   the
         individual, the date of  their  departure  from  the  country,  the
         reason for their  illegal  departure,  their  connection  with  any
         organisations or groups and any  other  circumstances.   The  judge
         will decide the severity of the punishment within the parameters of
         Article 34.  This procedure also applies to people who are deported
         back to Iran, not in the possession of  a  passport  containing  an
         exit visa; in this case the Iranian Embassy will issue them with  a
         document confirming their  nationality  ...  illegal  departure  is
         often prosecuted in conjunction  with  other,  unrelated  offences.
         Such a methodology appears to suggest that it is the  investigation
         into the facts  surrounding  the  easily  observable  and  provable
         offence of illegal departure, namely the motive for such an act (as
         a  decision  to  depart  illegally  suggests  a  desire  to  escape
         prosecutorial/police  detection  for  past  illegal  deeds),   that
         eventually results in the  discovery  of  the  underlying  offence,
         leading to a combined prosecution."

222. The same approach applies to those who have been identified  as  having
    a critical profile by reason of  activities  such  as  blogging.   Miss
    Khashefi considered it "highly likely" that someone who was  wanted  by
    the authorities or who had come to their  adverse  attention  would  be
    detained  on  arrival.   Their  mobile  phone  and  laptop   would   be
    confiscated for further investigation and all passwords would  have  to
    be revealed to interrogating officers.  She considered it again "highly
    likely" that a person forcefully returned to Iran  would  be  asked  to
    explain their dealings out of Iran and to  provide  Facebook  passwords
    and checks online against their name would  be  made.   The  ease  with
    which a person's internet-based activity in the United Kingdom would be
    discovered on return depended to a  considerable  extent  on  how  they
    conducted themselves.  If they had used their own name then they  would
    be easy to track down and friends or followers  or  posted  photographs
    would be a good link either directly to their activities or  to  things
    that would reveal their activities.  Their treatment  would  depend  to
    some extent on what they have been doing.  However, there was no reason
    to think that  the  authorities  would  make  any  allowances  for  the
    possibility that a person had engaged in activity insincerely in  order
    to improve his claim for asylum in the  United  Kingdom.   Anti-Iranian
    activity for whatever reason would be dealt with harshly.

223. Miss Khashefi then directed herself expressly to the case of EF.

224. She believed that anyone born a  Muslim  who  renounced  his  faith  to
    adopt another religion could face the death sentence.   She  recognised
    that this was not spelt out in the draft penal  code.   She  attributed
    that to international pressure and suggested that respect for Ayatollah
    Khomeini would  cause  an  Islamic  judge  to  follow  his  wishes  and
    pronounce a death sentence.  There was no reference in  the  report  to
    any example  of  this  being  done  and  her  comments  might  be  best
    understood as speculation albeit by an informed person.

225. She then turned to the [WEBSITE] Facebook profile.  She confirmed  that
    this translates loosely as [redacted] and is therefore a  challenge  to
    the fundamental  identity  of  Iran  which  styles  itself  an  Islamic
    republic.  She said that this of itself is contrary to Article  498  of
    the Islamic penal code facing a maximum  of  ten  years'  imprisonment.
    She accepted that EF had managed to gather about 1,500 supporters.  She
    said that if the profile had come to  the  attention  of  the  security
    intelligence forces, as might happen through confession of an  arrested
    friend, the appellant EF would be traced and would be at risk.

226. She said that by possessing anti-filter software EF  had  committed  an
    offence which could be punished by a fine or three months'  to  a  year
    imprisonment and that by  reason  of  organising  meetings  to  discuss
    political views looking for a change in the political structure of  the
    country he risked being charged with incitement,  threatening  national
    security, gathering [information] to conspire against  the  regime  and
    other similar-sounding offences which could be punished  by  up  to  74
    lashes and custody for up to two years.  The  fact  that  the  meetings
    were small was not an important consideration.

227. She had seen an interview on [company redacted] involving EF  dated  14
    December 2011 where he publicised his Facebook profile  and  undermined
    the revolution by saying that the revolution was  orchestrated  by  the
    West rather than representing a unified view of the Iranian people.

228. She said that she could see when she visited his [WEBSITE]  profile  as
    a member of the public that there were some  935  photographs  and  109
    mutual friends that they shared.   Enquiry  of  one  of  those  friends
    showed that on 9 December 2013 a little over 4,000 people were  friends
    with a  profile.   She  described  the  public  posts  as  "of  clearly
    political nature".  Several posts about the "Iranian  People's  Freedom
    Front" and an invitation to participate in a gathering about executions
    in Iran at the beginning of December.  She regarded almost  every  post
    she could find (as a member of the public) as  being  punishable  under
    Iranian law.

229. The profile photograph shows the appellant EF  and  she  had  seen  the
    same person clearly identified standing next  to  a  "graphic  reading"
    from the [group name redacted].  As far as she is able to ascertain the
    appellant's name did not appear on the profile  until  he  was  in  the
    United Kingdom.  After he came to the United Kingdom he  became  linked
    to a YouTube channel in his name.

230. She confirmed that the appellant  EF  had  identified  himself  as  the
    administrator of [group name  redacted].   This  was  a  Facebook  page
    created in February 2012  and  is  described  as  an  open  group.   In
    December 2013 he had had 1,310 "likes".  The  posts  are  open  to  all
    members of the public who would care to look.

231. The posts included anti-Islamic rhetoric, mockery of the ruling  clergy
    and an advertisement for a demonstration against executions in Iran  on
    5 December that was advertised on the  page.   She  understood  from  a
    YouTube post that EF was also the secretary general of that  particular
    group.  There was a website saying the group's aims were to  unify  and
    organise nationalist groups based the  history,  culture  and  love  of
    Iran.  On the Saeed Ghahremani dedicated YouTube channel there is video
    of the group calling for a boycott of the presidential elections.   The
    text is read by the appellant.

232. She also looked  at  the  [group  name  redacted].   This  was  also  a
    Facebook page with 7,492 "likes" in December  2013.   It  had  an  open
    public page commenced in 2008.  The appellant EF said  that  he  became
    part of the administrative team in October 2011.  She said there was  a
    general news and current affairs page.  It was said to be dedicated  to
    unity amongst Iranian people and the territorial integrity of Iran  and
    does not support any political party.  It bases its work  on  universal
    human rights and values and identified itself as a  subsidiary  of  the
    Azarbaijan Movement for Democracy and Integrity of Iran.  She said that
    the appellant had support  letters  from  the  chairman  of  the  Iran-
    Azarbaijan movement Zeinali Lohrasb and she identified its website.

233. She had also studied the [group name redacted] which  she  said  had  a
    closed group page so that the administration had to approve  membership
    of the  group  and  posts  were  not  public.   In  December  2013  its
    membership was in excess of 5,000.  For the purposes of the report  she
    asked to join the group and her  request  was  approved  by  [WEBSITE].
    There were four administrators of the group.  The content was general.

234. The webpage indicated that the owner  was  [WEBSITE].   The  last  post
    showed that it had been taken over by "Soldiers for Islam".

235. She described Jebhe  Iran  Azad  Artesh  Areae  [WEBSITE]  as  an  open
    Facebook group which was "most  outspoken  in  its  opposition  to  the
    Islamic  regime".   She  described  the  regime  as   "monstrous"   and
    "bloodthirsty" and numerous other  equally  unappreciative  adjectives.
    It invited all freedom-loving Iranians to unite under the banner of the
    great King Cyrus of Persia who was identified as the founder of secular
    government and human rights.  The  pages  were  news  analysis  with  a
    nationalist flavour and a membership of 1,636 people.  There were posts
    by members of the group that clearly insulted Islam,  the  prophet  and
    the Islamic regime.

236. Additionally she had seen a membership payment slip and support  letter
    identifying the appellant EF as a member of [group  name  redacted]  in
    January 2012 when his appeal was heard but she understood him to be  no
    longer a member.

237. Jebhe Iran Azad Artesh Areae [WEBSITE] and [group  name  redacted]  are
    particularly relevant because they are identified on Persian  Wikipedia
    as two of the organisations who were initial supporters of the  Iranian
    National Council created by the joining of the Iranian People's Freedom
    Front and the Azarbaijan Movement for Democracy and Integrity of  Iran.
    This was an  organisation  created  to  support  the  Iranian  National
    Council which was called for by Reza Pahlavi, the son of the late shah.
     Over 16,000 individuals and groups had signed to show support for  the
    Iran National Council.  Over 20,000 people appeared to have taken  part
    in the voting and the founders met in  Paris.   One  Reza  Pahlavi  was
    selected  as  the  council's  spokesperson   and   he   has   attracted
    international media attention.  The  Iranian  National  Council  has  a
    Facebook page that has been liked by 31,885 people  in  December  2013.
    EF  said  that  he  no  longer  supports   the   council   because   of
    "administrative irregularities" but he is  identified  as  one  of  the
    original signatories.  The  Iranian  People's  Freedom  Front  is  also
    listed as a supporting group.

238. She also said that  she  had  seen  postings  on  the  YouTube  channel
    clearly  identifying  the  appellant  as  one  who  organised  and  led
    demonstrations on his YouTube.  He  had  read  declarations  and  given
    several satellite interviews.  He  mostly  did  it  on  behalf  of  the
    Iranian People's Freedom Front.  Stations can  be  picked  up  anywhere
    outside Iran.

239. She summarised his sur place activities as one who  had  organised  and
    participated in demonstrations.  Photographs and  video  recordings  of
    those were posted on YouTube and the  Iranian  People's  Freedom  Front
    website, Facebook and [WEBSITE]'s page.  They could have been  seen  by
    thousands of people.

240. She suggested that his links with Reza Pahlavi and his support for  the
    Iran National Council were ways in which he could have been  identified
    as someone who opposed the regime even if his Facebook profiles had not
    come to the attention of the authorities.

241. She drew attention to the fact  that  the  audiences  for  his  YouTube
    posts were limited.  No more than 301 viewers were recorded.   However,
    she pointed out that we do not know the identity of those people.   She
    suggested that it could have been officials from the regime.

242. Miss Khashefi then conducted a Google search in  the  appellant's  name
    using both English and  Persian  characters.   The  search  in  Persian
    characters identified his YouTube channel including an announcement  of
    his appointment as secretary general of the [group  name  redacted],  a
    link to the [group name redacted] website  announcing  the  appellant's
    appointment as spokesperson and deputy secretary  of  the  [group  name
    redacted] including his photograph and a link to a Facebook page with a
    group of 174 members called the [group name redacted] movement in union
    with the Iranian People's Freedom Front.  There was also a  link  to  a
    condolence video message to survivors of the earthquake in  North  West
    Iran in 2012.  The cover photograph is  of  a  group  of  about  twenty
    people holding the nationalist flag of Iran with a central lion  and  a
    rising sun.  There were placards reading "Free Iran" and "Dear Khomeini
    go to hell".  The appellant was shown holding the flag.  There was also
    a photograph linked by [WEBSITE].

243. The English search identified other people with the same name and  also
    led to this appellant's YouTube channel.

244. Miss Khashefi suggested that in the event of return a simple search  by
    intelligence officers at the airport would identify the appellant as an
    opposition figure even if he was not already known in that capacity.

245. She pointed  out  that  Iran's  "dissent  laws"  have  extraterritorial
    effect and the appellant would be punished upon return.

246. She then dealt with punishment for claiming asylum.

247. Miss Khashefi referred to a newspaper article quoting a senior  Iranian
    judge published in February 2011 suggesting that asylum  seekers  could
    be prosecuted  for  "dissemination  of  false  propaganda  against  the
    Islamic Republic of Iran" and punished accordingly.   Punishment  could
    be assumed to be akin to false witness and that typically  attracted  a
    custodial term of between three months and two years or a fine.  If the
    prophet had been insulted then there could be the death penalty and  if
    false or forged documents had been used the offender could be lashed.

248. She drew attention to the  Country  of  Origin  Information  Report  of
    January  2013  quoting  an  Amnesty  International  Report   with   the
    disturbing and clear headline "We are ordered to crush you".  There was
    a report by Swiss refugee agency quoting an unnamed  judge  complaining
    that people had been attacking the  reputation  of  Iran  by  political
    activities against Iran from abroad.  It was explained  that  a  person
    who was returned would be detained for a few days while the police made
    enquiries.  The report continued:

         "If the police can prove that the person was not active and has not
         done or said anything that  could  damage  the  reputation  of  the
         Islamic Republic, then they are released.  If the person was either
         politically active in Iran  before  leaving,  or  has  been  active
         abroad, they must be tried and receive a punishment appropriate  to
         their activities." (Report paragraph 134).

249. We note that the burden of proof was apparently on the police to  prove
    the innocence of the detained person.

250. Miss Khashefi then examined the returns procedure.  Unless  the  person
    to be returned admits to having a valid current Iranian passport  there
    can be no question of return without contacting the Iranian authorities
    to establish the identity and nationality of the person to be returned.
     This would generate considerable paperwork and gives  the  authorities
    an opportunity to  make  enquiries.   A  person  who  had  exited  Iran
    illegally would be given a particular  form  entitled  "illegal  exit".
    Unsurprisingly the form requires the full name, birth certificate, date
    of birth, the father's name, United Kingdom address,  Iranian  address,
    date of illegal exit, place of illegal  exit  and  reason  for  illegal
    exit.  The  subject  is  also  required  to  identify  their  level  of
    education, whether or not they have been conscripted,  their  telephone
    and residential address and place of work and telephone and address  in
    the United Kingdom and details about  their  spouse  and  children.   A
    photograph also has to be  affixed.   Plainly  this  information  gives
    abundant opportunity to make enquiries about  the  subject's  political
    activities in Iran or the United Kingdom.  Further if any questions are
    not answered then the subject can expect to be detained on return  when
    more enquiries will be made.

251. Although at the time  of  writing  Mr  Rouhani  was  a  relatively  new
    president Miss Khashefi explained that in Iran a person is not  allowed
    to stand for political office without  the  approval  of  the  guardian
    council.  There  really  was  little  opportunity  for  a  person  with
    radically different views being able to stand for  election  and  there
    was no reason to assume that his election as  president  would  provide
    for a major change.  Undoubtedly there  were  some  encouraging  signs.
    Some prisoners of conscience  were  pardoned.   President  Rouhani  had
    chosen women for three important cabinet positions.  These  things  did
    not change the fact that people were still being arrested  for  working
    as journalists or human rights defenders.

252. Her opinion about the risks facing a person returning to Iran  was  not
    changed.  In her concluding paragraphs Miss  Khashefi  emphasised  that
    Iran has the inclination and  the  resources  to  invest  in  the  best
    available technology to monitor and control internet  use  within  Iran
    and that its legal system does intend to criminalise and punish out  of
    country activities that could be seen as being against the interests of
    Iran.  Returning from the United  Kingdom  had  some  added  difficulty
    because of British interference with Iran's internal affairs  over  the
    last century or so.  Whilst appreciating the possibility  of  a  person
    engaging in online activity insincerely she saw no reason to think that
    the insincerity  would  be  recognised  or  found  significant  by  the
    security forces in Iran.

253. She emphasised how simple use of Google produces enough information  to
    cause difficulties for the appellant  EF.   Anyone  returning  to  Iran
    would be "highly likely" to be interviewed and that is the process that
    can so easily trigger persecution.

254. Miss Khashefi had responded to requests for  further  information  made
    by the Secretary of State after her evidence had been  disclosed.   The
    questions were asked in part to test the sources on which Miss Khashefi
    relied.  In response to further questions about the working of Facebook
    she said there are "high privacy settings" which  are  not  searchable.
    These can only be accessed by someone patient enough to work their  way
    through the operational requirements but she had direct  experience  of
    such a tightly restricted page.  However, such groups are vulnerable if
    one member is arrested and she  was  aware  of  occasions  of  a  group
    responding to the arrest of one of its members by finishing the  group,
    deleting all reference to it and then having the computers  "decleaned"
    to eliminate all traces.  She knew that people did not  always  observe
    the security measures.  She  said  that  surveillance  methods  can  be
    frustrated by the use  of  a  pseudonym  but  she  knew  from  personal
    experience how activists from Iran residing in the United  Kingdom  had
    been monitored because of surveillance of their friends  and  relatives
    in Iran.

255. As we understand her evidence it was  suggested  that  surveillance  of
    such people can create a pattern which enables a person's  identity  to
    be recognised.  She explained that contact by  officials  by  email  is
    more threatening than contact by Facebook.  Email is personal and often
    carries a request for cooperation.

256. Miss Khashefi gave evidence before  us  and  adopted  her  reports  and
    answered some supplementary questions.  This included confirmation that
    [company redacted] was an internet-based "television" channel and  that
    [company redacted] was on the internet and on satellite and had a  good
    following in Iran.

257. She was cross-examined.

258. She explained that she had no technical qualifications but had  been  a
    blogger and Facebook user since 2008.  She explained that  Facebook  is
    often used to circulate things by people other than the post they  have
    written.

259. She agreed that Iran was a country that took quickly to new  technology
    and there was often tension between what the  government  required  and
    what actually happened.  For example satellite television  was  largely
    banned  in  Iran  but  was  also  widely  available.   Technology   was
    frequently smuggled into the country and satellite  dishes  had  become
    available that were smaller than those common in the United Kingdom and
    worked within the house.

260. She also accepted that condign punishment  including  lashing  did  not
    seem to make much impact on the easy, albeit illicit,  availability  of
    new technological products.

261. She also accepted that virtual private networks were seen as a  popular
    way around government intrusion.  Similarly the very high price  of  an
    internet connection and the deliberately slow speed did not stop people
    using the internet.  International news sites such as BBC and Voice  of
    America  provided   anti-filter   software   to   overcome   government
    restrictions.  The question "is it your sense that there is an  ongoing
    battle to circumvent restrictions" met with the pithy reply  "yes,  and
    we have several people in prison for finding ways round".

262. She also recognised that the Iranian authorities  were  introducing  an
    alternative to the World Wide Web which she knew  as  "Halal  internet"
    and "Salaam World".  She accepted that it should not be necessary,  for
    example, to go "outside" for banking.  The  regime  had  problems  with
    mobile telephones.  It had tried to stop ways of  using  modern  mobile
    phones to upload photographs immediately.

263. She accepted that Facebook had been used as a  survey  of  about  5,000
    people including 2,500 from Iran  most  of  whom  had  expressed  their
    opposition to the death penalty.  She did not know if it  was  possible
    to analyse Facebook to see where visitors were from.

264. Again she agreed that there was an active blogging scene  in  Iran  and
    people  were  returning  to  blogging  rather  than  the  immediacy  of
    Facebook.  She also accepted that the requirement to register blogs was
    largely ignored.  She also accepted that she had set up a  Facebook  in
    order to have a very large group of "friends" even though they were not
    people she necessarily knew.  She had set  up  her  account  so  people
    could see the  news.   The  number  of  followers  recorded  would  not
    necessarily be the number of people who visited the page.   However,  a
    follower would know every time a person made a posting.

265.  The  Iranian  Cyber  Army  was  affiliated  to  the  Iranian  National
    Revolutionary Guard.  She believed that there was a website set  up  by
    Sepah.  There were many factions within Sepah and  setting  up  such  a
    site was the kind of thing  they  did.   She  accepted  that  any  link
    between  the  Cyber  Army  and  Sepah  was   "opaque   and   tortuous".
    Nevertheless Sepah had strong intelligence gathering units and arrested
    people.

266. Although Iran had considerable capacity  to  monitor  the  internet  it
    also had a high number of internet users.

267. She was referred expressly to an article  published  in  2013  entitled
    "Freedom  on  the  Net"  from  Freedom  House.    This   confirms   the
    considerable restrictions imposed  on  internet  users  in  Iran.   For
    example, it gave the statutory basis in Iranian  law  for  registration
    and giving details to owners of cyber caf�s.  It  quoted  reports  from
    Reuters and the Wall Street Journal about major Chinese firms providing
    surveillance equipment, with a presentation showing  how  Iran's  Mobin
    Net ISP would potentially have the  capacity  to  utilise  deep  packet
    inspection to conduct real time monitoring and to  block  websites  and
    track users and to  reconstruct  email  messages  as  a  means  of  its
    citizens.  Thus Facebook accounts and  other  areas  of  activity  were
    found to be hacked and defaced with a statement saying that  the  owner
    of the page had been placed under investigation by judicial  order  and
    other websites had been hacked to portray a meaning other than the  one
    intended.

268. Nevertheless the authors of the report found  the  role  of  the  Cyber
    Police or other security forces to be "unclear", exactly what role  the
    Cyber Police or other security forces had in such activity.  There  was
    no doubt that in the weeks leading up  to  the  presidential  elections
    there had been a significant increase in targeted cyber attacks against
    high profile activists and journalists being  traced  back  to  Iranian
    servers.

269. However, Miss Khashefi had to accept that none  of  these  things  were
    evidence that the state was always able to intervene when it  might  so
    wish to do.  She also believed that the  Iranian  authorities  did  not
    have the capacity to monitor all activity  to  and  from  Iran.   Quite
    literally millions of people wanted to use the internet in Iran.

270. She did not know how the Iranian authorities could  monitor  activities
    outside Iran if they monitor them at all.  She did not  think  it  far-
    fetched to suggest that embassy officials or Iranian  citizens  working
    under the guidance of their embassies would  apply  for  jobs  and  she
    believed there was a media-monitoring unit run by Tehran in the  United
    Kingdom even though there had been no embassy since 2011.  She believed
    it operated from an Islamic centre.

271. It was put to her bluntly that it "must be  right"  that  the  internet
    runs so quickly that Iran  cannot  possibly  monitor  everything.   She
    agreed with that suggestion.  She did not agree that cyber attacks were
    limited to high profile targets such as  the  BBC  Persian  Service  or
    Voice of America.  She said that blogs had been attacked too.

272. She was then asked particularly about EF's activity.   She  had  looked
    for [WEBSITE].  Certainly things had been posted as long  ago  as  2011
    and there was no evidence of this site being hacked by  December  2013.
    Neither was it apparent from looking at the site where to  find  EF  or
    any names except those freely  disclosed.   However,  there  were  over
    4,000 friends.  She was then asked about the  website  of  the  Iranian
    People's  Freedom  Front.   She  explained  that  an  administrator  or
    "admins" was the one person who controlled access to the page.  Usually
    the person was the creator or someone to do with the administration  of
    the site.  She believed that some of the television  sites  were  based
    outside Iran.  She explained that different broadcasters bought  blocks
    of time.  Some broadcasted live.  Some broadcast recordings.

273. She confirmed that one of the demonstrations photographed  appeared  to
    be a relatively small group of people demonstrating.

274. She was asked about returning  people  to  Iran.   She  confirmed  that
    Iranian affairs were managed by the Consulate of  Oman  in  the  United
    Kingdom and sometimes for certain things by the government  of  Sweden.
    There was skeleton staff at the former embassy where people  could  go.
    She understood that there  were  something  of  the  order  of  250,000
    Iranians in the United Kingdom.  Before  the  government  of  Oman  was
    involved people used to go to Dublin from the  United  Kingdom  to  get
    help.  The Home Office does not help.

275. Miss Khashefi was later recalled to give evidence.  Miss  Khashefi  was
    asked about a report she prepared in the case of CD.  The report is  at
    page 322 in her bundle.  Her main findings were to support  CD's  claim
    of having worked as a teacher.  The story set out at paragraphs 5 to 15
    of that statement  including  the  reference  to  starting  work  on  a
    temporary contract because she was unsuitable for full-time  employment
    as a teacher was, in Miss Khashefi's experience, exactly what was  done
    when a person was not known to be disloyal but was  not  trusted.   She
    said it was particularly difficult for women to be out of work but as a
    qualified person CD could seek work with a  private  company.   Support
    for an unsuccessful election candidate would  not  matter  because  the
    candidate would have to have been approved by the supreme leader before
    offering himself for election.  She said that the president is a clever
    diplomat.

276.  We  summarise  now  that  report.   There  is  an  appropriate  expert
    direction  and  reference  to  the  Ikarian  Reefer  guidelines.   Miss
    Khashefi had looked at the statements and interview records and refusal
    letter and also documents from the IRIB (Iranian Broadcasting) and CD's
    own blogs and internet activities.  This includes an article written by
    the appellant for the [journal redacted] in Iran.

277. Broadly Miss Khashefi understood it to be CD's  case  that  she  worked
    for the IRIB and took time off to get paid study leave  in  the  United
    Kingdom.   She  became  connected  with  the  Green  Movement  and  was
    discovered by Herasat.  She said there are ways of being  removed  from
    state employment.  One is  exraj,  which  is  simple  dismissal.   This
    method of terminating a contract of employment does not prevent  future
    employment by the state.  Another is enfesal,  which  is  qualified  as
    enfesal da'em or enfesal movaghat.  Enfesal da'em  is  disqualification
    permanently and enfesal movaghat is disqualification for  a  determined
    period.  These decisions are appealable.  There was  no  evidence  that
    the appellant CD had been subjected to  enfesal  and  so  she  was  not
    prohibited from being re-employed by the state.  The employee number is
    consistent throughout  her  payslips,  employment  documents  and  IRIB
    portal and the reference to her employment status being "undetermined -
    on leave without notice case referred to disciplinary  division"  seems
    wholly consistent with her case.

278. Miss Khashefi said that IRIB were  in  many  ways  good  employers.   A
    person employed with them  would  have  healthcare  cover  and  pension
    arrangements.  Further it would advance her own career to have  a  long
    period of working for IRIB even on a continued temporary basis.   There
    was nothing unbelievable about her claim that she was  unable  to  take
    part in big political campaigns but was careful and considerate and did
    what she could.

279. Miss Khashefi then explained the operation of Herasat.  She likened  it
    to security officers in any public building in the United  Kingdom  but
    whereas in the United Kingdom security staff might be  expected  to  be
    interested in matters relating to physical security and safety  Herasat
    would additionally go a stage further and ensure, for example, that the
    Islamic model and religious code was enforced.  Thus prayer times would
    happen as required and employees would participate.  Similarly  fasting
    would be observed in Ramadan and "un-Islamic behaviour" (such as people
    of opposite sexes sharing the same lift) would be stopped.

280. She was aware of a statutory entitlement given to  state  employees  to
    have unpaid leave for up to three years to further their education  and
    the possibility of this being extended for two years to  a  maximum  of
    five  years.   Periods  of  leave  could  be  subject  to  some   local
    negotiation but there is a statutory entitlement to a  holiday  of  two
    and a half days' paid leave for  the  first  month  of  employment  and
    continuing until a person is allowed four months' holiday a year.   She
    was not aware of any mechanism  whereby  CD  could  have  obtained  six
    months' paid study leave but four months' paid leave was  available  to
    her and it was not inconceivable that a further two month period  could
    have been negotiated locally.

281. Unsurprisingly, continued  absence  without  leave  is  a  disciplinary
    matter.  The correspondence of a colleague claiming that she  had  seen
    documents saying that the appellant was about to be dismissed but could
    not provide copies was in accordance with Miss Khashefi's understanding
    of processes in state companies.  The person making the report  had  no
    right to see the correspondence nor to take an opportunity to find  out
    something to pass it  on.   She  considered  it  "highly  likely"  that
    Herasat would have carried out investigations on CD when she failed  to
    return to work.

282. There would be no objection to CD having published writing  before  she
    was contractually employed  by  IRIB.   She  was  an  analyst  and  the
    credibility  of  her  employer  would  be   enhanced   by   appropriate
    publications.  Anything that was published  openly  would  not  be  too
    critical.  However, any hint of rebellious views would be noted.

283. Miss Khashefi commented on the widespread use of the internet  in  Iran
    and how Iran ranked fourth in the world on the number  of  blogs.   The
    extent of censorship become known only in 2004  when  visual  sites  of
    organisations such as The Voice of  America  which  were  sponsored  by
    national governments or Iranian opposition groups became  filtered  and
    unavailable in  Iran.   The  authorities  were  not  prepared  for  the
    enormous explosion in internet use and introduced new  laws  to  combat
    "internet offences".

284. Notwithstanding the new laws it was possible  for  the  contributor  to
    remain anonymous.  The authorities were threatened by this and from  31
    December 2006 it was mandatory for bloggers  to  register  their  sites
    with the Ministry of Islamic Culture and Guidance.  Very  full  details
    were required including family and  contact  details.   Protest  groups
    developed refusing to register.  These included sites  on  "blogfa.com"
    and "Persianblog.com" and in July 2007 some of  these  sites  had  been
    hacked and destroyed.  She understood that blogfa.com had been  hacked,
    so many bloggers from Iran  were  experiencing  problems.   The  blogfa
    management then set up "blogfa.ir" (and transferred blogfa.com over  to
    blogfa.ir).   Blogfa.ir  was  also  hacked   after   the   presidential
    elections.  The "Allah's Cyber Army" took responsibility for  that  and
    sites were closed by a notice from Allah's Cyber Army  on  the  leading
    page.  Blogfa had to respond to the pressure by monitoring and  closing
    questionable blogs.  Again she considered it plausible that  CD's  blog
    was of the kind that would have been shut down.

285. The report then dealt with CD's activities outside Iran.

286. It  seemed  clear  that  any  activity  against  the  Islamic  Republic
    committed outside the borders of Iran would be punishable within  Iran.
    Since June 2009 the Iranian authorities have made it  very  clear  that
    they  will  commence  investigations  within  Iran  and  seek  to   use
    international arrest warrants to arrange a  person's  return.   Quoting
    the report, she said:

         "this fear is fed by constant announcements from the authorities in
         Iran that anyone engaged in activities against the Islamic Republic
         outside Iran would be identified and prosecuted."

287. Face recognition software has been used since June  2009.   She  opined
    that regular attendance at demonstrations  was  as  risky  as  carrying
    banners or leading chants.  The Islamic Republic believes that protests
    outside Iran are organised by dissident groups who are  criminal.   The
    faces of the "wanted" had been posted  on  a  website  set  up  by  the
    Revolutionary Guard (Sepah Pasdaran), intelligence officers  are  known
    to gather in Iranian Embassies and so are ready to act.

288. She believed that, for example, the  embassy  in  Iran  had  a  special
    media monitoring unit that existed to scour the media reports and  news
    on Iran in case a story emerged that required comment.  The  same  unit
    worked with another that monitored the web-based activities of  Iranian
    groups for intelligence.  Unlike many  sites  iran-free.org  places  an
    emphasis on new writing rather than reposting  other  stories  and  for
    this reason alone could be of particular interest to  the  intelligence
    units.  Miss Khashefi considered the Gheichi blog  to  be  too  new  to
    attract too many readers but noted it was CD's case that  some  of  her
    articles had featured on [website name redacted], which  she  described
    as "one of the  most  visited  news  sites  by  the  Iranian  dissident
    community for dissemination of original  writing  and  views".   Anyone
    wanting to know news or opinions from Iran would visit it and  she  had
    little confidence in the anonymity of a person being preserved  in  the
    face of serious enquiry by the well-funded  and  sophisticated  Iranian
    intelligence service.

289. Public dissatisfaction with the declared results of  the  elections  of
    June 2009 was so widespread that fear of  recognition  seemed  to  have
    evaporated.  In the United  Kingdom,  for  example,  many  people  were
    second or third generation Iranians growing up outside  Iran  and  they
    took part in public demonstrations without apparent  concern  of  being
    identified.  During demonstrations in June and July  2009  outside  the
    Iranian Embassy in London there were examples of members of  the  crowd
    identifying people  with  cameras  who,  unlike  apparently  legitimate
    journalists, were not filming events but filming the faces of people in
    the crowd.  Such people were asked to leave, sometimes with the help of
    the police.

290. Facebook had emerged as the  preferred  way  of  communicating  between
    actual or would be demonstrators.

291. Miss Khashefi is well-known in  the  Iranian  community  and  said  how
    Iranians  frequently  confided  in  her  their  concern   about   being
    identified.  One family told her that they had left identity  documents
    at the Iranian Consulate and when they went to return  them  they  were
    admonished for attending demonstrations.  Miss Khashefi had no  way  of
    knowing if that story was accurate but she cited it as  an  example  of
    many similar stories.

292. Iranians had also been recruited to infiltrate  the  community  in  the
    United Kingdom and report and this not only gathered useful information
    but encouraged an atmosphere of mistrust and suspicion that suited well
    the purposes of the Iranian regime.

293. A German television programme reported on people who  had  demonstrated
    in Germany against Iran  reporting  that  they  had  been  targets  for
    intimidation by  the  Iranian  regime.   Notwithstanding  emphatic  and
    rather scoffing denials by the Iranian ambassador in Germany, Germany's
    security police had confirmed reports that there  were  Iranian  agents
    amongst the crowds outside the embassy.  She  found  it  relevant  that
    documents show that CD had been "protected from employment  because  of
    her unsuitability rather than because she  is  prohibited".   This  was
    consistent with her claim to have been in full-time employment with the
    IRIB when she came to  the  United  Kingdom.   It  was  plausible  that
    Herasat would investigate her  absence,  her  pro-reform  politics  and
    links with the Green Movement would make her unsuitable for work  as  a
    state employee.  She would be  of  adverse  interest  to  the  security
    services in the  event  of  her  return.   The  political  benefits  of
    encouraging the Green  Movement  such  as  high  voter  engagement  and
    turnout have passed after the election and conduct that would have been
    tolerated before the election would now be the basis of an offence.

294. Although at the time of writing she  could  leave  the  United  Kingdom
    easily on a valid current passport the involvement of [redacted] at the
    very least created a risk of her being brought to the attention of  the
    authorities on computer records in the event of her  return.   Even  if
    she managed to clear the airport any re-engagement  with  her  employer
    would attract the security forces.   Her  activities  could  attract  a
    custodial sentence.  London is a centre of political engagement against
    the authorities in Iran.  Many meetings are publicised on Facebook  and
    Twitter.   These  are  the  kind  of  features  which  will  cause  the
    authorities to take an interest in her.  Potential interrogation  tends
    to attract ill-treatment and even torture.

295. Miss Khashefi was careful not to overstate  her  case  but  said  there
    would be no guarantees of the appellant's rights and in Miss Khashefi's
    opinion she would risk detention, ill-treatment and torture.

296.  She  was  asked  questions  drawing  attention  to  her  view  of  the
    plausibility of the appellant's account.  She explained  that  she  did
    not claim any technical understanding of the  internet  and  she  could
    only write as a user but she was aware of things called Virtual Private
    Networks and there were privacy settings on Facebook which suppressed a
    person's identity but she had no idea how effective they  were  in  the
    face of a determined enquiry.

297. She was cross-examined.

298. She was reminded that she had identified  two  particularly  successful
    Iranian bloggers (57 and 58 in her report) named Hossein Derakhsahn and
    Hossein Ronaghi Maleki respectively.

299. There was a government department known as the  Gozinesh  that  had  to
    prove appointments and admission to  university.   There  were  private
    universities were people who failed the ideological test were  able  to
    be  educated.   However,  the  Gozinesh  would  be  aware  of  people's
    failings.  For example, she said that if CD  had  been  expelled  as  a
    teacher because she was questioning and  not  sufficiently  devoted  to
    promoting Islam then these things could be expected to have come to the
    attention of the Gozinesh.  She said that at the time that CD  got  her
    job she would not be excluded by reason of her views.

300. However, she was a contractual rather  than  full-time  employee.   She
    said a lot of competent people were sacked and had to be  replaced  and
    they were re-employed as freelancers.

301. She said a lot of things in Iran were done on a personal level.   There
    was nothing unbelievable about  the  appellant  having  to  attempt  to
    renegotiate the terms of her employment or more accurately the terms of
    her leave of absence.

302. The article published supporting or at least not being too critical  of
    the Revolutionary Guard is something that would be part of her profile.
     She was pressed about a letter confirming the  appellant's  dismissal.
    She could not find it and accepted that she  did  not  appear  to  have
    listed it.

303. It remained her view that the appellant  was  not  subject  to  enfesal
    because that was not mentioned in any of the letters rejecting her  and
    so her dismissal as a teacher  would  not  stop  her  getting  work  in
    government service.  She had found a translation of the letter at  page
    303 in the bundle.  It is impolite and refers to her application  being
    unsuccessful because the application "has not met  with  the  selection
    criteria and condition had a sensitive position".  But she clearly  had
    seen something that make her think in terms of dismissal which  is  why
    she expressed herself as she did at  paragraphs  1.4  and  1.5  in  the
    report.

304. She was then directed to page 328  of  the  report  which  referred  to
    blogfa.  There was a printout from blogfa announcing that it could  not
    provide services for one of three reasons, namely, a violation  of  the
    laws and agreements in relation to the use of site services,  an  order
    from the legal authorities  to  block  the  web  blog,  publication  of
    immoral content or content deemed to be unauthorised based on the  laws
    of the country.  This was it was suggested rather all-embracing and did
    not for example have the reference to Soldiers of Islam  that  occurred
    in the blocking of EF's case.

305. It was suggested that it could simply be  a  failure  to  register  the
    blog because that would be under the heading "Violation of  the  Laws".
    She said she would accept Ms Enayat's observations but she was not in a
    position to comment herself on subscription accounts.

306. She did not know if people who had claimed asylum  were  identified  as
    such by the Home Office.

Submissions

307. Mr Haywood for AB addressed us first.  Although  representing  his  own
    client all three appellants had points in  common  and  where  this  is
    relevant we have considered the submissions as a whole.

308. In very simple terms it was the AB's case that he  was  an  Iranian  of
    Kurdish ethnicity who  risked  persecution  because  of  his  political
    affiliations and activities just before leaving Iran and after arriving
    in the United Kingdom.

309. The skeleton argument very properly reminds us that his claim  to  have
    had computer material containing incriminating material was disbelieved
    when the case was first heard in the Upper Tribunal and  the  appellant
    therefore could not rely on that strand of evidence now.

310. He said that he, and indeed the other representatives,  recognised  the
    initial incongruity between claiming to be at risk because of  blogging
    and allied  activities  when  there  was  abundant  evidence  that  the
    internet was widely used in Iran and the  huge  resources  invested  in
    controlling the use of the internet by  the  government  of  Iran  were
    plainly less  than  wholly  successful.   However,  he  submitted  that
    although internet use in Iran was  widespread  it  would  be  wrong  to
    assume that all internet activity involved  political  discourse.   The
    number of people of interest to the  government  because  of  suspected
    political opposition was significantly smaller, he submitted, than  the
    raw data suggested.

311. It is an important part of AB's case that he had arrived in the  United
    Kingdom without documents.  It was plain that he would have  to  obtain
    documents in   order to be returned and  part  of  his  case  that  the
    process of claiming and relying on exceptional travel  documents  would
    add significantly to the risk of his being persecuted.

312. He particularly drew to our attention  paragraph  5.4  of  the  Iranian
    Operational Guidance Notes, version 8, dated  October  2012  being  the
    most recent ones available.  This drew  on  a  "Freedom  House"  report
    saying how  "the  authorities  sometimes  stopped  citizens  at  Tehran
    International Airport as they arrived in the country,  asking  them  to
    log into their Youtube and Facebook accounts, and in some cases  forced
    them to delete information."

313. It is also plain at paragraph 3.15.5 of the OGN  that  anyone  who  had
    left Iran irregularly and therefore could not show by  an  entry  in  a
    passport that he had  had  permission  to  leave  could  expect  to  be
    arrested and brought before a court.  The sentence for leaving  without
    a valid passport could be as high as three years' imprisonment although
    the minimum available sentence was  a  fine  equivalent  to  about  �6.
    According to paragraph 3.15.5 "the court assesses the background of the
    individual, the date of their departure from the  country,  the  reason
    for their illegal departure, their connection with any organisations or
    groups and any other circumstances."

314. Mr Haywood submitted that it was clear  that  there  was  at  the  very
    least a real risk  of  such  questioning  exposing  political  activity
    either in Iran or after  departure.   He  drew  our  attention  to  the
    Amnesty International Report  dated  28  February  2012.   This  report
    recognised  that  there  were  examples  of  the  Iranian   authorities
    responding positively to campaigning on  behalf  of  depressed  people.
    The general trend was for an increase in restriction and ill-treatment.
     Further the report made plain that it was not necessary to be involved
    at a particularly  high  level  to  attract  opprobrium.   For  example
    although the report referred to  there  being  "over  ten  journalists,
    writers and bloggers" who  had  been  detained  the  report  continued,
    "hundreds of  prisoners  of  conscience  and  political  prisoners  are
    currently imprisoned or detained, although it is difficult  to  provide
    accurate figures on the numbers held at any one time".

315. We  do  not  read  this  report  as  though  the  word  "hundreds"  was
    hyperbolic.  It clearly supports Mr  Haywood's  contention,  shared  by
    others, that it is not necessary to be a high profile  activist  to  be
    persecuted  in  Iran.   He  then  reviewed  existing  country  guidance
    material which  he  submitted  and  that  was  now  of  limited  value.
    Nevertheless it was well recognised that returning to Iran is always  a
    potential pressure point.  Illegal exit is an offence  and  an  offence
    that  interests  the  authorities  so   that   people   are   detained,
    interrogated and returned.  Nothing else happened in the recent past to
    diminish this risk.

316. This was particularly true in the case of SB (risk on return -  illegal
    exit) Iran CG [2009] UKAIT 00053.  The added factor now was evidence of
    the real risk of enquiry about internet activity and the possibility of
    that leading to persecution.

317. In SA (Iranian Arabs - no general risk) Iran CG [2011]  UKUT  41  (IAC)
    it was decided that an Iranian Arab was not  at  risk  because  of  his
    ethnicity but returning from London which was considered  a  centre  of
    separatist activity, was of itself a risk factor.  In BA (demonstrators
    in Britain - risk on return) Iran  CG  [2011]  CG  UKUT  36  (IAC)  the
    Tribunal recognised that a returnee could  expect  to  be  screened  on
    arrival and an activist could be the subject  of  further  enquiry  and
    possibly risk depending on all the circumstances.  He submitted that we
    were now more aware of specific risks as a consequence of  activity  on
    Facebook or other media and  we  now  have  evidence  of  people  being
    required to give access to  their  Facebook  accounts.   He  also  drew
    attention to the finding in BA that a person  might  pass  through  the
    airport but be "picked up" on their return home.

318. He then drew attention to a decision of the  European  Court  of  Human
    Rights in the case of RC v Sweden done at Strasbourg on  9  March  2010
    Application No.41827/07.  Paragraphs 44  and  45  emphasise  that  "the
    Iranian  authorities  frequently  detain  and  ill-treat  persons   who
    participate in peaceful demonstrations in the country".  It  emphasises
    that the evidence shows it is not only leaders  who  are  high  profile
    actors who are detained.  A similar point was made in the  decision  of
    the New Zealand Immigration and Protection Tribunal in the case  of  AP
    (Iran) [2011] NZIPT800012.  This notes with approval  a  finding  in  a
    case reported to it that:

         "Dozens of individuals in the US and Europe who criticised Iran  on
         Facebook  or  Twitter  said  their  relatives  back  in  Iran  were
         questioned or  temporarily  detained  because  of  their  postings.
         About three dozen individuals interviewed said that when travelling
         this summer back to Iran, they were questioned about  whether  they
         hold a foreign passport, whether they possess Facebook accounts and
         why they were visiting Iran.   The  questioning,  they  said,  took
         place at passport control  upon  their  arrival  at  Tehran's  Imam
         Khomeini International Airport.  Five interviewees who travelled to
         Iran in recent months said they were forced by police  at  Tehran's
         Airport to log into  their  Facebook  accounts.   Several  reported
         having their passports confiscated because of harsh criticisms they
         had posted online about the way the Iranian Government had  handled
         its controversial elections earlier this year".

319. He submitted that it  was  clear  that  there  would  be  scrutiny  and
    questions  about  electronic  activity.    Mr   Haywood   then   relied
    particularly  on  the  Operational  Guidance  Notes  to   support   his
    submissions that this appellant as an ethnic Kurd was  at  risk.   This
    refers to a Freedom House report stating how Kurdish opposition  groups
    and separatists are "brutally suppressed".  Amnesty International noted
    how members of  Kurdish  minority  groups  who  express  "any  form  of
    peaceful descent are vulnerable  to  accusations  of  participation  in
    banned Kurdish groups" and that such accusations bring with them a risk
    of  human  rights  violations  including  the  death  penalty.    Again
    according to the Operational Guidance Notes the degree  of  involvement
    that was proved did not have to be great to bring with it a  real  risk
    of persecution.  Possessing a CD or pamphlet could be enough to be seen
    as acting against national security.

320. He then turned his submissions  directly  to  the  problems  associated
    with blogging emphasising, as he  had  done  already,  that  there  was
    agreement that blogging was widespread.  He particularly relied on  the
    report of the death of Sattar Beheshti who was put to death because  of
    "actions against national security and social networks  and  Facebook".
    However, there was also reference to a blogger who was not particularly
    well-known, dying in custody, and another blogger who according to  his
    sister had no political activities or membership  of  any  group  being
    detained.  These were points echoed in the skeleton argument  which  we
    have also considered.  We consider that skeleton argument now.

321. It is pointed out there was no doubt about the appellant's  links  with
    the KDP.  There was support from the organisation identifying him as an
    active member of the party both in Iran and in the United Kingdom.

322. It is also plain that he had been involved  in  producing  songs  which
    had been posted on the internet.  This much had been  accepted  by  the
    Secretary of State.  The appellant was photographed on the site and  it
    was plain that the songs or some of them  were  supportive  of  Kurdish
    independence.

323. It was also plain that the appellant is an active blogger.  He  blogged
    before leaving Iran and he blogged in the  United  Kingdom.   The  blog
    prepared in the United Kingdom has his photograph  and  full  name  and
    shows him to be in the United Kingdom.  The  appellant  plainly  has  a
    Facebook account and hosts a room on  Facebook  under  the  name  [name
    redacted].  The contents  satirises  the  Iranian  regime.   There  are
    YouTube recordings of his songs and his photograph.

324. Since being in the United Kingdom he has been  to  party  meetings  and
    there had been no challenge to his  evidence  that  he  attended  party
    meetings.  He did not play a prominent  part  in  them.   The  skeleton
    argument contended that there was a "striking" quantity of material.

325. There was then a very detailed analysis  of  the  Operational  Guidance
    Notes for October 2012.  These notes emphasised the role of  the  Cyber
    Army and the Cyber command in monitoring  internet  communications  and
    Freedom House since September 2012 reporting on internet users in  Iran
    suffering from "routine surveillance, harassment,  and  the  threat  of
    imprisonment for their online activities, particularly  those  critical
    of the authorities."

326. We note the use of the word "particularly".   The  evidence  points  to
    the Iranian regime being sensitive to all kinds of internet activity.

327. The Operational Guidance Note says that Iran is  not  a  country  where
    people will be required  to  demonstrate  loyalty  to  the  government.
    Presumably this contrasts with the situation that was known to exist in
    Zimbabwe where there was a real risk of a person  being  made  to  show
    that he was a government supporter and  persecuted  if  he  could  not.
    However the same note continues  that  the  Iranian  authorities  "take
    serious action against individuals who they believe are critical of, or
    pose  a  threat  to  the  state  and  this  treatment  may  amount   to
    persecution."

328. Again we note the language that is used.  Posing a threat to the  state
    is more than sufficient.  The risk comes to a person who is "critical".

329. As indicated above the Operational  Guidance  Notes  refer  to  Kurdish
    opposition  groups  being  "brutally  suppressed".   It  was  not   the
    appellant's case that a person or he in particular  would  be  at  risk
    simply because of Kurdish ethnicity.  Rather it was a case there was  a
    real risk of very grave persecution if someone was seen to be a Kurdish
    separatist.  By the standards  of  the  Iranian  authorities  he  is  a
    Kurdish separatist and returning him would create a real risk  of  this
    being discovered if it was not known already because  of  interrogation
    on return.

330. The skeleton argument summarises relevant country reports.

331. The US Department of State Report refers  to  the  crackdown  on  civil
    society intensifying after the 2009 elections.  There  are  reports  of
    disappearances, cruel inhuman  and  degrading  punishments,  judicially
    sanctioned  amputation  and  flogging,  beatings  and  rape  and  other
    harshness.  Although some prison facilities including  Evin  prison  in
    Tehran, are notorious.  There was evidence of  there  being  unofficial
    secret prisons where abuse occurred  and  prison  conditions  generally
    being harsh and life-threatening.  The  point  is  made  that  although
    there  are  reassuring  constitutional  provisions  in   practice   the
    authorities can and do detain people incommunicado, sometimes for weeks
    or even months, without trial or  contact  with  their  families.   The
    "offences" attract attention are often vague by western  standards  and
    include such nebulous activity as "antirevolutionary behaviour", "moral
    corruption" and "siding with global  arrogance".   The  point  is  that
    offences of this kind make it difficult to predict with any  degree  of
    accuracy just what kind  of  behaviour  is  going  to  attract  adverse
    attention.  However, it is quite clear that journalists  generally  and
    Kurdish language newspapers in particular face  harassment,  opposition
    or worse.

332. There were 28  Kurdish  prisoners  in  the  country  facing  the  death
    sentence.

333. The Human Rights Watch Report refers to harsh sentences  being  imposed
    on journalists and bloggers based on  "vague  and  ill-defined  present
    security laws".

334. The skeleton argument then  looks  at  the  Danish  and  Norwegian  FFM
    Report and the report from the Danish  Refugee  Council  and  Norwegian
    Landinfo. The same message comes.  Human rights activists and reporters
    were ceasing to report.  Many had left.  Many were in prison.

335. The same report then noted how an  individual  connected  with  Kurdish
    activities who was caught with a leaflet would be likely to be arrested
    and tortured and forced to confess. They would be put through  a  "five
    minute trial" and the outcome of the trial  was  wholly  unpredictable.
    There could be a mild sentence or they could be sentenced to many years
    of imprisonment.  The comment was made that it was "impossible to say".

336. This is an example from the Landinfo of the difficulty of  seeing  what
    brings a risk.  Again according to the Landinfo Report in a  time  when
    political activity and demonstrations were banned criticism is  emerged
    in the blogosphere.  The control and  censorship  of  the  internet  is
    extensive.  The use of a virtual  private  network  is  widespread  and
    easy.  It is forbidden but it is not expected that use  would  lead  to
    condign punishment.

337. The Freedom of  Expression  report  was  considered  particularly  with
    reference to the UN Special Rapporteur.  Again the message is of  tight
    press laws, generalised offenses and sharp crackdowns.   One  Mr  Mehdi
    Khazali started a fourteen year sentence for criticising the government
    on his freelance blog.

338. The UN Special Rapporteur noted no signs of improvement.

339. It was advanced in July  2013  that  five  million  websites  had  been
    blocked and about 1,500  anti-religious  websites  were  blocked  every
    month.  It was reported that at least 40 journalists  and  29  bloggers
    were serving sentences in Iran.

340. The skeleton argument relied particularly on Reporters Without  Borders
    information describing Iran as "an internet enemy".  Nokia Siemens  was
    thought to be working perhaps unofficially with the Government of  Iran
    and was involved in the sale of internet surveillance  technology.   Mr
    Haywood emphasised how the Iranian Government had equipped itself  with
    a wide range of effective tools for monitoring  internet  activity  and
    how "posting illegal content or using round  about  methods  to  access
    blocked content is punishable by  long  jail  terms"  [911  -  skeleton
    argument 13].

341. He particularly drew attention to the 2013 Freedom House  Report  which
    emphasises how the Iranian authorities "continue to restrict access  to
    tens of thousands of websites, particularly those of international  use
    sources, the opposition Green Movement, ethnic and religious minorities
    and human rights groups."

342. These startling high figures were justified by further details  in  the
    same report which also emphasised the sophistication of the  government
    filters for picking up words or strings of words that were of  interest
    to them.  In April 2013 a person described as "a prominent Cyber police
    commander" described Facebook as "the most disgusting spyware  and  the
    most dangerous warfare of the US".  The  Computer  Crime  Law  of  2009
    identifies punishment for spying, hacking, piracy, fishing, libel,  and
    publishing materials deemed to damage "public  morality"  or  to  be  a
    "dissemination of lies".  Punishments  are  mandated  and  are  severe.
    Offences against public morality or chastity are  punished  with  death
    and long prison sentences and draconian fines and other  penalties  for
    other offences.

343. He particularly drew attention to the death in  custody  of  the  well-
    known blogger, Sattar Beheshti.  Appalling as the death of  one  person
    always is, it is perhaps more of interest to us to see  that  "numerous
    bloggers remain in prison and are currently serving prison terms of  up
    to twenty years".

344. He relied very heavily on Miss Enayat's  report  submitting  that  this
    was "powerful, commonsense reasoning".  Mr  Haywood  particularly  drew
    our attention to studies that Miss Enayat made  about  the  people  who
    returned, Rojin or Rozhin Mohammadi  who  is  described  as  a  Kurdish
    medical student at Manila University in the  Philippines.   She  was  a
    human rights activist who kept a blog.  On her return  to  Iran  on  14
    November 2011 she was taken to Evin Prison.   She  was  freed  on  bail
    after 24 hours.  However five days later  security  agents  raided  her
    father's house to arrest her  again.   She  was  not  there.   She  was
    summoned  to  attend  Evin  Prison  for  interrogation   and   personal
    belongings  including  her  computer   were   confiscated.    She   was
    interrogated for three consecutive days before being  released.   On  5
    December it was reported that she  had  been  charged  with  crimes  of
    propaganda.  Members of her family were also put under pressure.  On  2
    January 2012 she was released on bail awaiting trial and she  left  the
    country some time in 2013.  Eventually  she  was  given  permission  to
    leave after five months of delay.  Miss Enayat was not able to see  her
    blog but enquiries led her to believe that it was  not  something  that
    the writer thought serious enough to attract severe  ill-treatment  but
    according to Amnesty  International  both  she  and  her  brother  were
    tortured.

345. Miss Enayat also looked at the case of Bahar Alinia.  Miss  Enayat  had
    been able to see  her  blog.   Miss  Enayat  described  it  as  "mainly
    concerned with her personal philosophy on life and  political  only  in
    the very broadest sense of the term."  Nevertheless on  her  return  to
    Iran she was arrested on account of her blog in December  2011.   After
    she had been released some time  before  February  2012  she  fled  the
    country regularly.  In a subsequent blog Miss Alinia described this  as
    one of the strategies of the Iranian Government.   They  banned  people
    from leaving the country but also intimidated those who returned.   The
    skeleton argument emphasises (paragraphs 45, 46, 47 and 48) that people
    who are  known  to  have  been  in  trouble  are  not  people  seen  as
    particularly prominent.

346. The skeleton argument draws heavily on the Freedom House Report  saying
    how the Attorney General Officer of Sirjan had  warned  internet  users
    "to avoid any illegal online activities, such as publishing photos  and
    women not wearing hijab, otherwise there would  be  legal  consequences
    awaiting them."

347. Enquiries by  the  UN  Special  Rapporteur  suggested  that  Mr  Sattar
    Beheshti's difficulties in custody followed his being  severely  beaten
    for the purpose of retrieving his Facebook username  and  password.  He
    quoted a radio free Europe article stating that the Iranian authorities
    were able to access Facebook accounts without resorting to hacking  but
    just by obtaining the passwords from detainees  under  torture.    Miss
    Enayat had relied on a report by Freedom  House  quoting  a  number  of
    protestors who were put on trial  charged  with  offences  relating  to
    their use of Facebook or a comparable  site  that  facilitated  sharing
    news called Beheshti quoting a number of protestors  who  were  put  on
    trial charged with offences relating to their  use  of  Facebook  or  a
    Persian site that facilitated sharing news called Balatarin.   Many  of
    those detained said the interrogators confronted them  with  copies  of
    their emails and wanted the passwords to their Facebook accounts.  They
    were then interrogated about their "friends".

348. Essentially the same points were made  independently  by  a  journalist
    with a particular interest in cyber dissidents.  Ms  Enayat  also  gave
    detailed accounts of people who  had  returned  in  circumstances  that
    would not have been thought suspicious being asked about their Facebook
    activities.  A person who said untruthfully that they did  not  have  a
    Facebook account was detained when he saw a guard "Google" his name.  A
    Facebook account was found and his passport was  confiscated.   He  was
    allowed to leave the country after about a month but only after several
    rounds of interrogation.  The Iran authorities also spied  on  citizens
    by using fake Facebook accounts.

349.  The  skeleton  argument  draws  attention  to  the  decision  of   the
    Australian  Government  Refugee  Review  Tribunal  in  Iran  IRN  36407
    acknowledging evidence that the Iranian authorities monitor  from  Iran
    the activities of overseas Iranians on social network sites as well  as
    storming directly protests.  The  Swiss  Refugee  Council  (OSAR)  drew
    attention to the unpredictability of the Iranian authorities.  It would
    seem clear that some people were  received  into  the  country  without
    difficulty.  It was also clear that some  people  were  assumed  to  be
    involved in anti-government propaganda or activities because  they  had
    sought asylum abroad.  However, the Swiss  authorities  were  satisfied
    from two contacts in Iran  that  at  least  generally  rejected  asylum
    seekers are interrogated on return and detained whilst their cases  are
    reviewed.  The government is anxious about people who  "are  trying  to
    destroy the reputation of Iran".

350. This Tribunal in BA (Demonstrators in Britain - risk  on  return)  Iran
    CG  [2011]  UKUT  36  (IAC)  acknowledged  evidence  of   three   dozen
    individuals who had been interviewed and said that they were questioned
    on their return and asked directly if they had Facebook accounts.  Five
    of those said that they were forced to log into their Facebook accounts
    by police at Tehran Airport.

351. Mr Haywood submitted it was not easy to  see  who  was  going  to  slip
    through and who was going to be interrogated and ill-treated.  He  then
    focused his submissions particularly on the case of AB.

352. He fairly acknowledged that unfavourable or adverse  findings  of  fact
    had already been made in  this  case.   Nevertheless  there  was  clear
    evidence that he had blogged from within the  United  Kingdom  and  had
    identified himself with pro-Kurdish activities.  His YouTube recordings
    were there to be seen and were sufficient for him to be identified as a
    separatist.

353. Ms  Enayat's  report  pointed  out  that  Sattar  Beheshti  was  not  a
    prominent blogger and had registered fewer than 30 viewers in the month
    of  his  arrest.   Mr  Haywood  particularly  drew  attention  to   the
    appellant's visibility.  Ordinary use of Google reveals a photograph of
    the appellant and a link to his blog.  He hosts a  Facebook  room  with
    satirical content and links  to  a  blog  where  there  are  recordings
    uploaded by him.  One of the recordings is of a Kurdish epic song.   It
    came into prominence in Iran's war against the Kurdish people 30  years
    ago.

354. The "hip hop" posted by the appellant is  described  as  a  "very  deep
    political song against Iran mullahs regime".  Hip hop itself is reviled
    as a  form  of  Satanism.   He  had  quite  clearly  been  involved  in
    sufficient things to create  at  least  the  real  risk  of  his  being
    persecuted in the event of these things coming to light and there was a
    risk of them coming to light  on  return.   He  submitted  the  appeals
    should be allowed.

355. Ms Harrison for EF addressed us and relied on her skeleton argument.

356. This corrected a slip in the finding that there was an error of law  by
    pointing out that the appellant arrived in the United  Kingdom  on  the
    back of a lorry and it had never been suggested by the respondent  that
    he had his own passport.  His case was very simple.  He  is  an  ethnic
    Qashqai who speaks Farsi  and  Turkish.   He  is  an  enthusiastic  and
    prolific user of social media on the  internet,  particularly  Facebook
    and YouTube and has used these as a way of  sharing  and  disseminating
    political aims and objectives that are objectionable to the  government
    in Iran.  If he is returned to Iran his internet activity both in  Iran
    before he left and in the United Kingdom  since  his  arrival  will  be
    discovered and each of them is sufficient to  create  a  real  risk  of
    persecution.  She submitted that  the  Country  of  Origin  Information
    Report for January 2013 recognised that Qashqai people made up about 2%
    of the Iranian population and although not persecuted per se because of
    their ethnicity minority groups tended to be more likely to suffer  the
    dispossession of their property and  discrimination  in  education  and
    employment.   The  government  in   Iran   was   engaged   in   "ethnic
    restructuring"  to  force  Qashqais  out  of  the  oil  and  sugar-rich
    Khuzestan province.  Their traditional grazing pasture was  being  sold
    off  to  the  private  sector.   Ms  Harrison  submitted   that   these
    contentions were not controversial.  They had not  been  challenged  by
    the Secretary of State and were well-documented.

357. Particularly  the  appellant  said  he  had  been  twice  arrested  and
    detained by the Iranian authorities.  The first was  during  his  third
    year in high school when he and two school friends were caught drinking
    homemade alcohol in the holy month of Ramadan.  He spent  24  hours  in
    the  disciplinary  detention  centre  before   being   transferred   to
    Firoozabad Prison.  He was then roughly  treated  and  lashed  with  80
    lashes.

358. His second arrest was  a  year  later  when  he  was  arrested  by  the
    Revolutionary Guard resistance for removing a picture at his school  of
    the founder of the Islamic revolution.  His punishment  was  48  hours'
    detention.

359. He said that with four friends whom  he  named  he  had  established  a
    group aiming to establish a secular government in Iran in 2009.  He set
    up an internet page about a month after the initial  meeting  of  their
    group and there was an email  address  associated  with  that  internet
    page.  The appellant and his  group  became  active  on  the  internet,
    particularly Facebook.  He believed that one  of  his  co-founders  had
    been arrested by Etelaat at his own place and had  not  been  heard  of
    since.  These points are set out in the appellant's witness statements.

360. The skeleton argument relied heavily on the expert report  of  Ms  Roya
    Khashefi.  The change of leadership did not represent a sea  change  in
    Iranian society.  The appellant was very much at risk.

361. The Iranian Constitution had developed to ensure that an Islamic  state
    was entrenched and persons such as the appellant who favoured a secular
    state  were  its  enemies.   Internet  and  satellite  broadcasts  were
    received as significant opposition forces that had to be crushed.

362. There were available to various  prosecuting  authorities  a  range  of
    imprecise offences against the revolution and these  permitted  condign
    punishment for activities of the kind in which the appellant had  taken
    part.  For example, the death penalty was  a  possible  punishment  for
    insulting Islam and a prison sentence of between two and six years  was
    possible for insulting the supreme leader.  The Iranian authorities did
    not understand the idea of "low level dissent".  Any  opposition  could
    attract persecutory punishment.  Cyber crimes such as "e-legal  illegal
    access to data" were similarly vague.  Any kind of involvement  in  the
    production and distribution of obscene material could attract the death
    penalty.  The idea of obscenity in this context again is rather  broad.
    The breadth  and  imprecision  of  restriction  against  internet-based
    activity  would  make  the  appellant's  position  intolerable  if  the
    authorities were aware of what he had done if he was returned.

363. Ms Harrison's argument submitted that the appellant would be very  easy
    to locate.  She relied on Roya Khashefi's report which  showed  that  a
    simple Google search in  Persian  or  English  would  identify  him  as
    someone  who  had  acted  against   the   regime.    Although   website
    administrators and Facebook operators tried to be careful it was  known
    that there  were  intelligence  and  security  agents  who  befriended,
    monitored and gathered information on  Facebook  users.   The  skeleton
    argument then  moved  on  to  look  at  the  treatment  of  individuals
    perceived as a threat.

364. She relied particularly on the reports of the return of the  journalist
    Saeed Razavi Faghih who was arrested after  returning  to  Tehran  from
    France.  He had been in France for seven years.  He had previously been
    tried in absentia.   The  second  report  about  individuals  who  blog
    particularly looked at Navid Mohebbi who gave away his email  and  blog
    passwords.  The report in question  comes  from  "the  Green  Voice  of
    Freedom".  It says how Saeed Razavi Faghih was currently held  in  Evin
    Prison.  This report is of limited value.  We are not in a position  to
    form a clear view about the reliability of the Green Voice  of  Freedom
    and the report is very short because it tells us little other  than  he
    was detained in 2009.  Nevertheless,  that  is  another  example  of  a
    person of interest to the authorities being intercepted on return.  The
    report about Navid Mohebbi is  under  the  headline  "world's  youngest
    detained blogger on  trial".   The  report  comes  from  Global  Voices
    Advocacy.  He was not allowed legal representation because  the  charge
    was of an offence against national security and also of  insulting  the
    Islamic Republic's founder and  current  leader  by  means  of  foreign
    media.  It was his case that he was  arrested  for  no  reason  in  the
    street.  He was released when he gave away his email and blog passwords
    but required to report back.  It seems he did and was arrested.  By way
    of illustration of the nature of his behaviour the article said that in
    2009 he wrote about sports he played and going to school and  having  a
    small operation on his nose.  He also said how he  read  the  book  The
    Second Sex by Simone de Beauvoir.  He had  been  accepted  at  Tehran's
    Azad University to read political science.  He clearly was perceived to
    be a risk.

365. The skeleton argument directed us  particularly  to  the  international
    campaign for human rights in Iran, an article entitled  "more  detained
    social network users: forced confessions feared".

366. This is dated  December  2013  and  refers  to  the  intelligence  unit
    arresting two individuals  who  had  been  active  on  Facebook  in  "a
    continuing wave of arrests against internet and social media users  and
    professionals".  This document refers to an earlier  report  confirming
    that access to Facebook pages is achieved not so much  through  hacking
    capability but by extracting  access  passwords  from  detainees  under
    torture.  The skeleton argument also emphasises the sinister nature  of
    the closing sentence of the article "forced  confessions  -  frequently
    obtained under torture - are often the  only  'evidence'  presented  by
    Iranian security organisations when prosecuting Iranian  civil  society
    activists and dissidents."

367. One of the people detained, Mohammad Amin Akrami  had  been  living  in
    India and returned to Iran.  It appears that he was detained either  on
    return or as a result of enquiries made on return.  In short,  this  is
    an example of precisely the concerns raised by the appellants  in  this
    appeal.

368. We do not wish to be dismissive of  the  other  points  raised  in  the
    skeleton argument by summarising them as "more of the same".  They  are
    summaries of background evidence reports which the Iranian  authorities
    are involved in clamping down  on  dissidents  and  punishing  severely
    those involved in internet activity.  An article from Iran Human Rights
    dated 9 January 2014 illustrates the conflicting messages given out  by
    different parts of the Iranian governmental structure.  For example, in
    September 2013 Hassan Rouhani gave an interview in which he  said  that
    the government thought  people  should  have  access  to  international
    information although adding that "monitoring and observations should be
    in the framework of protecting our national identity and model values".
      In  the  same  interview  he  indicated  that  social  networks  "are
    important".  At different times  the  social  media  "WeChat"  is  both
    praised and criticised by different policy statements.  The only  thing
    that was clear is that free access to  the  internet  as  it  would  be
    understood in the West is not happening.   An  article  from  the  same
    website, iranhumanrights.org, dated  December  2013  commented  on  the
    activity of the Cyber  Police  in  monitoring  internet  traffic.   The
    police were boasting  of  their  presence,  particularly  on  Facebook,
    instagram and WeChat.

369.  The  skeleton  argument  then   referred   to   the   Tribunal's   own
    jurisprudence and also  S.F.  and  Others  v  Sweden,  Application  no.
    52077/10 which accepted the argument that a person was at risk  because
    of activities conducted in Sweden after a colleague in  Iran  had  been
    arrested and,  it  was  assumed,  persuaded  to  divest  details.   The
    argument then summarised S G's case.  It said that he had been prolific
    in his internet activities and the translations show that he  had  done
    enough to be at risk if his activities came to  the  attention  of  the
    authorities.  These included his speaking out  against  the  regime  on
    [company redacted] and YouTube where his identity could be  established
    easily.  His Facebook page has in  excess  of  4,000  friends.   Anyone
    accessing his YouTube  page  can  see  a  video  that  would  be  found
    incriminating.  The last few paragraphs of the  skeleton  argument  are
    particularly pithy, taking the picture still further.  It asserts  that
    the appellant  "has  committed  activities  in  the  UK  which  can  be
    interpreted as crimes in Iran.  The Iranian  authorities  would  punish
    him for these crimes.   He  is  linked  to  a  high  profile  political
    movement outside Iran which can reasonably be assumed to have attracted
    the attention of the Iranian authorities."

370. However, he goes on to say that he would be returned with an attention-
    grabbing travel document because he no longer has a passport  and  this
    would lead to interrogation which would lead to his internet activities
    being  discovered  and  he  is  therefore  at  risk  and  entitled   to
    international protection.

371. In her oral submissions Ms Harrison respectfully reminded  us  that  we
    had to make our own findings about what this man had done in Iran or in
    the United Kingdom.  She submitted that there was clear evidence of his
    involvement in [WEBSITE]  and  really  no  reason  to  doubt  it.   His
    internet activities were sufficiently political to create a risk and so
    the appeal should be allowed.

372. Mr Hodson for CD also relied on a corrected skeleton argument and  oral
    submissions.

373. The skeleton argument suggests  that  CD's  activities  in  the  United
    Kingdom of posting  items  on  her  Facebook  page  and  maintaining  a
    personal blog are sur place internet activities that are to some extent
    representative of other Iranian asylum  seekers.   It  is,  however,  a
    particular and aggravating feature of her case that she  used  to  work
    for the Islamic Republic of Iran Broadcasting Service  as  a  political
    researcher.  The work she does might well be thought to have  a  strong
    political undertone.  He submitted that conduct or  views  unacceptable
    to the Iranian government is a widely drawn concept.  The appellant has
    been critical of the Iranian regime and expressed views about women and
    Islam which are sufficiently  critical  to  make  her  a  target.   The
    argument summarised the facts of her case.  She is an Iranian  national
    born in 1975 in Najafabad.  She entered the United Kingdom as a student
    lawfully in June 2011 and has remained since.  She claimed  asylum  and
    was interviewed at the Asylum Screening Unit in March  2011.   She  was
    refused  asylum.   The  application  was  appealed.   The  appeal   was
    dismissed but the decision set aside with the consent of the respondent
    for error of law in 2012.

374. Put very simply, it is her case that she risks persecution  because  of
    the social and religious beliefs expressed on  her  personal  blog  and
    Facebook postings and other online activities.  She was awarded a first-
    class degree in political science and worked part-time as a teacher  of
    history employed by the Ministry of Education but  was  sacked  because
    she questioned the contents  of  courses  and  did  not  promote  Islam
    satisfactorily.  She worked for the political research section  of  the
    Islamic Republic of Iran Broadcasting Company on a series of  temporary
    contracts and whilst doing that work also  wrote  freelance  pieces  of
    political analysis some of which were published in the Defence  Journal
    Quarterly of the Revolutionary Guards.  She made determined efforts  to
    obtain a permanent position with IRIB but was always  rejected  because
    she was not sufficiently loyal and the Gozinesh  did  not  approve  her
    appointment.  She campaigned  on  behalf  of  Mir  Hussein  Mousavi  in
    support of the Green Movement at the time of the  Iranian  presidential
    elections in 2009 and took part in some of the major protests  held  in
    the second  half  of  2009  following  the  controversial  election  of
    President Ahmadinejad.  After she arrived in the United Kingdom she was
    informed that the Herasat had  been  making  enquiries  about  her  and
    contacted her family objecting to her travelling to the United  Kingdom
    and requiring her to return to face a disciplinary hearing.

375. But she later learnt that she had been sacked from  her  position  with
    IRIB at the instigation of Herasat.  She took  part  in  demonstrations
    against the Iranian regime in London in February  and  March  2011  and
    stopped attending when she removed to Manchester.

376. She had started a blog in Iran and has shown evidence  of  postings  in
    November 2009.  Blogs were posted on blogfa.ir  that  were  unpolitical
    and social topics without being overtly critical of the Islamic regime.
     She continued to blog after she came to the United  Kingdom  when  she
    became more expressly political and openly critical.  She then  started
    a blog under the assumed name of [name redacted]  which  translates  as
    [name redacted].  The blogs were on a variety of subjects inclusive  of
    socialist views for women in Iran as well as expressing  her  atheistic
    convictions  against  Islam  and  opposition  to  the  current  regime.
    Similar points have been  made  in  her  Facebook  account.   She  sees
    herself as a political analyst and journalist.  She  has  published  on
    the   website   iran-free.org   and   subjects   have   included    the
    democratisation of the Arab world, the role of Facebook and Twitter  as
    revolutionary tools in Egypt and the way ahead for the  Green  Movement
    in Iran.  She has also given a talk to the  National  Black  and  Asian
    Writers Conference at a festival in Manchester in October 2013 entitled
    [redacted] drawing on her personal experience as  a  journalist  and  a
    blogger.

377. She is in contact with friends and family in Iran using  a  variety  of
    well-known means of electronic communication.

378. The grounds draw  attention  to  documentary  evidence  supporting  the
    appellant's case.  In particular (because this has been  challenged  by
    the respondent) she has produced copies of IRIB payslips  and  an  IRIB
    identity card.  Also letters confirming her failure to obtain  a  full-
    time appointment.  There is also an email chain supporting her claim to
    have been dismissed.  There are also photographs  which  she  says  are
    photographs of her at a demonstration or demonstrations in London.

379. Of particular interest are her blogs or summaries of  her  blogs.   The
    blog purporting to be written on 7 December 2010 is somewhat equivocal.
     It states "we don't want a  superstitious  government"  but  does  not
    indicate what government would be seen as superstitious.  It  continues
    though that "the biggest corruption is the government  corruption"  and
    it shows the reader that "we respect Revolutionary Guards  -  Vasij  is
    who defend people's  rights".   The  article  dated  10  November  2010
    approves of people who were protesting  and  praises  the  "bravery  of
    these Green Movement women".  It concludes "Lady Iran will find her way
    with her hardworking daughters".  We agree with Mr Hodson that there is
    a detectable change in style after the appellant arrived in the  United
    Kingdom.  For example, the item written on 10 November  2010  is  quite
    unequivocal  when  it  talks  about  Tehran  extending  the  repression
    overseas and tells the story of  an  engineering  student  receiving  a
    threatening  email  telling  him  to  stop  criticising   the   Iranian
    government on Facebook, again to give  meat  to  the  thread  that  his
    father was captured by security guards at his home in Tehran.  The blog
    dated 16 July 2010  rejoices  in  women  becoming  more  assertive  and
    independent.  An essay written on 13 February  2011  for  iran-free.org
    includes the sentence "the failure of the reformation government  which
    leaded [sic]  to  suppressing  the  youth  generation  is  the  biggest
    evidence".

380. Clearly this is overtly critical of the present  regime.   The  website
    under the name of [name redacted] has a  number  of  critical  postings
    against the government.  Her complaints  about  the  number  of  people
    being executed, for example a posting dated  1  June  2011,  which  can
    hardly be a comforting thought for the Iranian leaders is entitled "the
    success of the Syrian movement and  the  disease  called  reformism  in
    Iran".  Another on 25 March 2011 is entitled "farewell to  religion  is
    the start to living freely".  There  is  an  article  under  the  [name
    redacted] website under the pseudonym [name redacted] dated 27 February
    2012.  The article comments on criticisms of  an  Iranian  actress  who
    allowed herself to be photographed naked.  Mahtab suggested they should
    mind their own business and expressed the view that it was  Islam  that
    had lost its dignity.  She suggested that  those  concerned  should  be
    more concerned by women in Iran using the  internet  to  try  and  find
    customers.

381. She then wrote about the attack on the British Embassy  in  Iran  which
    she described as:

         "the peak of madness and craziness of the government but  it  seems
         that it is purposely done; the aim to stop the  pandemonium  flames
         of fire is to continue its survival whereas at the time  of  losing
         control the sponsors would be the first to be sacrificed."

382.  Mr  Hodson  suggested  that  the  same  liberal  feminist  outlook  is
    demonstrated in the Facebook  pages.   Other  entries  referred  to  "a
    moving documentary about the  SKSM  and  the  role  of  the  clergy  in
    promoting religious prostitution" and then a reference to someone being
    tortured to death in Islamic regime prisons.

383. On 5 November 2012 there was a  rather  emotional  reference  enjoining
    the reader to think about a woman imprisoned unjustly  and  the  effect
    that that had on her family.

384. We were then referred to background material which we  have  considered
    but titles such as "Freedom House 'Iran not living  up  to  promise  of
    greater freedoms'" or "International Campaign for Human Rights in  Iran
    'repression  intensifies  despite  Rouhani's  promises'  October  2013"
    sufficiently identify the thrust of the evidence.

385. Our attention was  particularly  drawn  to  the  Amnesty  International
    Report "We Are Ordered To Crush  You"  dated  28  February  2012.   The
    opening paragraph, which is wholly justified by detailed examples given
    later in the report, says how the "net of  repression  is  widening  in
    Iran" and the authorities arresting a range of people who might in  the
    broadest sense be thought  opinion  formers  simply  for  speaking  out
    against the government or even just expressing  views  with  which  the
    authorities do not agree.

386. At paragraph 4.6 the report says how  "bloggers"  have  been  held  for
    long periods without charge or trial before  being  sentenced  to  long
    periods of imprisonment.

387. We know particularly the case of Hossein Derakhsahn who,  according  to
    the report, is sometimes called  the  Iranian  "blog  father".   It  is
    understood that he had started the surge of blogging in Iran by posting
    in Persian simple instructions about how to set up a website.   He  was
    sentenced to a  total  of  nineteen  and  a  half  years'  imprisonment
    comprised of a variety of sentences to be served consecutively for such
    imprecise offences as "cooperating with hostile states" or "insults  to
    the holy sanctities".  Most of his blogging had been conducted  outside
    Iran but he returned for a family visit and was arrested at his  family
    home soon afterwards.

388. The report lists a total of 21 people who had attracted  the  attention
    of Amnesty  International  and  are  considered  in  the  report.   The
    synopses are understandably short but it is impossible  to  regard  the
    list as composed  entirely  of  people  who  might  be  thought  to  be
    particularly prominent and therefore particularly objectionable to  the
    Iranian state.  There is, for example, reference to  one  Javid  Houtan
    Kayan described as a legal representative who was imprisoned because he
    defended a woman sentenced to death by  stoning.   Similarly  Mahboubeh
    Karami is serving  a  three  year  sentence  because  of  her  peaceful
    campaigning for greater rights for women.  We note  also  the  case  of
    Peyman Aref, a student activist who was flogged with  74  lashes  after
    being convicted of "insulting the president".

389. We note too the quotation  from  the  Organization  Suisse  d'Aide  aux
    R�fugi�s report of  18  August  2011.   This  deals  particularly  with
    returned asylum seekers and quotes an unnamed judge as saying:

         "Asylum seekers are interrogated on return,  whether  or  not  they
         have been political activists in Iran  or  abroad.   If  they  have
         tried to conduct propaganda against Iran, they are culpable and are
         detained until the judge decides the  sentence.   In  recent  years
         many people have tried to destroy the reputation of Iran  and  this
         must be stopped.  Such people help the opposition groups and  their
         culpability is plain.  Returnees will therefore be held for  a  few
         days until it is clear to the  police,  that  they  have  not  been
         involved in political activity.  If the police can prove  that  the
         person was not active and has not done or said  anything  that  can
         damage the reputation of the Islamic Republic, they  are  released.
         If the person was either politically active in Iran before leaving,
         or had been active abroad, they  must  be  tried  and  receive  the
         punishment appropriate to their activities."

390. There are many references in  the  skeleton  argument  and  reports  of
    bloggers being arrested and detained.  We have particularly  looked  at
    the Country of Origin Research and Information  Report  dated  20  June
    2010 produced by the Refugee  Review  Tribunal  of  the  Government  of
    Australia.  This report was particularly concerned with protesters  who
    returned from London after the June 2009 presidential elections.   This
    quotes the Wall Street Journal reporting that:

         "dozens of individuals in the US and Europe who criticised Iran  on
         Facebook  or  Twitter  said  their  relatives  back  in  Iran  were
         questioned or  temporarily  detained  because  of  their  postings.
         About  three  dozen  individuals  interviewed   said   that,   when
         travelling this summer back to Iran,  they  were  questioned  about
         whether they  hold  a  foreign  passport,  whether  they  possessed
         Facebook  accounts  and  why  they   were   visiting   Iran.    The
         questioning, they said, took place at passport control  upon  their
         arrival at Tehran's Imam Khomeini International Airport."

391. The same report said that five of  those  interviewed  said  they  were
    forced by the airport police to log onto  their  Facebook  accounts  on
    arrival.  The Wall Street Journal again contrasted information from the
    Iranian Diplomatic Mission in New  York  claiming  that  its  officials
    encouraged and facilitated the return of Iranian citizens to Iran  with
    contrary evidence.  He gave the account  of  an  Iranian  engineer  who
    attended protests in a European country.  When he travelled to Iran his
    passport, mobile phone and laptop were confiscated and he was called in
    for questioning on several occasions and blindfolded, kicked and abused
    and required to hand over his Facebook passwords.  The authorities  had
    images of him taking part in demonstrations in Europe.  He said that he
    had only been to a few demonstrations and did not live  in  Iran.   The
    Wall Street Journal speculated that this  conduct  was  done  with  the
    intention of sewing panic in the Diaspora.

392.  The  Landinfo  report  for  February  2013  deals  particularly   with
    Christian  converts  and  Kurdish   people   and   post-2009   election
    protesters.  It quotes the  International  Organisation  for  Migration
    saying that Iranians who return with their passports will not face  any
    problem at the airport and a long stay abroad is not an issue  provided
    the person left lawfully.  However, Iranians who  left  with  passports
    but are returned on a laissez-passer will be questioned.  According  to
    IOM nobody had been arrested while travelling back on a laissez-passer.
     However, its information related solely  to  those  who  had  returned
    voluntarily.   Nevertheless  it  had  no  experience  of  people  being
    arrested by the authorities at  the  airports.   All  Iranian  citizens
    leaving Iran had an exit stamp placed in  their  passport  showing  the
    date of departure.

393. Our attention was  drawn  particularly  to  the  Australian  Government
    Refugee Review Tribunal country advice on Iran published in April 2010.
     This concluded that it was "likely that the Iranian authorities  would
    be aware of protests against the Iranian  regime  by  overseas  Iranian
    communities".  A number of sources claim that the  Iranian  authorities
    monitor the activities of overseas Iranians via  social  network  sites
    such as Facebook and YouTube and by directly filming overseas protests.
     The same article made it plain that "a number of media sources confirm
    that through its monitoring of sites  such  as  Facebook,  YouTube  and
    Twitter, the Iranian authorities  were  able  to  track  the  political
    activities of overseas Iranians."

394. The question "is there  any  evidence  that  people  involved  in  such
    protests outside Iran have had problems on return to Iran?" is answered
    unequivocally in the affirmative.  It developed the answer by referring
    to "a small number of western media sources" claiming that returnees on
    arrival at the airport were asked to log into their  Facebook  accounts
    and people thus questioned were detained or  threatened  or  had  their
    passports confiscated and even disappeared.  The report referred to the
    Wall Street Journal article mentioned above, December 2009, which  said
    how the author had conducted interviews with  90  Iranians  in  various
    western countries and noted that "it could not independently verify the
    claims but the interviewees provided consistently similar  descriptions
    of harassment".

395. There was a report  from  someone  posting  on  the  American  "Foreign
    Policy" magazine  website  saying  how  the  writer  had  overheard  an
    Immigration Officer at  Tehran  ask  someone  if  she  had  a  Facebook
    account.  When she replied untruthfully that she had  not  the  officer
    found her name on Facebook and noted the names of her friends.  In  the
    Times in July 2009 it was reported that the Persian  community  in  the
    United Kingdom had been investigating claims that a number  of  British
    Iranians had "disappeared" from the airport and returned to Iran.   The
    section concludes as follows:

         "Given the above information and the current political  climate  in
         Iran, Iranians who participated in overseas  protests  against  the
         Iranian government, or who have criticised the government on  their
         Facebook pages, may be at risk of harassment,  detention  and  even
         disappearance on return to Iran."

396. The skeleton argument  then  directed  us  to  Mr  KG's  report.   This
    emphasised the use of devices to slow the operation of the internet  to
    facilitate the use of intercepting devices to learn about traffic  that
    is sent.  There are reasons to believe that the authorities  can  track
    down any computer user  if  they  are  sufficiently  determined.   This
    appellant  operates  an  insecure  system.   For  example,  the   [name
    redacted] website was easily hacked, with  permission,  by  an  expert.
    The report reminded us that even a person who is normally exceptionally
    careful can still be let down by a careless mistake.

397. Given that the authorities are targeting bloggers and users  of  social
    networks and the appellant has expressed views in her  online  writings
    that are critical of the government, she is in the category  of  people
    who would risk persecution if  detected.   Opposition  by  the  Iranian
    authorities is savage and whilst oppression may have peaked in the lead-
    up to the 2013 presidential election there is no reason to  think  that
    it has waned to the point of a person  no  longer  being  at  risk.   A
    person can be identified because of internet activity outside Iran and,
    it was contended, real risks exist for the appellant and people in  her
    circumstances without more.  On return a person with other than a valid
    passport properly  stamped  to  show  lawful  exit  can  expect  to  be
    interrogated and questioned about internet activity and  made  to  give
    out details such as Facebook passwords which would create a risk.

398. This appellant is at risk for a variety of reasons.   Her  profile  and
    history have raised question marks about her behaviour.  Indeed she has
    been unable to secure a full-time appointment as  a  result  and  is  a
    known political analyst.  She was telling the truth when she  said  she
    had been under  investigation  by  Herasat.   She  supported  reformist
    candidates in past presidential elections and this too would be  known.
    The profile built up as a result of the Herasat investigations would of
    itself attract a real risk of  interrogation  and  persecution  at  the
    airport.  Her circumstances are made very much worse  by  her  blogging
    and similar activities which would create difficulties in the event  of
    her return.  Without the need for further  interrogation  her  scissors
    activities might well be known to the authorities anyway.   It  is  her
    case, consistent with her  activities  in  Iran,  that  her  sur  place
    activities  have  been  for  genuine  reasons  but  even  if  they  are
    opportunistic and insincere  they  have  created  a  risk  and  she  is
    entitled to protection.  She could not give a proper account of herself
    in the United Kingdom without attracting opprobrium  and  the  risk  of
    persecution.  In short, the appeal should be allowed.

399. Notwithstanding the very thorough  skeleton  argument  (which  we  have
    found helpful) Mr Hodson addressed us at some length.  He outlined  the
    argument that the Iranian authorities  were  the  leading  surveillance
    monitors  of  the  world.   Filtering,  monitoring  and  checking  were
    standard activities in Iran and Virtual Private Networks  not  entirely
    reliable alternatives. The appellant CD is "a classic blogger"  and  is
    engaged in many different  kinds  of  internet  activity  and  has  the
    education and aptitude to make political  or  quasi-political  comment.
    It is not surprising that much of the evidence about risk is conjecture
    but it should not be dismissed for that reason alone.   Conjecture  can
    be informed by established facts and expert opinion  and  that  is  the
    kind of evidence we received, he said.  It  was  possible  rather  than
    fanciful to suggest  that  her  activities  had  been  intercepted  and
    records of them added to her profile in Iran.

400. However, without in any way diminishing this point  the  fact  is  that
    she would be returned in a way that would attract attention.  She would
    be a failed asylum seeker who had been in the United Kingdom  for  some
    time.  That would be obvious and quickly established by  questions  and
    would of itself suggest she had been badmouthing the Iranian state.

401. The suggestion in the report "after  the  Green  Movement"  of  Opennet
    Initiative in February 2013 that blogfa is no  longer  filtered  is  no
    indication that it will not be filtered on some  future  occasion.   It
    was quite clear that it was possible that her activities in the  United
    Kingdom had been intercepted.

402. It was trite law but worth remembering that people cannot  be  expected
    to lie their way through the airport in the event of return.   She  had
    been doing things that put her in the category of risk  and  she  could
    expect to be interrogated.  It was only a short step from there to  say
    that she is in fact at risk.

403. He emphasised points made  in  the  skeleton  argument  which  we  have
    outlined  above.   The  Country  of  Origin  Information  Report  dated
    September 2013 is helpful  to  the  appellant.   It  summarises  points
    already made, namely that the Iranian authorities are  expanding  their
    oppression of dissent and saw the World  Wide  Web  as  something  from
    which people had to be protected.  Surveillance, harassment and threats
    to internet users  were  described  as  "routine".   Much  activity  is
    forbidden and there is a low threshold of tolerance for criticism.

404. The report "Freedom on the Net Report 2012" referred to a crackdown  on
    online activity and prison  sentences  against  bloggers  and  examples
    given of sentences of fifteen years and nineteen  years.   He  referred
    again to the ongoing battle between the state and the blogger  as  they
    each tried to outdo each other's security  devices.   The  report  from
    Freedom House Freedom on the Net 2013 said  how  the  internet  service
    providers are required to record all the data exchange by  their  users
    for a period of up to six months.  The report  says  that  "it  is  not
    clear whether the security  services  have  the  technical  ability  to
    process all this data".  That, Mr Hodson submitted, meant what it said.
     It was not clear.   It  is  possible  that  they  do.   Bloggers  were
    frightened.

405. He then talked specifically about CD's case.   He  submitted  that  she
    was a substantially truthful witness.  There was  internal  consistency
    in her story and her writing and political  views,  particularly  those
    supportive of  women,  were  the  kind  of  thing  that  would  not  be
    appreciated in Iran.

406. She had written things at a time when there  was  much  optimism.   The
    optimism was not being fulfilled.  Now the situation is getting  worse.
    The report "Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, 'in Iran, beware  of  your
    Facebook friends'" dated 8 June 2011 explains how activities thought to
    be private on Facebook had come to  the  attention  of  authorities  in
    various ways and circumstances.  Put simply, there is a risk and he has
    proved his case.

407. We now turn to the submissions made by Mr Rawat for  the  Secretary  of
    State.  He too relied on a skeleton argument.

408. We have outlined the skeleton argument above and  have  considered  it.
    There were agreed issues.   These  are  set  out  very  neatly  in  the
    skeleton argument and we have mentioned them above.

409. Mr Rawat then considered the list  of  issues  that  we  have  set  out
    above.

410. He addressed the first  two  points  (essentially,  would  the  Iranian
    authorities know or care about his internet activities) together.

411. He made the point that Iran has  the  highest  proportion  of  internet
    users in the  Middle  East.   Its  predominantly  young  population  is
    educated and internet-literate.  Somewhere between 26% and 47%  of  the
    population have access to the internet.  If the latter figure is  right
    there are 42,000,000 people in Iran who can use the internet.

412. The authorities have sought to control internet access by  slowing  the
    speed and raising prices and  blocking  and  filtering  websites.   The
    official national system is easily  bypassed  and  the  state  has  not
    succeeded  in  diminishing  internet   use.    People   in   Iran   use
    circumvention tools, particularly Virtual  Private  Networks,  to  view
    websites and online material.  They are relatively easy to  obtain  and
    set up on the black market and their  use  does  not  lead  to  serious
    punishment.

413. The Iranian  authorities  target  users.   The  organisation  Reporters
    Without Borders recorded 26 journalists and twenty "netizens" in prison
    in March 2013 and in October 2013 the United Nations Special Rapporteur
    reported 29 "bloggers" being currently in prison.  Whilst this tends to
    confirm that some people are persecuted in Iran for expressing opinions
    that are offensive to the state, the number detained is clearly a  very
    small percentage of internet users and many of  those  targeted  had  a
    raised  profile.   For  example,  they  are   identified   as   working
    journalists or associated with reformist movements.

414.  Although  the  authorities  had  closed  websites  their  attitude  is
    inconsistent. For example,  although  Facebook  and  Twitter  are  both
    blocked the supreme leader Khamenei is a member of Facebook and  has  a
    Twitter account.  All six presidential elections for the 2013  election
    maintain a presence on  both  chat  rooms.   President  Rouhani  has  a
    Facebook and a Twitter account as do other cabinet members.  It  really
    did not seem plausible that people would still be in trouble  just  for
    having Twitter or Facebook accounts.

415. Although the Iranian authorities have been determined to  close  things
    down the abundance of circumvention tools and internet users  indicates
    it has not been successful and there is an open internet in Iran.

416. The evidence did not support the suggestion that all internet  activity
    is monitored.  Reporters Without Borders said in March  2012  (?)  that
    "the regime does not yet have the resources  for  keeping  millions  of
    internet users under surveillance".  The authorities could use  against
    people outside Iran the techniques for infiltrating  and  impersonating
    activities that they used against people inside Iran.  To make sense of
    this it must be assumed that the amount  of  risk  is  related  to  the
    degree of interest that a party's presence  creates  and  none  of  the
    appellants here had done enough to attract attention.

417. In concerning issue 3  (additional  factors)  the  Secretary  of  State
    accepted  that  many  things  might  create  a  risk  on  return.   The
    respondent contended that each case had to be looked  at  carefully  on
    its own facts and that sur place activity per se would  not  raise  the
    level of risk.  This followed the lead given in  BA  (Demonstrators  in
    Britain - risk on return) Iran CG [2011] UKUT 36 (IAC).

418. Understandably the skeleton argument  particularly  drew  attention  to
    the matters referred to above from IOM (International Organisation  for
    Migration) Tehran and summarised in the joint report  from  the  Danish
    Immigration Service, the Norwegian  Landinfo  and  the  Danish  Refugee
    Council of 2013 showing that there was  no  evidence  of  anyone  being
    arrested because they had been returned on a laissez-passer.

419. We look again at these reports now. We set out below  in  its  entirety
    paragraph 6.1.2 of the joint report headed "entry for returnees" relied
    upon by the Secretary of State.  The paragraph says:

         "IOM, Tehran informed  the  delegation  that  the  organisation  is
         operating an assisted voluntary return (AVR)  programme  worldwide.
         Asked about the number of persons  who  have  benefited  from  this
         programme, IOM informed that it is less than  100  per  year.   The
         majority of people who have returned to Iran under  this  programme
         from various  countries  including  Switzerland,  Norway,  Belgium,
         Australia, Indonesia (people who were on the way to Australia)  and
         the Netherlands are according to IOM, people who have been  looking
         for a better life,  studying  opportunities  and  people  who  have
         family abroad.

         Regarding returnees, IOM, Tehran, stated that Iranians  who  return
         with their passports will not face any problem at the airport  when
         they return after a long stay abroad.  It was  added  that  a  long
         stay abroad in itself, is not an issue as long as a person has left
         the country legally.  IOM added that Iranians  who  have  left  the
         country on their passports and are  returned  on  a  Laissez-passer
         will be questioned by the Immigration Police at the airport.   This
         questioning may take a few hours, but according to IOM, nobody  has
         been arrested when travelling back on a Laissez-passer.

         When asked specifically as to the  situation  of  deportation,  IOM
         stressed that they are only dealing with voluntary return  and  had
         no knowledge of the situation of deportees if any.   It  was  added
         that they would assume that such persons  would  be  welcomed  upon
         return, as these persons are nationals of Iran.

         IOM stated that so far, they  have  not  had  any  experience  with
         people being arrested by the authorities at the airport.  IOM added
         that if persons have been involved in  criminal  activities  abroad
         and are on the Interpol list, it is another issue.

         Mr Hossein Abdy, head of passport  and  visa  department,  stressed
         that the Iranian Constitution allows for  Iranians  to  live  where
         they wish.  It is not a criminal offence in Iran for any Iranian to
         ask  for  asylum  in  another  country.   He  further  stated  that
         approximately 60% of Iranians who have asylum in  other  countries,
         travel back and forth between Iran and other countries."

420. We cannot understand how Mr Abdy can possibly know  how  many  Iranians
    have asylum in other countries and therefore  how  that  statistic  can
    possibly be right.

421. The skeleton argument continued that  following  SB  (risk  on  return-
    illegal exit) Iran CG [2009] UKAIT 00053 it was established that  there
    is no general risk of persecution consequent on leaving Iran illegally.

422. There was no evidence that possessing a laptop or other equipment  that
    could be used to access the internet did anything to increase any  risk
    there might be.

423. Use of internet activity before leaving Iran could be  a  consideration
    but a great deal depended on exactly what had been done and whether  it
    had been noted and how long had passed since it had been done and  what
    attention it had attracted.

424. Whether a  person  who  had  been  active  on  the  internet  would  be
    identified and  linked  to  his  internet  activities  was  very  fact-
    dependent and something about which general pronouncements could not be
    made.  There was no evidence to show that there was a general  capacity
    or desire to link a returnee with social media.

425. Dealing with issue 6 (opportunistic  activity)  the  skeleton  argument
    recognised that opportunistic activity is not a  bar  to  international
    protection.

426. Mr Rawat made oral submissions.

427. He particularly took us to the Freedom House  report  entitled  Freedom
    on the Net 2013 Iran.  This is set out in the respondent's  bundle  and
    Mr Rawat made it clear that the Secretary of State  accepted  that  the
    Iranian authorities are  intent  on  controlling  internet  access.   A
    similar point was made in the report from Reporters Without Borders.

428. We were looking at Freedom on the Net 2013 and Enemies of the  Internet
    2013.  The Freedom on the Net report  2013,  however,  expresses  doubt
    about the ability of the Iranian state to process the vast quantity  of
    information that it gathers.  Although the  Freedom  on  the  Net  2013
    report  supports  much  of   the   appellants'   evidence   about   the
    determination of the Iranian state to spy on  the  internet  it  raises
    clear doubts about the  ability  of  the  authorities  to  process  the
    information they gather.  Page 17 of the report (page 62 in the bundle)
    says expressly "it is not clear whether the security services have  the
    technical ability to process all this data."

429. We are instinctively inclined to the view that this doubt must be  very
    widespread or how else can it be understood that so many people in Iran
    use the internet.  The report from Reporters Without Borders on freedom
    of information entitled "Enemies of the Internet  2013  Report  Special
    Edition: Surveillance" again supports much of  the  other  evidence  we
    have received about the means and mechanisms available  to  control  or
    spy  on  the  internet.   Its  summary  under  the  heading  "Iran"  is
    significant.  It puts the number  of  internet  users  lower  than  the
    figures before us  of  25,200,000.   Nevertheless  this  represents  an
    internet penetration rate of 32.8%.  It  records  that  there  were  26
    journalists in prison and twenty netizens and one netizen killed in the
    past year.

430.  The  report  recognises  that  the  internet  "plays  a  key  role  in
    circulating news and information thanks to dissidents  and  independent
    news providers".  It also observes that the "authorities  often  accuse
    social networks of being tools in the pay of western  powers  that  are
    plotting against the government".   The  article  also  confirms  other
    evidence about the unpredictable nature of the Iranian authorities.  It
    notes examples of "pro-regime websites" being blocked  and  the  outcry
    from government officials that followed the blocking of Google in Iran.
     We particularly note the phrase: "They subject the Iranian internet to
    an illogical and uncoordinated rollercoaster  on  the  basis  of  often
    divergent political interests."

431. The report confirmed that in January 2013 the government announced  new
    technology particularly targeted at Twitter and  Facebook.   There  was
    doubt about the government's ability to achieve this  target  but  this
    was not seen as an example of loosening control but of  developing  new
    ways of increasing it.  The report confirmed  that  the  government  of
    Iran  has  deep  packet  inspection  tools  and  the  legislation   was
    increasingly oppressive.  The report gave detailed account of one Saeid
    Pourheydar who was described as a journalist arrested  and  ill-treated
    in 2010.  The intelligence officers had transcripts  of  the  telephone
    conversations  and  printouts  of  his   emails   and   SMS   messages.
    Nevertheless,  the  report  concluded  that  Virtual  Private   Network
    technology which although unlawful was readily available  in  Iran  and
    could be used to  circumvent  content  blocking  and  censorship.   The
    paragraph headed "Tips" advises:

         "The regime does not yet have the resources for keeping millions of
         internet users under surveillance.  You should be able to fend  off
         most threats if you  adopt  basic  precautions  such  as  regularly
         updating your operating system  and  software  applications,  using
         antivirus and VPN software,  and  systematically  using  the  HTTPS
         Protocol whenever possible."

432. The report warned against  the  continuing  use  of  websites  such  as
    Facebook, YouTube or Twitter which were  blocked  but  suddenly  became
    available.   It  was  suggested  this  will  "often  be   because   the
    authorities are trying to use the man in the middle to  capture  users'
    names and passwords".  Nevertheless the  report  indicated  that  using
    VPNs eliminated that risk.

433. A very similar picture emerges  from  the  document  "after  the  Green
    Movement internet controls in Iran, 2009 - 2012" published  by  Opennet
    Initiative, February 2013.  This recognises  the  tension  between  the
    desire of the Iranian authorities to control any desire of the citizens
    to  express  themselves  freely.   The  writers  were  satisfied   that
    dissidents and anti-regime activists outside Iran had been tracked  and
    eventually persecuted by following the footprint of their social  media
    activities.  However, circumvention of filters  by  using  proxies  and
    Virtual Private Networks is commonplace.

434. We have found it instructive to consider  the  article  "Iran's  'Cable
    Guys' Provide Service Four  Contraband  Satellites  -  Al-Monitor:  the
    Pulse".  This is concerned with  the  supply  of  satellite  television
    receivers and is dated October 2013.  It illustrates the  extraordinary
    tension between the wishes of the Iranian authorities and the wishes of
    the Iranian people and shows how the people adapt  to  changes  in  the
    law.  Satellite dishes are illegal items in Iran, yet somewhere between
    50% and 70% of households in Tehran own one.  Satellites have developed
    to make them easier to hide and they can  be  repositioned  quickly  to
    pick up  signals  from  the  best  available  satellite.   The  article
    explains how the "moral police" have abandoned the tactic  of  bursting
    into someone's home because they are  no  longer  let  in.   They  have
    developed an alternative tactic of climbing of walls  and  entering  by
    that means.  The government clamps  down  from  time  to  time  and  an
    example was given of hundreds of satellite dishes being confiscated and
    crushed but they are quickly replaced.  The article explained that they
    were smuggled into Iran either by corruption at  the  land  borders  or
    underneath ships.

435. Mr Rawat particularly drew our attention to the report of  the  Special
    Rapporteur on the situation on human rights in the Islamic Republic  of
    Iran dated 28 February 2013.  There seemed little reason to doubt  that
    people are persecuted in Iran.  The article included at Appendix  II  a
    "list of currently imprisoned journalists in Iran".  We have counted 44
    people in that list.  Their plight sounded  grim.   There  were  people
    facing, for example, fourteen years' imprisonment in  Evin  Prison  for
    "insulting the supreme leader".  A prisoner was also to be  lashed  and
    faced ten years' exile.  Whilst an  extreme  example,  there  are  many
    others on the list sentenced to terms of imprisonment measured probably
    in years rather than months  and  some  of  them  to  be  lashed.   The
    offences are  of  the  rather  vague  kind  that  were  identified  and
    criticised in Ms Enayat's report.  No-one  was  suggesting  that  their
    plight should be trivialised or excused but it was  suggested  that  44
    imprisoned journalists does not really support the implicit  suggestion
    that anyone of Iran's many millions of bloggers or low level occasional
    net activists really faces a real risk of persecution.

436. Mr Rawat submitted that the fact was plain that  Iran  did  operate  an
    internet system where many of its subscribers were able to contact  the
    world news sources.  The  government  was  not  able  to  exercise  the
    control it wanted to exercise and a very large number  of  people  were
    not frightened of the government, at least in this regard.  He  further
    submitted that the fact that the Iranian authorities seek to infiltrate
    websites by impersonation or pretending to be a  supportive  subscriber
    is of itself proof that  the  monitoring  facilities  are  not  totally
    effective.  If  they  were  then  there  would  be  no  need  for  such
    intrusion.  He submitted that there was clear evidence of the extent of
    internet activity that could not be controlled by the  government.   He
    submitted it clearly could not be the case that all  bloggers  were  at
    risk.  It was difficult therefore to say how we  could  assess  whether
    there was a risk for  any  particular  blogger  for  activities  in  or
    outside Iran.  He submitted it was relevant to decide  if  the  blogger
    was original or passing on material.

437. Although recognising Ms Enayat disagreed on this point he submitted  it
    was a way of  deciding  the  degree  of  threat  a  particular  blogger
    produced.  He suggested that the persons identified  as  imprisoned  in
    the report "Reporters Without Borders" of April 2012 looked like people
    with some prominence.  Thus one person who was in prison was  described
    as the author of the blog "Iran's land report".  Another report  as  an
    example was of a lawyer who defended journalists and cyber  dissidents.
    Another who was constantly harassed before being detained was described
    as a founder of the  Centre  for  Human  Rights.   A  blogger  who  was
    released on bail it was reported was described  as  a  "satirical  poet
    openly critical of the government".

438. There are many other examples given.  Those  who  attracted  attention,
    it was submitted, tended to  look  like  leaders  of  movements  albeit
    perhaps in some cases relatively modest ones.  Persons who occasionally
    expressed critical views or passed on the critical views of others were
    not really at risk of imprisonment.

439. He then dealt with the suggestion that the person would  be  questioned
    on return.  No doubt aware of the potential  damage  that  Ms  Enayat's
    evidence could do to his case, Mr  Rawat  submitted  that  Ms  Enayat's
    examples of people who had had trouble on return was somewhat dated and
    did not necessarily indicate the present position.  The  L'OSAR  report
    was dated 2011 and the Danish report was dated 2009.  At  paragraph  97
    of Ms Enayat's report she referred to Appendix III where she claimed to
    have logged 29 known cases of returnee treatment since the  year  2000.
    Appendix III is in fact headed "redocumentation procedures for  Iranian
    nationals resident abroad".

440. Mr Rawat then made submissions concerning each appellant's case.

441. In the case of CD he said it was accepted that she  had  been  employed
    by the broadcasting organisation  but  not  that  she  had  acquired  a
    profile for being disloyal.  It really made no sense that she would  be
    perceived as disloyal but then employed in  what  might  be  thought  a
    sensitive  position.   Her  disloyalty  did  not  go  much  beyond  not
    observing Islamic prayers.  The local Herasat were security guards with
    a mandate to snoop.  Attracting their disapproval  did  not  amount  to
    very much.   Her  documentation  did  not  really  support  her.   When
    interviewed the appellant found it difficult to explain why  she  might
    be thought disloyal.  Her political activities in Khatami's  time  were
    very limited but she  assumed  they  were  enough.   She  indicated  in
    answers to questions around 28 of her interview  that  there  may  have
    been economic advantages to her employer  in  keeping  her  on  a  more
    casual basis.

442. Her blog had attracted seven entries.  It had  been  shut  down  for  a
    variety of reasons that had not been specified.  Elsewhere she had  119
    friends.  She really did not have very much exposure.   There  was  not
    much interest in her.

443. Dealing with the case of EF Mr Rawat said that his account  of  leaving
    Iran lacked credibility.  He was in the same position as  other  people
    who did not apparently wish to leave Iran.  He had about 137  followers
    or people may have seen  his  video.   The  interest  in  his  blog  is
    minimal.  The Iranian National Council's website had  attracted  16,000
    individual supporters (Ms Khashefi at  paragraph  121).   Against  this
    background EF's 137 was not impressive.  The background material  shows
    how Anonymous Iran had drawn over 22,000 supporters  worldwide.   This,
    he submitted, is the kind of activity that attracts the interest of the
    authorities.

444. In the case of AB adverse findings had already been made about him  and
    upheld in the Court of Appeal.   He  has  done  little  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  He is not a prominent  figure.  He  does  not  make  original
    criticisms.  He passes things on.  His Facebook and YouTube  identities
    have changed.  He would not be at risk now.

445. Mr Haywood exercised his right to reply.   He  particularly  challenged
    the suggestion that a person had to have a high profile  before  facing
    any risk on return.  Although some  people  who  had  been  in  trouble
    clearly had a high profile there was no reason to assume that was  true
    of everyone.  By way of example, there is a report  from  the  national
    campaign for human rights in Iran referring to the arrest in  September
    2012 of Kaveh Taheri who was  charged  with  "acting  against  national
    security" and "creating public anxiety in the virtual space".   He  was
    said to have had no political activities whatsoever  outside  his  blog
    where he expressed personal opinions.  At page 1034 in the respondent's
    bundle there is a table entitled "removals and voluntary departures  by
    the country of destination and type".  There are figures given for Iran
    from 2004 until 2013 and the figures are given at quarterly  intervals.
    In the last two quarters of 2012 and the first  two  quarters  of  2013
    there were 26 enforced removals.  A further fifteen  who  were  refused
    entry at port subsequently departed.  There were (we think,  the  print
    is very small) 141 voluntary departures in the same period.  Mr Haywood
    submitted these were small numbers and  were  not  a  sound  basis  for
    predicting exactly what would happen.  We  remind  ourselves  that  the
    appellants only have to show a "real risk".

446. Ms Harrison chose not to address us.

447.  Mr  Hodson  redirected  us  to  the  "Enemies  of  the  Internet"  and
    emphasised that although that report  encouraged  the  use  of  Virtual
    Private Networks it  also  emphasised  the  suspicious  and  determined
    nature of the Iranian state  and  described  as  emphatic  that  people
    should not use the state-controlled VPNs.   He  repeated  Mr  Haywood's
    theme that there was no evidence that only high profile people were  at
    risk.  The appellant CD had her leave  to  remain  cancelled  and  that
    would attract attention.  The website was not secure  and  the  aliases
    would have been rumbled.

Conclusions

448.  We have considered carefully the material before us.  Unusually for  a
    case such as this there has been little challenge to the evidence.  The
    experts gave  honestly  held  opinions  that  were  substantiated  with
    reference to appropriate  sources.   Where  they  were  challenged  the
    challenge  was  nuanced  rather  than  aggressive.   Questions  by  the
    Secretary of State were intended to make  us  ask  searchingly  if  the
    matters complained of established a real risk in this particular or any
    case rather than to suggest that the experts were  inept  or  partisan.
    We do not think that they were either of these.

449. Certain things are quite clear and uncontroversial.  Iran is a  country
    that does persecute some people who oppose it.  Persecution takes  many
    forms.  We have been given detailed  examples  of  a  small  number  of
    people sent to prison for a long period of time in conditions that must
    be very challenging.

450. However, persecution is not  limited  to  imprisonment.  We  have  been
    given more examples of people who are beaten up or lashed or  harassed.
    The fact that there are only a relatively small number  of  journalists
    known to be in prison is not the particularly illuminating  point  that
    the Secretary of State tried to make it.

451. It is very difficult to establish any kind of clear picture  about  the
    risks consequent on blogging activities in Iran.  It cannot be the case
    that a real risk or persecution is  generated  simply  by  making  some
    unsavoury remark or mild criticism of the government of Iran.  We  make
    it clear that this is not because the government of Iran is tolerant of
    mild criticisms.  There is evidence that it is not.  However, we cannot
    argue with the numbers.  People who are active on the internet run into
    millions in Iran and on the most  conservative  estimates  represent  a
    very substantial part of the population.  Many of them, no  doubt,  are
    involved in activity that is entirely benign or even supportive of  the
    government.  Given the low levels of tolerance illustrated above we are
    quite satisfied that many of the people active on the web in  Iran  are
    critical.  This is not necessarily overt.  Mild concerns can be  enough
    as can association with western  music  or  western  ideas  or  western
    fashions.   All  of  these  things  attract  disapproval  and,  we  are
    satisfied, might attract persecution.

452. It is quite clear that the Cyber  Army,  however  big  it  may  be,  is
    capable of perusing the internet and intercepting messages and  closing
    down accounts.  There is no reason to assume it goes on from  there  to
    persecute those involved.  Given the scale of  operations  there  would
    surely be evidence if  those  whose  accounts  were  closed  down  were
    routinely caught, interrogated and ill-treated.  That does not seem  to
    happen routinely although there are no doubt occasions  when  it  does.
    All of the witnesses  who  expressed  a  view  described  this  tension
    between the Iranian authorities trying to supervise everything and  the
    Iranian people, or parts of them, seeking to  avoid  being  supervised.
    It is indeed a "cat and mouse" battle in which one side or the other at
    any particular time might gain the ascendancy.

453. We accept the evidence of people blogging outside Iran  reporting  that
    members of their families had, consequentially, been detained. This  is
    a significant finding supported by skimpy evidence  but  we  note  that
    several examples were given to the reporters. We find it unlikely  that
    they were all made up when the claim is  intrinsically  believable.  We
    accept that some monitoring of activities outside Iran is possible  and
    that it occurs. We are not able to  say  what  circumstances,  if  any,
    enhance or dilute that risk.

454. We were impressed by the evidence of Mr  Esfaniairi  who  was  detained
    and then persecuted because of a careless remark made on his blog.   By
    identifying a shop that had ill-treated  him  he  set  up  a  chain  of
    circumstances that allowed him to be identified.  This really can  only
    have come about in one of two ways.  The first is that he was just very
    unlucky, the second is that he was  being  monitored  closely  and  the
    authorities had the time and inclination to study his reports and  look
    for something that might reveal  his  identity.   The  fact  that  that
    happened in his case is not evidence that it happens in every  case  or
    that there is any real risk of it happening  in  every  case.   He  was
    someone who had been annoying the authorities persistently and  we  can
    understand why they may have devoted resources to supervising him.

455. We do reject Mr Rawat's submission that a high degree  of  activity  is
    necessary to attract persecution.  It is probably  the  case  that  the
    more active persons are the more likely they are to be  persecuted  but
    the reverse just does not apply.  We find that the authorities  do  not
    chase everyone who just might be an opponent but if that opponent comes
    to their attention for some reason then that person might be  in  quite
    serious trouble for conduct which  to  the  ideas  of  western  liberal
    society seems of little consequence.

456. The fact that people who do not seem to  be  of  any  interest  to  the
    authorities have no  trouble  on  return  is  not  really  significant.
    Although Iran might be described as  exceedingly  touchy  there  is  no
    reason to assume that the state persecutes everyone and the  mere  fact
    of being in the United Kingdom for a prolonged period does not lead  to
    persecution.  It may lead to scrutiny and  this  is  what  concerns  us
    most.  The fact is that although there may be quite a large  number  of
    people who choose to go to Iran  their  fate  is  of  little  value  in
    determining what risk, if any, might be faced by a person  who  is  not
    willing to return. Clearly an  Iranian  citizen  is  more  likely  than
    someone not familiar with the country to appreciate the risks  that  he
    or she really faces in the event of return. A person with  no  profile,
    with nothing to hide and whose biggest fault is to have  overstayed  in
    another country may well feel that  he  has  done  nothing  to  attract
    attention and will therefore go home.  Such a person may well be  right
    and will not produce statistics showing a risk of persecution.

457. We accept the evidence that some people who have  expected  no  trouble
    have found trouble and that  does  concern  us.   We  also  accept  the
    evidence that very few people seem to be returned unwillingly and  this
    makes it very difficult to predict with any degree of  confidence  what
    fate, if any, awaits them.  There is clear evidence  that  some  people
    are asked about their internet  activity  and  particularly  for  their
    Facebook password.  We can think of no reason whatsoever to doubt  this
    evidence.  It is absolutely  clear  that  blogging  and  activities  on
    Facebook are very common amongst Iranian citizens and it is very  clear
    that the Iranian authorities are exceedingly twitchy  about  them.   We
    cannot see why a person who would attract the authorities  sufficiently
    to be interrogated and asked to give account of his conduct outside  of
    Iran would not be asked what he had done on the internet. Such a person
    could not be expected to lie, partly because that is  how  the  law  is
    developed and partly because, as is illustrated in one of the  examples
    given above, it is often quite easy to  check  up  and  expose  such  a
    person.  We find that the act of returning  someone  creates  a  "pinch
    point" so that returnees are  brought  into  direct  contact  with  the
    authorities  in  Iran  who  have  both  the  time  and  inclination  to
    interrogate them.  We think it likely that they  will  be  asked  about
    their internet activity and likely if they have any  internet  activity
    for that to be exposed and  if  it  is  less  than  flattering  of  the
    government to lead to a real risk of persecution.

458. We now direct ourselves particularly to  the  questions  asked  as  the
    list of issues.  Under (1) we say that social and other  internet-based
    media is used widely through Iran by a  very  high  percentage  of  the
    population and many of the people who use it are involved in  blogging,
    uploading photographs and videos, using Facebook and some  of  them  do
    things that are at least perceived as criticisms of the Iranian  state.
    The Iranian state is very aware of the power of  the  internet  and  is
    very determined but not particularly successful in restraining it.   We
    are quite satisfied that  the  Iranian  authorities  in  their  various
    guises both regulate and  police  the  internet.   There  is  no  other
    explanation for the large number of reported examples of internet sites
    being  closed  down  or  marked  by  the  Cyber   Police   or   similar
    organisations.  We do not see any direct link between such activity  by
    the state or quasi-state officials and persecution.

459. It is not clear to us how the state officials  are  able  to  intercept
    blogs.  Partly it must be the result of being  a  false  friend,  which
    must be some response to intelligence-led activity or guessing,  partly
    maybe the result  of  filtering,  which  we  accept  can  be  extremely
    sophisticated.  We were, however, impressed by the suggestion that  the
    most revealing method is just carelessness or response to questioning.

460. The capability to monitor outside Iran is not very different  from  the
    capability to monitor inside Iran.  Essentially  the  internet  as  the
    name implies is associated with the World Wide  Web.   We  accept  that
    there  is  some  evidence,  which  we  find  persuasive   rather   than
    compelling, that some websites operating  outside  the  United  Kingdom
    have been intercepted and this again is most likely to be the result of
    the Iranian authorities being concerned.  There is clearly  some  level
    of interest within Iran in the comments of people living outside  Iran.
    We do not find this particularly revealing.   We  accept  the  evidence
    that a party of ten is sufficient to create an offence.   There  is  no
    particular reason why a person outside or inside Iran involved in  blog
    activity doing things such as that done by AB should  attract  a  great
    deal of attention but search engines and browsing could find  them  and
    start to build a profile.  The Iranian  authorities  clearly  have  the
    capacity to restrict access to social internet-based media.  They do it
    in a variety of ways but all of them can be overcome, and this is where
    we get the "cat and mouse struggle" indicated  above.   Overall  it  is
    very difficult to  make  any  sensible  findings  about  anything  that
    converts a technical possibility of something being discovered  into  a
    real risk of it being discovered.  Under (3)  we  find  that  our  main
    concern is the pinch point of return.  A person  who  is  returning  to
    Iran after a reasonably short period of time on  an  ordinary  passport
    having left Iran illegally  would  almost  certainly  not  attract  any
    particular attention at all.  However, very few people who come  before
    the Tribunal are in such a category.  At  the  very  least  people  who
    would be before the Tribunal can expect  to  have  had  their  ordinary
    leave to be in the United Kingdom  to  have  lapsed  and  may  well  be
    travelling on a special passport.  Nevertheless for the small number of
    people who would be returning  on  an  ordinary  passport  having  left
    lawfully we do not think that there would be any risk to them at all.

461. We do accept that a person who is  interrogated  would  have  enquiries
    made and the more active they had been the more likely the  authorities
    would become interested and pursue their investigations.   We  have  no
    hesitation in saying CD is in such a category.  She is a woman who  has
    in the minds of the authorities been a nuisance for  a  long  time  and
    this would come to light in enquiries on her return.

462. As to question (4) we are again in an area of  uncertainty.   A  person
    who has been extremely discreet and careful may  well  not  be  linked.
    The difficulty is that it is easy to be indiscreet and  very  difficult
    to stand up to the interrogation of the kind  that  we  think  is  very
    likely to happen in the event of return.  The mere fact that  a  person
    blogged in the United Kingdom would not  mean  they  would  necessarily
    come to the attention of the authorities in Iran.  They may  well  have
    been discreet and successful in being discreet but only  if  everything
    had worked for them.

463. In answer to question (5) we are again to some extent  speculating  but
    it is clear to us that the  more  active  a  person  had  been  on  the
    internet the more enquiries that were we to make  the  more  likely  of
    that person getting into trouble.

464. We do not find it at all relevant if a person had used the internet  in
    an opportunistic way.  We are aware of examples in some countries where
    there is clear evidence that the authorities are scornful of people who
    try to create a claim by being rude overseas.   There  is  no  evidence
    remotely similar to that in this case.  The touchiness of  the  Iranian
    authorities does not seem to be in the least concerned with the motives
    of the person making a claim but if  it  is  interested  it  makes  the
    situation worse, not better because seeking asylum is being rude  about
    the government of Iran and whilst that may not of itself be  sufficient
    to lead to persecution it is a point in that direction.

465. It follows therefore that we allow all of these appeals.

In summary

466. It is very difficult to establish any kind of clear picture  about  the
    risks consequent on blogging activities in Iran.  Very few people  seem
    to be returned unwillingly and this makes it very difficult to  predict
    with any degree of confidence what fate, if  any,  awaits  them.   Some
    monitoring of activities outside Iran is possible and it occurs. It  is
    not possible to determine what circumstances, if any, enhance or dilute
    the risk although a high degree of activity is not necessary to attract
    persecution.

467. The mere fact of being in the United Kingdom  for  a  prolonged  period
    does not lead to persecution.  However it  may  lead  to  scrutiny  and
    there is clear evidence that some people are asked about their internet
    activity and particularly for their  Facebook  password.   The  act  of
    returning someone creates a "pinch point" so that a person  is  brought
    into direct contact with the authorities in Iran who have both the time
    and inclination to interrogate them.  We think it likely that they will
    be asked about their internet activity and  likely  if  they  have  any
    internet activity for that to  be  exposed  and  if  it  is  less  than
    flattering of the government to lead to at the very least a  real  risk
    of persecution.

468. Social and other internet-based media is used widely through Iran by  a
    very high percentage of the population and activities such as  blogging
    may be perceived as criticisms of the state which is very aware of  the
    power of the internet.  The Iranian authorities in their various guises
    both regulate and police the internet, closing down or marking internet
    sites  although  this  does  not  appear  to  be  linked  directly   to
    persecution.

469. The capability to monitor outside Iran is not very different  from  the
    capability to monitor inside Iran.   The  Iranian  authorities  clearly
    have the capacity to restrict access to  social  internet-based  media.
    Overall it is very  difficult  to  make  any  sensible  findings  about
    anything that converts  a  technical  possibility  of  something  being
    discovered into a real risk of it being discovered.

470. The main concern is the pinch  point  of  return.   A  person  who  was
    returning to Iran after  a  reasonably  short  period  of  time  on  an
    ordinary passport having left Iran illegally would almost certainly not
    attract any particular attention at all and for  the  small  number  of
    people who would be returning  on  an  ordinary  passport  having  left
    lawfully we do not think that there would be any risk to them at all.

471. However, as might more frequently be the case, where a  person's  leave
    to remain had lapsed and who might be travelling on a special passport,
    there would be enhanced interest. The more active  they  had  been  the
    more likely the authorities' interest could lead to persecution.

472. The mere fact that a person, if  extremely  discrete,  blogged  in  the
    United Kingdom would not  mean  they  would  necessarily  come  to  the
    attention of the authorities in Iran.  However, if there was a lapse of
    discretion they could face hostile interrogation on return which  might
    expose them to risk. The more active a person had been on the  internet
    the greater the risk. It is not relevant  if  a  person  had  used  the
    internet in an opportunistic way. The  authorities  are  not  concerned
    with a person's motivation. However in cases in which they  have  taken
    an interest claiming asylum is  viewed  negatively.  This  may  not  of
    itself be sufficient to lead to persecution  but  it  may  enhance  the
    risk.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |Dated 19 March 2015                  |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Re-Dated 29 April 2015               |




























    APPENDIX 1

    EVIDENCE OF CD

 1. The appellant CD gave evidence before us.  She made statements dated 15
    March 2011, 3 May 2011, 16 June 2011, 29 March 2012 and 7 January 2014.
     Subject to unremarkable but necessary corrections which we have  noted
    the appellant adopted these statements as  part  of  her  evidence.  We
    consider them now.

 2. In her first statement she outlined her personal circumstances.   These
    are not contentious and not everything she raised is  relevant  but  we
    refer to some of the peripheral points because they set the  appeal  in
    its context.

 3. The appellant CD was born in small town in the Isfahan area of Iran and
    was one of five children.  She has brothers and sisters and nephews and
    nieces in Iran. She was successful at school and was commended in  High
    School for having the best grades in her term.  She  studied  political
    science at Isfahan University and like many students of her  generation
    was politically aware and she was active in the May  1997  presidential
    elections that brought Mahammad Khatami to power.

 4. She graduated with a first class degree in political  science  and  got
    work at the Ministry of Education teaching history but the Ministry  of
    Education expelled her for two reasons.  She  started  questioning  and
    objecting to  the  content  of  books  because  they  were  unreal  and
    untruthful and  she  was  not  engaged  in  promoting  and  encouraging
    students to practise the Islam.

 5. In 2000 she started to  work  as  a  political  researcher  on  Iranian
    Television which she explained "operates directly under the  government
    authorities".

 6. She said she gained a reputation as a "very good" political analyst.

 7. She began to publish  articles  in  political  journals  including  the
    [journal redacted] published by the Iranian Revolutionary Guards.  Then
    she became a member of a research committee for the Middle East in  the
    Foreign Ministry.

 8. She was trying to make  her  employment  at  the  State  Television  as
    permanent rather than temporary arrangement  but  Herasat  blocked  her
    appointment because she was not regarded as being sufficiently loyal.

 9. Eventually she was recruited as a translator for news in 2007  but  was
    warned to mind her behaviour.

10. In the presidential elections in 2009 she campaigned in favour  of  the
    Green movement.  She hoped that Mir Hussein Mousavi would  bring  about
    fundamental change in Iran and she  planned  to  continue  her  studies
    hoping to obtain a doctorate in a United Kingdom university.

11. She sought to improve her command of the English language and  obtained
    a visa to enter the United Kingdom as  a  student  to  attend  language
    college.

12. The terms of her employment permitted her paid study leave and she  was
    rather reluctantly given six months' paid leave of absence.

13. On 19 September 2010 she arrived in the United Kingdom but after a  few
    weeks her family was  contacted  by  her  employers  objecting  to  her
    departure and requesting her to return to Iran to appear at a hearing.

14. In anticipation of making plans to return to work  for  the  television
    station by contacted an executive by email.  She then was approached by
    a colleague from the Information Ministry who said that  her  file  had
    been opened.   This  contained  information  in  writing  about  Iran's
    intention to enrol in nuclear programmes in the Middle East.  Enquiries
    were made about her political  activities  and  religious  beliefs  and
    reasons for leaving Iran.  She understood  that  the  people  who  were
    enquiring her were the  same  branch  of  the  security  services  that
    imprisoned and tortured people.  She regarded them as "highly  ruthless
    and unethical"  and  she  was  frightened  of  them  because  of  their
    reputation for causing people to disappear  without  trace.   The  same
    people then questioned her former roommate and visited her family  home
    and encouraged her family to encourage her return.

15. After two  months  her  former  employers  stopped  paying  her  salary
    although payment had been approved for six months.  This left her  very
    apprehensive about returning.

16. She took part in demonstrations in front of the Iranian  Embassy.   She
    believed that the government of Iran would fall and  demonstrations  of
    the kind that she attended might help bring about that end.

17. The demonstrations were filmed and she became very  anxious  about  her
    circumstances.

18. She had heard that a student whom she identified as Ehsan Abdoh who had
    taken part in  such  demonstrations  returned  to  Iran  and  was  soon
    sentenced to seven years' imprisonment.

19. Additionally she wrote some papers on Middle East revolutions  and  the
    Iranian Green movement for a Persian website.  She described the regime
    as "very angry about this kind of online activities".

20. In her statement of 15 March 2011 she  commented  on  the  Reasons  for
    Refusal Letter of 25 March 2011.

21. CD gave more details of how she came to secure a permanent job with the
    Iranian State Television notwithstanding that she had been sacked as  a
    teacher because she refused to promote Islam.  She said  that  the  pay
    was low and that persons employed  on  a  temporary  contract  are  not
    subject to as much scrutiny as a person on a permanent  contract.   Her
    history stopped her getting a full-time job.

22. She obtained a permanent position as a  translator  of  the  news  from
    English to Farsi in 2007.  Sensitive material was only  distributed  to
    managers.  It was not published generally.

23. She sought to support her claim with reference to  various  contractual
    or similar documents and also a copy of the  [journal  redacted]  where
    she was identified as an author and her position at the  IRIB  (Iranian
    Broadcasting) noted.

24. She brought that particular publication with her because  the  articles
    she had written caused a stir in Iran and she wanted to try and publish
    it in a British magazine.

25. She also submitted copies of her payslips that she  had  obtained  from
    the IRIB website under her personal portal and explained that  although
    she only had continuous employment from 2003 to 2007 she had moved from
    successive contracts from 2000 to 2003.  However, they did not give her
    pension or other entitlements.

26. She understood that it was suggested that if she would be monitored  by
    Herasat as she alleged she could not have  published  articles  as  she
    claimed to have done.  She said that the articles were published before
    2007 when she was working as a political researcher  and  her  managers
    were open-minded to some extent.  Researchers had to  show  loyalty  to
    the supreme leader but were otherwise allowed some licence  to  express
    their views, particularly in election time.  Even so  she  showed  some
    restraint and tact.  It was  only  after  she  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom that it was clear that Herasat were concerned about her.

27. She said that it was rather missing the  point  to  criticise  her  for
    saying that her salary was stopped after two  months  although  Herasat
    were interested in her.  A better way of putting  it  is  that  Herasat
    became interested in her and two months later her salary stopped.  That
    was the time it took for the interest  of  Herasat  to  crank  its  way
    through the IRIB bureaucracy.

28. She explained at paragraph 35 of that statement that her blog had  been
    shut down because she would be  identified  as  someone  who  supported
    Mousavi in the election.

29. She had posted on her blog after coming to the United Kingdom.  She had
    also created a new blog under the nickname "Mahtab".  She had posted  a
    link to that blog on www.balatarin.com which is a website  for  Iranian
    activists.  She  had  written  articles  that  had  been  published  on
    www.iranfree.org.

30. She had tried to get work at the BBC and Manoto Cable TV in the  United
    Kingdom.

31. In her statement of 16 June 2011 she explained how on  31  May  2011  a
    former colleague had contacted her to tell her that IRIB had decided to
    dismiss her.  She asked her friend to obtain a copy.  When a  copy  was
    not forthcoming she contacted another colleague who explained that IRIB
    would only release the document to the  appellant  or  a  lawyer.   Her
    lawyer lived 400 kilometres away.

32. On 2 June 2011 she contacted IRIB and was told that there was no  right
    of appeal against the decision.   Herasat  had  pushed  the  IRIB  into
    making it and it was not to be changed.

33. She made a statement on 29 March 2012.  There  she  explained  that  in
    August 2011 a former colleague had contacted her to say  that  she  had
    heard that the appellant's name had been published in  a  newspaper  as
    someone who had been dismissed from IRIB.   It  was  published  in  the
    state newspaper Jam-e-Jam.  It was a message to ensure she would not be
    employed again.

34. The appellant had tried to find an electronic copy of the  edition  and
    her friend had tried to find a paper copy but they had both failed.

35. She explained that she had borrowed money from her employer.  The money
    was collected every month from her wages.  Since she  had  been  sacked
    her colleagues who had guaranteed the loan had had money taken from her
    account.  Her colleague had asked the appellant to  provide  the  money
    which was owed.  She had to find about �1,700.  She had paid  the  loan
    by transferring money from her own account to a  friend's  account  and
    the friend had transferred it into the guarantor's account.  She  still
    owed money and was coming to an arrangement with the bank.

36. She talked about the voluntary work she was doing in the United Kingdom
    and her continuing to write online and had written on topics  including
    the attack  on  the  United  Kingdom  Embassy  in  Iran  by  government
    loyalists, the civil war in Syria and criticism of Iranian policies  of
    oppressing people.  She had also posted links on Facebook  about  never
    forgetting the young people  at  the  election  protests  of  2009  and
    criticising Islam for suppressing women.

37. She had written a book about her experiences as a  journalist  in  Iran
    and is an asylum seeker in the United Kingdom.  She said it was not  an
    autobiography but based on her experiences and she intended to  publish
    it in Manchester.

38. She had not been involved in any street protests  against  the  Iranian
    regime since moving to Manchester.  She could not afford to  travel  to
    London.

39. Her most recent statement was dated 7 January 2014.

40. She gave more details on her family circumstances.

41. As she had stated previously her parents divorced when she  was  young.
    She is now in contact with her mother and her  father.   Typically  she
    spoke to her father by telephone every month and her mother every week.
     Sometimes she is able to use Yahoo Messenger to  contact  her  mother.
    Her mother goes to a member of the family  who  has  a  computer.   She
    speaks sometimes to her brothers and sisters and to  her  half-sisters,
    to her sister R about twice a week and her sister N about every two  or
    three weeks.

42. The Iranian authorities had contacted her father about her.

43. She identified close friends in Iran.  One she  had  lived  with  as  a
    student and the other was a colleague at IRIB but was now a teacher  in
    Northern Iran.  She listed other friends  she  contacted  sometimes  by
    Facebook, Viber, Oovoo, SMS, and Messenger or ordinary email.

44. She had been prompted to claim asylum.  One of the events that had  led
    to that decision was her blog being blocked in  February  2011.   Blogs
    were posted under the name "E M" (this  represents  the  name  actually
    given in evidence).  She  had  copies  of  the  blogs  on  her  desktop
    computer at her home in Tehran.  She continued to post blogs after  she
    arrived in the United Kingdom.  She  had  written  about  the  problems
    Iranians faced overseas and the Green movement and the protests against
    the election President Ahmadinejad and in praise of the courageous role
    of women in the movement.  In December 2010 she posted an extract  from
    a speech by Mir Mousavi and she has made copies of her blogs.

45. She said that the blogs she had posted when she was in Iran were not as
    bold as those when she was in the United Kingdom.

46. She speculated that her blogs were closed in February 2011 because  she
    had posted three blogs in the United Kingdom and was openly critical of
    the regime.  She accepted that it was true that a  lot  of  blogs  were
    closed at about that time.

47. She confirmed that after coming to the United Kingdom she  had  written
    two articles that were posted on the internet.  One was a commentary on
    the Tunis revolution which was written  at  the  request  of  a  former
    colleague  then  based  in  Switzerland  who  ran  a   website   called
    iranfree.org.  Another one was on the power of Facebook as a  means  of
    assisting protesters.  Her name was on the articles.  It was a week  or
    so after the article was posted on  the  internet  that  her  blog  was
    blocked on blogfa.  She repeated that she  was  known  as  a  political
    analyst in Iran but the criticisms she had made there were milder  than
    those from outside the United Kingdom.

48. She said that it did not deter her from writing blogs when her blog  on
    blogfa  was  blocked.   Rather  she  went  to  blogdoon.com  which  she
    described as another Iranian Persian language domain  for  blogs.   She
    identified her blogs.  One of them translated  as  [redacted]  and  was
    intended as a pun on the cutting action of the censor.

49. Her first blog on that post was entitled "Farewell To Religion  Is  The
    Start Of Living Freely".  She was "generally critical of the whole idea
    of an Islamic state."

50. Since then her blogs had become more critical.  She had  blogged  under
    an assumed woman's name and started using one of her own names but  not
    her whole name.  She said it was a very common name.  She did not  know
    if this would work as a  security  measure  but  it  seems  a  sensible
    precaution.

51. She said she had also posted matters on her Facebook page.  She  had  a
    following of 120 Facebook friends.  Some she knew well,  some  she  did
    not know at all outside Facebook.

52. She identified her Facebook page, which she said was in her full name.

53. She insisted she had been active in the United Kingdom in  other  ways,
    typically attending demonstrations.  She had photographs.  She said the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge had misunderstood the evidence she gave about
    the dates.

54. She had been asked to talk to the Seventh National Black Nation Writers
    Conference and Festival because it was known that  she  was  writing  a
    book.  She felt particularly well-qualified to talk about the  way  the
    government of Iran repressed and intimidated freedom of speech.

55. She had taken "full advantage of my blog to  communicate  my  thoughts,
    reactions and feelings on a whole range of topics" after coming to  the
    United Kingdom.

56. She believed that if she returned to Iran she would be stopped  at  the
    airport and asked to provide her Facebook and email  details  including
    passwords.   She  believed  there  was  a  real  risk  of  the  Iranian
    authorities knowing about her blog, particularly because of her use  of
    Messenger to communicate with friends  and  family.   She  did  have  a
    profile as a political analyst.  She was afraid of  being  interrogated
    in Iran.  She also believed she would risk being arrested, detained and
    charged with serious crimes.

57. The appellant said that she had a profile in Iran.  This was  a  result
    of her working as a political  analyst  and  working  for  the  Iranian
    national media.  Her loyalty had been questioned and she was  confident
    that this would be noted especially  as  she  was  dismissed  following
    investigations by Herasat.  She described Herasat as a  branch  of  the
    Iranian security system.  The further her  absence  from  Iran  over  a
    period of three years would attract questions.  She would be questioned
    about what she had done in the United Kingdom and this  was  likely  to
    lead to the truth emerging of her writing and blogging.

58. It was her belief that she would be arrested, detained and charged with
    serious crimes and she would be subject to severe ill-treatment  whilst
    detained and could not expect a fair trial.  She said at the very least
    she would receive a disproportionate prison sentence.   She  was  asked
    about blogfa.  She said this was a blogging service which  was  blocked
    or stopped by the authorities.  She did not know who had blocked it.

59. She denied violating any laws and agreements or publishing any  immoral
    content.

60. Her attention was particularly drawn to an article  in  the  bundle  at
    page 133 and an English translation at  132.   These  are  short  blogs
    written on 7 December 2010 and 10 November 2010.  The November  article
    includes praise for people who protested outside Parliament in  support
    of women, socialists and green reporters.  She  expressed  her  respect
    for the "bravery of these green movement women".

61. The December article reflected on the  election  that  would  determine
    Iran's future.  She expressed  the  view  that  "we"  did  not  want  a
    superstitious government, a charity based government, a genius who  had
    made sole decisions for the country.  She was also careful to say  that
    "we" respected the revolutionary guard.  Both of  these  articles  bore
    the name CD and then a further name that could not be deciphered.   She
    was then referred to the notice page 418 in the bundle  in  translation
    that the blog had been stopped.  It was dated 14 February 2011 and  she
    said that was when she  discovered  the  blog  had  been  blocked.   14
    February was significant because it was the day of a  demonstration  in
    front  of  the  embassy.   She  confirmed  she  had  attended   various
    demonstrations although could not remember all of the occasions and had
    attended the Embassy demonstration on 14 February.  She said  that  she
    had been inspired to write by an article in the website  "Iranfree.org"
    which had commented on the Egyptian revolution.  There  was  a  similar
    article about the Tunisian  revolution.   The  English  translation  at
    pages 150 to 152 of the log beginning at page 153 began by  saying  how
    the overthrow of the Hosni Mobarak dictatorship in Egypt  had  "offered
    hope to the people  in  Middle  East  as  well  as  Africa  and  Arabic
    countries and particularly Iranians".  The concluding  passage  of  the
    blog suggested that if demonstrations were widespread the government of
    Iran would have less opportunity of suppressing it.  The statement  was
    supported by pictures that appear to show her demonstrating outside the
    Iranian Embassy in Kensington.   She  said  there  was  also  an  entry
    showing her at the demonstration.

62. For completeness she also produced her Iranian broadcasting corporation
    identity card which identified her as a translator.

63. She was cross-examined.

64. She confirmed that it was usual in Iran to finish high  school  at  the
    age of 18 and then go on to university  if  the  necessary  exams  were
    passed.

65. She confirmed that she was sacked from her job in the year  2000.   She
    appealed the decision and confirmed that her  appeal  was  unsuccessful
    because she questioned texts and refused to promote Islam.

66. She said Herasat were at the university  that  she  attended.   Herasat
    were also at the Ministry of Education.

67. She said  that  when  she  was  applying  for  work  with  the  Iranian
    Television IRIB the authorities did not go to Herasat  but  to  another
    division called Gozinesh.  Nevertheless she accepted that she had  said
    because she understood it to be the case that a report would  be  given
    to Herasat.  She said that her reputation of a disloyalty  was  not  so
    good in the way of getting a permanent contract.   She  did  eventually
    get a job as a translator because  she  satisfied  them  that  she  was
    loyal.  She explained the job as an interpreter was much less sensitive
    than the job as a political researcher.

68. She understood the suggestion that it was strange  that  a  person  was
    able to get work for seven  years  if  they  were  suspected  of  being
    disloyal but she insisted this was because she was working in the  less
    sensitive work as a translator rather than the more sensitive  work  of
    political researcher.  She pointed out that the American attack on Iraq
    had created a big demand for researchers and there were  "thousands  of
    people" working because extras were needed.  She pointed out  that  she
    did suppress her disloyalty at work and nothing could be proved against
    her.  She was reminded that in interview she had  said  she  was  never
    given a reason why she was not recruited earlier  than  she  was.   She
    said that "they were just talking generally saying  that  you  are  not
    fully loyal to leadership and Islam".  She regarded this  as  a  fairly
    customary allegation.   She  was  asked  to  comment  on  page  155  in
    translation of a review paper.  It was dated  January  2006  under  the
    name CD who was then described as a  "researcher".   The  paper  was  a
    summary of an article written in 2006 for publication  by  the  Iranian
    Revolutionary Guard.  She was asked why the guard would let someone who
    was disloyal write for them.  She said that the research  she  did  was
    separate from her workplace and was submitted to the authorities before
    being printed.

69. She accepted that she had sat on a research committee for a few  years.
    She was asked to explain again why this was permitted if  she  was  not
    safe.  She pointed out that the main accusations against  her  came  in
    2005.  She was asked if it is her case that she was  not  a  figure  of
    suspicion at all between 2000 and 2005.  She  said  that  she  was  not
    allowed to work for them for the two years between 2005 and  2007  when
    they made a decision.  She confirmed she had not had  problems  between
    2000 and 2005.  She enjoyed her work and did not particularly  want  to
    be a full-time employee.

70. Between 2000 and 2007  she  did  want  a  permanent  job  with  Iranian
    Television.  She said  many  reasons  were  offered  for  her  lack  of
    success.  For example on  one  occasion  she  was  thought  not  to  be
    compliant with the dress code requiring her to cover her hair and  wear
    a Hajib.  She explained at her interview  that  the  main  problem  she
    faced was they did not want to recruit her officially  or  give  her  a
    permanent contract.  They wanted to use her skills but not give her all
    the benefits and rights of a full-time employee.

71. She accepted that generally they preferred temporary staff.

72. She insisted it took her about two years to improve her loyalty.

73. She was asked about her visit to the United Kingdom.  She had  said  in
    her statement (paragraph 12, page 24) that  government  employees  were
    entitled to three years' paid leave and three years unpaid leave.  Once
    she became an assistant she was  granted  six  months'  paid  leave  of
    absence.  This was supported by her managers.

74. She had no direct contact with  Herasat  although  Herasat  signed  her
    identity documents.  She said it was  not  usual  to  ask  Herasat  for
    permission.

75. She was reminded that in answer to question 45 at  interview  she  said
    that the problems in Iran that prompted her to seek  asylum  started  a
    few weeks after she had  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom.   She  said
    Herasat were enquiring about her.  Her managers knew she might want  to
    be away for more than six months.  She said that the emails at page 277
    in the bundle dated 17 December 2010 and 20 December 2010 came  from  a
    private email address of a colleague who worked for Iranian Television.
     She did not know why the person had used Yahoo.

76. She was reminded she had said  earlier  that  IRIB  did  not  have  the
    facility for sending emails and she  confirmed  that  that  was  right.
    However it was pointed out to her that there was  a  contact  page  for
    Iranian Television website printed in January 2014  that  did  show  an
    email address for Iranian Television.  She said every  channel  had  an
    official email contact but there were  not  email  facilities  for  all
    50,000 members of staff.

77. She was asked to comment on the criticism at page 277 in the email that
    she had not obtained  the  necessary  permission  from  Herasat  before
    leaving.  She said she was not aware of the  rule  at  the  time.   She
    believed the rule was enforced after she  had  left  the  office.   She
    confirmed that when her friend Mrs Khodabandeh had  contacted  her  she
    had intended to return to Iran.  She said that  Mrs  Khodabandeh  would
    solve the problem and she did not talk to anyone else.  She did not ask
    Mrs Khodabandeh to speak to the manager.  She said things did not  work
    like that in Iran.

78. She was then asked about leaving her PhD proposal in a private cabinet.
     She was asked why she had left an incriminating document in a cabinet,
    albeit a private one, when she believed that her superior  blocked  her
    and made it hard for her to get a permanent contract.   She  was  asked
    why if that was the case she left an incriminating PhD  proposal  where
    it could be found when she was away from work for six months.  She said
    that it was in a locked private cabinet.

79. She confirmed that she  had  not  got  into  trouble  because  she  had
    expressed approved for the Green Movement at work.  She also  confirmed
    that many people had demonstrated against the Iranian Government.   She
    also confirmed that it was her case that thousands of people blogged in
    Iran.  She also confirmed she had attended demonstrations after  coming
    to the United  Kingdom.   College  students  had  told  her  about  the
    demonstrations.  She was particularly interested in blogdome.com.   She
    believed it was popular in Iran but there was no particular reason  for
    using that site.  She  also  confirmed  that  she  had  used  the  name
    [redacted] on her blog for a time.  She was asked more questions  about
    the selection of her Facebook entries.  She confirmed  she  had  had  a
    "beautiful poster of [redacted] under beloved child"  work  of  graphic
    designer in Holland.  That person was a lawyer  who  had  been  put  in
    prison.  Her blog of 27 September 2013  reflected  that  although  more
    than 50 people had been executed in the last month [redacted] had  been
    unconditionally released.

80. The appellant said she had started using Facebook after she came to the
    United Kingdom. She had used it to communicate with  friends  and  more
    distant family members in Iran.

81. She confirmed that she had never been arrested and  was  not  aware  of
    there being a warrant for her arrest, that she had been sacked from her
    employment.  Her employer made  no  attempt  to  try  and  contact  her
    although they had contacted her father.  That was on  one  occasion  in
    2010.  It was suggested to her that in March 2011 she wanted to stay in
    the United Kingdom to complete her education.  She had contacted  Leeds
    University and they had offered her a partial scholarship but that  was
    not enough to support her.  She replied  that  she  did  not  have  any
    choice.

82. She was not re-examined.

APPENDIX 2

EVIDENCE OF EF

 1. The appellant EF gave evidence before us.   He  had  made  a  statement
    dated 15 December 2011.

 2. There he said that he was born in Iran in Firoozabad in the province of
    Fars in 1972 and had lived there all his life.

 3. He said that he followed the "Zarodastian" religion that  he  described
    as the ancient Persian religion.  Many Iranian nationals had left  Iran
    for India to follow their religion peacefully.

 4. He said his mother and father were both Muslims and followed Islam  but
    he did not believe in Islam.  Islam was a disunited  religion  and  did
    not respect human rights.  He was particularly unattracted  by  Iranian
    "Islamic" punishments.

 5. He was an unmarried man who lived mainly on his own but sometimes  with
    his parents in or around Firoozabad.

 6. He said he was educated in Iran to university level  where  he  studied
    agricultural engineering.  He had worked on his father's land and  sold
    crops to make his living.

 7. He had helped establish a group called [name redacted] with the help of
    four friends who he named.  They intended to gather all the people  who
    were "fed up of the current Iranian  Islamic  regime".   One  of  their
    objections to the Islamic regime was that it brooked no opposition.

 8. They set up a group on Facebook intending to gather  enough  people  to
    defy the government.  He said the group  was  formed  about  two  years
    before making the statement in December 2011 with the assistance of the
    friends he had identified.  They encouraged other people  to  join  the
    group and had small meetings.  People who wanted  to  join  they  would
    make enquiries to satisfy themselves that they were genuine and in tune
    with their thinking.

 9. They also went on to, for example, Yahoo chat rooms to communicate with
    others who wanted change.  There were about 2,200 followers  since  the
    group was formed.

10. His Facebook activity consisted of posting articles  and  opinions  for
    others to see.

11. Since coming to the United Kingdom he had set up a  co-ordinated  group
    with others and had about 1,500 followers.  He could act more freely in
    the United Kingdom and expand the work of the group.

12. He said his problems began in Iran on 19 Tir 1390 when  his  friend  BD
    (one of those who helped him establish the group [name  redacted])  was
    arrested.  A mutual friend not involved in [name redacted] had seen  BD
    arrested and contacted the appellant  to  tell  him  that  plainclothes
    officers had taken BD away and had also taken his car.

13. After that the appellant  spoke  with  BD2,  another  of  the  founding
    members of the [name redacted] and decided it  would  be  best  if  the
    appellant left Iran.  BD was still in detention.

14. BD2 introduced him to one Hassan Kurd who eventually smuggled  him  out
    of Iran in a car for a fee of US$1,500.

15. He was smuggled over the border into Turkey and eventually to  a  hotel
    in Istanbul.

16. He had a telephone conversation with one  of  his  cousins,  a  medical
    practitioner with a surgery near to his home.  His cousin told him  how
    the authorities had been to the appellant's house and  confiscated  his
    computer and paperwork but he had no news about BD.

17. The appellant had saved banned books  on  his  computer  including  two
    particular banned books whose possession  attracted  heavy  punishment.
    He thought it would cost him his life.

18. He was scared to return to Iran.

19. He did not believe Turkey was a safe place for Iranians because of  the
    close relationship between the governments.  There are  Iranian  agents
    within the Turkish state.  He did not think it safe to remain there and
    he found an agent to get him out of Turkey for US$12,000.

20. He had been in Turkey for about 45 to 50 days and went  out  by  lorry.
    He explained that there were several stages in the  lorry  journey  but
    people in travel were not allowed to talk or  ask  questions.   He  was
    discovered by border agents in a lorry at Dover.  He claimed asylum  on
    arrival.

21. He believed that in the event of his return to Iran he would  be  taken
    to court and sentenced for opposing the regime and  that  he  would  be
    killed.  His opposition was not just to the Islamic regime but was seen
    as being "against God" and therefore would attract severe punishment.

22. His asylum claim was unsuccessful and he made a written response to the
    refusal letter.  The response was dated 15 December 2011.

23. He insisted that he  had  stated  that  he  did  not  feel  fit  to  be
    interviewed when the screening  interview  took  place.   He  had  been
    travelling for over 48 hours in the lorry and wanted a  solicitor.   He
    was told he was not entitled to a solicitor and discovered  later  that
    they had not acknowledged in the records his complaint that he was  not
    fit to be interviewed.

24. He denied there was anything suspicious about his not being able to say
    he made his computer.  He said that in Iran it was customary to buy the
    computer in  parts  from  specialist  manufacturers  and  assemble  the
    computer by the final  customer.   It  was  possible  to  buy  complete
    computers in Iran but cheaper to buy and assemble the parts which might
    be older products.

25. He said he could not have been visiting his uncle as suspected  by  the
    Secretary of State because his uncle had died in 1982 in Iran.  He  was
    visiting his cousin.  He had been arrested for drinking alcohol.   That
    was more than twenty years ago and he could not remember  the  name  of
    the sentencing judge.  He had not mentioned it at  screening  interview
    because he thought he was being asked about political  activities.   He
    could not recall the date of an arrest nineteen years  ago.   Again  he
    explained that he was tired at his screening interview.

26. He speculated he had a medical condition making  it  hard  to  remember
    precise dates but he insisted that he had set up his  opposition  group
    about two years before making the statement.

27. He said there were 1,500 members on Facebook when he  made  that  claim
    but there were now 2,190.  The information was there by checking.

28. He repeated that he did not know the maker of his computer because  his
    computer was not made by  a  particular  supplier  but  assembled  from
    parts.  He did use the computer every day.

29. He explained that filter codes were available from Voice of America and
    Radio Farda.  The American International Press encourages people to use
    codes to get around  filters.   The  required  information  is  readily
    available.  He said he could not remember the day of the week  when  BD
    was arrested.  He was told that they were dressed in plain clothes  and
    that is how he believed the Ettela'at behaved.  BD  was  at  the  water
    company office applying for permission for a framing project.

30. He confirmed that he was in Turkey, not Iran when his house was raided.
     He did not know if there was an arrest warrant.  He was only trying to
    make sense of what he had been told.

31. He had made an updated statement which is not  actually  dated  in  our
    copy but according to the chronology was made on 4 December 2013.

32. There he explained that he was born a Muslim but was not  a  practising
    Muslim.  He had stopped practising Islam about 25  years  earlier.   He
    was not a Zoroastrian but he followed its philosophy  of  "think  well,
    speak well and do well".

33. He explained that he as from the Qashqai tribe or  group.   His  family
    was well-known in the southwest of Iran and  his  paternal  grandfather
    had been a famous [redacted] or  tribal  leader.   He  spoke  Farsi  at
    school but Turkish Qashqai at home.

34. The family had problems since the start of the Islamic revolution.   In
    about June 1981 there was a skirmish between Sepah Pastaran and Qashqai
    leaders.  The Qashqai had a military base  where  about  500  men  were
    stationed.  The Central Government wanted to close  it.   There  was  a
    three day war and his uncle, [redacted], was killed.  After the war the
    remaining Qashqai soldiers were arrested and imprisoned.  Four or  five
    people were executed by firing  squad  and  the  others  were  forcibly
    displaced and removed to other areas of Iran.  They  were  banned  from
    returning to Fars province.

35. His father had been one of the 500 soldiers  fighting  at  the  Qashqai
    military base.  He was imprisoned because he had arranged  the  funeral
    of the appellant's uncle, [redacted] who had died in a combat.  He  was
    imprisoned for nearly a year.

36. His family had  been  members  of  the  "elite"  and  suffered  in  the
    revolution as  a  consequence.    Most  of  the  land  they  owned  was
    confiscated leaving them only a small  amount  of  land  to  farm.  The
    family said that they were victims  of  constant  discrimination.   For
    example,  although  the  appellant  had  a   degree   in   agricultural
    engineering he could not get a decent job in  Iran  and  he  attributed
    that to discrimination because his family  were  actively  involved  in
    opposition politics.

37. He explained how  Facebook  was  not  permitted  in  Iran  but  various
    organisations including the BBC, Voice of America and Radio Farda would
    email links on how to access the internet.

38. In late 2009 or early 2010 he set up a website  called  [WEBSITE].   He
    said there were "absolutely no privacy settings  on  that  account"  so
    anyone who accessed it could access all on the site.

39. This gave easy access  to  his  date  of  birth  and  mobile  telephone
    numbers, his United Kingdom address and his screen names for  use  with
    Yahoo  Messenger  and  Skype.   An  email  is  given  as  well.    This
    information was on his "about" page where there is also  a  link  to  a
    website of which he was the General Secretary.

40. He established [WEBSITE] in late 2009 or early 2010 while in Iran using
    it to criticise the regime.  He would ask  for  his  own  thoughts  and
    others with a similar political opinion and he would also publish  news
    or other information that he thought would his  readers.   He  said  he
    presently had 4,051 friends.  He usually checked the  Facebook  account
    of someone who made a "friend request"  to  ascertain  that  they  were
    consistently of the same political view.

41. His "friends" links included a link to opposition political figures and
    journalists and also a famous Iranian feminist "Azar Majedi".

42. He published and shared political articles via his  [WEBSITE]  Facebook
    page.

43. On that site there was a column showing links in Farsi  to  an  earlier
    Facebook page for which he was responsible.  This  was  begun  in  2010
    with four friends and he knew the page  had  been  hacked.   They  were
    Islamic agents who had attacked many other accounts.  He said that when
    he or his colleagues uploaded articles against the Islamic regime which
    they had written they found them on the internet in a distorted form.

44. He said there were originally  seven  administrators,  that  they  lost
    control.  The account was hacked because there was  a  message  in  the
    "about" section saying "God is great" and linking to soldiers of Islam.
     After that page was hacked the original management  lost  all  control
    and could no longer use the page.

45. The next link on the favourites page is to a group he  established  and
    which attracted 1,636 friends.  It had no privacy settings and  he  was
    one of the administrators of the website.  He said the site worked as a
    newspaper and the place for exchanging ideas.  It showed him using  the
    earlier pre-Islamic Government flag of Iran.

46. After the group [group name redacted] was hacked we established  a  new
    group with a slightly different name called [group name redacted] which
    is a closed group so that  each  member  can  enter  information.   The
    appellant was one of four administrators of that  group  which  at  the
    time of writing had 5,184 members.

47. He also ran a website known as the [website name  redacted]  which  was
    established  with  26  other   people   from   different   groups   and
    organisations and the group had been hosted by another website but they
    had lost control of that site.  The purpose was to establish a national
    Council and this was done at a meeting in Paris in early 2012.

48. Prior to the establishment of the national Council there was a  meeting
    for all of the  groups  conducted  by  Skype  in  which  the  appellant
    participated.  The establishment  of  the  [group  name  redacted]  was
    broadcast in Iran by the satellite channel, Andishe.  After  the  Skype
    meeting a new website was established by  the  original  committee  and
    placed before the elections in Paris.  The details of  the  appellant's
    group and name and personal details were on that website in  Farsi  and
    English.   Notwithstanding  his  role  in  founding   the   group   the
    appellant's delegate was not permitted entry to Paris (?  paragraph  25
    witness  statement  meaning   a   little   obscure)   and   there   was
    dissatisfaction with the way things had been addressed on the  national
    committee so the appellant opted out  and  the  story  about  that  was
    broadcast in several opposition newspapers.

49. The appellant  also  used  YouTube  as  a  means  of  broadcasting  his
    political activities.  He had uploaded twelve of his  own  videos  onto
    that site.

50. On 12 August 2013 a regional newspaper, the Evening Gazette,  published
    a report about his United Kingdom  activities  and  the  names  of  the
    spokespeople for the Iranian People's Freedom Front where  one  of  the
    names was misspelt.

51. The appellant was twice interviewed with [company  redacted]  which  is
    accessible via his YouTube account.  The first interview was  in  2011,
    the second in 2012.  He had heard about [company redacted] when he  was
    co-operating with another organisation based in Sweden.  In  his  first
    interview with [company redacted] he discussed political activities and
    what he did with regard to [WEBSITE].  The second interview  was  about
    bringing different opposition groups together through Facebook.

52. The appellant had a YouTube account with a video about the announcement
    which is discussed above.  He  also  spoke  to  the  presenter  of  the
    programme speaking against the Iranian regime.

53. He used Skype as a means to discuss  politics.   He  referred  to  open
    session on Skype about the killing of  the  Mujahideen  in  Iraq.   The
    discussion on Skype was later posted on YouTube and was critical of why
    people are massacred and enquired about who was responsible.

54. As well as adopting his statements  the  appellant  drew  attention  to
    printouts in the bundle showing  his  Facebook  page.   These  included
    screen shots with people the appellant identified as prominent  critics
    of the Iranian regime.  He identified sites that had been  hacked.   He
    explained there were some pages where he shared control  with  five  or
    six other people and another page that was private  to  him.   He  then
    explained how a  group  had  hacked  one  of  the  sites  to  which  he
    contributed including one used to bring together the different  groups.
    He had several sites of which he was administrator including a Facebook
    page and a YouTube page.

55. The witness was cross-examined.

56. He confirmed that when he was in Iran he had set  up  a  Facebook  page
    with four others and it was the arrest of one of those, BD,  that  made
    him leave Iran.  He left within 24 hours of the arrest with the help of
    BM.  This had all been explained in his statement.   He  also  accepted
    that he did not shut down the Facebook page when he heard of the arrest
    and he did not put up a warning to tell people that it was a  dangerous
    place to have discussed politics.  In fact  he  did  nothing  to  deter
    anyone from being open.

57. He confirmed that he did have US$13,500 available to  get  him  out  of
    Iran.

58. He was at the time on a family farm.

59. He said the Facebook pages had been open for two years before he had to
    leave Iran and were run from a computer in his bedroom.

60. He was asked about the make of computer and his inability  to  remember
    it.  He repeated as explained in his statement that  the  computer  was
    assembles from separately purchased components.  He confirmed  that  he
    could not  remember  the  name  of  the  components  either.   He  also
    confirmed that after he had come to the United  Kingdom  the  page  was
    still open.  He  was  then  asked  particularly  about  his  own  site,
    [WEBSITE].  He said that only he could put things on his  own  Facebook
    page.  He did post videos from other sites.  He was  asked  if  friends
    could put what he wants onto the page and he said with  his  permission
    that could be done.  He confirmed that  anyone  accepted  as  a  friend
    could read his Facebook page and that when he was running the page from
    Iran he would check the identity of potential  friends.   He  was  less
    careful now he was in the United Kingdom but he  did  still  give  some
    thought to requests to allow people to be a friend.  He was asked about
    his YouTube pages.   This  recorded  how  many  times  exhibited  being
    watched, the recorded numbers tended to be in the  low  100s  or  less.
    For example, on page 21 in the bundle, one featuring the appellant  had
    recorded 301 views whereas one beneath it which the appellant had liked
    had attracted 42,812 views.  He was asked about the interviews  he  had
    given and said they were for internet channels or  satellite  channels.
    One with Beca was a satellite channel and was a live  interview  so  he
    was sure that had been broadcast.  He could not know  if  other  things
    that had been recorded had been noted. He accepted that very few people
    had visited his website.

61. He was not re-examined.


APPENDIX 3 ERROR OF LAW
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                        |Date Sent                    |
|On 25th April 2013                            |On 02nd May 2013             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                                     EF
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:


For the Appellant:     Ms S Harrison of Halliday Reeves Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr C Dewison Home Office Presenting Officer

                                  DECISION

      1. The appellant, a  national  of  Iran,  date  of  birth  [redacted],
         appeals a decision promulgated 14 May 2012 of  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Balloch who dismissed an appeal against a decision to  remove
         him pursuant to s.10  of  the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  1999.
         Permission to appeal was granted on 20th June 2012.




      Background

      2. The appellant arrived in the UK on his  own  passport  and  claimed
         asylum. His application was refused for reasons set out in a letter
         dated 27th October 2011 and he was served with a decision to remove
         him as an illegal entrant dated the same date.


      3. The basis of his claim for asylum was, in essence, that he had been
         a founder member in Iran of a facebook group called [WEBSITE],  the
         aims of which were to provide a background for a secular government
         in Iran. Comments, articles and links  were  placed  on  an  "open"
         facebook page. He claims that one of the other founding members was
         arrested and, after having been informed of  this  a  decision  was
         taken by him and others in the group that he should leave Iran  for
         his own safety. He also claims that  the  facebook  "friends"  have
         continued to expand since his arrival in the UK  and  he  therefore
         bases a sur place claim on this activity.

      4. During the course of his hearing before the First-tier Tribunal the
         appellant produced print outs of  facebook  pages  which  were  not
         translated. The  judge,  also  watched  on  a  mobile  (because  of
         difficulties with the technical equipment in the  Tribunal  hearing
         room) an interview asserted to  be  with  the  appellant  in  Farsi
         whilst the appellant was in  the  UK  with  Mr  Sorbi  on  [company
         redacted], a  public  broadcast  internet  communications  company.
         Included in  the  documents  produced  was  a  transcript  of  that
         interview which was not certified by the translator (see  paragraph
         52 of the Consolidated Asylum  and  Immigration  (Procedure)  Rules
         2005).

      5. Judge  Cope found:

           a. He was  unable  to  place  any  evidential  weight  upon  the
              transcript of the television  interview  because  it  had  no
              identification,  no  certificate  of  authenticity   and   no
              acknowledgement that the  translator  was  aware  of  his/her
              responsibilities to provide an accurate translation.
           b. The evidence was insufficient to establish that the appellant
              had been interview by Mr  Sorbi  on  any  publicly  broadcast
              television station.
           c. The pages of facebook  produced  during  the  course  of  the
              hearing were in Farsi, with no translation provided, and thus
              he was  unable  to  establish  the  substantive  content  and
              refused to look at them.
           d. He had not been provided  with  any  evidential  material  to
              substantiate the appellant's claim that the  facebook  social
              website had about 1,500 members which had increased  to  over
              2000 members whilst he was in the UK.
           e. The appellant had given contradictory evidence as to  whether
              he had been arrested and how he had left Iran.
           f. There are 30 million internet users in  Iran;  the  appellant
              was unable to put forward any explanation why  his  "website"
              had been singled out or how  it  had  actually  come  to  the
              attention of the authorities.


         Error of law


      6. The grounds of appeal submit


             1. that the evidence produced by  the  appellant  -  facebook,
                YouTube, and [company redacted] distinguished the appellant
                both as an anti government activist in Iran and because  of
                sur place activities in the UK.
             2. that  the  judge  had  failed  to  consider  the  'on-line'
                evidence in the context of the background country  evidence
                relating to Iran and the use by the Iranian  Government  of
                'cyberpolice'.
             3. the facebook page and other on-line material  is  open  and
                available; a matter the judge failed to take account of.




      7. The judge refused to consider the material produced because it  was
         not translated. He appears to place great weight on the appellant's
         account that he had produced  these  materials  to  his  solicitors
         prior to the date of hearing and yet they were not  produced  until
         the hearing. Although there  is  no  obligation  upon  a  judge  to
         consider un-translated document (see rules 51 and 52 of the  Asylum
         and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005) the judge  is  not
         prohibited from such consideration. The documents produced were, on
         the face of them from the few words that were not in Farsi,  appear
         to relate to the appellant whose photograph appears. We  note  that
         an adjournment was not requested to enable  translation  but  given
         the clear relevance to the case  we  do  consider  that  the  judge
         should have considered them on the basis of  the  information  that
         was available and taken them into account in reaching his decision;
         at the very least he should have explained in  rather  more  detail
         why the lack of translation was  sufficient  to  ignore  them  when
         there were elements that would have been apparent and relevant.


      8. The judge refers to 30 million internet users in Iran but does  not
         appear to have recognised that an open facebook  account  does  not
         require such scrutiny as the judge appeared to consider  necessary,
         by  the  Iranian  authorities  to  identify  subversive   or   anti
         government activity.

      9. The judge in his determination did not address the appellant's  sur
         place activity despite this being  a  significant  element  of  the
         appeal; he referred and made findings upon the appellant's activity
         in Iran only. However we are satisfied that those findings made  by
         the judge have been infected by the lack of  consideration  of  the
         facebook material and the refusal  to  consider  the  TV  interview
         transcript.

     10. In these circumstances we are satisfied there  are  errors  of  law
         such that the decision be set aside to  be  remade.   None  of  the
         findings as regards the appellant's activity in Iran or his claimed
         sur place activity are to stand.

     11. Further directions are to follow.

          Conclusions:


      The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve  the
      making of an error on a point of law.


      We set aside the decision to be re-made.



                                    Date 30th April 2013 re-dated 13th May
        2013
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Coker
