
       [pic]

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

         SW (lesbians - HJ and HT applied) Jamaica CG [2011] UKUT 00251(IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House                          Determination sent to parties
On:  7 December 2009 and 30 November 2010                 on 24 June 2011


                                   Before

                      Senior Immigration Judge Gleeson
                      Senior Immigration Judge Spencer



                                   Between

                                     SW
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr S Chelvan, Counsel instructed by Wilson &
Co, Solicitors

For the Respondent:          Mr J Auburn, Counsel instructed by the
Treasury Solicitor


     1) Jamaica is a deeply homophobic society.  There is a high  level  of
        violence, and where a real risk of persecution or serious  harm  is
        established, the Jamaicans state offers lesbians no sufficiency  of
        protection.

     2) Lesbianism (actual or perceived) brings a risk of violence,  up  to
        and including 'corrective' rape and murder.

     3) Not all lesbians are at risk.  Those who  are  naturally  discreet,
        have  children  and/or  are  willing  to  present  a   heterosexual
        narrative for family or  societal  reasons  may  live  as  discreet
        lesbians without persecutory risk, provided that they are not doing
        so out of fear.

     4) Single women with no male partner or children risk being  perceived
        as lesbian, whether or not that is the case, unless they present  a
        heterosexual narrative and behave with discretion.

     5) Because the risks arise from perceived as well  as  actual  lesbian
        sexual orientation, internal relocation does  not  enhance  safety.
        Newcomers in rural communities will be the subject  of  speculative
        conclusions, derived both by asking them questions and by observing
        their lifestyle and unless they can show a heterosexual  narrative,
        they risk being identified as  lesbians.  Perceived  lesbians  also
        risk social exclusion (loss of  employment  or  being  driven  from
        their homes).

     6) A manly appearance is a risk factor, as is rejection of suitors  if
        a woman does not have a husband, boyfriend or child, or an  obvious
        and credible explanation for their absence.

     7) In general, younger women who are not yet settled may  be  at  less
        risk; the risk increases with age.  Women are  expected  to  become
        sexually active early and remain  so  into  their  sixties,  unless
        there is an obvious  reason  why  they  do  not  currently  have  a
        partner, for example, recent widowhood.

     8) Members of the social elite may be better  protected  because  they
        are able to live in gated communities where  their  activities  are
        not the subject of public  scrutiny.    Social  elite  members  are
        usually from known families, wealthy, lighter  skinned  and  better
        educated; often they are high-ranking professional people.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. This was the reconsideration before the AIT, with permission  granted  to
   the appellant, of the determination of the Tribunal dismissing her appeal
   against the decision of the Respondent to refuse her refugee recognition,
   humanitarian protection or leave to remain on human rights grounds on the
   basis of her sexual orientation (lesbian).  The appellant is  a  Jamaican
   citizen and the respondent has accepted throughout  that  she  is  indeed
   lesbian.

2. The determination of this appeal was not delivered before  the  abolition
   of the AIT on 15 February 2010. The reconsideration accordingly continued
   as an appeal before the Upper Tribunal, the Tribunal having  reached  its
   views on credibility immediately after the hearing in December 2009.

3. The appeal was identified as a potential country  guidance  case  on  the
   risk on return to lesbians in Jamaica.  The Tribunal heard evidence  from
   the appellant herself, from her current girlfriend, and from Mr O Hilaire
   Sobers, the appellant's country expert.  We also received into evidence a
   large bundle of country background analysis and documents.

4. Some of the legal and  factual  questions  dealt  with  in  the  parties'
   arguments are no longer  relevant  since  the  decision  of  the  Supreme
   Court's landmark decision on the proper approach to homosexuality  in  HJ
   (Iran) and  HT  (Cameroon)HHHTHT  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
   Department [2010] UKSC 31  (hereafter for clarity referred to as 'HJ  and
   HT') which overruled the 'reasonably tolerating living  discreetly'  test
   approved by the Court of Appeal in HJ (Iran) v Secretary of State for the
   Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ  172 ('HJ (Iran)').

5. The test in HJ and HT has now been  incorporated  into  the  respondent's
   Operational Guidance Note on Jamaica, as from January  2011.   There  has
   been no new Country of Origin Report on Jamaica since December 2009, that
   being the report which was before the Tribunal when we  first  heard  the
   appeal.

6. The appellant's oral evidence and that of her girlfriend is  set  out  in
   full at Appendix A, together with the country evidence of  Mr  O  Hilaire
   Sobers, and a summary of all the country evidence  and  documents  before
   us, updated where appropriate if  later  versions  of  the  document  now
   exist.  The documents before the Tribunal are listed in Appendix B.

Existing AIT country guidance

7.  The Tribunal's relevant Jamaica country guidance is to be  found  in  DW
   (Homosexual Men;  Persecution;  Sufficiency  of  Protection)  Jamaica  CG
   [2005]  UKAIT  00168  and  AB  (Protection,  criminal   gangs,   internal
   relocation) Jamaica CG [2007] UKAIT 00018.  The AIT's  existing  guidance
   does not deal with  lesbianism,  nor  is  there  clear  guidance  on  the
   protection  available  by  internal  relocation.   Both   cases   include
   consideration of written reports by Mr O Hilaire Sobers.

8. In DW, the AIT held that:

      "Men who are perceived to be  homosexual  and  have  for  this  reason
      suffered  persecution  in  Jamaica  are  likely  to  be  at  risk   of
      persecution on return. Men who are perceived to be homosexual and have
      not suffered past persecution  may  be  at  risk  depending  on  their
      particular circumstances. The Secretary of State conceded that,  as  a
      general rule, the authorities do not provide  homosexual  men  with  a
      sufficiency of protection. There are  likely  to  be  difficulties  in
      finding safety through internal relocation  but  in  this  respect  no
      general guidance is given."

   The respondent did not seek to argue in DW that  there  was  an  internal
   relocation option for male homosexuals.

9. In AB's case in 2007, the AIT held that:

      "The authorities in Jamaica are in general willing and able to provide
      effective protection. However, unless reasonably likely to be admitted
      into the Witness Protection programme, a person targeted by a criminal
      gang will not normally receive effective protection in his home area.

      Whether such a person will be able to achieve protection by relocating
      will depend on his particular circumstances, but the evidence does not
      support the view that internal relocation is an unsafe or unreasonable
      option in Jamaica in general: it is a matter for determination on  the
      facts of each individual case."

The HJ and HT test

10. Following the decision in HJ  and  HT,  when  considering  the  risk  on
   return, the Tribunal is now required to answer the following questions:

   a) whether it was satisfied on the evidence that the claimant was gay, or
      that he or she would be treated as gay by potential persecutors in the
      country of nationality; and if so
   b) whether it was satisfied on the available evidence that gay people who
      lived openly would be liable to persecution in the applicant's country
      of nationality; and if so
   c) what the individual claimant would do if he or she  were  returned  to
      that country.

11. Depending on the answers to those  questions,  the  following  questions
   arise  which  are  determinative  of   the   question   of   persecution,
   humanitarian protection or human rights breaches:

   a) If the Tribunal found that the claimant would in fact live openly  and
      thereby be exposed to a real risk of persecution, then he or  she  had
      established a well-founded fear of persecution,  even  if  they  could
      avoid the risk by living "discreetly";


   b) If, on the other hand, the tribunal concluded that the claimant  would
      in fact live discreetly and so avoid persecution, it must go on to ask
      itself why the claimant would do so.  That would affect the outcome of
      the appeal in the following ways:

           i) where a claimant  would  choose  to  live  discreetly  simply
              because that was how he or she wished to live, or because  of
              social pressures, for example not wanting to distress parents
              or embarrass friends, then an international protection  claim
              should be rejected:

                 "Social pressures of that kind do not amount to persecution
                 and the Convention does not offer protection against  them.
                 Such a person  has  no  well-founded  fear  of  persecution
                 because, for reasons that have nothing to do with any  fear
                 of persecution, he himself chooses to adopt a way  of  life
                 which means that he is not in fact liable to be  persecuted
                 because he is gay."
          ii) However, where a material  reason  for  the  claimant  living
              discreetly on return would be a fear of the persecution which
              would  follow  if  he  or  she  were  to  live  openly  as  a
              homosexual,   then   international   protection   should   be
              available:
                 "...other things being equal,  his  application  should  be
                 accepted.  Such  a  person  has  a  well-founded  fear   of
                 persecution. To reject his application on the  ground  that
                 he could avoid the persecution by living  discreetly  would
                 be to defeat the very right which the Convention exists  to
                 protect - his right to live freely and openly as a gay  man
                 without fear of persecution. By admitting him to asylum and
                 allowing him to live freely and openly as a gay man without
                 fear of persecution, the receiving state  gives  effect  to
                 that right by affording the applicant a surrogate  for  the
                 protection  from   persecution   which   his   country   of
                 nationality should have afforded him."

Procedural history and preliminary issues

The reconsideration application

12. The appellant's challenge to the Immigration Judge's  determination  was
   on three grounds:  first, that the Immigration Judge had made findings of
   fact and credibility at the civil standard of  balance  of  probabilities
   rather than the lower standard of  real  risk  or  reasonable  degree  of
   likelihood which is the appropriate standard of proof  for  international
   protection claims.  On that basis, the positive findings  stand  (because
   even to the lower standard, they would still  have  been  made)  but  the
   negative findings must be remade.

13. Second, in the light of the respondent's concession that no  sufficiency
   of protection was available for lesbians in Jamaica if  a  real  risk  of
   persecution or serious harm were  established,  the  appellant  contended
   that it was wrong in law to find that  "there is always  the  possibility
   of harm but no one is entitled to absolute protection".

14. Thirdly, the appellant disputed the  Immigration  Judge's  finding  that
   there had been no real change in  her  behaviour  and  lifestyle  in  the
   United Kingdom sufficient to bring about a risk of harm if she were to be
   returned to Jamaica.  Reconsideration was granted by SIJ  Latter  on  all
   grounds.

Material error of law

15. The material error of law part of the reconsideration took place  on  24
   September 2008 before SIJ Waumsley and his decision is appended  to  this
   determination at Appendix C.  For present purposes it  suffices  to  cite
   paragraph 9 of that decision:

      "9.   I therefore find that the Immigration Judge did make a  material
      error of law in reaching his decision [the standard of  proof  error],
      and accordingly that it cannot stand.  Having so concluded, and having
      notified the representatives for the parties that I  had  done  so,  I
      also informed them that I did not consider  it  appropriate  that  the
      appeal  should  continue  to  be  dealt  with  under  the  fast  track
      procedure.  I therefore made an order under rule 30(1) of  the  Asylum
      and Immigration Tribunal (Fast Track Procedure) Rules 2005 that  those
      Rules should cease to apply to the appeal."

16. That was the basis on which, in terms  of  the  appeal  process  of  the
   Upper Tribunal, the Tribunal proceeded to remake the determination.

Preliminary issues

17.  Two  preliminary  issues  arose.   First,  the  respondent  sought   an
   adjournment of the hearing, claiming that she had not been able  properly
   to prepare for it. She also sought to reopen the material  error  of  law
   decision.  Mr Auburn for the respondent, having not been present  at  any
   of the directions  hearings  over  the  previous  year,  also  sought  to
   challenge the selection of the appeal as  a  potential  country  guidance
   decision.

18. For the appellant, Mr Chelvan opposed any adjournment, arguing  that  at
   the stage 2 reconsideration hearing it was  too  late  to  challenge  the
   material error of law finding.   The appellant was ready for the hearing;
   Mr Sobers' report was in draft and he had arranged his  air  travel  from
   New York and hotel accommodation in order to attend the hearing and  give
   evidence in person.

19. The Tribunal refused the adjournment, observing that the material  error
   of law decision dated back to 24 September 2008, and that  the  case  had
   been the subject of country guidance directions at hearings on 8  October
   2008, 6 November 2008 and 24 November 2008:  on none of  those  occasions
   did the Respondent seek to reopen the  agreed  position  that  there  was
   indeed a material error of law in the determination in  relation  to  the
   standard of proof.  The Respondent had therefore had more than a year  to
   prepare for the hearing, which would proceed as listed.

20. For the avoidance of doubt, even had Mr  Blundell  not  agreed  in  2008
   that there was a material error of law in the determination, the Tribunal
   would certainly have reached the same conclusion:  it is an obvious error
   of law to determine an international protection Convention case (refugee,
   humanitarian protection, or Article 3 ECHR) to the higher civil  standard
   of balance of probabilities, as this Immigration Judge did.

21.  The  second  preliminary  issue  concerned  what,  if   anything,   the
   respondent was to be taken to have conceded.   The concession history was
   very similar to that considered by the Court of Appeal in NR (Jamaica)  v
   Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ  856,  also  a
   Jamaican lesbian appeal.  The factual acceptance that the appellant is  a
   Jamaican citizen and a lesbian stands unchallenged, save for questions as
   to her likely behaviour on return (discreet or open).

22. At  paragraph 12 of NR,  the Court of Appeal said:

      "12.  ... the Tribunal may in its discretion permit a concession to be
      withdrawn if in its view there is good reason in all the circumstances
      for that course to be taken. Its discretion is wide. Its exercise will
      depend  on  the  particular  circumstances  of  the  case  before  it.
      Prejudice to the  applicant  is  a  significant  feature.  So  is  its
      absence. Its absence does not however  mean  that  an  application  to
      withdraw a concession will  invariably  be  granted.  Bad  faith  will
      almost certainly be fatal to an application to withdraw a  concession.
      In the final analysis, what is important is that as a  result  of  the
      exercise of its discretion the Tribunal is enabled to decide the  real
      areas of dispute on their merits so as to reach a result which is just
      both to the appellant and the Secretary of State."

23.  In  the  light  of  that  guidance,  we  considered  the   respondent's
   concessions.  In the present appeal, the Respondent's adjournment request
   letter stated that:

      "... The Secretary of State  accepts  that  Jamaica  is  an  extremely
      homophobic society; and that for a person to be openly gay in  Jamaica
      would attract a real risk of persecution."

24. In a letter served early  on  the  morning  of  the  hearing,  Mr  Scott
   Richardson, who has conduct of the appeal  for  the  Treasury  Solicitor,
   narrowed that concession to:

      "...The  Respondent  accepts  that  Jamaica  is  a  deeply  homophobic
      society; and it is likely that  a  woman  who  behaves  on  return  to
      Jamaica  in  a  manner  that  is  openly  gay  might  attract  adverse
      attention. However, there is no evidence that lesbians generally  face
      serious ill-treatment in Jamaica. ...

      8.    Further, the Respondent certainly never intended to  go  further
           (by way of concession) than that established  for  Jamaican  gay
           men in DW, where the AIT held:


           [77] "... A man who is not thought  to  be  homosexual,  perhaps
           because he has hidden his sexuality, is  not  likely  to  be  at
           risk. There will  be  no  perception  of  homosexuality  and  no
           history"

           and concluding -


           [79] "... A man who is perceived to  be  homosexual  and,  as  a
           consequence, has suffered past persecution is, unless there  has
           been a material change in his circumstances,  likely  to  be  at
           risk of persecution ... A man who is perceived to be  homosexual
           but has not suffered  past  persecution  may  also  be  at  risk
           depending  on  his  particular  circumstances   including,   for
           example, the extent to which it is believed he suffered  threats
           before  departure  and  how   he   will   behave   on   return."
                            [Emphasis added]"

25. In addition, and on advice,  Ms  Alice  Holmes,  the  Senior  Presenting
   Officer (with  Counsel's  advice)  clarified  the  concession  which  the
   respondent wished to make on sufficiency of protection  for  lesbians  in
   Jamaica:

      "[During the hearing] ...the Secretary of State conceded  that,  if  a
      real  risk  of  treatment  amounting  to  persecution   were   to   be
      established, that there would be no sufficiency of protection.  ...SIJ
      Gleeson asked if this could be confirmed by fax before the end of  the
      day.  I now write  to  confirm  this,  noting  what  is  said  in  the
      Secretary of State's Operational Guidance Note at paragraph 3.7.16 -


           "Where a lesbian is able to establish a real risk  of  treatment
           amounting to persecution or Article 3 treatment, sufficiency  of
           protection cannot be relied on."

26. The respondent's primary contention was that there was no evidence  that
   lesbians generally faced a real risk of serious ill-treatment in Jamaica,
   despite the admitted risk of "adverse attention"  to  open  or  perceived
   lesbians.

Preserved factual findings

27. Having regard to the application of the higher civil standard of  proof,
   and after discussion with the parties,  the  following  factual  findings
   were treated as preserved:

     i) The appellant is a lesbian and a Jamaican citizen;

    ii) The appellant came to no direct harm in Jamaica  before  coming  to
        the United Kingdom, enjoying a  discreet  social  life  with  other
        lesbian  women  and  several  covert  lesbian   relationships.   In
        particular, the single  incident  at  a  nightclub  on   which  the
        appellant relied did not lead to any actual harm to her or  any  of
        her discreet lesbian companions;

   iii) In Jamaica, the appellant had the support of her  brother  and  her
        former boyfriend.

    iv) Her employer had discovered her discreet lesbianism  and  that  had
        caused no difficulty;

     v)  The  appellant  has   now   experienced   several   open   lesbian
        relationships in the United Kingdom,  none  of  which  amounted  to
        family life within the meaning of Article 8 ECHR; and that

    vi) The appellant is educated, sophisticated and articulate.

28. To that  may  be  added  the  appellant's  professional  position  as  a
   recently qualified accountant, and her physical appearance.  She attended
   the Tribunal and we were able to see that her style of dress was feminine
   rather than 'manly', and her skin is fairly dark.

29. The areas where negative findings were made and the  Tribunal  needs  to
   remake any relevant part of the factual matrix were:

     a) the freedom with which the appellant had been able to  express  her
        lesbian orientation in Jamaica before coming to the United Kingdom,
        and the bearing that had on  her  likely  ability  to  express  her
        lesbianism openly on return;
     b) the relevance of her personal appearance to  any  risk  related  to
        perception of lesbian orientation;
     c) whether it was reasonable to expect her to return to  living  as  a
        discreet lesbian in Jamaica; and in general,
     d) The risk on return and the adjustments to her lifestyle  which  the
        appellant might have to make to achieve safety.

30. Points (c) and (d) are now questions of mixed fact and law.   Point  (b)
   was not pursued at the hearing or in any of  the  skeleton  arguments  or
   submissions.

Evidence of appellant and her girlfriend

31. For present purposes, the following are the  relevant  features  of  the
   factual matrix.  The appellant is a lesbian from Jamaica  who,  while  in
   Jamaica, lived with her grandfather, had three boyfriends  (one  of  whom
   remained a good friend) and a number of  discreet  lesbian  relationships
   brokered through an internet chatroom specific to lesbians called  'Women
   for Women'  (W4W).   She  came  to  no  harm  by  reason  of  her  sexual
   orientation while in Jamaica. Most of her relationships were conducted at
   night in discreet places; she had a long relationship with the wife of  a
   pilot who was often conveniently away, on that basis.

32. On three occasions, W4W organised outings to bars.  On the  third,  they
   were identified as possible lesbians because they were  dancing  together
   rather than with men, and the DJ began  playing  openly  hostile  popular
   songs (of which there are many in Jamaica), while  the  men  in  the  bar
   began offering to 'sort them out' in a manner which made it  quite  plain
   that they were considering rape.  The women left  the  bar  rapidly,  and
   fortunately the men did not pursue them.

33. The appellant took a number of holidays with  her  two  sisters  in  the
   United States, where  there  was  more  freedom,  returning  to  discreet
   lesbianism in Jamaica each time, but  suffered  clinical  depression  and
   stress, the reason for which she was  unable  to  disclose  to  her  male
   doctor.

34. In 2003, the appellant came to the  United  Kingdom  as  an  accountancy
   student, a qualification she has now obtained.  She also came  out  as  a
   lesbian, and has had  a  series  of  fairly  short  but  intense  lesbian
   relationships with women here, two of whom have  been  prepared  to  give
   evidence at her asylum hearings.  The appellant  has  been  a  member  of
   Black Lesbians UK (BLUK) and has also taken part in a Gay Pride march.

35. For a time in the United Kingdom, the appellant lived in  a  house  with
   two Jamaican men, without difficulty until she brought a girlfriend  home
   for the weekend.  There was a row:   one  of  the  men  smashed  all  the
   crockery on the basis that the appellant had polluted it  and  thereafter
   she had to buy and use separate crockery.  She never brought a girlfriend
   home overnight after that, but stayed a further five months in  the  flat
   because, on reflection, she considered  that  there  was  sufficiency  of
   protection for lesbians in the United Kingdom, and further, that  due  to
   the precarious immigration status of at least one of the men, they  would
   not risk her calling the police.

36. The appellant has since been dispersed by NASS to Stoke on  Trent.   She
   does not feel at risk there or indeed anywhere  in  the  United  Kingdom,
   because there is legal and police support here. She finds it rather  dull
   and tends to meet her girlfriend in London rather than Stoke, where  they
   go to bars, out to dinner, and dancing together and with  other  friends.
   She stays in with her girlfriends too, just watching television and being
   normal.  She meets their families and has no  difficulty  being  accepted
   for who she is.

37. The appellant was adamant that if returned  to  Jamaica  she  would  not
   resume living discreetly, because after six years (now over seven  years)
   she was not the same person; she would also not be prepared to  risk  her
   depression returning.  For both those reasons, the appellant  would  only
   date someone who was prepared to be seen with her in public, whatever the
   risks, on the same basis as in the United Kingdom.

38. When it was put to her on behalf of the respondent  that  there  existed
   no other open lesbians in Jamaica  with  whom  she  could  enter  into  a
   relationship, that did not change her view.  The appellant was  asked  in
   cross-examination whether she would be discreet if she were  on  a  brief
   holiday  in  Saudi  Arabia  with  a  girlfriend  (though  why  she  might
   contemplate going there was unclear), or walking on a beach in the United
   Kingdom where there had recently  been  a  homophobic  attack.   In  both
   cases,  the  appellant  stated  that  she  would  still  behave   openly,
   mentioning the  sufficiency  of  protection  in  the  United  Kingdom  in
   relation to walking on a beach where there had been a  recent  homophobic
   attack.

39. The appellant and her current girlfriend  both  said  that  if  she  was
   returned that would end their relationship, since the appellant would not
   expect her girlfriend to travel  to  such  a  dangerous  place,  and  the
   girlfriend would not go,  particularly  as  she  has  a  young  child  to
   consider.

Mr Sobers' evidence

40. Again, Mr Sobers' evidence is set out in full  in  Appendix  A  to  this
   determination.  For present purposes,  there  were  three  areas  of  his
   evidence which we need to consider.

41. Mr Auburn for the respondent argued that Mr Sobers  was  not  impartial,
   and that was put to him in cross-examination.  Mr Auburn pointed  out  to
   Mr Sobers that he was a lifelong human rights campaigner who now did  not
   live in Jamaica as a result of death threats received in 2001, and  whose
   articles in the  'Jamaica  Gleaner'  newspaper  criticised  the  Jamaican
   government in vigorous terms incompatible with impartiality as a witness.
    Mr Sobers responded that his human rights career did not mean  he  could
   not give impartial evidence:  indeed, the Jamaican government had thought
   sufficiently highly of him to appoint him a judge, and the  UKBA  Country
   of Origin unit had asked him for input to the Country of Origin Report on
   the question of gang violence, at short notice.  That report,  which  was
   in our bundle, did not deal with homosexuality, but that does not  appear
   to have been part of his remit.  As  to  the  death  threats,  Mr  Sobers
   returned regularly to Jamaica for professional reasons, and also to visit
   his mother who still lives there, and again, he  did  not  consider  that
   those threats removed his ability to assist the Tribunal on the questions
   now before it.

42. Mr Sobers gave evidence on the position of women  in  Jamaican  society.
   They were expected to become sexually active very  young,  with  children
   coming along as no surprise, but only 20% of women ever  married.   Women
   were expected to have men around, or children by  them,  or  both,  until
   late in life.   Mr Sobers  described  this  as  presenting  or  having  a
   'heterosexual narrative'.

43. If a woman did not present a heterosexual narrative in that  way,  there
   would be concern, but while she was still a student, or looking after  an
   elderly relative, and was still young and thus not yet 'settled'  in  her
   life, people would not necessarily draw  adverse  conclusions  about  her
   sexuality.  However, that protection was unlikely to outlast her twenties
   (Mr Sobers' evidence was not precise on this point) and as a woman became
   older, if she was living alone  with  no  man  'buzzing  around'  and  no
   children, suspicions would be raised.

44. Mr Sobers explained that Jamaican hostility to  homosexuality  arose  in
   part from a literal interpretation of passages in the bible at  Leviticus
   18:22 ('Thou shalt not  lie  with  mankind,  as  with  womankind:  it  is
   abomination') and/or Leviticus 20:13 ('If a man also lie with mankind, as
   he lieth with a woman, both of them have committed an  abomination:  they
   shall surely be put to death. Their blood  shall  be  upon  them').   The
   situation was compounded by  the  slave  heritage  in  Jamaica,  and  the
   breeding of child slaves from female slaves.  There was a persistent myth
   in Jamaica that lesbians could be 'cured' by raping them which was  often
   referred to in popular songs and on occasion acted out by men.

45. Mr Sobers also explained that Jamaica was a gossipy  community  where  a
   woman new to an area might well  be  asked  questions  about  her  family
   arrangements, but equally, local people might  draw  conclusions  without
   asking those questions, based on her behaviour.  It was quite possible to
   be heterosexual and to be thought homosexual  if  no  men  were  'buzzing
   around' and the woman had no children.   Mr Sobers gave the example of  a
   goddaughter of his, in  her  early  20s,  who  was  already  causing  her
   relatives concern because she had no interested men or boyfriends.   This
   part of his evidence became rather confused in cross-examination but  the
   thrust of his evidence was clear.

46. When asked about the consequences of being a lone woman, Mr Sobers  said
   that there would naturally be approaches from local men if  a  woman  did
   not appear to have a man or men friends.   The  reaction  if  a  man  was
   rebuffed was unpredictable:  if the woman was lucky, he  might  shrug  it
   off, but if not, the response could be extremely violent.  The man  might
   also start  rumours  of  lesbianism  leading  other  men  to  attack  the
   appellant or commit 'corrective' rape.

47. Mr Sobers identified a reduced  risk  for  what  he  called  the  social
   elites:  wealthy, professionally  educated,  light  skinned  people  from
   'known' families, living for the most part  in  gated  communities  where
   they could control what was known of  their  comings  and  goings.   Such
   people if they were gay were not absolutely safe but they were  certainly
   safer than the rest of the lesbian, gay, bisexual and transsexual  (LGBT)
   community.  The appellant, despite her new accountancy qualification, was
   not a member of that group and  her  salary  would  not  even  cover  the
   mortgage on the properties in those communities.   His understanding  was
   that she was not from a known family, nor particularly  highly  educated.
   Only the very richest most senior accountants would become  part  of  the
   elite, if they were not from a known family.

Submissions

48. After the oral evidence  had  been  taken,  it  was  agreed,  given  the
   lateness of the hour (just before 4  pm)  that  the  parties  would  make
   written submissions, to supplement the skeleton arguments they had filed.
    In November 2010, the Upper Tribunal relisted the appeal to  enable  the
   parties to make any additional oral submissions but both parties  elected
   to rely on the documents,  evidence  and  submissions  already  provided,
   which at this stage included an HJ and HT submission by  Mr  Chelvan  for
   the appellant. The respondent did not make any additional submissions  in
   the light of HJ (Iran) although she was given  the  opportunity  (and  an
   extension of time) to do so.

49. We now summarise the legal and evidential submissions the parties  made,
   to the extent to which they remain relevant to the issue of the  risk  on
   return to Jamaica for lesbians.

Respondent's submissions

50. Mr Auburn's arguments both before  and  after  the  hearing  were  based
   exclusively  on  HJ  (Iran)  since  the  respondent  did  not  take   the
   opportunity to make further submissions based on the new test set by  the
   Supreme Court in HJ and HT.  Much of the respondent's factual  and  legal
   argument falls in the light of that judgment.

51. For the respondent, the main passages in Mr Auburn's  skeleton  argument
   are found at paragraphs 11-16:

      "11.  The respondent agrees that the relevant inquiry concerns how the
      appellant will in fact behave if returned to Jamaica. ...

      14.   The respondent acknowledges the relevance  of  perception.   The
      issue of perception is closely related to the issue of discretion. The
      respondent's case is that as a  matter  of  fact  the  appellant  will
      conduct her personal/romantic affairs in a discreet  manner.   If  she
      does so then this is fundamental to how she is likely to be  perceived
      by the general public.

      15.   It is more appropriate to address this issue further  after  the
      evidence, rather than before.

      16.   [How A will behave on return] is a question of fact  which  will
      be addressed after evidence."

52. The respondent acknowledged that lesbians faced  an  increased  risk  of
   discrimination in Jamaica, but noted that lesbianism was not unlawful and
   asserted that an internal relocation option existed  should  difficulties
   occur.   That position was reflected in  the  December  2009  Country  of
   Origin Report and in the then current Operational  Guidance  Note,  which
   has subsequently been substantially revised in the light of  HJ  and  HT.
   The latest version of the Operational Guidance Note was issued on  3  May
   2011.

53. In relation to Article  8  ECHR,  Mr  Auburn  argued  that  this  was  a
   'foreign' not a 'domestic' private and family life case and relied on the
   human rights element of the respondent's original letter of refusal.   He
   relied upon the European Court of Human Rights decision  in  F  v  United
   Kingdom (Application no. 17341/03)  [2004]  ECHR  723,  an  admissibility
   decision in which the court stated that

      "on a purely pragmatic basis, it cannot be required that an  expelling
      Contracting State only return an alien to a country which is  in  full
      and effective enforcement of all the rights and freedoms  set  out  in
      the Convention."

54. Mr Auburn contended  that  if  returned,  the  appellant  would  in  all
   likelihood live in Jamaica discreetly; that if she did so she  would  not
   be at a real risk of persecution; and that doing so would  be  reasonably
   tolerable.  On that  basis,  he  submitted  that  the  appeal  should  be
   dismissed.

55. On  5  December  2009,  Mr  Auburn  produced  a  supplementary  skeleton
   argument  dealing  with  the  concession  question  and  the  'reasonably
   tolerable' point which has now been settled by the Supreme Court  in  HJ.
   Nothing in the supplementary skeleton remains  relevant  to  the  country
   guidance issue.

56. In Mr Auburn's  closing  submissions,  after  setting  out  the  factual
   background and relevant law, he  analysed  the  evidence  of  Mr  Sobers,
   arguing that while he was 'an  impressive  individual  in  his  work  and
   career', Mr Sobers could not properly be  put  forward  as  an  impartial
   expert upon whose opinion evidence the Tribunal could rely, in the  light
   of his long career  as  a  human  rights  activist  and  campaigner,  his
   vigorously expressed criticism of the Jamaican  government,  in  language
   such as to call into question his objectivity, and the death  threats  he
   received in 2001, as a result of which he no  longer  lived  in  Jamaica,
   which Mr Auburn submitted must also have made it impossible for him to be
   objective about Jamaican government and society.   Mr  Auburn  relied  on
   paragraph  18.145  of  Macdonald's  Immigration  Law  and  Practice  (7th
   edition, 2008) , in particular the following passage:

      "In Slimani, a starred Tribunal approved the  guidance  given  in  The
      Ikarian Reefer that to be relied  on,  the  expert  needs  to  provide
      independent assistance to the Tribunal, must not assume the role of an
      advocate, and needs to specify the facts on which his or  her  opinion
      is based..."

57. Mr Auburn contended that no weight should be given to  the  evidence  Mr
   Sobers had given,  by  reason  of  his  partiality  and  his  failure  to
   appreciate that partiality.  In the light of that partiality, even having
   regard to Mr Sobers' extensive knowledge of events in Jamaica,  that  the
   Tribunal could not have confidence that  he  had  presented  a  full  and
   balanced  picture,  rather  than  selectively  emphasising  facts   which
   supported his position, omitting those which did not.

58. Mr Auburn contended that Mr Sobers ought to have disclosed his  previous
   contribution to the Country of Origin Report  on  Jamaica  and  that  his
   failure to comment on gay and lesbian  matters  in  that  commentary  was
   unexplained, which  the  Tribunal  ought  to  find  unsatisfactory.    Mr
   Sobers' evidence on LGBT matters should be regarded as inconsistent  with
   the other country evidence and with the appellant's own experience before
   coming to the United Kingdom.  Mr Auburn pointed  to  the  lack  of  harm
   occurring to the appellant and her lesbian friends during the period when
   she lived in Jamaica.

59. Mr Auburn submitted that when she last  lived  in  Jamaica,  during  her
   late teens and twenties, her three brief male relationships and  lack  of
   regular male visitors did not amount to a 'heterosexual  narrative',  yet
   she had not come to any harm and nor had her friends, none  of  whom  had
   male partners.

60. Mr Auburn asked us to dismiss Mr Sobers' evidence that there was a  risk
   of perceived lesbianism causing difficulty even for a woman who  did  not
   have a homosexual orientation, on the basis that there was nothing in the
   country evidence put forward to support that contention.  He argued  that
   press reports of harm to women who were lesbians should  be  regarded  as
   instances of Jamaica's high  general  crime  rate  or  the  facts  having
   emerged locally.   He  noted  that  the  appellant  had  apparently  been
   preserved from  enquiry  by  living  down  a  long  drive  and  with  her
   grandfather, and further, that after returning  from  her  trips  to  the
   United States, there did not appear to have been any fresh local  enquiry
   as to her sexuality.

61. Mr  Auburn  criticised  the  validity  of  Mr  Sobers'  observations  in
   relation to the appellant's likely behaviour on return, on the basis that
   he was not in a position to comment as to whether she would  have  female
   visitors only, or a mixture of males and females, and if so how many.  Mr
   Auburn argued that Mr Sobers' lack of knowledge in these  respects  would
   impair his assessment of how she would be perceived on  return,  and  the
   level of risk entailed.

62. Mr Auburn asked the Tribunal to treat parts of the appellant's  evidence
   as  lacking  in  credibility.   The  Tribunal  should  not   credit   the
   appellant's evidence in response to the hypothetical questions  which  he
   had put to her (strolling along a British  beach  arm  in  arm  with  her
   partner at a spot  where  she  was  informed  there  had  been  a  recent
   homophobic attack, or a brief stopover with a lesbian  partner  in  Saudi
   Arabia)  and should find that the appellant would, if truthful, have said
   that in those circumstances she would exercise discretion, in  the  light
   of the risk to her from any alternative conduct.

63. The Tribunal should also reject the appellant's account  of  the  broken
   crockery incident.  She had chosen  to  live  in  a  council  house  with
   Jamaican men, despite the risk they posed in the light of her  lifestyle,
   and she continued to live there even after their reaction to her bringing
   a woman home overnight.   Further, the appellant had not  mentioned  this
   incident when interviewed in August  2008,  just  four  months  after  it
   occurred.

64. Mr Auburn's submissions on the law come to this:  that although an  open
   lesbian may attract adverse attention in Jamaica, such attention was  not
   at a level which engaged international protection, in that  there  is  no
   consistent pattern of ill-treatment.   On the facts, the Tribunal  should
   find that the appellant would return to living  discreetly,  despite  her
   evidence to the contrary; in her asylum interview she had asserted a fear
   of people finding out about her sexuality in Jamaica; she had stated that
   she would not take her present partner to Jamaica because they would  not
   be able to have a relationship in public; and that in  any  event,  there
   were no other open lesbians  in  Jamaica  with  whom  she  could  have  a
   relationship.

65. If the Tribunal felt it necessary to deal with Article  8  ECHR  in  the
   'domestic' sense, despite Mr Chelvan's indication that no  such  argument
   was relied upon, Mr Auburn noted  that  the  relationship  in  which  the
   appellant currently was involved was a very short-lived one and had  been
   commenced at a time when the appellant's status in the United Kingdom was
   tenuous.

66. The appellant had exercised  discretion  while  previously  in  Jamaica,
   largely because the  cultural  intolerance  of  homosexuals,  but  partly
   because of the need to respect the privacy of her married lover.

67. Mr Auburn accepted that the broader country  evidence  from  newspapers,
   human rights organisations  and  so  on  in  the  background  bundle  did
   indicate the  existence  of  attacks  on  lesbians  in  Jamaica,  but  he
   contended that  they  were  infrequent,  and  that  there  was  often  no
   explanation why the incident had occurred or whether it  related  to  the
   raising of a perception  or  suspicion  in  the  local  community,  or  a
   particular incident as a result of which an individual was labelled as  a
   lesbian, rather than the overall very high  crime  rate  in  Jamaica.  He
   contended that there was no clear understanding of the process  by  which
   individual lesbians might come to adverse attention.  He  relied  on  the
   Tribunal's analysis in DW as set out in the judicial head note:

      "Men who are perceived to be  homosexual  and  have  for  this  reason
      suffered  persecution  in  Jamaica  are  likely  to  be  at  risk   of
      persecution on return. Men who are perceived to be homosexual and have
      not suffered past persecution  may  be  at  risk  depending  on  their
      particular circumstances. The Secretary of State conceded that,  as  a
      general rule, the authorities do not provide  homosexual  men  with  a
      sufficiency of protection. There are  likely  to  be  difficulties  in
      finding safety through internal relocation  but  in  this  respect  no
      general guidance is given."

68. Where there had been no past persecution, the effect of DW was that  the
   risk on return for any actual or perceived homosexual was a  question  of
   fact for the Tribunal. That analysis, contended Mr Auburn, was applicable
   also to lesbians, and on these  facts,  the  present  appellant  had  not
   demonstrated a real risk  of  persecution  or  serious  harm  on  return.
   Therefore, there was no need to address the internal relocation  question
   for this appellant. Even in cases where a lesbian appellant was  able  to
   establish a real risk of persecution or serious harm in her home area, Mr
   Auburn contended that internal relocation  within  Jamaica  would  assist
   her.  Mr Auburn asked the Tribunal to reject Mr Sobers'  suggestion  that
   in these days of  modern  communication,  internal  relocation  was  less
   effective, and also his reliance  on  the  general  high  crime  rate  in
   Jamaica.

69. On the question of internal relocation, which was not settled in DW,  Mr
   Auburn argued that there was no evidence in the country  materials  about
   lesbians whose problems had followed them to another area after  internal
   relocation and that if such  evidence  existed,  the  Jamaica  Forum  for
   Lesbians, All-Sexuals and Gays (J-FLAG)  or  other  human  rights  groups
   would have mentioned it.

70. In conclusion, Mr Auburn contended that there was  no  evidence  of  the
   existence of any other open Jamaican lesbians  with  whom  the  appellant
   could have an open relationship.  The danger to discreet lesbians was  of
   "isolated and infrequent incidents which fall short of the threshold  for
   persecution". The test for  persecution  was  a  high  one,  requiring  a
   'consistent pattern' of  ill-treatment  and  the  evidence  from  Jamaica
   amounted to no more than one of isolated and infrequent incidents falling
   short of that threshold. Lesbians generally would  therefore  not  be  at
   risk on return to Jamaica.   Individual lesbians might have circumstances
   particular to them which gave rise to  a  localised  risk,  but  lesbians
   generally  were  not  at  risk  because,  in  his  submission,  they  all
   maintained discretion as to their sexual identity.

Appellant's submissions

71. For the appellant, so far as relevant, Mr Chelvan's  skeleton  arguments
   and submissions raised the following issues and matters.  He reminded the
   Tribunal of the appellant's evidence, both at her asylum interview and in
   the hearings, that she had now fully  'come  out'  as  a  lesbian,  since
   leaving Jamaica and entering the United Kingdom.  She could not return to
   living discreetly in Jamaica, and it was unreasonable to expect her to do
   so, especially as  it  would  aggravate  her  depressive  illness.    The
   appellant was a sexually active woman who would form  relationships  with
   women and there was risk amounting to persecution for lesbian  Jamaicans,
   ranging from verbal abuse and threats through to rape and  abuse  by  men
   who thought that they could 'convert' them to heterosexuality.

72. Mr Chelvan submitted that perception of lesbianism, rather  than  actual
   lesbianism, was the relevant test.  The appellant could not return to her
   home area where her mother lived: her mother had married a pastor and  it
   would not be safe or appropriate.  It  would  embarrass  her  mother  and
   possibly put at risk her mother's new marriage.  The appellant would need
   to opt for internal relocation and, in an area where she  was  not  known
   personally, would be assessed as a stranger.  Mr Chelvan's  argument  was
   that without any males in her life, the appellant would be  perceived  as
   lesbian, no matter how discreet her behaviour, and would therefore be  at
   risk.

73. In his supplementary skeleton, Mr Chelvan confirmed (paragraph  4)  that
   no freestanding  Article  8  ECHR  right  was  being  advanced  in  these
   proceedings,  other  than  in  relation  to  the  interference  with  the
   appellant's right to respect for her private and family life on return by
   being required to resume living discreetly.  Mr Chelvan submitted that to
   require the appellant to act with discretion was to require the appellant
   to present a "lying" heterosexual female lifestyle to evade a persecutory
   perception of her.  The other matters in the supplementary skeleton  have
   already been dealt with in this determination.

74. In his closing submissions, responding to those of  the  respondent,  Mr
   Chelvan resisted the  suggestion  that  a  negative  credibility  finding
   should be made on the appellant's  core  evidence,  or  that  Mr  Sobers'
   evidence should be deemed unreliable and partial. The  Tribunal  had  not
   accepted a reverse Demirkaya argument that lack of  previous  persecution
   was determinative of future safety (see DW at paragraphs 14 and 20 and AB
   at paragraphs 163-164).

75. Lesbians, as women and lesbians, suffered  a  double  bind  of  expected
   norms from which they were protected in Jamaica  only  where  they  could
   demonstrate what Mr Sobers had described as a  'heterosexual  narrative'.
   Mr Chelvan asked the Tribunal to consider  the  UNHCR  Guidance  Note  of
   November 2008:

      "Lesbian women often experience harm as a result of the  interrelation
      of their sexual orientation and  gender,  since  women's  position  in
      society is generally less powerful than that  of  men.   Lesbians  are
      even more likely than gay men to feel obliged to conform outwardly  to
      family and social expectations, for instance, by marrying  someone  of
      the opposite sex.  In societies where women are regarded primarily  as
      the  wives  (of  men)  and  mothers,  lesbians  may  be  isolated  and
      invisible."

76. Further, he cited commentary by Dauvergne and  Millbank  in  an  article
   entitled 'Applicants S396/2002 and S395/2002, a gay refugee  couple  from
   Bangladesh' 25 Sydney Law Review 97 [2003]:

      "Is this normal life?   Would  the  court  for  example  hold  that  a
      heterosexual person's fundamental human rights were not infringed  if,
      'for safety's sake' they had to pretend to be gay  in  every  area  of
      their professional, personal and social life, in every  public  place,
      by not living with their partner of choice, never showing affection to
      their partner or identifying themselves as  a  couple  to  friends  or
      family, and only pursuing their heterosexual lifestyle by having swift
      and furtive sex with strangers or prostitutes in a  public  park.   Is
      such desperate secrecy and deception, undertaken in fear, for  months,
      years, or decades, a normal life?"

77. Dealing with  Mr  Sobers'  evidence,  Mr  Chelvan  drew  the  Tribunal's
   attention to earlier judicial assessments of his country expertise and to
   the respondent's acceptance of his honesty and his knowledge relating  to
   sexual identity asylum claims.  The  respondent  had  not  submitted  any
   country background evidence of her own  which  contradicted  that  of  Mr
   Sobers, and his report in  the  present  appeal  was  both  balanced  and
   sourced.  Mr Chelvan directed the Tribunal  to  other  country  documents
   which were supportive of Mr Sobers' evidence and invited the Tribunal  to
   find that in Jamaica:

           a)  lesbians  must  adopt  a  heterosexual  narrative  to  avoid
              persecution;
           b) violence occurs in the private sphere;
           c) persecution occurs whatever relative safety a  lesbian  might
              previously have enjoyed through 'undetection'.

78. Mr Sobers' evidence, corroborated by other reports in the bundle as  set
   out in the  submissions,  was  supportive  of  the  appellant's  personal
   history in Jamaica before she came to the United Kingdom.  Mr Sobers  was
   not in a position to decide how the appellant  would  behave  on  return;
   that was a matter for the Tribunal.

79. Dealing next with the appellant's evidence, Mr  Chelvan  submitted  that
   she had been found credible by the First-tier Tribunal judge  and  should
   be found truthful  and  honest  by  the  present  Tribunal.   The  broken
   crockery incident should not be held against her; the appellant had  felt
   relatively safe on reflection, because  in  the  United  Kingdom,  unlike
   Jamaica, there was  sufficiency  of  protection  for  lesbians,  open  or
   discreet.

80. The appellant's evidence  as  to  her  likely  behaviour  on  return  to
   Jamaica had been very clear. She had been away from Jamaica for six years
   and had now 'come out' in the  United  Kingdom  as  gay.   She  described
   herself firmly as an open lesbian and was  not  prepared  to  modify  her
   behaviour on return:  the Tribunal should find  that  to  be  honest  and
   credible evidence.  The Tribunal should find that the appellant would not
   act discreetly.  Her evidence had  been  consistent  throughout  on  that
   point and extremely firm.    The Tribunal should accept as  credible  the
   appellant's evidence  that  were  she  to  adapt  and  return  to  living
   discreetly the appellant  would  be  doing  so  out  of  fear,  would  be
   extremely stressed and that her depression would be aggravated.

81. Applying the proposed factual matrix to the legal framework, Mr  Chelvan
   submitted that there was no need for the appellant to show  a  consistent
   pattern of ill-treatment of discreet lesbians since the need to return to
   discretion for safety's sake was itself persecutory, following HJ and HT,
   especially since such discretion would need to endure for the rest of  an
   appellant's life.   Sexual identity was more than just  conduct;  it  was
   not a question of  public  sex  acts,  but  rather,  of  the  appellant's
   relationships  with  women  being  conducted  openly.     It   would   be
   intolerable for this appellant to conduct them in any other way,  despite
   the risks that would entail.

82. Finally, dealing with  the  risk  to  Jamaican  lesbians  generally,  Mr
   Chelvan relied principally on his skeleton argument.   There would  be  a
   real risk in her home area (Montego Bay) but also a risk in any  area  of
   internal relocation. A person arriving in a new area in Jamaica would  be
   assessed  by  the  local  population  and  conclusions  drawn  about  her
   orientation, both from what she said when asked, and also from  what  she
   did or did not do.  The risk was therefore  present  throughout  Jamaica.
   Mr Chelvan asked the Tribunal to allow the appeal.

83. In response to the Tribunal's directions for further  submissions  after
   HJ  and  HT  Mr  Chelvan  adopted  his  skeleton  arguments  and  closing
   submissions, noting that in HJ and HT, the Supreme Court had rejected the
   'reasonably tolerable living discreetly' test.  The  appellant's  lesbian
   sexual orientation was not disputed; the  respondent  had  conceded  that
   open or perceived lesbians might attract risk; all  lesbians  in  Jamaica
   should be considered as living discreetly, if they did so, by reason of a
   fear of persecution for  their  sexual  orientation  and  therefore,  all
   Jamaican lesbians should be considered as entitled to refugee status  and
   human rights protection under Article 3 ECHR.

84. Mr Chelvan relied upon paragraphs 19.28 ff of the  respondent's  Country
   of Origin Report for December 2009, which he contended did  not  indicate
   that the problem for Jamaican lesbians was one of isolated incidents  but
   a consistent pattern of serious harm, including rape and  murder,  simply
   for being lesbian.  In MD (Women) Ivory Coast CG [2010]  UKUT  215  (IAC)
   the Upper Tribunal had held that Operational Guidance Notes were merely a
   policy statement and should not be regarded as country evidence.

85. The appellant was not a person who  was  naturally  discreet  about  her
   sexuality, as contemplated by the final question in  HJ  (Iran).  If  she
   were to live discreetly (which Mr Chelvan did not accept), that would  be
   because she was afraid  to  live  openly.   The  Refugee  Convention  and
   Article 3 ECHR claims should therefore succeed.  The Tribunal ought to be
   prepared to go further than the Supreme Court in HJ (Iran), and say  that
   because of the risk to persons not able to show a heterosexual  narrative
   in Jamaica, a naturally discreet lesbian or bisexual woman would still be
   a refugee.

86. The rest of Mr Chelvan's submissions  dealt  with  the  perception  test
   already mentioned, which he contended was a new test  not  considered  in
   HJ.  The appellant, and any single woman with no  heterosexual  narrative
   in Jamaica, would be considered to be lesbian even if she were not.   The
   presentation of a heterosexual narrative based on fear would  offend  the
   HJ and HT principles and to require it would be unlawful.

Our assessment

The weight to be given to Mr Sobers' evidence

87. We considered the weight to be attached to the evidence  of  Mr  Sobers.
   Mr Sobers has given evidence (written and oral) in a number  of  Jamaican
   cases and both the AIT and  the  Court  of  Appeal  have  expressed  both
   respect for his broad knowledge of conditions in Jamaica.  However, in AB
   (Protection, criminal gangs, internal relocation) Jamaica CG [2007] UKAIT
   00018, the AIT expressed concern about his objectivity when dealing  with
   questions of gang violence. The AIT in that appeal had the benefit  of  a
   number of reports by Mr Sobers but not, as we have, of his oral evidence.
     The AIT assessed Mr Sobers' opinion on gang violence in these terms:

      "128 ...So far as we are concerned, he is to be  taken  as  an  expert
        doing his best to perform his duty to the court. ...

     1. Whilst Mr Sobers' reports  mostly  seek  to  present  all  relevant
        evidence on the issue with which we are concerned, we  do  consider
        there are several aspects which reduce somewhat the weight  we  are
        able to give  them.  Miss  Brown  contended  that  he  consistently
        approached the evidence about crime and violence in Jamaica from  a
        fixed negative stand point. We do not agree with that criticism  in
        full: in particular we think that in many respects (albeit not all)
        his reports take pains to identify  all  available  evidence,  even
        items which on their face do not support his viewpoint. However, we
        think his opinions on certain issues do betray a  fixed  viewpoint.
        ..."

88. We therefore approached Mr Sobers' oral evidence  on  the  situation  of
   lesbians in Jamaica with both respect and caution. Much was made  by  the
   respondent of Mr Sobers' human rights activism  and  profile  and  it  is
   right that since receiving death threats in 2001, he no longer  lives  in
   Jamaica.  However, as the Tribunal has stated on many occasions, the mere
   fact that someone is a human rights activist does not entail  a  lack  of
   objectivity.  As regards knowledge of a country, the  Tribunal  has  also
   stated in key cases that to be an expert one does not necessarily have to
   live there or to visit regularly.

89. We reminded ourselves of the guidance given by  the  European  Court  of
   Human Rights in  NA v  The  United  Kingdom  (Application  no.  25904/07)
   [2008] ECHR on the assessment of country information and expert  evidence
   in particular:
      "120. In assessing such material, consideration must be given  to  its
      source, in particular its independence, reliability  and  objectivity.
      In respect of reports, the authority and reputation of the author, the
      seriousness  of  the  investigations  by  means  of  which  they  were
      compiled, the consistency of their conclusions and their corroboration
      by other sources are all relevant considerations (see Saadi v.  Italy,
      cited above,  143).
      121.  The Court also recognises that consideration must  be  given  to
      the presence and reporting capacities of the author of the material in
      the country in question. ...
      122.  While the Court accepts that many reports  are,  by  their  very
      nature, general assessments, greater importance  must  necessarily  be
      attached to reports which consider the human rights situation  in  the
      country of destination  and  directly  address  the  grounds  for  the
      alleged real risk of ill-treatment  in  the  case  before  the  Court.
      Ultimately, the Court's own assessment of the human  rights  situation
      in a country of destination is carried out only to  determine  whether
      there would be a violation of Article 3 if the applicant in  the  case
      before it were to be returned to that country. Thus the weight  to  be
      attached to independent assessments  must  inevitably  depend  on  the
      extent to which those assessments are  couched  in  terms  similar  to
      Article 3. ..."

90. Mr Sobers, although he no longer lives  in  Jamaica,  visits  regularly,
   both for professional and personal reasons (his mother still lives there)
   and he still contributes articles and letters  about  Jamaican  political
   governance in the Jamaican  press.    We  were  not  satisfied  from  the
   answers given by Mr Sobers  to  questions  about  the  death  threats  he
   received in 2001 that those threats had, as suggested, caused him to lose
   perspective about the Jamaican government.  Even had we been satisfied in
   that respect, it would have had no real relevance to this  appeal,  which
   deals with an asserted risk of persecution or serious harm from actors of
   persecution other than the Jamaican government.

91. Mr Auburn's criticisms of  Mr  Sobers'  contributions  to  the  'Jamaica
   Observer' and the 'Jamaica Gleaner', were that the views there  expressed
   were intemperate and betrayed a lack  of  impartiality.   He  produced  a
   number of articles from those publications wherein  Mr  Sobers  expressed
   views about the shortcomings of the Jamaican government, in forceful  and
   vigorous language:

   a) Mr Sobers described the Jamaican government  as  "intolerably  corrupt
      and degenerate", and people of Jamaica  as  being  "complicit  in  the
      corruption of our institutions";

   b) He criticised the banning of any recognition that  LGBT  people  might
      have families as "rank backwardness...fetid hypocrisy";

   c) In another article, he responded to an allegation  that  human  rights
      groups in Jamaica were simply carrying out the wishes of their donors;

   d) Mr Sobers criticised a number of proposals by an MP, Ernest Smith,  as
      making a virtue of "crassness, bigotry  and  stupidity".   Mr  Smith's
      proposals were  that  the  Jamaican  authorities  should  ban  J-FLAG,
      deprive gays of gun licences  and  enforce  virginity  tests  on  high
      school girls at the beginning of each school year as  a  condition  of
      readmission to their schools.

 92.    Such highly emotive and personalised language is a far cry from that
     which we would expect from a country expert, but we have not  seen  any
     other samples of the language considered appropriate in letters to  the
     'Jamaica Gleaner' and the 'Jamaica Observer' when discussing  political
     governance in Jamaica. The allegation about human rights  organisations
     to which Mr Sobers responded  appears  also  to  have  been  in  strong
     language.  In contrast, Mr Sobers' reports for the  APCI  and  for  the
     Tribunal are in restrained and proper language and we are not persuaded
     that his views are so unreasonable or intemperate in  relation  to  the
     Jamaican government that we should give them no weight.

 93.    In relation to the criticism that Mr Sobers failed to  disclose  his
     involvement in the November 2006 Jamaica Country of Origin  Report,  it
     is difficult to see how that was to his discredit.  His commentary  and
     the  minutes  of  the  relevant  meeting,  together   with   subsequent
     commentary by the respondent and Mr Sobers, have  all  been  disclosed.
     Mr Sobers' brief was, at short notice, to contribute on the question of
     gang violence in Jamaica. He was not asked to deal with LGBT issues and
     he did not do so.

 94.    The respondent accepted that Mr Sobers was an honest witness in  the
     context of the report he prepared for these proceedings in his capacity
     as a country expert.  He is an internationally known figure,  a  member
     of the Jamaican Bar and an established  human  rights  campaigner.   Mr
     Sobers has strong views, but his expression of them was restrained  and
     where available he provided sources.  Some of the  evidence  Mr  Sobers
     gave was from his personal knowledge of Jamaican society.  In  contrast
     with the position in AB, the evidence he  gave  the  Tribunal  in  this
     appeal was consistent with the other country sources before us.  It  is
     right, therefore,  that  we  should  give  significant  weight  to  his
     description of the attitudes of Jamaican men and the societal treatment
     of lesbianism in Jamaica.

Conclusions arising out of Mr Sobers' evidence

 95. We accept the following assertions in Mr Sobers' report and evidence as
     established to the appropriate standard of proof for the  international
     protection Conventions:

        1. Jamaican women become sexually  active  early.   Only  20%  ever
           marry but children are expected to come along at any time  after
           the mid-teens and women are expected  to  remain  interested  in
           sexual activity and available  for  sexual  relationships  until
           their sixties.  We  add  this  qualification:   since  the  risk
           arises from perceived as well as actual lesbianism, a  woman  of
           any age, but particularly an older woman, who had recently  lost
           a husband or boyfriend might not need to explain why they had no
           partner for the time being.

        2. Young women need to establish a heterosexual narrative to  avoid
           being perceived as lesbian.   That  can  be  done  by  having  a
           boyfriend (or husband) or having children.   Young women who are
           still studying and living in dormitories will not necessarily be
           suspected of lesbian orientation, while  women  who  are  living
           with elderly relatives as carers may also be exempt for a  time,
           but in either case, as the woman becomes older, if  she  has  no
           regular male visitors and no children come along, questions will
           be asked and  conclusions  drawn,  whatever  her  actual  sexual
           orientation.

        3. Enquiries would be made of newcomers to  an  area  to  establish
           whether they were in  a  relationship,  had  children,  or  were
           sexually  available  to  the  local  men.   Atypical  dress   or
           behaviour, such as having no men in attendance and no  children,
           or wearing manly  clothes,  was  likely  to  be  interpreted  as
           indicating that the woman was a lesbian.

        4. If a woman were  unattached,  local  men  would  indicate  their
           availability.  Their reaction to  rejection  was  unpredictable:
           the woman might be fortunate in that the man  might  walk  away,
           but there was a real risk that he would be offended  and  either
           seek to harm her himself or tell others that she was a  lesbian.
           The harm might come from another man:  a report in the  Guardian
           newspaper in 2007 described the risk  from  a  'boyfriend  twice
           removed' who would come over to 'whoop [her] arse' when he heard
           an ex-girlfriend described as lesbian, or the rape which a woman
           would not report, knowing that protection was not available.

 96.     We reject Mr Auburn's submission that Mr Sobers cannot properly  be
     regarded as a country expert on LGBT issues in Jamaica, either  because
     of the death threats, or because of  his  lifelong  interest  in  human
     rights and the vigour  with  which  he  criticised  Jamaican  political
     governance.   Mr  Sobers'  evidence  was  honest,  largely   internally
     consistent,  and  properly  sourced.  It   was   not   expressed   with
     inappropriate vigour.

 97.    However, we attach  no  weight  to  Mr  Sobers'  commentary  on  the
     appellant's likely behaviour on return to Jamaica:   the  question  was
     not a proper one for him to be asked as a country expert, since it is a
     question of fact for the Tribunal, and he is not in a position to  know
     how this individual appellant would behave.

Other country evidence

 98.    The country evidence before the Tribunal at the date of  hearing  is
     set out in Appendix A.  In particular, we note that at paragraph  19.28
     of the respondent's Country of Origin Report for December 2009:


      "Lesbians
      19.28 An article in Women's  E-News  on  the  plight  of  lesbians  in
      Jamaica reported  that  women  who  step  outside  societal  norms  by
      dressing in 'too manly' a style  or  having  few  male  visitors,  for
      example - risk threats  of  verbal  and  physical  abuse.  Women  have
      reportedly been raped, beaten, murdered and forced out of their  homes
      or jobs simply for being lesbians. (Women's E-News, 'Lesbian Activists
      in Jamaica Tell Horror Stories'), 3 September 2005 ...

      19.29 The Guardian reported that: "The lesbian experience  is  neither
      better  nor  worse  but  certainly  different  [than  the   gay   male
      experience]. 'The abuse against women is a bit more subtle,' says  one
      lesbian who did not wish to be  named.  'There's  the  rape  that  you
      probably never report. The beating from the  boyfriend  twice  removed
      who's just heard that you're  lesbian  and  has  come  to  whoop  your
      arse;..."


      19.30 Lesbians in Jamaica have also faced forced  evictions  from  the
      communities they live in.  In April 2007, residents  of  the  McGregor
      Gully community in East Kingston gave  gays  and  lesbians  two  weeks
      notice to move out or "or suffer the consequences."  Lesbians were the
      main target of the eviction order, but  gay  men  were  also  told  to
      leave.  According to the Jamaica Star, the residents said  they  would
      not stop until their community was "gay free" and were "not afraid  of
      resorting to extreme measures." ...


      19.31 Beenie Man's 'Han Up Deh' also includes  the  incitement:  "Hang
      chi-chi gal [lesbians] with a long piece of rope." ...

 99. The disputed Operational Guidance Note  was  revised  and  reissued  in
     January 2011, and again on 3 May 2011.  The guidance to caseworkers  on
     behalf of Country of Origin unit now reads:

      "3.7.6 Conclusion. ...

      3.7.7       In general the Jamaican authorities  do  not  provide  gay
      men, lesbians and bisexuals or those perceived as such with  effective
      protection. There are also likely to be difficulties in finding safety
      through internal relocation. The law provides for freedom of  movement
      within the country and Government generally  respects  this  right  in
      practice.  However, in the case of DW  (Homosexual  Men;  Persecution;
      Sufficiency of Protection), it  was  found  that  in  a  country  like
      Jamaica, where homophobic attitudes are prevalent across the  country,
      it would be unduly harsh to  expect  a  gay  man  or  someone  who  is
      perceived as such to relocate. In addition, the Supreme Court  in  the
      case of HJ (Iran) made the point that internal relocation is  not  the
      answer if it depends on the person concealing their sexual orientation
      in the proposed new location for fear of persecution.

      3.7.8       If there is a  real  risk  that  a  gay  man,  lesbian  or
      bisexual sexual relationship or those perceived as such, has, or will,
      become known, the applicant would on return to  Jamaica  face  a  real
      risk of discrimination and  violence  by  members  of  the  public  or
      criminal gangs, to the extent that this would amount  to  persecution.
      As gay men, lesbians and bisexuals in Jamaica may be considered to  be
      members of a particular social group, they should be granted asylum.

      3.7.9       However, if  an  individual  chooses  to  live  discreetly
      because he/she wants to avoid embarrassment or distress to her or  his
      family and friends he/she will not be deemed to have  a  well  founded
      fear of persecution and will not qualify for asylum. This  is  because
      he/she has adopted a lifestyle to cope with social pressures  and  not
      because he/she fears persecution due to her or his sexual orientation.

       10. If an individual chooses to live discreetly because he/she fears
           persecution if he/she were to live as  openly  gay,  lesbian  or
           bisexual then he/she will have a well founded fear and should be
           granted asylum. It is important that gay, lesbian  and  bisexual
           people  enjoy  the  right  to  live  openly  without   fear   of
           persecution. They should not be asked or  be  expected  to  live
           discreetly because of their well founded fear of persecution due
           to their sexual orientation."

100. There has been no  new  Country  of  Origin  Report  on  Jamaica  since
     December 2009.  The other country  materials  set  out  in  Appendix  A
     support and underline the position now accepted by  the  respondent  in
     the Operational Guidance Note guidance.

101. On the basis of the evidence before the Upper  Tribunal,  it  is  clear
     that the anti-gay stance in Jamaica  goes  right  to  the  top  of  the
     political structure.  The Prime Minister recently stated that he  would
     not accept any male or  female  homosexual  in  his  cabinet  and  that
     Jamaica will not bow to international pressure and change its stance on
     homosexuality.  Ernest Smith MP's  call  for  increased  sentences  for
     buggery, virginity tests on girls returning to school after the  summer
     vacation, and a ban on gun licences for homosexuals were all indicative
     of that political and social climate. A poll  by  the  Jamaica  Gleaner
     recorded that 70% of Jamaicans considered that homosexuals should  have
     no civil rights at all.

102. Levels of criminality and violence in Jamaica are  very  high  overall,
     and there is ample evidence of attacks  on  homosexuals  and  lesbians,
     including the perception that rape  is  a  method  of  "curing"  sexual
     orientation.  The  evidence  was  that  there  was  no  sufficiency  of
     protection:  police attending reported attacks on gays arrived  slowly,
     did little, and on occasioned joined in on the side of the  aggressors.
     The social elite  are  in  a  better  position:   they  live  in  gated
     communities and can regulate what the world knows of them.   They  have
     money, education, geographical  protection,  and,  usually,  come  from
     families that are "known" and have lighter  skin.  Even  they  are  not
     necessarily safe, but they are safer:   their  financial  position  may
     enable  them  to  hire  personal  protection  rather  than  relying  on
     sufficiency of protection from the Jamaican state.

103. In contrast to the ability to  go  out  in  all-female  groups  in  the
     United Kingdom, we accept that the evidence is that in Jamaica,  it  is
     unacceptable socially to go out to dinner with another woman, or to  go
     to a club or go dancing with  her,  particularly  if  you  then  reject
     approaches from men.  The lyrics of  dancehall  music  incite  violence
     against gays and lesbians, suggesting that they  are  better  dead,  or
     that they be raped.  Some Church leaders regard it as brazen  for  gays
     and lesbians even to have a representative support group.

104. In order to live safely in Jamaica,  a  single  woman  must  present  a
     "heterosexual narrative", normally involving  male  friendships  and/or
     children.  If a woman had no men  friends,  local  men  would  indicate
     their  availability  and  their  reactions  to   rejection   would   be
     unpredictable, ranging between walking away and violence, even  murder.
     Mob violence is a problem; jobs can be lost and people  driven  out  of
     their homes if they were perceived to be gay or lesbian.

105. Open or perceived lesbians are at risk throughout Jamaica.   While  the
     greatest risk is in the metropolitan areas, outside the  cities  locals
     gossip about a woman with no children or men friends, unless  there  is
     an obvious, good reason, and perceived lesbianism  entails  risk,  even
     where a woman is not lesbian.

106. We rejected Mr Chelvan's argument that all lesbians in Jamaica  are  at
     risk of persecution, by reason  of  the  risk  of  being  perceived  as
     lesbian.  That is to go much further than the Supreme Court in  HJ  and
     HT and very close to  finding  a  generic  risk  to  all  single  women
     throughout the country, eliding the final point in HJ and HT that those
     who are naturally discreet for reasons other than fear do  not  require
     international protection.  On the evidence, lesbians who chose to  live
     discreetly for societal or family reasons,  rather  than  because  they
     feared persecution, and who elected to create a heterosexual  narrative
     to support that  position,  would  not  be  entitled  to  international
     protection because they would be  able  to  avoid  the  risk  of  being
     perceived as lesbian by having either men around or children.

Country guidance conclusions

107. We give the following guidance overall on  the  risk  to  lesbians  and
     perceived lesbians in Jamaica:

          1) Jamaica is a deeply homophobic society.  There is a high  level
             of violence overall, and where a real risk  of  persecution  or
             serious  harm  is  established,  the  Jamaicans  state   offers
             lesbians no sufficiency of protection.

          2) Lesbianism (actual or perceived) brings a risk of violence,  up
             to and including 'corrective' rape and murder.

          3) Not  all  lesbians  are  at  risk.   Those  who  are  naturally
             discreet,  have  children  and/or  are  willing  to  present  a
             heterosexual narrative for family or societal reasons may  live
             as discreet lesbians without persecutory  risk,  provided  that
             they are not doing so out of fear.

          4) Single women with  no  male  partner  or  children  risk  being
             perceived as lesbian, whether or not that is the  case,  unless
             they  present  a  heterosexual  narrative   and   behave   with
             discretion.

          5) Because the risks  arise  from  perceived  as  well  as  actual
             lesbian  sexual  orientation,  internal  relocation  does   not
             enhance safety.  Newcomers in rural  communities  will  be  the
             subject of speculative conclusions, derived both by asking them
             questions and by observing their lifestyle and unless they  can
             show a heterosexual narrative, they risk  being  identified  as
             lesbians. Perceived lesbians also risk social  exclusion  (loss
             of employment or being driven from their homes).

          6) A manly appearance is a risk factor, as is rejection of suitors
             if a woman does not have a husband, boyfriend or child,  or  an
             obvious and credible explanation for their absence.

          7) In general, younger women who are not yet  settled  may  be  at
             less risk; the risk increases with age.  Women are expected  to
             become sexually active early and remain so into their  sixties,
             unless there is an obvious reason why  they  do  not  currently
             have a partner, for example, recent widowhood.

          8) Members of the social elite may  be  better  protected  because
             they  are  able  to  live  in  gated  communities  where  their
             activities are not the subject  of  public  scrutiny.    Social
             elite members are usually from known families, wealthy, lighter
             skinned  and  better  educated;  often  they  are  high-ranking
             professional people.

The appellant's case

108. We turn next to the factual matrix in this appellant's case.  She is  a
     Jamaican lesbian, and is not a member of  the  social  elite.   She  is
     fairly dark skinned, at the beginning of her professional career as  an
     accountant, and does not have a manly appearance.

109. The appellant came to no direct harm in Jamaica before  coming  to  the
     United Kingdom, apart from her depressive illness.  She had a  discreet
     social life  with  other  lesbian  women  and  several  covert  lesbian
     relationships and the single incident  at  a  nightclub  on  which  the
     appellant relied did not lead to any actual harm to her or any  of  her
     discreet lesbian companions.  Her employer, on whom she  had  a  crush,
     was aware of her sexual identity but it caused no problems.

110. The appellant when last in Jamaica was a young woman, in  her  twenties
     and not yet settled. She had a heterosexual narrative in that she lived
     with her elderly grandfather, had a male friend in her life (her former
     boyfriend), and her longest discreet relationship was with a woman  who
     could demonstrate a heterosexual narrative  because  she  was  married.
     The W4W group went dancing on three occasions, and on one of those, got
     into difficulty from which, fortunately, they  escaped  unharmed.   The
     description of the music playing and the threats  by  the  men  at  the
     dancehall are, again, entirely consistent with the country evidence.

111. The appellant is much older now; she has been  in  the  United  Kingdom
     since 2003 and is no longer of an age where she would be  expected  not
     to be settled.  She has  had  a  number  of  short-lived  open  lesbian
     relationships here and is educated, sophisticated and articulate.

112. The appellant's account of her  various  United  Kingdom  relationships
     was not challenged by the respondent, save in relation to the  crockery
     incident and her ability to remain on those premises for a  few  months
     longer.

113. Having considered all of the evidence before us, immediately after  the
     hearing we formed the view that the appellant was a  witness  of  truth
     and that her account  was  not  exaggerated.   The  appellant  and  her
     girlfriend gave their evidence calmly, clearly  and  consistently.   In
     particular, the appellant gave a coherent and credible account  of  the
     gradual emergence of her sexuality  in  Jamaica,  and  of  the  social,
     religious and family  difficulties  it  caused  her,  as  well  as  her
     reliance on antidepressants.

114.  The  appellant's  account  of  her  continued  emergence   into   open
     lesbianism after she reached the United Kingdom was equally  consistent
     and credible. She did not claim to have developed a family life in  the
     United Kingdom with any one woman,  but  she  had  lived  freely  as  a
     lesbian.

115. With some reservations, we accepted the appellant's evidence  that  she
     would continue to live openly as a lesbian  if  she  were  returned  to
     Jamaica, even if it put her at physical risk there.  We have considered
     whether her being prepared not to  bring  girlfriends  home  after  the
     broken crockery incident was a return to discretion.  It may have been,
     but that was three  years  ago  and  the  appellant  has  continued  to
     develop.

116. We noted Mr Auburn's submission that  the  appellant  would  return  to
     discreet lesbianism principally because of the hostility to lesbians in
     Jamaica.  We do not consider that assists the respondent in  the  light
     of HJ and HT, because the appellant's reason for so doing would not  be
     social discretion but fear.  The appellant is not in a position  easily
     to represent her former heterosexual narrative, even if she  wished  to
     do so:  she is older, her grandfather has died, and  her  ex-boyfriend,
     whom she has not seen since 2003,  now  lives  outside  Jamaica.    The
     appellant has no children and does not wish to have any.

117.  The appellant has no heterosexual narrative to support her now and  we
     accept that she is one of the rare people who would live  openly  as  a
     lesbian, despite the risks, in a relationship if she could find someone
     who would do the same, but in  any  case,  without  a  supporting  male
     figure.  If Mr Auburn is right that there would be no other lesbian  in
     Jamaica prepared to live openly as a lesbian with her,  that  does  not
     improve the situation, since the effect would  be  that  the  appellant
     would be deprived of any expression of her sexuality at all.

118. The evidence of the appellant's girlfriend  was  credible  and  direct:
     theirs was a new relationship. She would like to  see  it  develop  but
     would not go to Jamaica if the appellant  were  returned,  because  the
     girlfriend considered that it was dangerous to do  so  and  she  had  a
     young child to consider.  Article 8 ECHR is not engaged in the domestic
     sense, and the appellant's Counsel rightly did not rely on it.

Conclusions

119. We follow the  step-by-step  approach  in  HJ  and  HT,  which  may  be
     summarised thus:

     1) Is the appellant homosexual?

     2) Is [her] country of nationality one  where  homosexual  people  who
        live openly are liable to persecution?

     3) Would this appellant live openly as a homosexual?

     4) If the appellant would not live openly, what is the reason?

        a) If it is a question of the appellant being naturally discreet or
           responding to social pressures such as a wish not  to  embarrass
           [her] parents, that will be insufficient to engage  the  Refugee
           Convention or other international protection; but if

        b) a material reason for the applicant living discreetly  on  [her]
           return would be a fear of the persecution which would follow  if
           they were to live openly as a  homosexual,  then,  other  things
           being equal, the application for refugee status should succeed.

120. Applying that analysis to the facts of the present  appeal,  we  answer
     questions  1  and  2  in  the  affirmative.   The  appellant's   sexual
     orientation is accepted and the respondent conceded that Jamaica  is  a
     country where people who  lived  openly  as  lesbians  were  liable  to
     persecution.  We  also  answer  question  3  in  the  affirmative;  the
     appellant impressed us as a calm and credible witness  and  we  believe
     her firm evidence that she  would  not  return  to  living  discreetly,
     whatever the risk.

121. If we are wrong about that and question 4 must be considered,  we  find
     on these facts that the appellant is not now 'naturally  discreet'  and
     her case does not fall into the exception at  4(a)  of  the  test;  any
     return to discreet living would be by reason of her fear of persecution
     rather than by reason of social pressures, and the appellant  therefore
     would be entitled to refugee protection  under  question  4(b)  in  the
     alternative.

122. It follows that the appellant has established a risk of persecution  on
     return and the Refugee Convention is engaged.  The respondent  accepted
     that there was no sufficiency of protection in Jamaica for lesbians who
     could establish that they were at real risk of persecution  or  serious
     harm.  Internal relocation is a question of fact, and on the  facts  of
     this  appeal,  would  not  avail  the  appellant.  Those  findings  are
     determinative in her favour and the asylum appeal must be allowed.

Decision



123. The original Tribunal made a material error of law in this  appeal  (by
   applying the higher civil standard of proof rather than  the  asylum  and
   human rights standard of real risk or reasonable degree  of  likelihood).
   We set aside that determination and proceed to remake the decision.

124. We substitute a determination allowing this appeal  under  the  Refugee
   Convention and Article 3 ECHR.  Humanitarian protection was  inapplicable
   as the asylum appeal succeeds.

Funding

125. The Tribunal is satisfied that, at the  time  the  appellant  made  the
   Section 103A application and for the reasons indicated in the  order  for
   reconsideration, there was a significant prospect that the  appeal  would
   be  allowed  upon  reconsideration.   Accordingly  it  orders  that   the
   appellant's costs in respect of the application for  reconsideration  and
   in respect of the reconsideration are to be  paid  out  of  the  relevant
   fund, as defined in Rule  33  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal
   (Procedure) Rules 2005.

   Signed
   Senior Immigration Judge Gleeson


                                 Appendix A

           Oral and documentary evidence before the Upper Tribunal


Appellant's evidence

1. The appellant gave oral evidence after adopting her witness statement  of
   20 November 2009. Her account fell into two phases, the first 30 years of
   her life spent in Jamaica, and the period after she came  to  the  United
   Kingdom, during which she gradually emerged  as  an  open  lesbian.   Her
   various  girlfriends  are  referred  to  by  alphabetical  initials,   in
   chronological order.

Jamaica: 1973-2003

2. The appellant's early life may be taken quite shortly: she was  aware  of
   her sexual orientation from the age of about 7 and  had  a  close  school
   friend whom she used to kiss on the lips,  behind  the  school  premises.
   They were spotted by a teacher and both girls were spanked.  They did not
   do it again.  Her mother was a Pentecostal Christian and very  religious.
   The family went to Church every  Sunday.  The  appellant's  mother  never
   mentioned the  incident  and  thereafter  the  appellant  suppressed  her
   feelings for many years.

3. The appellant's homosexual feelings  returned  in  her  early  20s.   She
   experienced three short sexual relationships with men, none lasting  more
   than a couple of months, because sexual relations with them did not  feel
   right.   One  remained  a  good  friend  and  is  aware  of  her   sexual
   orientation.  The appellant became clinically  depressed,  she  considers
   because  of  the  difficult  social  situation  caused  by   her   sexual
   orientation.  She received antidepressant treatment from her doctor  from
   the age of 24 but  did  not  disclose  the  reason  for  her  depression.
   Eventually, the appellant discovered how to meet women online,  at  first
   in general chat rooms in which she approached  other  women  (with  mixed
   success), and  then  in  a  lesbian-specific  chat  room  ("Women4Women",
   hereafter W4W), where she was able to set up discreet  dates  with  other
   lesbians.  They would go out, chat and discuss how they coped, or take  a
   car to a secluded spot and  kiss  where  they  could  not  be  seen.  The
   appellant had learned the lesson of her schooldays.

4. The appellant continued gradually to discover her sexuality.  Members  of
   W4W arranged social outings to a nightclub or the beach, or would meet at
   someone's home. In the appellant's area of Jamaica, there  were  five  or
   six women in the group.  If they went to a bar, they  were  very  careful
   not to give any indication of being gay. They were very careful who  they
   invited to group outings: sometimes men would prompt  straight  women  to
   join the online group, seeking to discover information about its  lesbian
   members, so new members were vetted for a period of  time  online  before
   they were allowed to meet other members.

5. After a time, the appellant began a relationship with one of  the  group,
   Ms A, a married bisexual woman with a son.  Ms A's husband  was  a  pilot
   and often away, which made it easier for them to meet. They  would  drive
   out, always at night, to a secluded spot beside the beach, far away  from
   where they both lived, and with Ms A the appellant finally had full  sex.
    They met at least once a week and spoke on the telephone  two  or  three
   times a week.  They could not go out to dinner, or the  cinema,  or  even
   hold hands in public.  The appellant heard from  friends  who  took  more
   risks than she did that if two women went out together,  men  would  come
   and threaten them, asking if they were lesbian.  Some women she heard  of
   were beaten and raped because they were considered to be lesbians.

6. The appellant only had one hostile experience while in Jamaica.   It  was
   during a W4W outing to a nightclub. The women were dancing  together  and
   the DJ started playing music with homophobic lyrics by  artists  such  as
   Beenie Man and TK. A group of men surrounded the women and began  calling
   them "chi-chi girls", "sodomites", "pea eaters" and  "pussy  eaters"  all
   terms for homosexuals  and/or  lesbians.    They  were  saying,  "Let  us
   convert you, we  will  make  you  into  straight  women"  and  the  women
   understood clearly that they were threatening rape.  The group  left  the
   club fast; the men followed them out but did not carry out their threats.
    The appellant could not say why:  she thought perhaps on  that  occasion
   there had been safety in numbers.

7. In early 2000, the appellant told her brother that she  was  lesbian;  he
   was supportive.  From July 2000 to  May  2003  she  worked  at  the  Ritz
   Carlton Golf and Spa.  She had a crush on her female boss there; her boss
   was not lesbian but was probably aware  of  her  infatuation.   Her  boss
   called a meeting and told the staff to accept people  who  were  gay  and
   lesbian. The appellant felt that remark was intended  to  make  her  more
   comfortable.

8. Generally, though, the appellant had to live  a  very  discreet  life  in
   Jamaica and she felt frustrated, trapped and restricted.  She  felt  less
   of a human; she resented the freedoms which heterosexual  people  had  to
   express their  sexuality  publicly.   She  also  had  to  deal  with  her
   sexuality without any counselling or  support;  a  referral  to  J-FLAG's
   support worker in her area was not  very  helpful  as  the  male  support
   worker did not really engage with her. J-FLAG was a new organisation  and
   under-resourced.

9. In 2003, the appellant decided to leave Jamaica and come  to  the  United
   Kingdom to study accountancy here.  Her visits to the United  States,  to
   see her sisters living there, had shown her how different life  could  be
   in a country where she was free to express her sexuality, but she had not
   told her sisters of her orientation or considered seeking  asylum  there.
   When in America, she was just on holiday, combined with a family visit.

United Kingdom: 2003-2009

10. On arrival in the United Kingdom,  the  appellant  began  a  short-lived
   relationship with a woman, Ms B, which lasted from  December  2003-August
   2004.  On New Years' Eve 2004, she told her sister S of her  orientation.
    S was very disappointed and cried, saying that it was  not  right.   The
   appellant and her sister S are still in touch  but  the  subject  is  not
   mentioned.

11. In January 2005, the appellant began a relationship with Ms  C,  and  in
   May 2005 they moved in together.  During 2005,  the  appellant  told  her
   sister J (who lives in New York) that she was lesbian.  J was  supportive
   and even permitted the appellant to take Ms C over in 2006 to visit.  The
   appellant's relationship with Ms C ended in September 2006.

12. The appellant had intended to tell her mother about her  sexuality,  but
   before  she  could  do  so,  J's  boyfriend  told  her  mother,  who  was
   devastated,  distraught,  and  blamed  herself.    The   revelation   was
   particularly distressing because her mother had recently married a pastor
   and she feared social consequences if her daughter's  orientation  became
   known to his parishioners.  After the initial shock,  the  appellant  and
   her mother were reconciled.  The appellant's mother prays for change  and
   they remain close.  Other family members have not been told, though aunts
   and uncles have speculated about  the  appellant  because  she  is  still
   unmarried and childless.

13. From December 2006-August 2007, the appellant had a relationship in  the
   United Kingdom with Ms D.  From February-March  2008,  she  had  a  short
   relationship with Ms E, a bisexual woman whose husband was in  prison  at
   the time.  Ms E stayed at the appellant's flat for a night  one  weekend,
   upsetting the two heterosexual Jamaican men with whom the  appellant  was
   living.  They started gossiping and saying she was lesbian, then  one  of
   the men broke all the cups and bowls they shared, saying that he did  not
   want to be around a "sodomite" or to share utensils with one.  They  felt
   she might infect them.  The appellant had to buy separate crockery to use
   for herself.  Nevertheless, she stayed in  the  house  for  another  four
   months; the men were not very pleased, but one of them had no  status  in
   the United Kingdom and they were not prepared to risk her reporting  them
   to the police.

14. The appellant's student leave to study accountancy was extended  several
   times up to January 2008,  when  the  respondent  refused  to  extend  it
   further: the appellant's appeal against that  refusal  was  dismissed  in
   August 2008.  Apart from short periods when she lived with Ms C and Ms F,
   the appellant stayed rent-free with various Jamaican friends while in the
   United Kingdom.  Her sisters in the United States supported  her  studies
   financially  as  much  as  they  could.   The  appellant  also   obtained
   employment as a bookkeeper and accounts clerk. The appellant pursued  her
   accountancy  studies  at  a  number  of  colleges,  and  sat  the   final
   examination in June 2009.  She is now a fully  qualified  accountant  and
   has been in the United Kingdom for over seven years.

15. From April 2008, the appellant was  in  a  relationship  with  Ms  F,  a
   previously heterosexual woman, whose first female relationship  was  with
   the appellant.   They went to gay bars and pubs, or just  stayed  in  and
   watched movies.  She did not tell Ms F about her immigration situation.

16. In August 2008, the  appellant  claimed  asylum,  and  was  detained  at
   Yarlswood.  She was forced to explain her situation  to  Ms  F,  who  was
   supportive, visited her in detention and gave evidence at the appellant's
   Immigration Judge appeal hearing.   It was a very  serious  relationship:
   Ms F introduced the appellant to her family, friends and colleagues. When
   the appellant was released in September 2008, she moved in with Ms F, but
   the relationship came to an end in August 2009.

17. The appellant met her current girlfriend, Ms G, in Club  Life  over  the
   August Bank Holiday of 2009.  On 9 September 2009, she was  dispersed  to
   NASS accommodation in Stoke-on-Trent.  The relationship continued  up  to
   the date of the reconsideration hearing, conducted mainly  in  visits  to
   pubs and clubs in London. They also went out as a group with friends. The
   appellant had met Ms G's mother and sister.

18. The appellant enjoyed the freer atmosphere in the United  Kingdom.   The
   question of her being lesbian was simply not a problem here.  She marched
   in Gay Pride in 2005 with BLUK (Black Lesbians UK). The appellant  was  a
   member of various gay Facebook groups and pages.  A few  of  her  friends
   removed  her  as  a  Facebook  friend  when  they  became  aware  of  her
   orientation but the rest did not.  She had become  more  open  about  her
   sexuality: her Facebook friends now knew of  her  orientation,  including
   those still living in Jamaica.  The appellant told  one  or  two  friends
   directly and they accepted her.  It followed that the appellant  was  now
   "out" not just to her family but  to  a  wider  group  of  non-homosexual
   Jamaicans who knew her when she lived there.

19. In her oral evidence, the appellant adopted her statement and  confirmed
   that she was 30 years old when she arrived in the United Kingdom to study
   accountancy.   She considered that  she  would  have  been  perceived  as
   marriageable and available from the age of 18.  In her 20s, she had  been
   at university, travelled to the United States and so  on;  she  had  been
   busy with college and  establishing  herself  at  work.   She  had  begun
   meeting other lesbians in groups from the age of about 24,  but  did  not
   have a physical relationship until she was 27.

20. In cross-examination, the appellant was  asked  about  the  reaction  to
   lesbians here in the United Kingdom.  She considered that, though  levels
   of tolerance might vary, she had never felt unsafe and  any  question  of
   risk  seemed  hypothetical.   If  there  were  a  problem,  the  domestic
   protection was much better. She would not contemplate changing  her  open
   lesbianism to avoid harm, wherever she lived.  She was "out" now:   being
   discreet had made her ill with depression and she  had  no  intention  of
   risking that again.  When asked by Mr Auburn how she would behave  if  on
   holiday in Saudi Arabia, the appellant said  that  if  she  were  to  put
   herself in that position, she would reason that it was not for  long  and
   would not be afraid to be open about her sexuality there.  There had been
   no previous suggestion that the  appellant  wished  to  travel  to  Saudi
   Arabia, on holiday or otherwise.

21. The appellant confirmed that six years ago, when she left  Jamaica,  she
   had been living discreetly.  She had gone out with  lesbian  friends  but
   always at night and usually to safe places.  If the W4W group went  to  a
   bar, there would be six or seven of them.  She could  only  recall  three
   such occasions and one of them was the one  where  they  had  difficulty.
   Her relationship  with  Ms  A  had  been  conducted  discreetly,  driving
   somewhere safe for sex maybe once a week.  It was an unhealthy  lifestyle
   and not sustainable.  The relationship ended after  three  years,  during
   which they were never out in public together as  it  was  too  dangerous.
   Even if two women went to a restaurant and a man came over,  that  was  a
   risk.  If they showed no interest in him or refused to dance, that  would
   lead to a negative perception.

22. The appellant was nevertheless most emphatic that she would,  now,  take
   the risk.  She would not return to secrecy after six years  of  openness;
   however, she feared what might occur if she behaved openly, as she  would
   do.  She would not take Ms G.  It was not  fair  to  expect  it.   If  in
   Jamaica anyone asked why the appellant was not married,  she  would  tell
   them she was a lesbian.  She knew who she was now and  would  not  modify
   her behaviour.  She felt really strongly about it; she was  not  prepared
   to take a retrograde step, even though she knew it was unsafe not  to  do
   so. She was no longer prepared to live closeted and if she met someone in
   Jamaica, they would have to be prepared to  be  open  or  she  would  not
   consider going out with them.  She had suffered depression  in  the  past
   from her closeted life and was not prepared to return to that.

23. The appellant was asked about  the  crockery-smashing  incident  in  the
   United Kingdom.  She explained that she was living, rent free, in a house
   owned by a friend of her mother, with two men and another  girl  who  was
   heterosexual.   They did not behave homophobically until  her  girlfriend
   stayed over one weekend.  By that time the appellant had been there for a
   couple of months:  she was  initially  unsure  how  to  deal  with  their
   reaction but she soon relaxed, since she knew that they  could  not  risk
   any trouble with the police.  They had to be tolerant  because  of  that.
   She stayed for a further five months, but after that her girlfriend  came
   in the daytime only.    It  was  put  to  the  appellant  that  this  was
   inconsistent with her claimed fear of Jamaican men,  but  she  emphasised
   that it was the availability of domestic protection in the United Kingdom
   which made the difference.

24. The appellant had no difficulty before she left Jamaica because she  had
   men friends  in  evidence  and  was  living  with  her  grandfather.  The
   appellant confirmed that her mother and brother were  aware  now  of  her
   sexual identity, as was her male friend, but she had not seen  him  since
   leaving Jamaica six years ago and  would  not  be  able  to  use  him  to
   recreate the heterosexual narrative she had projected before leaving,  if
   she now returned.  Nevertheless, if returned she would do the same as she
   did now in London, going out to clubs and pubs  with  other  women.   She
   would want a partner to be with and she  would  not  hide.   Heterosexual
   women in Jamaica had female friends and went out  in  the  evenings  with
   them; the appellant and her W4W friends had done the same.

25. The appellant was asked why she had not claimed  asylum  in  the  United
   States on her visits in 1997 and 1998, returning to  Jamaica  each  time,
   and the same on her visit to the United States from the United Kingdom in
   2006 with Ms C. She stated that at that time she had no reason to  do  so
   since she was not in danger in America.

26. In re-examination, the appellant stated that she took  pictures  of  the
   broken crockery just to be on the safe side, since initially she was  not
   sure whether the  situation  would  escalate.   She  was  working  as  an
   accounts assistant and living free helped her finances, especially as she
   was also studying.  The other girl who lived there was also a  friend  of
   the person who owned the house,  and  the  men  knew  the  appellant  was
   studying.  She did have some platonic male friends in the United  Kingdom
   and in Jamaica; one, a heterosexual man who had  a  son  now,  was  still
   there, but others had moved to the United States.   She did not know  his
   present social status, or whether he was in a relationship, but  she  had
   spoken to him on the phone when he was last in London.

27. Only one woman, Ms A, had visited the appellant's home when she  was  in
   Jamaica.  At that time, the appellant was living  with  her  grandfather,
   and Ms A only came at night.   Her  grandfather  was  "old  school":  the
   appellant was not permitted to take visitors to his home.  He  was  known
   and the appellant had moved there when she was working  in  Montego  Bay.
   He did not have many neighbours.  The grandfather had since died.

28. Now, if returned, she would tell people at work that she was a  lesbian.
    "Coming out" and accepting herself had been  liberating.   Now  she  was
   herself, and she could be who she was without fear. Other lesbians  lived
   discreetly because they feared harm:  the appellant would not do so.  She
   was not prepared to have children, it would be horrible  and  not  "her'.
   She would not be living the life she wanted to  live.    If  she  entered
   into a relationship in Jamaica, she would expect a partner there to  take
   the risks with her.

Evidence of appellant's girlfriend

29. In her witness statement, Ms G stated that she  was  a  British  Citizen
   and met the appellant at Club Life in Vauxhall  on  August  Bank  Holiday
   2009.  She went there with friends and noticed the  appellant,  whom  she
   thought very attractive.  After a time, the appellant asked her to dance.
    They danced and kept company all night, then exchanged numbers,  meeting
   several times over the next week or so.  The appellant told Ms G that she
   was moving to Stoke-on-Trent.  Ms G was surprised and disappointed:   she
   really  liked  the  appellant  but  was  not  keen  on  a  long  distance
   relationship, having just finished one.

30. The relationship continued, mainly by daily telephone  calls,  with  the
   appellant staying with Ms G about twice a month.  Ms G went once to Stoke-
   on-Trent to visit the appellant but there was not much to do  there;  the
   clubs and pubs they liked were in London.  Some of Ms G's gay friends had
   met the appellant.  She had introduced the  appellant  to  her  son,  her
   mother, her sister and various nieces and nephews, and spoken of  her  to
   her straight friends.  The appellant had introduced Ms G to a  couple  of
   her friends too.   The appellant was comfortable  in  her  sexuality  and
   happy to refer to herself as lesbian.  That was unusual and refreshing.

31. Ms G understood that the appellant might be returned to  Jamaica,  which
   she found hard to contemplate as it would end their relationship.   Ms  G
   was looking to settle down and it was difficult  to  plan  ahead  in  the
   present situation.  Ms G would not go  to  Jamaica:   it  would  make  no
   sense, because she and the appellant wanted to be who they were,  and  to
   be together.  It was well known on the gay scene in  the  United  Kingdom
   that Jamaica was one of the places where as a lesbian  you  simply  could
   not go.

32. In contrast, in the United Kingdom,  they  could  be  normal;  they  had
   nights out together, they stayed in  to  watch  television,  they  played
   sport, they went out for dinner, together and with friends.  That  was  a
   freedom they would not have in Jamaica. Papers such as "The Voice',  West
   Indian newspapers, the internet, and friends in  the  gay  community  all
   reported that in Jamaica, gays were raped and killed, and the government,
   police, and people in general frowned on homosexuals.

33. In her oral evidence,  Ms  G  adopted  her  witness  statement  and  was
   tendered for cross-examination.  In cross-examination,  she  stated  that
   she had never been to Jamaica. She was  not  even  prepared  to  move  to
   Stoke, never mind Jamaica.  The appellant had moved  to  Stoke  just  two
   weeks after they met. There was not  enough  to  do  in  Stoke.   In  re-
   examination, she said she might visit Jamaica for a holiday  but  not  to
   live; it was out of the question.  The life there was  totally  different
   and not safe.   The relationship was still in the early stages and if  it
   came to an end now, Ms G would be disappointed.

Country evidence

Expert report and oral evidence of Mr Sobers

34. Mr O. Hilaire Sobers LLB  (Hons)  UWI,  LLM  (Warwick),  Attorney-at-Law
   (Jamaican  Bar)  was  instructed  by  the  appellant's  solicitors.   The
   appellant's representatives disclosed the letter  of  instruction  which,
   with corrections for several obvious typographical errors, asked  him  to
   deal with the following questions:

   (1)      What are the current risks faced by lesbians in Jamaica and have
        things changed over the last 1-2 years?
   (2)      What is Jamaican society's attitude to lesbianism?
   (3)      To what extent can a woman identified as a lesbian access  state
        protection or relocate within Jamaica to avoid any risk?
   (4)      How possible is it for a lesbian woman to  have  a  relationship
        with  another  woman,  including  cohabiting?  Can  this  be   done
        discreetly?  Would 2 women living together  arouse  suspicions?  To
        what extent can women show affection in public?
   (5)      How (un)usual is it for a woman to live alone  or  with  another
        woman  in  Jamaica?  Can  a  woman  without   family   support   be
        economically self-sufficient?
   (6)      Looking at this appellant's particular case, what are the  risks
        she would face in Jamaica? To what extent could she have  the  same
        lifestyle there that she does here?

35. Against that background, Mr Sobers' report set out his understanding  of
   the facts of this particular appeal and summarised the  questions  rather
   more shortly:

   a) The risk of discrimination and harm to lesbians in Jamaica;
   b) The sufficiency of protection currently available to women of same-sex
      orientation by the Jamaican state; and
   c) The possibility of internal relocation to avoid the risk of homophobic-
      inspired violence.

36. Mr Sobers' report set out his qualifications  and  experience.   He  had
   been an attorney-at-law with the Jamaican Bar for over 30  years.  Before
   coming to the United Kingdom in 2001, he had been  resident  in  Jamaica,
   where while practising law he appeared in both civil and criminal courts.
    He was Executive Director of the Independent Jamaican Council for  Human
   Rights from 1998-1999. In September 1991, he had been  a  member  of  the
   Public Defender's legal team at the Commission of Inquiry  into  violence
   in West Kingston, which he described as a garrison community.  From 1994-
   1995 he founded and ran "Brother's Keeper", an NGO  designed  to  promote
   solutions to Jamaica's violent crime problem.

37. Mr Sobers came to the United Kingdom in September 2001  to  study  here.
   In December 2002, he was awarded the LLM in Law in Development  from  the
   University of Warwick, with particular focus on human rights and criminal
   justice.  Since completing that qualification, he had lived  in  America,
   and currently in Washington DC, where he was a human  rights  consultant,
   but he  maintained  both  professional  and  personal  ties  to  Jamaica,
   visiting every year.

38. Mr Sobers in his latest  report  noted  the  high  rate  of  murders  in
   Jamaica (1611 in 2008, about 60 per 100,000 inhabitants) and  a  reported
   increase in shootings, rape and robbery in 2008.  Violence against  women
   was widespread.  Of those offences which were  reported,  sexual  assault
   was the second highest cause, after fighting.  Mr Sobers relied upon  the
   following documents in support of that position:

    . the US State Department Report for 2008;
    . the Jamaican Ministry  of  Justice  Victim  Support  Unit  information
      between 2005-2008;
    . a 1999 report by the UN Development Program,

39. All three reports recorded high levels of  violence  against  women  and
   significant underreporting of such assaults.  More particularly,

    . In 2006,  Amnesty  International  reported  that  the  Sexual  Assault
      Investigation Unit in Jamaica  considered  that  only  25%  of  sexual
      assaults were reported;
    . On 23 April 2009, the Jamaica  Information  Service  reported  Senator
      Dwight Nelson, Minister of National Security as calling for a  culture
      change as Jamaican men "have been acculturised to the notion that they
      have a right to sexually harass women" and  that  the  government  was
      committed to efforts to eradicate all types of violence against women,
      including sexual violence;
    . A March 2009 study found  that  almost  half  of  Jamaican  adolescent
      females had experienced sexual coercion, with 27%  having  experienced
      some form of sexual violence.

40. In contrast to the reports which  were  criticised  in  AB,  Mr  Sobers'
   report for this appeal was carefully  sourced  throughout,  drawing  both
   upon the country materials mentioned and on  his  personal  knowledge  of
   Jamaica, to support his conclusions that  women  who  lived  alone  there
   would be perceived as lesbians, whatever their actual sexuality, and that
   those who claimed to be bisexual or transgendered would  be  regarded  as
   homosexuals (of whichever  sex).  A  long  section  of  the  report  then
   considered questions relating to male homosexuality, with  which  we  are
   not concerned directly in the present determination.

41. The aspects of Mr Sobers' report which related to  female  homosexuality
   may be summarised as follows.  He noted that lesbianism  in  Jamaica  was
   not a criminal offence, the criminal legislation being directed  at  male
   homosexuals. The Government of Jamaica had repeatedly refused  to  repeal
   the buggery laws criminalising  male  homosexuality.    Verbal  abuse  of
   lesbians and gays was a given,  with  violence  more  unpredictable,  but
   involving virulent physical brutality when it  occurred.   Senior  Church
   figures such as Wellesley A  Blair,  Administrative  Bishop  of  the  New
   Testament Church of God, had called for criminal penalties such as public
   lashing for "sodomites" and criminals. Dance-hall song lyrics called  for
   lesbians to be killed.  A consistently reported aspect of  the  hostility
   to lesbians was the notion that they could and should be  forcibly  cured
   by rape.  Mr Sobers gave a small number of examples of rapes and  attacks
   on women who were openly lesbian, observing that the Jamaican culture  of
   masculinity  "views  lesbianism  as  a  particular  affront  to  what  is
   perceived to be the natural prerogative of men in  their  relations  with
   women".   A manly physical appearance or other visible manifestations  of
   sexuality were  risk  factors.   Risks  to  women  perceived  as  lesbian
   included community ostracism, physical violence and rape.

42. Police attitudes at lower levels mirrored those of society as  a  whole.
   There were examples of police officers and civilians  failing  to  attend
   promptly at premises where homosexuals were under attack, or  joining  in
   the verbal abuse ("nasty battymen") and themselves  striking  homosexuals
   who had sought protection. Again, these examples  mainly  concerned  men,
   although the report included a troubling account of  the  murder  of  two
   lesbians at the end of June 2006,  followed  by  a  two  month  delay  in
   arresting and charging the only  suspect.   Overall,  Mr  Sobers'  report
   supported the Respondent's concession that sufficiency of protection  was
   not available to lesbians who were at risk of persecution or serious harm
   in Jamaica.

43. As regards internal relocation, Mr Sobers' report noted that there  were
   improved internal communications (new roads  and  the  spread  of  mobile
   telephony), but increased levels of violence in rural parishes.   It  was
   his considered opinion that the appellant's fear of  return  as  an  open
   lesbian was well-founded.

44. In his oral evidence, Mr Sobers  adopted  his  statement  and  confirmed
   that he was now living in Maryland, United States.  Mr  Sobers  confirmed
   that he had given written, but  not  oral,  evidence  in  DW,  which  was
   accepted by the  Tribunal.   There  was,  he  considered,  no  difference
   between the evidence in his report for this appeal and  the  respondent's
   Country of Origin Report on Jamaica for 2009.

45. Mr Sobers had been asked to contribute to the respondent's  revision  of
   the 2006 Country of Origin Report, on  the  question  of  gang  violence.
   The terms of reference for his  contribution  were  limited  to  criminal
   violence, not to homosexuality questions.  He had been given  only  about
   three weeks' notice of that brief and whilst he accepted  that  it  might
   have assisted the respondent for him to have  made  a  broader  response,
   that had not been in his remit and there was no time to do it.

46. Mr Chelvan put to Mr  Sobers  that  he  described  himself  in  letters,
   articles and on his blog as a human rights activist as well as a  lawyer.
   Mr Sobers agreed, stating that he  had  15  years'  experience  in  human
   rights, including as an academic, and was a member of the Inter  American
   Commission of Human Rights, an intergovernmental organisation.  That  was
   different from the NGO which he  had  personally  set  up  in  1994,  the
   Independent Jamaican Council for Human Rights, of which he was  Executive
   Director.  He wrote a weekly column in  the  'Jamaica  Gleaner'  and  was
   regularly consulted by international non-governmental organisations  such
   as Human Rights Watch.  Amnesty International had asked him to  go  on  a
   mission to Africa.  Overall, he regarded his  role  as  speaking  out  on
   Jamaican matters.

47. Mr Sobers  had  visited  Jamaica  regularly  over  the  previous  years.
   According to his passport, he had  visited  in  December  2005,  December
   2007, October and December 2008, May and June 2009. Some  of  those  were
   family visits (his mother is  still  in  Jamaica)  and  some  were  work-
   related. For example, in May  2009,  he  had  met  with  a  coalition  of
   vulnerable communities of the Caribbean, gay rights activists  and  those
   involved in HIV/AIDS support programmes, who were dealing  with  regional
   patterns of homophobia.  He had visited Jamaica 4 times in  the  last  12
   months.

48. Turning to  the  position  of  the  appellant,  Mr  Sobers  stated  that
   perception was the key.  The appellant was 36 years old,  unmarried  with
   no children.  In order to avoid a real risk of harm in Jamaica, she would
   need to project or present a heterosexual narrative, some indication of a
   visiting relationship with a man, or of children.  This  kind  of  social
   cover was used by the gay community, people who lived  alone  or  with  a
   same-sex  friend  needed  to  explain  their  lack  of  male   followers.
   Sometimes, their age itself was sufficient  explanation,  for  example  a
   female over 65 years old living alone would raise few if any queries,  if
   she were widowed or divorced. It would be assumed that  her  reproductive
   life was behind her.  For younger women, male visitors were not essential
   if they had children.

49. Mr Sobers stated that  small  communities  liked  to  "place"  incomers.
   Questions would be asked, and opinions formed from her apparent  conduct.
   If the answers were unsatisfactory, the appellant would be at risk:   his
   opinion was that a woman who did not appear to conform to the social norm
   of heterosexuality would receive hostile reactions which  could  escalate
   to violence.

50. When asked about the risk of enquiries from men  in  the  neighbourhood.
   Mr Sobers explained that if a woman had no male visitors, the  local  men
   would be likely to indicate their availability and assume  that  she  was
   available.  If the woman rejected them, their reaction would vary:   some
   might simply walk  away,  others  might  take  rejection  personally  and
   assume, therefore, that the woman was a lesbian.   The  adverse  reaction
   then provoked could range between  verbal  abuse  and  serious  violence.
   There was what Mr Sobers described as a "pathological  myth"  in  Jamaica
   that lesbians could be cured by male rape.

51. Mr Sobers was asked about the protection afforded to what his report  in
   DW described as "social elites" who could evade  harm.   He  stated  that
   they could be defined or recognised  by  income,  education,  where  they
   lived, family lineage or light skin, and  that  the  social  elite  could
   largely insulate themselves from persecution or  attack  because  of  the
   social and economic power they wielded.  They lived in gated  communities
   with greater privacy, thus minimising their exposure to such  risks,  but
   not eliminating it.  There were examples of people from the social  elite
   who had suffered persecution or harassment.

52. Mr Chelvan asked Mr Sobers to consider the position  of  the  appellant,
   who was now a fully qualified chartered accountant.  He replied that  she
   would not qualify as  a  member  of  the  social  elite,  since  she  had
   education, but no lineage  or  geographic  protection.   Members  of  the
   social elite would be those at the  top  of  her  profession,  not  newly
   qualified chartered accountants.  Her skin colour was quite  dark;  light
   skin in Jamaica made it more likely that you would be  assumed  to  be  a
   member of the social elite.  Houses in Strawberry Hill  and  other  gated
   communities would be outside her financial  capacity;  her  salary  would
   barely cover the rent.

53. If the appellant were living with another woman, that would have  to  be
   explained.   In general, if the  appellant  were  to  live  with  another
   woman, that would be likely to generate a perception that  the  appellant
   and her  partner  were  lesbians.   In  order  to  protect  herself,  the
   appellant would need to present a heterosexual narrative to explain  away
   her lifestyle which appeared contrary  to  the  heterosexual  norm.   Two
   sisters, or two recently  divorced  or  widowed  women,  or  two  college
   students living together would not excite suspicion  of  lesbianism.    A
   young girl might be forgiven for living in a group of younger women;  the
   same was true of a person living with an elderly aunt, for whom  she  had
   obvious  carer  responsibilities.   The  appellant  could  not,   as   he
   understood it, bring herself within any of these groups.

54. Mr Sobers was asked to explain the difference  between  the  appellant's
   situation now, and in 2003 when  she  left  Jamaica.   He  observed  that
   before the appellant left Jamaica, she was a much younger woman (29 years
   old) and was now in her mid-30s.  There would be concern that she had not
   married or had children yet.  When previously in Jamaica, she  had  brief
   relationships with men, plus a supportive ex-boyfriend and cousin.  While
   in Jamaica, her cultural instincts had restrained her  and  she  had  not
   lived as an open lesbian.  She had a heterosexual narrative in place.  It
   was not surprising that she had no difficulty, particularly  as  she  was
   too young to be really "settled".

55. In the six years since the appellant came to  the  United  Kingdom,  his
   understanding was that her position had evolved, that the  appellant  was
   now operating openly in her gay relationships and would continue to do so
   on return. If the appellant wanted to minimise the  risk  now,  operating
   openly was just not an option.  Jamaica was still a patriarchal  culture,
   with men perceiving women as vessels for their sexual  gratification  and
   women's sexuality seen as subordinate to  that  of  men.   There  was  an
   asymmetry between what men expected,  and  offered,  in  sexual  matters.
   There was a significant incidence of violence  against  women  which  was
   underreported; a comparison of the number of women  treated  in  hospital
   with the number who had reported being attacked supported that asymmetry.
    Among his own acquaintances, he knew of few women who had not suffered a
   sexual assault.

56. If the appellant were now to return, single and with  no  children,  she
   was likely to be at risk. Women in Jamaica were expected to begin  having
   children from 17  -18  years  old.   Only  20%  of  women  ever  married.
   Beginning in their teens,  one  or  two  children,  or  even  more,  were
   considered no surprise for a Jamaican woman. Women  who  were  unable  to
   have children might be perceived as lesbians; it  all  depended  on  what
   their local community knew about them.  If the community knew nothing, it
   would make assumptions, particularly if she had only female visitors  and
   they were ones who could not be explained  as  family  members;  in  that
   case, her risk would be increased.

57. For the respondent, in cross-examination, Mr Auburn  put  to  Mr  Sobers
   that he was a former human rights activist.  He agreed. He had campaigned
   against the death penalty, expressing himself in strong terms, but he saw
   no conflict between that language and his claim to impartiality.  Indeed,
   despite that advocacy, his country had seen fit to appoint Mr Sobers as a
   judge.  Mr Auburn suggested that the witness'  former  activities  called
   into question the degree to  which  he  could  be  considered  to  be  an
   impartial expert. Mr Sobers vigorously rejected that, stating  that  none
   of his reports to the Tribunal could be impugned as  less  than  factual.
   He agreed that he had received a death threat in 2001 but disagreed  with
   the suggestion that this had made it difficult for him  to  see  anything
   positive in the Jamaican government, since he was part of the story,  not
   an observer:  Mr Sobers did not follow that  argument,  stating  that  he
   could see no connection between receiving a death threat and not  feeling
   compassion.

58. Mr Auburn then asked the appellant about the political context  for  the
   origins of homophobia in Jamaica.   Mr  Sobers  referred  to  historical,
   political and religious factors set out at paragraphs 8  and  36  of  his
   report, and to the well-known passages from Leviticus chapters 18.22  and
   20.13 regarding homosexuality:


      "18.22      Thou shalt not lie with mankind as with womankind:  it  is
      abomination.

        20.13     If a man also lie with mankind, as he lieth with a  woman,
           both of them have committed an abomination:  they  shall  surely
           be put to death; their blood shall be upon them."

59. In  Jamaica,  where  religion  was  very  important,  that  approach  to
   homosexuality  was  deeply  rooted.   In  common  with  other  developing
   countries, the Jamaican male population had a deep  rooted  antipathy  to
   homosexuality, because  sexual  activity  incapable  of  producing  issue
   undermined survival  overall.   The  Offences  against  the  Person  Act,
   sections 76 and 79, continued to prohibit buggery  and  gross  indecency.
   The  government  had  absolutely  refused  to  abolish  either   offence,
   reflecting a  deeply  entrenched  prejudice  at  the  heart  of  Jamaican
   politics.

60. Mr Sobers himself had been perceived as gay because he campaigned  about
   homosexuality.  Pressed about the age of sexual activity  for  teenagers,
   Mr Sobers expressed concern about his 21-year old  god-daughter's  status
   (she is in her early 20s with no boyfriend or children).  Much  was  made
   of this in submissions but we are not inclined to put weight upon it.  It
   seems too fact-specific.  The appellant herself was now a pastor's  step-
   daughter:  Mr Sobers said that was two-edged, since although it gave  you
   some protection, you would be expected to  know  how  the  world  worked.
   Homophobic violence formed part of  the  wider  culture  of  violence  in
   Jamaica.

61. In re-examination,  Mr  Sobers  stated  that  Jamaica  had  the  highest
   density of churches per square mile in the world, 14  parishes,  although
   it was a very small country.  The appellant herself came  from  a  deeply
   Christian family, it appeared.  He would  expect  a  lesbian  to  conduct
   herself discreetly, refraining from lesbian behaviour, giving  absolutely
   no indication in her  dress  or  manner  to  suggest  that  she  was  not
   heterosexual, receiving male visitors at home and dancing with  men  when
   out.  That could create a narrative of conformity, a  heterosexual  norm.
   The alternative was  possible  violence:  some  bishops  considered  that
   homosexuals should be lashed in punishment.

Other country background evidence

FCO travel advice

62. FCO travel advice in April 2009 for Jamaica stated that:

      "Jamaica has laws which make certain homosexual acts illegal. The
      attitude of many Jamaicans to gay, lesbian, bisexual, transgender and
      intersex people is hostile."

      That advice still appeared on the website in May 2011.

UKBA Operational Guidance Note and Country of Origin Reports

63. The respondent's Country of  Origin  Report  for  December  2009,  which
   remains  the  most  recent  report,  contained  a  section  dealing  with
   lesbians, as well as more generic consideration of the  position  of  all
   homosexuals.  The overview of the position  of  homosexuals,  female  and
   male, is at paragraph 19.01 and following:

      "OVERVIEW

      19.01 Traditional  societal  attitudes  about  homosexuality  remained
      entrenched with homophobia continuing to be a significant  problem  in
      Jamaica. Lesbians and gay men remained a marginalised group  and  were
      often the target of harassment and violence. (Freedom  House,  Freedom
      in the World 2009 -  Jamaica)    Gareth  Thomas,  a  Minister  at  the
      Department of International Development, was reported by Pink News  on
      9 November 2008 as stating that

           "... the treatment of lesbian and gay people  in  Jamaica  is  a
           disgrace ... The Church condemns them as sinful  and  the  Prime
           Minister is unashamed to say he would not have a gay  person  in
           his Cabinet. The wildly popular dancehall culture  is  viciously
           homophobic, with many lyrics calling for lesbians and gays to be
           burned, beaten and shot."

      19.02 The US State Department Report on Human  Rights  Practices  2008
      (US State Department Report 2008),  published  on  25  February  2009,
      noted that the suspicion of homosexuality was often enough to  trigger
      violence.

           "Despite the easygoing image propagated by tourist boards,  gays
           and their advocates agree  that  Jamaica  is  by  far  the  most
           hostile island towards homosexuals in the  already  conservative
           Caribbean. They say gays, especially those in poor  communities,
           suffer frequent abuse. ... homophobia is  pervasive  across  the
           sun-soaked  island,  from  the  pulpit  to  the  floor  of   the
           Parliament." (365 Gay, 20 July 2009)

      A recent opinion poll carried out by the 'Jamaica Gleaner' found  that
      70 per cent of Jamaicans did not believe that gays and lesbians should
      have any civil rights. (365Gay website 20 June 2008).

      Newsweek International reported in September 2007 that 98 gay men  and
      lesbians were targeted between February and July 2007 in  43  separate
      mob attacks. The article stated that: "Four lesbians were raped,  four
      gay men murdered, and the houses of two gay men were burned down." The
      USSD 2008 noted that the murder of gay men continued during the year.

      19.03 Freedom House's report "Freedom in the World  2009  -  Jamaica',
      observed that the anti-gay lyrics of some  Jamaican  entertainers,  in
      particular reggae singers, remained a source of contention.

      The Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada has found that:

           "[T]he homophobia which suffuses the  music,  religion,  society
           and government has combined into a peculiar nationalism ...  For
           people that believe this,  gay-bashing  has  become  a  kind  of
           patriotism, an act in defence of the  nation,  and  an  integral
           part  of  the  Jamaican  identity."  (Responses  to  Information
           Requests, Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada, February  22,
           2007)

      Additional information on anti-gay lyrics  can  be  accessed  via  the
      following weblink: Amnesty International - Action  against  homophobia
      in Jamaica

      19.04 Amnesty International's (AI) 2009  Human  Rights  report  stated
      that it was difficult to gauge the true  extent  of  violence  against
      lesbians and gay men because levels of violence and prejudice  in  the
      country ensured that the subject remains taboo: lesbians and  gay  men
      "... do not report attacks for fear of  exposure."  In  addition,  the
      police were often responsible for participating  in  violence  against
      gay men and lesbians. (Jane's Sentinel Country  Risk  Assessments,  22
      October 2008)

      19.05 The 'Jamaica Gleaner' reported on 11 March 2009  that  a  survey
      had revealed that gay  men  were  not  using  health  care  facilities
      because of stigma attached to gays. "As debate stirs over the Jamaican
      Government's insistence  on  retaining  legislation  against  buggery,
      homosexual men continue to suffer from discriminatory acts which  make
      it difficult for them to seek health care in the country, a study  has
      indicated.

           "A 2008 survey commissioned by the  Ministry  of  Health  showed
           31.8 per cent of gay men in Jamaica are living with HIV. Another
           8.5 per cent  were  found  with  Chlamydia,  2.5  per  cent  had
           gonorrhoea and 5.5 per cent had syphilis.

           "According to a release from the Caribbean HIV &  AIDS  Alliance
           (CHAA), the high number of sexually transmitted infections among
           gay men, sometimes termed men who have sex with men (or MSM), is
           linked to the way they are treated by the law and members of the
           general population, including those in the health sector."   ...

      19.06 The Jamaica Forum for Lesbians, All-Sexuals and Gays (J-FLAG) is
      Jamaica's  only  human  rights  organisation  working   to   eliminate
      discrimination  against  gay   and   lesbian   Jamaicans.     (Amnesty
      International, " "Battybwoys affi dead:" Action against homophobia  in
      Jamaica", accessed 12 October 2009)."

64. The   section on lesbians begins at paragraph 19.28:

      "LESBIANS
      19.28 An article in Women's e  News  on  the  plight  of  lesbians  in
      Jamaica reported  that  women  who  step  outside  societal  norms  by
      dressing in "too manly" a style  or  having  few  male  visitors,  for
      example - risk threats  of  verbal  and  physical  abuse.  Women  have
      reportedly been raped, beaten, murdered and forced out of their  homes
      or jobs simply for being lesbians. ...

      19.29 The Guardian reported that: "The lesbian experience  is  neither
      better  nor  worse  but  certainly  different  [than  the   gay   male
      experience]. "The abuse against women is a bit more subtle," says  one
      lesbian who did not wish to be  named.  "There's  the  rape  that  you
      probably never report. The beating from the  boyfriend  twice  removed
      who's just heard that you're lesbian and has come to whoop your arse."
      ('Victory for Gay Rights Campaign  as  Reggae  Star  Agrees  to  Ditch
      Homophobic  Lyrics',  The  Guardian,  July  23,  2007,  available   at
      http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/2007/jul/23/musicnews.gayrights         ,
      accessed 2 October 2008.)

      19.30 Lesbians in Jamaica have also faced forced  evictions  from  the
      communities they live in. In April 2007,  residents  of  the  McGregor
      Gully community in East Kingston gave  gays  and  lesbians  two  weeks
      notice to move out or "or suffer the consequences." Lesbians were  the
      main target of the eviction order, but  gay  men  were  also  told  to
      leave. According to the Jamaica Star, the residents  said  they  would
      not stop until their community was "gay free" and were "not afraid  of
      resorting to extreme measures."  ('Gays  Must  Leave  Today',  Jamaica
      Star, April 26, 2007) Full details can be accessed  at  the  following
      weblink: http://www.jamaicastar.com/thestar/20070426/news/news1.html,

      19.31 Beenie Man's "Han Up Deh" also includes  the  incitement:  "Hang
      chi-chi gal [lesbians] with a long piece of rope." See: "Black and Gay
      and Hunted', New Statesman, 4 October 2004, which can be  accessed  at
      the  following  weblink:  http://www.newstatesman.com/200410040017   ,
      accessed 25 September 2008."

65. On 1 June 2009, the respondent issued an Operational Guidance  Note  for
   Jamaica, which was reissued in July 2010 and dealt with the  position  of
   gays and lesbians in Jamaica.  That has subsequently been replaced by  an
   updated Operational Guidance Note, in line with HJ and HT, which  is  set
   out in the body of the determination.

UNHCR Guidance Note

66. A UNHCR Guidance Note on Refugee Claims relating to  Sexual  Orientation
   and Gender Identity  in  November  2008  adds  nothing  to  the  thorough
   consideration of the proper approach in the Supreme  Court's  HJ  and  HT
   judgment.  It does not deal specifically with Jamaica.

UNHCR Guidance Note

67. A UNHCR Guidance Note on Refugee Claims relating to  Sexual  Orientation
   and Gender Identity  in  November  2008  adds  nothing  to  the  thorough
   consideration of the proper approach in the Supreme  Court's  HJ  and  HT
   judgment.  It does not deal specifically with Jamaica.

US State Department Reports on Jamaica

68. The US State Department Report for Jamaica 2008, published  in  February
   2009, was included in the bundle. It has now been overtaken by  the  2009
   Report published in March 2010, which dealt with sexual orientation thus:

      "Societal Abuses, Discrimination, and Acts of Violence Based on Sexual
      Orientation and Gender Identity

      ...The Jamaica Forum for Lesbians,  All  Sexuals,  and  Gays  (J-FLAG)
      continued  to  report  human  rights   abuses,   including   arbitrary
      detention, mob attacks, stabbings, harassment of  homosexual  patients
      by hospital and prison staff, and targeted shootings of such  persons.
      Police often did not investigate such incidents.  J-FLAG  reported  33
      cases of serious injuries  to  gays  and  lesbians  over  an  18-month
      period. The violence led many such persons to emigrate.

      J-FLAG members also  suffered  attacks  on  their  property  and  home
      intrusions, as people demanded to know the number of persons and  beds
      in a home. In one instance, a fire bombing at the home of two men left
      one of them with burns on  more  than  60  percent  of  his  body.  In
      addition such persons faced death and  arson  threats,  with  some  of
      these directed at the J-FLAG offices. J-FLAG  did  not  publicize  its
      location due to such  threats,  and  its  officials  reported  feeling
      unsafe having meetings with clients at the organization's office.

      ...Lesbian women were subject to  sexual  assault  as  well  as  other
      physical attacks. Human rights NGOs  and  government  entities  agreed
      that brutality against such persons, primarily  by  private  citizens,
      was widespread in the community."

69. Additional passages in the February 2009 version were:

      "...No laws protect persons living with HIV/AIDS from  discrimination.
      Human rights NGOs reported severe stigma  and  discrimination  against
      this group. The ILO worked with the Ministry of Labor on a program  to
      reduce the stigma of HIV/AIDS in the workplace and to assist employers
      in designing policies for workers with HIV/AIDS. Although health  care
      facilities were prepared to handle patients with HIV/AIDS, health care
      workers often neglected such patients."

Amnesty International


70. Two documents from Amnesty  International  in  August  2001  record  the
   death threats against Mr Sobers.  Additionally, the Amnesty International
   Annual Report for 2009 on Jamaica dealt with discrimination against  LGBT
   people as follows:

      "Discrimination - lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender people

      There were continuing reports of mob violence against  people,  mostly
      men, perceived to be involved  in  same-sex  relationships.  The  true
      extent of attacks on gay men was unknown as the subject is  taboo  and
      people do not report attacks for fear of exposure.

      In August [2008], a Molotov cocktail (petrol bomb) was thrown  into  a
      house in Clarendon, south central Jamaica, occupied  by  two  men  who
      were alleged to be gay. As the emergency  services  arrived,  a  small
      jeering crowd assembled outside the house. One  of  the  men  received
      burns covering 60 per cent of his body and was hospitalized for  three
      weeks."

71. In July 2009, Amnesty International issued a report entitled,  "Jamaica:
   Public Security Reforms and Human Rights in Jamaica", which, while it did
   not deal directly with homosexuality, recommended reform  of  the  police
   and justice systems in Jamaica.

Press reports

72. The bundles contain a number of press reports.   In  2004  The  Guardian
   newspaper's article entitled, "If you're gay in  Jamaica,  you're  dead!"
   was self-explanatory.  An article dated 9 March 2005 from Women's  eNews,
   "Lesbian activists in Jamaica tell horror stories" reports  the  evidence
   of Karlene (who uses her first name only,  for  safety  reasons),  on  an
   Amnesty International-sponsored speaking tour of the United  States.   It
   records that women who dress "too manly" or have few male  visitors  risk
   verbal and physical abuse, including being raped,  beaten,  murdered  and
   forced out of their  homes  and  jobs  simply  for  being  lesbians.   In
   particular, an example is given of a lesbian  raped  and  beaten  by  the
   local gang leader because she had no men coming to visit her.

73. A Human Rights Watch  report  of  1  February  2008  entitled  "Jamaica:
   Shield gays from mob attacks" referred to "roving mobs attacking innocent
   people and  staining  the  streets  with  blood",  with  protection  from
   Jamaican police illusory or  non-existent.   On  18  February  2008,  HJT
   Research News Reporting Service reported the  pastor  of  the  Fellowship
   Tabernacle in St Andrew, Jamaica, as telling the 'Jamaica Gleaner' that

      "Jamaicans generally deem homosexuality  as  wrong...attempts  by  gay
      activists to force their beliefs on society would in no way  influence
      Jamaicans to change their views."

74. The Rev Dr Lloyd Maxwell of the AGAPE Christian Fellowship  in  Portmore
   said   that   the   Church   "would   not    sanction    nor    encourage
   homosexuality...the Scriptures take a very clear stance on the  matters".
   Elder Nancy Wilson of  the  Metropolitan  Community  Church  in  Florida,
   United States, had led a demonstration outside the Jamaican consulate  in
   Miami, and in a comment reported in the Miami Herald said this:

      ""Every   month,   we   hear   incidents   of   people   beaten    and
      harassed...People are afraid, they are leaving the country if they can
      afford to," Wilson said."

75. A leading Jamaican J-FLAG activist, Gareth Henry,  had  fled  to  Canada
   and claimed asylum, saying that 13 of his friends had been  killed  since
   2004.  He had been attacked himself by a mob at a chemist shop  in  2007.
   An attack in St Andrew had involved up to 2000 people.   On  27  February
   2008, the New York Times described Jamaica as a "dire"  place  for  gays.
   On 28 May 2008, the Inter Press  Service  News  Agency  (IPS)  carried  a
   report headed "Rights-Jamaica: bad  place  to  be  gay  just  got  worse"
   recording that on a visit to  Britain,  Jamaica's  Prime  Minister  Bruce
   Golding stated that Jamaica would not allow values to be imposed upon  it
   from outside and that he would not permit gays in his cabinet.  A  number
   of  Jamaica's  leading  entertainers,  whose  music   promoted   anti-gay
   violence, had been banned in Europe (examples included Shabba  Ranks  and
   Buju Banton).

76. A report from Asylum Aid deals with the internal relocation  option  for
   women asylum seekers.  Since the homophobic problem  in  Jamaica  is  not
   limited to one geographical area and the  claimed  risk  to  lesbians  is
   based both on perceived lack of male company and actual homosexuality, we
   do not consider that internal relocation is relevant in this appeal.

77. On 19 February  2009,  Human  Rights  Watch  wrote  an  open  letter  to
   Jamaica's Prime Minister Golding, asking him publicly to  condemn  verbal
   or other attacks on LGBT people in Jamaica, in response to remarks by  MP
   Ernest Smith, suggesting that Jamaica was being overrun by homosexuality,
   calling for life sentences for buggery, suggesting that homosexuals  were
   abusive and violent and that the forming of J-FLAG was  "brazen"  by  the
   homosexual community in Jamaica.  It was this outburst  that  Mr  Sobers'
   Jamaica Gleaner letter characterised as ignorant, stupid and bigoted.

78. At the end of March 2009, Boycott.Jamaica.org  in  a  blog  post  by  Mr
   Wayne Besen entitled "Jamaica: a killer vacation", said this:

      "[The United States] should stop doing business with a country that is
      proud  of  its  persecution  against  gay,   lesbian,   bisexual   and
      transgender people.  Our goal is to turn Jamaica into a pariah  state,
      as long as GLBT people live in a state of terror. ...
      Why boycott? Because Jamaica is on a downward spiral and suffers  from
      collective cultural  dementia  on  this  issue.  There  is  clearly  a
      pathological panic and homo-hysteria that has infected this nation  at
      its core. Consider that the Jamaica Cancer Society has raised concerns
      that the fear of being labeled gay is causing  some  Jamaican  men  to
      avoid prostate examinations,  causing  one  of  the  highest  prostate
      cancer rates in the world. ...There must  be  consequences  for  state
      sanctioned gay bashing. Such countries will not change on their own  -
      so economic carrots and sticks must be applied."

Inter-American Commission on Human Rights

79. A December 2008 report  from  the  Inter-American  Commission  on  Human
   Rights,  of  which  Mr  Sobers  was  a  member,  giving  its  preliminary
   observations on a visit to Jamaica, stated as follows:

      "Discrimination based on sexual orientation
       The Commission strongly condemns the high level  of  homophobia  that
      prevails throughout Jamaican society.  This homophobia has resulted in
      violent killings of persons thought to be gay,  lesbian,  bisexual  or
      transsexual, as well as stabbings, mob  attacks,  arbitrary  detention
      and police harassment.  The resulting fear in turn makes it  difficult
      for people within this group to access  certain  basic  services,  for
      example, medical services that might reveal their sexual  orientation.
      Defenders of the rights of gays, lesbians, bisexuals and  transsexuals
      have been murdered, beaten and threatened, and the  police  have  been
      criticized for failing in many instances  to  prevent  or  respond  to
      reports of such violence.  The State must take measures to ensure that
      people within this group can  associate  freely,  and  exercise  their
      other basic rights without fear of attack."

UK Lesbian and Gay Immigration Group (UKLGIG)

80. The appellant relied on a commentary written in November 2009 by  UKLGIG
   dealing with the UKBA Country of Origin Report on Jamaica for  2008.   We
   have considered the comments made.  They are largely  points  of  detail,
   save for quotations from antigay lyrics by  dancehall  artists,  and  the
   result of a Jamaica Gleaner poll  in  2008,  which  showed  that  70%  of
   Jamaicans did not believe that gays and lesbians should  have  any  civil
   rights at all.

81. On 23 December 2009, Martyn Potts, the then  Chair  of  UKLGIG,  emailed
   Wilson & Co, reflecting the results of subsequent UKLGIG input  into  the
   Country of Origin Report, and stating that with the help of  UKLGIG,  the
   Country of Origin Service was  developing  internal  guidelines  on  LGBT
   issues.  UKLGIG,  along  with  Amnesty  International,  Asylum  Aid,  the
   Refugee Council and UNHCR were members of the UKBA-led Refugee and Asylum
   Forum.  UKLGIG had an established relationship now with  the  Country  of
   Origin Service with its research and input being well regarded.  Its  own
   research continued and UKLGIG had a particular interest in the outcome of
   the present appeal.

Freedom House Reports

82. The Freedom House report for 2009 had this to say:

      "Amnesty International has identified homosexuals  as  a  marginalized
      group that is targeted for extreme harassment and  violence.  Same-sex
      intercourse is punishable by 10 years' imprisonment at hard labor.  In
      recent years, several Jamaicans have been granted asylum in Britain on
      the grounds that they were in danger because of  their  homosexuality.
      The antigay  lyrics  of  Jamaican  entertainers,  particularly  reggae
      singers, remain a source of contention. In 2004, Brian  Williamson,  a
      spokesperson for the advocacy group Jamaica Forum for  Lesbians,  All-
      Sexuals, and Gays (J-FLAG), was brutally murdered in his New  Kingston
      apartment. The perpetrator was sentenced to life in  prison  in  2006.
      Separately, Steve Harvey, a well-known activist on behalf of HIV/AIDS-
      related causes, was killed in 2005, and four people were later charged
      in the killing. In 2008, prominent J-FLAG member Gareth Henry fled  to
      Canada and filed for refugee status following an escalating series  of
      threats  against  his  life.  The  government  remains  resistant   to
      decriminalizing homosexuality."

83. The 2010 Freedom House Report is similar, confirming that  the  problems
   continue:

      "... Activists for gay and lesbian rights remain targets of  violence.
      Gareth Henry, a prominent member of the advocacy group  Jamaica  Forum
      for Lesbians, All-Sexuals, and Gays (J-FLAG), fled to Canada  in  2008
      and filed for refugee status following an escalating series of threats
      against his life. In  2009,  Prime  Minister  Bruce  Golding  endorsed
      keeping homosexuality illegal and vowed never to  allow  gays  in  his
      cabinet. The antigay lyrics  of  Jamaican  entertainers,  particularly
      reggae singers, remain a source of contention."

                                 Appendix B

                         Country of Origin Documents

|DATE              |DOCUMENT                                                   |
|                  |                                                           |
|2001              |                                                           |
|7 August 2001     |Amnesty International:  "Jamaica: Fear for safety, O.      |
|                  |Hilaire Sobers                                             |
|8 August 2001     |Amnesty International: Jamaica "Fear for safety: O. Hilaire|
|                  |Sobers, human rights activist, journalist, lawyer'         |
|                  |                                                           |
|2004              |                                                           |
|2 August 2004     |The Guardian, "If you're gay in Jamaica, you're dead!'     |
|14 November 2004  |Human Rights Watch report:  "Hated to death:  Homophobia,  |
|                  |Violence and Jamaica's HIV/AIDS epidemic'                  |
|                  |                                                           |
|2005              |                                                           |
|9 March 2005      |Womens eNews:  "Lesbian Activists in Jamaica tell Horror   |
|                  |Stories"                                                   |
|April 2005        |UKBA Country of Origin Report:  Jamaica                    |
|23 May 2005       |Amnesty International country report: Jamaica              |
|                  |                                                           |
|2006              |                                                           |
|21 JUNE  2006     |Amnesty International:  "Jamaica: sexual violence against  |
|                  |women and girls in Jamaica"                                |
|28 September 2006 |UKBA: Country of Origin Report: Jamaica                    |
|                  |                                                           |
|2007              |                                                           |
|25 February 2007  |Mr Sobers:  Commentary on November 2006 Country of Origin  |
|                  |Report: Jamaica, prepared for the Advisory Panel on Country|
|                  |Information, (O. Hilaire Sobers, Legal Practitioner and    |
|                  |Human Rights Consultant)                                   |
|6 March 2007      |Minutes of APCI meeting: Revision of Country of Origin     |
|                  |Reports for Eritrea and Jamaica (December 2006 reports).   |
|14 March 2007     |Mr Sobers:  Response to Home Office on Country of Origin   |
|                  |Report: Jamaica                                            |
|10 November 2007  |Jamaica Observer:  "Reason subverted by religiosity" (Mr   |
|                  |Sobers)                                                    |
|                  |                                                           |
|2008              |                                                           |
|27 January 2008   |Jamaica Gleaner:  "Seaga and post-Independence governance" |
|                  |(Mr Sobers)                                                |
|1 February 2008   |Human Rights Watch:  "Jamaica: Shield gays from mob        |
|                  |attacks"                                                   |
|18 February 2008  |HJ Research:  "Church leaders say homosexuality will not be|
|                  |accepted in Jamaica"                                       |
|27 February 2008  |HJT Research:  "New York Times says Jamaica is "dire" place|
|                  |for gays"                                                  |
|28 May 2008       |IPS:  "Rights-Jamaica: Bad place to be gay just got worse" |
|18 August 2008    |UKBA Country of Origin Report: Jamaica                     |
|November 2008     |Asylum Aid:  "Relocation, Relocation - the impact of       |
|                  |internal relocation on women asylum seekers"               |
|21 November 2008  |UNHCR guidance note on claims for refugee status under the |
|                  |1951 Convention relating to Sexual Orientation and Gender  |
|                  |Identity                                                   |
|5 December 2008   |Inter-American Commission on Human Rights:  "Preliminary   |
|                  |observations on visit to Jamaica"                          |
|                  |                                                           |
|2009              |                                                           |
|19 February 2009  |Human Rights Watch:  "Jamaica:  Condemn homophobic remarks"|
|21 February 2009  |Jamaica Gleaner:  Letters Page "Ignorance, Stupidity,      |
|                  |Bigotry" (Mr Sobers)                                       |
|23 February 2009  |US State Department Report:  Jamaica                       |
|31 March 2009     |Boycott.Jamaica.org : "Jamaica:  A killer vacation"        |
|23 April 2009     |FCO Travel Advice: Jamaica                                 |
|28 May 2009       |Amnesty International Annual Report: Jamaica               |
|1 June 2009       |UKBA Operational Guidance Note:  Jamaica                   |
|16 July 2009      |Freedom House report                                       |
|21 July 2009      |Amnesty International:  "Jamaica:  Public security reforms |
|                  |and human rights in Jamaica"                               |
|2 October 2009    |Wilson & Co letter of instruction to Mr Sobers             |
|16 November 2009  |Letter to Wilson & Co from Sebastian Rocca, Trustee and    |
|                  |former Executive Director of UKLGIG (UK Lesbian and Gay    |
|                  |Immigration  Group)                                        |
|27 November 2009  |Jamaica Observer:  Letters page "Fallacies, fatuities and  |
|                  |just plain lies" (Mr Sobers)                               |
|27 November 2009  |Copy Blogger profile for Hilaire Sobers                    |
|29 November 2009  |Country report of Mr O. Hilaire Sobers                     |
|30 November 2009  |UKLGIG's comments on UKBA 2008 Country of Origin Report on |
|                  |Jamaica                                                    |
|23 December 2009  |Email:  Martyn Potts, Chair, UKLGIG To Wilsons Solicitors  |


