
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

       R (on the application of MR) v Derby City Council  AAJR  [2013]  UKUT
00255 (IAC)


|Heard at Field House                                                        |
|On 17th and 18th April 2013                                                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PETER LANE

                                   Between

                     THE Queen on the application of MR

                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

                             DERBY CITY COUNCIL

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Applicant:     Azeem Suterwalla (instructed by Bhatia Best
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Tom Amraoui (instructed by the Solicitor, Derby City
Council)


                                  JUDGMENT

Introduction

1.   The task of the Tribunal in  these  proceedings  is  to  decide,  as  a
    matter of fact, the date of birth of the applicant, a citizen of  Iran,
    who claims to have arrived in the United Kingdom in January 2012.   Our
    task arises as a result of the bringing by the  applicant  of  judicial
    review proceedings to challenge the respondent's  assessment,  made  on
    24th September 2012, which concluded that the applicant  was,  on  that
    date, over the age of 18.  Permission to bring  those  proceedings  was
    granted by a Deputy Judge of  the  High  Court  on  4th  January  2013,
    following which the application for judicial review was transferred  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

2.   The applicant's case is that he was born on  22nd  May  1996  and  was,
    accordingly, aged 15 years and 8 months at the time  of  the  September
    2012  age  assessment.   An  earlier  assessment  undertaken   by   the
    respondent  on  11th  April  2012  (and  subsequently  withdrawn)   had
    concluded that the applicant was born on 1st January 1995.

The proceedings

3.   The Tribunal sat on 17th and 18th April 2013.  We heard  oral  evidence
    from the applicant, Ms Pavan Rana and Ms Charlotte  Parsons.   Ms  Rana
    and Ms Parsons are the social workers who undertook the September  2012
    assessment.  Judgment was reserved on 18th April.

4.    The applicant  spoke  with  the  assistance  of  an  interpreter.  The
    Tribunal had regard to and followed, as appropriate, the provisions  of
    the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No. 2 of 2010:  Child,  Vulnerable
    Adult and Sensitive Appellant Guidance. In  particular,  the  applicant
    was  informed  of  his  ability  to  request  breaks,   as   necessary.
    Irrespective of any such  specific  requests  from  the  applicant,  we
    remained mindful of the need to  ensure  that  the  applicant  did  not
    become overtaxed, whilst giving his evidence. Counsel  were  encouraged
    to frame  questions  in  a  manner  appropriate  to  a  person  of  the
    applicant's claimed age.

The law

5.   Following the judgment of the Supreme  Court  in  R(A)  v  Croydon  LBC
    [2009] 1 WLR 2557, the basic purpose of these  proceedings  is,  as  we
    have already indicated, to resolve the issue of the applicant's age, as
    a matter of fact.  In R(AE) v London Borough of Croydon [2012] EWCA Civ
    547 Aikens LJ said that:-

         "This is because the determination of a young  person's  age  is  a
         'precedent fact' to the local authority  exercising  its  statutory
         powers under section 20(1) of the [Children Act 1989].  There is  a
         right and a wrong answer and that, ultimately, is for  a  court  to
         decide." [3]

6.   In carrying out that exercise, the Tribunal must, effectively,  act  in
    an inquisitorial role and decide,  on  the  balance  of  probabilities,
    whether the applicant was or was not a child at the  time  of  the  age
    assessment: R(AE) at [23] and R(CJ v Cardiff CC) [2011] EWCA  Civ  1590
    at [22] and [23].

7.   There is no burden of proof in these proceedings - R(CJ) at  [22].   We
    are mindful that at [21] of R(CJ) the court made it clear that,  whilst
    there is no formal "benefit of the doubt" principle,  the  Tribunal  is
    not thereby expected to eschew a "sympathetic assessment  of  evidence"
    and:-

         "In evaluating the evidence it may well be inappropriate to  expect
         from the claimant conclusive evidence of age  in  circumstances  in
         which he has  arrived  unattended  and  without  original  identity
         documents.  The nature of the evaluation of  evidence  will  depend
         upon the particular facts of the case."

A.  Credibility of the applicant's own evidence

8.   In R(AE) v London Borough of Croydon [2012] EWCA Civ 547 the  Court  of
    Appeal considered that "in the absence of any documentary  evidence  of
    AE's age or any reliable dental or medical evidence, the starting point
    for the Deputy Judge's  task  of  assessing  the  age  of  AE  was  the
    credibility of his own evidence."  In the present  case,  both  parties
    agreed that the credibility of the applicant's own evidence was the key
    issue.  Not only is there no dental  or  medical  evidence;  there  is,
    effectively, no evidence, other than the  applicant's  account  of  his
    experiences in Iran, as recounted in  his  various  statements,  asylum
    interview and age assessments; and the social workers' observations  of
    the applicant's appearance and demeanour during those assessments.

(a)  The applicant's account

9.   In essence, the applicant's stated reasons  for  leaving  Iran  are  as
    follows.  Whilst working  in  his  father's  shop,  the  applicant  was
    enticed by a neighbour into assisting in smuggling petrol  and,  later,
    political literature expressing hostility to the Iranian regime.   This
    literature was stored in the shop, which was raided by the  authorities
    and  the  applicant's  father  apprehended.   Arrangements  were  made,
    involving  the  applicant's  mother  and  the  Kurdish   oppositionists
    responsible for the literature, to have the applicant removed from Iran
    and sent to a safe country.

10.  As given to us at the hearing, the applicant's account of how  he  came
    to know his age is as follows.  Prior  to  the  events  which  we  have
    described, the applicant's mother sought to ascertain  the  applicant's
    age, in order to determine whether he was ready  to  begin  the  Muslim
    practice of fasting.  Being illiterate (as was the applicant) she asked
    a neighbour, Mr Ata Nasri, to translate an identity document in respect
    of the applicant, known as a shunasnameh.  Reading from this  document,
    Mr Ata Nasri informed the applicant's mother  that  the  applicant  was
    born on 22nd May 1996 (in the western calendar).  Having been  informed
    of this date, the applicant has remembered it, notwithstanding that his
    concept of dates and times remains undeveloped.

(b)  Alleged inconsistencies  regarding  the  documentation  disclosing  the
    applicant's age

11.  The respondent  put  considerable  store  on  the  assertion  that  the
    applicant, when interviewed by Ms Rana and Ms Parsons on 24th September
    2012, contradicted himself in respect of how he had come  to  know  his
    age.  At tab 10/66 the age assessment states as follows:-

         "[Applicant] cannot read or write.  He also confirmed that  he  can
         only count to ten in figures.  He was asked how he  then  knew  his
         date of birth.  He initially stated that he had always known it and
         that he saw a birth certificate.  He was asked what information was
         recorded on it but stated that he cannot read or write so  he  does
         not know.  He stated that his mother had informed him of  his  date
         of birth and age just before he turned 15 years old.  He also never
         celebrated his birthday.


         [Applicant] also confirmed that his parents cannot read  or  write.
         He was asked if he kept track of the date/calendar.  He stated that
         his mother did.


         Later during the assessment, [applicant] was asked if  he  had  any
         seen any identification document stating his age, his response  was
         no, he had not.  He was therefore asked how sure he was of his age.
          He stated that a neighbour who can read and write assists them."

12.  The respondent sought to persuade us  that  this  inconsistency  was  a
    "glaring" one, which seriously damaged the applicant's credibility.  We
    do not accept this submission.  Our reasons are as follows.

13.  Carrying out an age assessment is, we fully accept,  a  difficult  task
    and it can be all too easy, after the event, to level criticism at  the
    way social workers have gone about it.  There are, however, significant
    problems with what is recorded at tab 10/66 and the  inferences  sought
    to be drawn from it.

14.  Ms Rana and Ms Parsons each  made  notes  of  the  interview  with  the
    applicant, which began in the early afternoon and concluded (it  seems)
    more than three hours later.  Neither Ms Rana nor  Ms  Parsons's  notes
    can properly be said to record the appellant having first said that  he
    had seen documentation recording his age and, later, having denied that
    he had seen any such  documentation.   Furthermore,  the  statement  at
    10/66 that the applicant "initially stated that he had always known it"
    (i.e. his date of birth) is directly  contradicted  by  the  manuscript
    notes of Ms Parsons which record (tab  21/161)  "everyone  should  know
    when they are born".  This subtle but important distinction (to use  Mr
    Suterwalla's phrase) has, we  find,  been  misinterpreted  as  a  point
    against  the  applicant,  whose  evidence  precisely  accords  with  Ms
    Parsons's record.

15.  The applicant's evidence to us was that, when referring  to  the  birth
    documentation about which he was aware, he had meant  his  shunasnameh,
    which the neighbour had translated for the applicant's mother.  Insofar
    as he might have  been  asked  later  whether  he  had  ever  seen  any
    identification documentation stating his age,  the  applicant  told  us
    that he would have replied that he had  not  seen  everything  in  this
    regard, but that he had seen the  shunasnameh.   As  described  by  the
    applicant, the shunasnameh is not a birth certificate  but,  rather,  a
    national identification document issued some time after birth,  bearing
    (amongst other things) a photograph of the applicant.

16.  Under cross-examination, Ms  Parsons  was  adamant  that  there  was  a
    discrepancy, albeit one not reflected in  her  notes.   We  prefer  the
    applicant's evidence, not least because Ms Parsons, in  oral  evidence,
    very fairly and properly acknowledged that the categoric  statement  at
    paragraph 6.3 of her witness statement (tab 15/98), that the  applicant
    "gave inconsistent and confusing answers on most if not all aspects  of
    his life"  was  fundamentally  incorrect,  as  a  reading  of  the  age
    assessment makes plain.

17.  Ms Rana, whose evidence was  both  fair  and  nuanced,  accepted  under
    cross-examination that she might have used the word "birth certificate"
    in her earlier questions, before later asking the applicant if  he  had
    seen any formal documentation with his age on it.  At  this  point,  we
    find that the general import of the evidence supports  the  applicant's
    case  that  when  he  was  later  asked  "if  he  had  ever  seen   any
    identification documents stating his age", he understood this to  be  a
    question as to whether he had seen any other documents, over and  above
    the document which Mr Ata Nasri had translated for his mother.

(c)  Timing and reasons of information as to date of birth

18.  We accept that the applicant's  answers  at  the  assessment  interview
    suggested that he had been told his  date  of  birth  "just  before  he
    turned 15 years old".  In oral evidence,  the  applicant  struggled  to
    grasp the meaning of questions designed to explore whether he  was,  on
    the one hand, not quite 15 years old when  this  happened  or,  on  the
    other hand, already 15 years old.  We did not get the  impression  that
    the applicant was dissembling;  rather,  his  confusion  struck  us  as
    genuine and an example of a fact that he still has a  somewhat  limited
    grasp of these matters.  There was also  an  initial  lack  of  clarity
    regarding whether the applicant had already begun to fast when  he  was
    told his age by his mother.  However, we accept the basic thrust of the
    evidence, which was that  the  purpose  for  asking  Mr  Ata  Nasri  to
    translate the shunasnameh  was  to  confirm  that  the  applicant  was,
    indeed, of an age when it was appropriate to expect him to fast.

(d)  Ability to know date of birth if illiterate

19.  Initially, Ms Parsons was adamant that it  was  not  possible  for  the
    applicant, being illiterate, to know  what  was  stated  in  his  birth
    documentation. Both she and Ms Rana, however, acknowledged that it  was
    possible for even an illiterate person to carry in their head a date of
    birth that had been told to  them.   It  is  apparent  that,  once  one
    accepts that hypothesis, there ceases to be  any  material  discrepancy
    between the  applicant's  claiming  to  know  his  date  of  birth  and
    otherwise being vague as to dates.

(e)  Home Office interview and first age assessment

20.   The  respondent  sought  to  make  an  issue  of  the  fact  that  the
    applicant's Home Office interview record did not contain any  reference
    to age documentation, such as the shunasnameh.  However, the  applicant
    does not appear to have been asked any specific  question  about  this.
    Although there is a case for saying that he should, nevertheless,  have
    volunteered information about it, given the short time between entering
    the United Kingdom and being interviewed, together with the  fact  that
    (whether or not he is the age claimed) the applicant would  still  have
    been a teenager, the absence of such  a  reference  is,  we  find,  not
    material.

21.   The applicant was asked in oral evidence whether  he  had  told  those
    interviewing him in connection with his first age assessment about  the
    shunasnameh.  He replied that he had, but they would not have  recorded
    it correctly.  Mr Amraoui submitted that this reply detracted from  the
    applicant's credibility, since there was nothing about the  shunasnameh
    recorded in the first age assessment.  Given that  the  thrust  of  the
    questioning at the hearing was about the second age assessment and that
    the first one was undertaken almost six months earlier, we do not  give
    this matter any material weight.

22.  In his Home Office interview, the applicant had been asked how  old  he
    was when he first started working for his father (questions 61 and 62).
     In response, the applicant  did  not  give  an  age.   The  respondent
    contended that this was a further incidence of the applicant's  refusal
    to be forthright on this issue.  In cross-examination, Ms Rana appeared
    to extend this criticism  to  what  was  said  (or  not  said)  by  the
    applicant at the second age assessment interview.  There  is,  however,
    nothing in the social workers' notes that  suggest  the  applicant  was
    specifically asked what age he was when he started to work in the shop.
     At tab 21/151 Ms Rana's notes record:-

         "Helped dad in shop sometimes till 15 every day.  After 15  another
             job."

23.  It does not appear that  the  interviewing  officer  indicated  to  the
    applicant that his answers to questions 61 and 62 were  unsatisfactory,
    nor does the Secretary of State's letter of refusal of  9th  July  2012
    make a specific issue of the alleged failure.  On its face,  Ms  Rana's
    record does not suggest that the applicant was being evasive.  Overall,
    we reject these credibility concerns of the respondent.

(f)  Applicant's failure to obtain age documentation from Iran

24.  It is a matter of concern that the  applicant's  solicitors  appear  to
    have failed to respond  to  the  respondent's  written  enquiry  as  to
    whether attempts have been made to obtain from Iran  the  documentation
    recording the applicant's age, which he says exists  in  that  country.
    The applicant's evidence is that he has no means of  getting  in  touch
    with his mother and that Mr Ata Nasri has no telephone.  It is possible
    that  this  issue  may  have  significance  in  connection   with   the
    outstanding claim made by the applicant to the Secretary of State to be
    in need of international protection.   On  the  present  state  of  the
    evidence, however, we are not satisfied that the  apparent  failure  to
    make enquiries in Iran can  be  said  to  be  due  to  the  applicant's
    unreasonable  refusal  to  cooperate  by   providing   all   reasonable
    information.  In particular, it does not appear that the assistance  of
    the Red Cross has been sought, or that the Secretary of State  has  yet
    seen fit to take up the matter of tracing.

25.  Thus, whilst we accept that this  issue  remains  problematic  for  the
    applicant's age case, we do  not  find  that  the  credibility  of  his
    evidence has been significantly damaged by it.

(g)  The applicant's claim to be in need of international protection

26.  Both Ms Rana and Ms Parsons told us that they had no  reason  to  doubt
    the truth of the applicant's claim  to  be  in  need  of  international
    protection.  When Ms Rana was asked whether, if that was so,  the  lack
    of any reason to doubt the applicant's credibility on that score  ought
    to have had an impact upon the assessment of credibility as to age,  Ms
    Rana said that it was not her job to assess the "asylum  story".   When
    pressed, however, Ms Rana accepted  that,  for  example,  discrepancies
    between a person's various accounts regarding a claim to be in need  of
    international protection  could  well  be  relevant  or,  indeed,  even
    important  in  determining  credibility  for  the   purposes   of   age
    assessment.

27.  Ms Parsons, on the other hand, asserted that  the  view  taken  by  the
    social workers of the credibility of the international protection claim
    had been considered as part of the age assessment exercise.  She  could
    not, however, point to any  passage  in  the  written  assessment  that
    demonstrated such consideration.

28.  The Tribunal, of course, accepts that it is not the function of  social
    workers to make a determination of a person's international  protection
    claim.  That is the job of the Secretary of State and, on  appeal,  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  However, as Ms Rana belatedly  acknowledged,  the
    assessment of credibility for the purposes of age assessment  may  well
    involve an examination of what a person has said in  respect  of  their
    international protection claim.

29.  In the present case,  nothing  that  the  applicant  had  said  in  the
    written materials that were available to the social workers,  or  which
    had otherwise been recorded, gave them cause to doubt  the  credibility
    of his account  of  how  he  came  to  need  international  protection.
    Whilst, in itself, this would plainly not compel the social workers  to
    ignore any concerns they might have had about the  credibility  of  the
    applicant's  own  evidence  concerning  his  age,  it   was,   in   the
    circumstances, wrong to ignore this aspect entirely.   It  is  possible
    that Ms Rana and Ms Parsons did so because they regarded the  applicant
    as having an incentive to have his date of birth accepted as  22nd  May
    1996, even if that were false; whereas there was no such  incentive  to
    lie as regards other aspects of the applicant's account  of  events  in
    Iran.  But the evidence  touching  on  the  claim  to  be  in  need  of
    international protection plainly did not  fall  within  that  category.
    Recognition as  a  refugee  or  a  person  entitled  to  the  grant  of
    humanitarian protection is a valuable  benefit  for  those  wishing  to
    remain in the United Kingdom, whether or not such  persons  merit  that
    recognition.

30.   Accordingly,  the  respondent's  stance  regarding   the   applicant's
    credibility for the purposes of the present proceedings fails  to  have
    regard to the complete relevant picture.   In  making  our  credibility
    findings, we have  borne  in  mind  that  no  material  discrepancy  or
    implausibility in the international protection claim  has  been  relied
    upon by Mr Amraoui on behalf of the respondent.

(h)  Failure to put matters of concern to applicant

31.  At the end of three or more hours or questioning of  the  applicant  on
    24 September,  Ms  Rana  and  Ms  Parsons  withdrew  to  discuss  their
    findings.  They then  re-entered  the  room  where  the  applicant  was
    sitting, with the interpreter and an appropriate independent adult, and
    read to the applicant a set of conclusions and reasons, now to be found
    at tab 10/71.  So far as credibility was concerned,  these  conclusions
    and reasons were as follows:-

         "...
         3.   You remained adamant that you are aware of your date of  birth
             as your mother informed you, however you  confirmed  that  you
             cannot read, write or count and that you  have  not  seen  any
             formal documentation with your date  of  birth  recorded.   In
             addition  to  this  your  mother  is  also  illiterate.   This
             questions your credibility and makes it possible for you to be
             older than the given age.


         4.   Furthermore, you presented as very unsure and hesitant  around
             dates and timescales.  You also confirmed that you have  never
             celebrated your birthday.  This also suggest  (sic)  that  the
             information you have provided may not be accurate."

32.  Whilst we accept  that  the  applicant  was  given  an  opportunity  to
    respond, Ms Rana, again fairly, acknowledged  that  she  may  not  have
    explained in terms that the conclusions  and  reasons  were,  in  fact,
    provisional and that (to use her  expression)  if  the  applicant  gave
    compelling evidence in response, then she and  Ms  Parsons  would  have
    felt obliged to consider  that  evidence,  before  reaching  any  final
    conclusion.  We accept the applicant's evidence, that he was unaware of
    the actual status of the "conclusions and reasons" at this  point.   In
    the circumstances, even leaving aside the  lateness  of  the  hour,  we
    consider that this explains why the applicant failed  to  go  into  any
    detail by way of response.  Furthermore, it is not  apparent  from  the
    conclusions and reasons that  the  applicant  was  being  informed,  in
    terms, that he had allegedly been inconsistent on the issue of  whether
    he had seen any age documentation in Iran.

33.  We have borne these matters in mind in considering credibility, as  set
    out above.  In particular, we are mindful that  the  hearing  in  these
    proceedings  has  effectively  been  the   first   occasion   for   the
    respondent's credibility concerns to have been properly articulated and
    put orally to the applicant.

(i)  The applicant's evidence to the Tribunal

34.   We should record here  that,  albeit  covering  a  limited  number  of
    matters, the applicant gave his evidence to  us  in  a  straightforward
    manner and that he gave  no  indication  that  he  was  dissembling  or
    exaggerating any aspect of his account.

(j)  Conclusions as to credibility of applicant's own evidence

35.  In conclusion, whilst  the  respondent  has  rightly  highlighted  some
    credibility concerns regarding the applicant's age, upon analysis  (and
    viewed in the round) we do not find that these concerns are such as  to
    conclude that the applicant lacks credibility on this issue.  At  worst
    for  the  applicant,  the  credibility  issue  is,  as  Mr   Suterwalla
    submitted, finely balanced.  As such, applying the sympathetic approach
    to the evidence earlier  described,  the  applicant  emerges  from  the
    analysis with his credibility  essentially  intact,  so  far  as  these
    proceedings are concerned.

36.  Finally on  this  issue,  we  agree  with  Mr  Suterwalla  that  it  is
    pertinent to note that the applicant's account of how he came  to  know
    his age concerned a point in time before the events took  place,  which
    are said to have caused the applicant to leave Iran.  Thus,  there  was
    not, on the face of it, any ulterior motive for the applicant's  mother
    to provide the applicant  with  an  inaccurate  date  of  birth.   This
    contrasts with the position where persons are told their date of  birth
    only immediately before they are removed from the country  in  which  a
    real risk to their life or person is said to have arisen.

37.  In  the  light  of  our  findings  regarding  the  credibility  of  the
    applicant's own evidence, he is, in the  circumstances  of  this  case,
    entitled to succeed, unless  the  evidence  concerning  appearance  and
    demeanour is of such cogency as to require a finding that, although the
    applicant's own evidence is more likely than not to represent the truth
    of what happened and what was said to him in Iran, the applicant has in
    reality been deceived as to his own age by persons in that country.

B.  The respondent's age assessment

(a)  Demeanour

38.  The first part of  the  analysis  section  of  the  age  assessment  of
    September  2012  deals  with  the  applicant's  demeanour  at  the  age
    assessment interview and the view taken as to his emotional maturity:-

         "During the assessment [the applicant] has displayed  a  very  high
         level of assertiveness, confidence and maturity.  He has at  points
         presented as argumentative.  [The applicant] maintained strong  eye
         contact with the female assessors and confidently  interrupted  the
         assessment on occasions to ask  if  he  could  go  home.   He  also
         interrupted  and  talked  over  the  interpreter.   This  level  of
         confidence and assertiveness is not consistent with that  of  a  16
         year old child and is more consistent with someone who  is  at  the
         latter stages of adolescence.


         With regards to the emotional maturity, [the applicant] appears  to
         have the coping mechanisms of an adult rather  than  a  child.   He
         displayed very little emotion when discussing the  separation  from
         his family, the likely torture and death of his father with whom he
         was  very  close.   It  was  taken  into  consideration  that  [the
         applicant] has undertaken previous assessments  and  has  discussed
         his life events before.  However, it is still expected  that  a  16
         year old  will  display  some  emotion  with  discussing  traumatic
         events.  [The applicant] was very well composed and only  displayed
         emotional when he was irate, particularly  when  it  was  suggested
         that it is possible that he could be over 18 years old."

39.  Both Ms Rana  and  Ms  Parsons  were  persuaded  that  the  applicant's
    demeanour during the age assessment interview, variously  described  in
    the  assessment  as  frustrated,  irritated,  self-assured,  assertive,
    confident,  aggressive  and  challenging,   was   indicative   of   the
    applicant's being an adult.  When pressed by  Mr  Suterwalla  for  more
    details, however, both social workers essentially prayed in  aid  their
    experience  in  dealing  with  both  children  and  adults  in  similar
    contexts.   The  Tribunal  acknowledges,  and  gives  weight  to,   the
    expertise of Ms Rana and Ms Parsons (both of whom have  conducted  many
    age assessments). But, in order to overcome  the  consequences  of  our
    positive credibility findings regarding the applicant's  own  evidence,
    very substantial weight would have to be given to the views of Ms  Rana
    and Ms Parsons. In all the circumstances, we consider  that  to  do  so
    would be unwarranted.  It would, in effect,  amount  to  our  according
    undue deference to the views of the social workers.  We  say  this  for
    the following reasons.

40.  Ms Rana appeared to accept that  there  were  inherent  limitations  in
    even a social worker's ability to draw robust conclusions on age, based
    on observations of a person's demeanour conducted over a single meeting
    of some three and a half hours.  Indeed, Ms Rana told us  that  if  she
    were in a situation where  the  only  available  information  concerned
    demeanour and appearance, and where there were no inconsistencies (i.e.
    credibility issues), then she would take longer to do  the  assessment,
    possibly requiring "a few days".  Since, for the reasons we have given,
    we do not find that Ms Rana and Ms Parsons  were  on  solid  ground  in
    reaching their negative credibility findings, it follows that  we  must
    exercise a degree of caution in assessing the weight  to  be  given  to
    their observations on demeanour and  emotional  maturity,  following  a
    single encounter with the applicant.

41.  We record at this point that  the  applicant's  demeanour  when  giving
    evidence to us did not exhibit any of the traits observed  by  Ms  Rana
    and Ms Parsons.  This is in no way to doubt the  genuineness  of  their
    views; merely to state that in the admittedly different  context  of  a
    Tribunal hearing we observed nothing that might lead us to accord their
    views greater weight than would otherwise be the case.

42.  Although Ms Rana and  Ms  Parsons  informed  us  that  they  had  taken
    account, in making their findings, of the fact that the  applicant  had
    already undergone one age assessment process,  we  were  not  persuaded
    that they paid any, or any adequate regard, to what had  been  observed
    in that first assessment.  One of the matters  that  impacted  upon  Ms
    Rana's view of the applicant's emotional  maturity  was  his  calm  and
    matter of fact way of describing the events in Iran, which led  to  his
    departure from that country; in particular, what had  happened  to  his
    father.  But, several months earlier, at the first assessment,  it  had
    been recorded that,  when  speaking  about  his  family  in  Iran,  the
    applicant's "eyes glazed over at this point suggesting he was upset".

43.  Likewise, the first age assessment recorded that,  when  the  applicant
    "was asked if he was in a relationship or married he said  he  did  not
    have a girlfriend.  [The applicant] was shy  about  this  question  and
    giggled  nervously  which  could  suggest  he  has  not  reached   full
    maturity".

44.  In cross-examination, Ms Rana appeared to accept that  the  applicant's
    background, working at a young age with those older than  him  in  what
    can only be described as challenging and dangerous circumstances, might
    have  had  an  effect  upon  his  emotional  development.   Despite  Ms
    Parsons's assertion that this background had been taken  into  account,
    the written assessment does  not  so  indicate  and,  overall,  we  are
    satisfied that neither of the social workers factored this in to  their
    assessment of demeanour.  Once  again,  we  consider  they  effectively
    disregarded the account given by the applicant in the  context  of  his
    claim to international protection.

45.  It was apparent that both Ms Rana  and  Ms  Parsons  placed  particular
    weight upon the action of the applicant in  tearing  up  the  piece  of
    paper upon which Ms Rana had recorded the  "conclusions  and  reasons",
    now to be found at  tab  10/71.   They  both  regarded  this  as  adult
    behaviour.   However,  in  oral  evidence  Ms  Parsons  described   the
    applicant as being "distraught" at this point, which, we must remember,
    came after more than three hours of questioning and in circumstances in
    which, as we have  found,  the  applicant  was  unaware  of  the  still
    provisional nature of the findings.  We do not ascribe  any  particular
    weight to this action of the applicant.

46.  In  conclusion,  we  do  not  find  that  the  evidence  regarding  the
    applicant's demeanour and emotional maturity comes close  to  being  of
    the required cogency described in paragraph [37] above.

(b)  Physical appearance

47.  The "conclusions  and  reasons"  at  tab  10/71  state:  "Lastly,  your
    physical appearance strongly suggests that you are over the age of 18".
     Elsewhere in the assessment it is recorded that the applicant did  not
    have any facial hair  or  stubble,  but  "it  was  noted  that  he  has
    previously presented to the offices with some stubble  indicating  that
    he does shave".

48.  Understandably, given that the applicant would,  on  his  own  account,
    have been over 16 when seen by Ms Rana and Ms Parsons, little  is  made
    on behalf of the respondent as regards the issue of  shaving.   Indeed,
    Mr Amraoui did not seek to persuade us that, in the circumstances, what
    the age assessment had to say about the applicant's physical appearance
    is capable of having any significant weight, whether on its own  or  in
    combination with other factors.

49.  Ms Rana accepted in  cross-examination  that  physical  appearance  can
    significantly vary between individuals of the same age and that "people
    age differently".  She also agreed with Mr Suterwalla that, in terms of
    physical appearance, the applicant was "not obviously over 18".

C.  The Tribunal's assessment of the applicant's age

50.  The respondent's attack on the applicant's credibility fails.  We  find
    that the applicant is more likely than not to be telling the  truth  as
    to the circumstances in which he was informed that he was born on  22nd
    May 1996.  Nothing in the respondent's age assessment, or in any of the
    other oral and written evidence,  causes  us  to  find  that  what  the
    applicant was told about his age was more likely than not to be  untrue
    and that he was already 18 when seen by Ms Rana and Ms Parsons on  24th
    September 2012.

51.  We shall accordingly make a declaration that the applicant was born  on
    22nd May 1996.  We shall hear Counsel if they cannot agree  the  format
    of that order or the terms of any further order sought,  in  particular
    on the issue of costs.






                               Signed        [pic]






                               Upper Tribunal Judge Peter Lane

