
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


   Aladeselu and Others (2006 Regs - reg 8) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00253(IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 7 June 2011                                |                             |
|                                              |28 June 2011                 |


                                   Before

                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE STOREY
                        SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                        ms temilola opeyemi aladeselu
                          mr felix adelekan anthony
                       mr paschal tobechukwu ashiegbu

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms L Targett-Parker, Counsel instructed by Davjunnel
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer



1. For the purposes of establishing whether a person qualifies as  an  Other
Family Member  (OFM)/extended  family  member  under  regulation  8  of  the
Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006, the requirement  that
they accompany or join the  Union  citizen/EEA  national  exercising  Treaty
rights must be read as encompassing both those who have arrived  before  and
those who have arrived after the Union citizen/EEA national sponsor.

2. The 2006 Regulations do not impose a  requirement  that  an  OFM/extended
family member must be present in the United Kingdom lawfully.

3. But in the context of the exercise of regulation 17(4) discretion  as  to
whether to issue a residence card, matters  relating  to  how  and  when  an
OFM/extended  family  member  arrives  in  a  host  Member  State  are   not
irrelevant.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    There are three appellants in this  case,  each  being  a  citizen  of
    Nigeria.  They are aged 41, 38 and 40  respectively.   The  second  and
    third appellants entered the UK illegally in  July  2007  and  November
    2006 respectively.  The first appellant arrived in  the  UK  in  August
    2007 on a visit visa and subsequently overstayed.  In terms of domestic
    immigration law therefore they are persons  with  no  lawful  basis  of
    stay.  However, they have a maternal cousin, Wanderlea De Brito, who is
    their sponsor.  It is not in dispute: that her father had lived in  the
    Netherlands and that she acquired Dutch citizenship  some  considerable
    time ago (certainly prior to any of the dates mentioned below); that in
    April 2008 she came to the UK; and that since then she  has  been  here
    exercising Treaty rights.  Neither is it in dispute that:

    (i)    between 2004 and the dates when the three appellants decided  to
         go to the UK the appellants were living with  her  in  Nigeria,  in
         accommodation which she had rented  and  that  she  was  supporting
         them;


    (ii)   in between the date of their arrival in the UK and  her  arrival
         in April 2008 she continued to support them financially by  way  of
         remittances; and


    (iii)  since April 2008 all three have lived with  her  in  London,  in
         accommodation she has rented, and she  continues  to  support  them
         financially.


2.    These are the basic facts as found by the First-tier  Tribunal  judge,
    Immigration Judge Hodgkinson, who heard their appeals in November 2010.
     Those appeals arose from a decision made by the respondent on 9 August
    2010 to refuse the application each had made for a  residence  card  as
    the extended family member of the sponsor.

3.    The reason why the Immigration Judge dismissed  their  appeals  was  a
    simple one, namely that he did not consider any of the appellants could
    meet the requirement  set  out  in  regulation  8  of  the  Immigration
    (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  (hereafter   "the   2006
    Regulations") which stipulate that extended family members must  either
    be accompanying or joining the EEA national  sponsor  in  the  UK.   In
    support of this assessment the Immigration Judge relied on the judgment
    of the Court of Appeal in KG (Sri Lanka) [2008] EWCA Civ 13 which  also
    concerned an extended family matter (or Other Family  Member  (OFM)  to
    use the language of the 2004/38/EC (the "Citizens Directive")), KG, who
    had arrived before the EEA national/Union citizen sponsor.  He  recited
    paras 72-74 of that judgment in which Buxton LJ wrote:


          "72.    As explained  in  �65  above,  the  requirement  that  the
             relatives should be accompanying or joining the Union  citizen
             is only specifically stated in Directive 2004/38  in  relation
             to article 2 relatives, but  it  is  inconceivable  that  that
             assumption is not also made in the case of OFMs.  Further, the
             only sensible assumption is that the case of an  OFM  arriving
             from a third country is assessed from this point  of  view  on
             his first seeking entry into the Member State; because  it  is
             then that the issue discussed above must arise, of whether his
             Community rights should override national immigration law.


         73.      Both of the appellants plainly fail on that  score.   When
             they sought admission to the United Kingdom (or, in  the  case
             of KG, arrived here clandestinely) the movement to the  United
             Kingdom of the Union citizen on which their claims  are  based
             was still five years in the future.  Indeed, in KG's case  the
             relation on whom he relies  had  not  yet  even  achieved  the
             status of Union citizen.   And  even  if  that  difficulty  is
             disregarded, and the  question  is  asked  whether  when  they
             applied  for  residence  permits  they  were  accompanying  or
             joining the Union citizen relative, the answer is still in the
             negative.  As  a  simple  matter  of  fact  neither  appellant
             accompanied the Union  citizen  relative.   And  as  a  simple
             matter of language they could not base their application for a
             residence permit on any claim that they were joining the Union
             citizen relative in the United  Kingdom.   Rather,  the  Union
             citizen relative had joined them in the United Kingdom,  where
             they had been present for many years before the Union  citizen
             relative arrived.


        74.       These  objections  are  not  merely  pedantic  points  of
             construction.  Rather, they illustrate  that  the  purpose  and
             justification of the ancillary rights granted to the  relatives
             of Union citizens is to support the  exercise  by  those  Union
             citizens of  their  own  rights,  if  needs  be  by  overriding
             domestic  immigration  law.   That  is  why,  to  qualify,  the
             relatives must either come with the Union citizen  when  he  is
             exercising his rights or join him once he has  exercised  those
             rights.  That purpose and justification is not borne  out  when
             an OFM who has already for many years been  in  breach  of  the
             immigration laws of a member state seeks  to  use  the  arrival
             there of his Union citizen relative as a means of  legitimising
             his own previous breach."


 4.   In amplifying the grounds seeking permission  to  appeal  Ms  Targett-
    Parker contended that the fact  that  the  appellants  entered  the  UK
    before the sponsor is not fatal because the test in Article 3.2 of  the
    Citizens Directive does not require them to do  so:  it  only  requires
    them to show  that  they  were  part  of  the  sponsor's  household  or
    dependent on the sponsor.  Further,  she  submitted,   KG  (Sri  Lanka)
    predated the European Court of Justice ruling in Case  C-127/08  Metock
    and it was clear from the latter case that the requirement that  family
    members "accompany or join" the Union citizen  has  been  held  not  to
    require the Union citizen sponsor to have come to the host state first.
     Whilst the Court of Appeal in  its  subsequent  judgment  in  Bigia  &
    Others [2009] EWCA Civ 79  only  specifically  found  the  Article  2.2
    related reasoning in Metock to apply to OFMs/extended family members in
    one respect (so as to disapply the requirement in reg 8(2)(a) that  the
    OFM be "residing in an EEA State"), it affirmed that under both Article
    2.2 and 3.2(a) the emphasis was on the elimination of obstacles to  the
    Treaty rights of the Union citizen (Bigia, para 43; Metock paras 56, 62
    and 92) and in cases like the appellants' - where  there  was  accepted
    recent dependency on the Union citizen in the country from  which  they
    have come - Maurice Kay LJ in Bigia identified such persons as  a  sub-
    class of OFMs who could show an impact on the Union citizen's  exercise
    of free movement rights (para 43).  Thus how and when an OFM arrives in
    the host Member State is irrelevant.

5.    Mr  Deller  submitted  that  the  important  concession  made  by  the
    respondent  in  Bigia  was  expressly  limited  to  the  issue  of  the
    requirement of prior (lawful) residence in another Member  State.   The
    court only differed from KG (Sri Lanka) on  matters  relating  to  this
    requirement.  When the appellants arrived in  the  UK  they  were  here
    illegally or, in the case of the first  appellant,  unlawfully.   There
    was no exercise of any EEA right by the sponsor  in  prospect  at  that
    time; and in any event the purpose behind the scheme was  clearly  that
    OFMs/extended family members should only seek to accompany or  join  an
    EEA principal already here.  Regulation 12 provided  the  proper  route
    which was for such persons to apply from abroad for a family permit.

Legal Framework

6.     The  relevant  legal  provisions  distinguish  between  close  family
    members (whom we shall term  CFMs)  and  other  family  members  (whom,
    following Bigia we shall call OFMs or extended family members). Dealing
    with CFMs, Article 2.2 of the Citizens Directive (2004/EC/38) states:

         "Family member" means:


             (a)       the spouse:


             (b)        the  partner  with  whom  the  Union  citizen   has
                  contracted a registered partnership, on the basis  of  the
                  legislation of a Member State, if the legislation  of  the
                  host  Member  State  treats  registered  partnerships   as
                  equivalent to marriage ...;


             (c)       the direct descendants who are under the age  of  21
                  or are dependants and those of the spouse  or  partner  as
                  defined in point (b);




             (d)       the dependant direct relatives in the ascending line
                  and those of the spouse or partner  as  defined  in  point
                  (b)."


7.    The corresponding provision of the 2006 Regulations, reg. 7(1)  states
    that:

         "... for the purpose of these  Regulations  the  following  persons
         shall be treated as the family members of another person -


         (a)      his spouse or civil partner;
         (b)      direct descendants  of  his,   his  spouse  or  his  civil
             partner who are -
             (i)       under 21; or
             (ii)  dependants of his, his spouse or his civil partner;
         (c)      dependent  direct relatives in his ascending line or  that
             of his spouse or his civil partners;
         (d) ..."

8.    Dealing with OFMs/extended family members, Article 3 of the  Directive
    provides:

         "1.      This Directive shall apply to all Union citizens who  move
             to or reside in a Member State other than that of  which  they
             are a national, and to their  family  members  as  defined  in
             point 2 of Article 2 who accompany or join them.


         2.       Without prejudice  to  any  right  to  free  movement  and
             residence the persons concerned may have in their  own  right,
             the host Member State shall, in accordance with  its  national
             legislation, facilitate entry and residence for the  following
             persons:


               a)  any  other  family   members,   irrespective   of   their
                  nationality, not falling under the definition in  point  2
                  of Article 2 who, in the  country  from  which  they  have
                  come, are dependants or members of the  household  of  the
                  Union citizen having the primary right  of  residence,  or
                  where there are serious health  grounds  strictly  require
                  the personal care of  the  family  members  by  the  Union
                  citizen.


               b) the partner with whom the  Union  citizen  has  a  durable
                  relationship, duly attested.

         The host member state shall undertake an extensive  examination  of
         the personal circumstances and must justify any denial of entry  or
         residence to these people."

9.    Up until  2  June  2011  the  corresponding  regulation  in  the  2006
    Regulations,  regulation  8(2)   headed   "Extended   family   members"
    stipulates:

         "(2)     A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if  the
             person is a relative of an EEA national,  his  spouse  or  his
             civil partner and-

             (a) the person is residing in an EEA State in which the EEA
                  national also resides and is dependent upon the EEA
                  national or is a member of his household;

             (b) the person satisfied the condition in paragraph (a) and is
                  accompanying the EEA national to the United Kingdom or
                  wishes to join him there; or

             (c) the person satisfied the condition in paragraph (a), has
                  joined the EEA national in the United Kingdom and
                  continues to be dependent upon him or to be a member of
                  his household."


Our Assessment

10.   It is well-established that in order to  qualify  as  an  OFM/extended
    family member a person must show dependency on  the  EEA  sponsor/Union
    citizen or membership of the latter's household  both  in  the  country
    from which she/he has come and in the host Member State:  see  Bigia  &
    Others; RK (Membership of household - dependency) India [2010] UKUT 421
    (IAC).

11.   It is also well-established that there  is  no  requirement  that  the
    OFM/extended family member be resident in another Member State prior to
    arrival in the host Member State:  hence  prior  to  2  June  2011  the
    requirement to this effect in regulation 8(1)(a) and the requirement in
    regulation 12(1)(b) stipulating "lawful residence in an EEA State"  was
    to be disapplied: see Bigia, para 41. As a result  of  The  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) (Amendment) Regulations 2011 (SI 2011 No.1247)
    for the words "EEA State"  there  are  now  substituted  the  words  "a
    country other than the United Kingdom". In regulation 12, for paragraph
    (1)(b) the provision substituted is "(b)  the  family  member  will  be
    accompanying the EEA national to the United Kingdom or joining the  EEA
    national there".

12.   What is less clear is whether there are not two  further  requirements
    imposed either by the Directive or by the 2006 Regulations  namely  (1)
    an "accompanying or joining" requirement (construed so as  to  preclude
    an OFM/extended family member arriving  before  the  Union  citizen/EEA
    national); and (2) a requirement of lawful presence in the host  State.
    The status of the former is  thrown  into  sharp  relied  by  the  IJ's
    assessment of the appellants' appeals; the status  of  the  latter  has
    been raised by Mr Deller's contention that the provisions of  the  2006
    Regulations relating to OFMs have been made pursuant to Article 3.2  of
    the  Directive  which  limits  the  obligation  on  Member  States   to
    facilitate their entry and residence to those that are  "in  accordance
    with national law" or, as worded in recital 6, "on the basis of its own
    national legislation".

"Accompanying or Joining"

a. The Citizens Directive

13.   In Metock the ECJ looked at the use  of  the  term  "accompanying  and
    joining" as it appears in Article 3.1 and  Articles  5  and  6  of  the
    Directive. Article 3.1 provides:

        "1.      This Directive shall apply to all Union citizens who  move
             to or reside in a Member State other than that  of  which  they
             are a national and to their family members as defined in  point
             2 of Article 2 who accompany or join them."


        The Court ruled that the condition contained  in  Article  3.1  that
    Article 2.2 family members had to "accompany or join" the Union citizen
    was not to be read as imposing a requirement that the  family  member's
    arrival must always precede or occur simultaneously with that  of   the
    Union citizen in the host Member State.

14.   However, it is notable that the "accompanying or joining"  requirement
    imposed in respect of Article 2.2 family  members  is  not  imposed  by
    Article 3.2 in respect of OFMs.  The only  requirements  stipulated  in
    Article 3.2 for OFMs are those relating to dependency or membership  of
    the household in the country from  which  they  have  come  or  serious
    health grounds.

15.   It seems to us that Buxton LJ in KG (Sri Lanka) may have assumed  that
    the Article 3.1 requirement  automatically  applied  to  all  types  of
    family members, including OFMs.  If that is so (and in  any  event)  we
    can only treat its ruling on the "accompanying or joining  requirement"
    as binding if satisfied that it was consistent with EU law post-Metock.



b. The national law/2006 EEA Regulations

16.   Nevertheless, "accompanying and joining"  requirements  are  contained
    in regulation 8 of the relevant national law - the 2006  Regulations  -
    and we cannot disapply those unless satisfied that they are contrary to
    the Directive or other EU law.  When we turn to regulation  8  we  find
    that there are two provisions that impose an "accompanying or  joining"
    requirement.  One is regulation 8(2)(b), which refers to a  person  who
    is "accompanying an EEA national to the United  Kingdom  or  wishes  to
    join him there".  The other is regulation 8(2)(c), which is given as an
    alternative way of satisfying the requirements of regulation 8(2):   it
    contains a "joining" requirement only.  It states:


         "The person satisfied the conditions in paragraph (a),  has  joined
         the EEA  national  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  continues  to  be
         dependent upon him or to be a member of his household."


17.   Plainly in the instant case we  are  only  concerned  with  regulation
    8(2)(c). Ms Targett-Parker has urged us to construe the words it uses -
    "has joined" - in the same way that  the  ECJ  construed  very  similar
    words in Metock, so as to encompass both persons  who  have  physically
    joined an EEA sponsor already  in  the  UK  and  persons  such  as  the
    appellants who came to the UK before the UK sponsor.   Mr  Deller  says
    that such a reading is not authorised either  by  Metock  or  Court  of
    Appeal authority.

18.   We have  not  found  this  an  easy  issue  to  resolve.  Even  if  an
    "accompanying or joining" requirement was imposed by Article 3.2(a), we
    would see no reason to construe it differently for OFMs and Article 2.2
    (CFM) family members. Metock has defined what  the  meaning  is  and  a
    stricter approach should not be imposed on OFMs. But as we  have  seen,
    under Article 3.2(a) "accompanying or joining" is not in  any  event  a
    requirement imposed for OFMs by the Directive.  It is purely a national
    law requirement and Article 3.2(a) and recital 6 permit  Member  States
    to impose national law requirements on OFMs  subject  only  to  limited
    constraints.

19.   In favour of the construction urged by Ms Targett-Parker are a  number
    of arguments.  One is that on the  reasoning  applied  by  the  ECJ  in
    Metock - and seemingly endorsed in respect of  OFMs  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal in Bigia - it seems possible to identify at least a sub-class of
    OFMs for whom a requirement of joining  the  Union  citizen  (construed
    again so as to prevent the OFM's prior arrival) would have a  deterrent
    effect on the exercise of that citizen's rights of free  movement.   We
    discussed with the parties the hypothetical example of a Union  citizen
    who would be deterred from taking up an employment contract in  a  host
    Member State starting  in  the  winter  unless  he  could  arrange  for
    dependent members of his household to start school in the  host  Member
    state at the beginning of the preceding Autumn  term.   Equally  it  is
    possible to construct hypothetical examples in which the need for prior
    arrival in the host Member State of an OFM would have no impact at  all
    on the exercise by the Union citizen of free movement rights.   Another
    point, already prefigured in our earlier comments, is that it would  be
    very odd indeed if the word(s) "accompany or join" were to be construed
    to have one meaning in the Directive (as assigned by the ECJ in Metock)
    and another meaning in transposing national legislation in the form  of
    the 2006 Regulations; especially when the latter contains  no  specific
    definition of its intended meaning.  Added to this point  is  the  fact
    that when interpreting national law transposing  a  Directive  we  must
    apply  a teleological approach to  interpretation  -   not  the  normal
    rules of  statutory  interpretation  in  English/UK  law,  which  allow
    recourse to a linguistic  "simple  matter  of  language"  approach.   A
    possible further point to be made is that the Court of Appeal in Bigia,
    when dealing with the only appellant who had come to the UK before  the
    UK sponsor, TS, appeared to consider he failed solely  because  of  the
    lack of any recent dependency abroad. Prior arrival was not seen as, or
    at least was not specified as, a problem.

20.   There is a further reason which has to do with the fact  that  the  UK
    government has chosen to  confer  on  OFMs/extended  family  members  a
    guarantee that once they establish eligibility as OFMs/extended  family
    members they have the same level of protection as  Article  2.2  family
    matters.  That appears to be the effect of regulation 7(3).

21.   Ranged against, there are  also  strong  arguments  in  favour  of  Mr
    Deller's position.  If Article 3.2(a) permits national  law  regulation
    of OFMs (by contrast with the automatic rights conferred on Article 2.2
    family matters) then surely it must permit a Member State to require  a
    "joining or accompanying" requirement as a  condition  of  eligibility.
    The provision is part of the 2006 Regulations and it would be wrong  to
    seek to disapply it unless it is plainly contrary to EU law.   Further,
    an accompanying or joining requirement (construed as  preventing  prior
    arrival by the OFM/extended family member) was applied by the Court  of
    Appeal in KG (Sri Lanka) and what the Court of Appeal said in Bigia and
    Others about KG must be no less true for the Upper Tribunal:  viz.  "We
    are, of course, bound by that authority unless and to the  extent  that
    it is inconsistent with the later decision of the ECJ in  Metock".   In
    Bigia the Court of Appeal was very specific in holding that the Article
    2.2-related principles established by Metock only applied  to  OFMs  in
    relation to the requirement of  prior  (lawful)  residence  in  another
    Member State. A further argument is that if there is no requirement for
    the EEA spouse to be accompanied by the OFM or to come before  the  OFM
    then, seemingly, applicants are  able  to  drive  a  coach  and  horses
    through the family permit scheme for which specific provision  is  made
    in regulation 12.

22.   We consider that the respective merits  of  the  arguments  favour  Ms
    Targett-Parker's position.  We must apply a teleological approach  that
    seeks to give effect to the purposes of the Directive  which  the  2006
    Regulations  purports  to  transpose.   Those  purposes   include   the
    elimination of obstacles to the exercise of  free  movement  rights  by
    Union citizens/EEA nationals.  Even if it is only a sub-class  of  OFMs
    whose EEA sponsor's freedom of movement rights would be obstructed by a
    requirement that they arrive in the host Member State before  the  OFM,
    that is surely  sufficient  to  show  that  there  can  be  no  blanket
    requirement to the contrary.  And in the absence of any more  qualified
    requirement, it would be otiose for us to seek to  impose  restrictions
    that do not appear in the ordinary language of  the  Regulations.   The
    requirement to join says nothing about when that joining  has  to  take
    place. Accordingly the requirement to "join" an EEA sponsor as set  out
    in regulation 8(2)(b) must be read as encompassing  both  OFMs/extended
    family members   who  have  arrived  before  and  OFMs/extended  family
    members who have arrived after the EEA sponsor.

23.   It follows from our analysis that in reaching  a  contrary  conclusion
    the Immigration Judge materially erred in law and his decision is to be
    set aside.

Lawful presence

24.   When we turn to the matter  of  what  decision  to  remake  the  first
    question we must address is whether  the  appellants  have  established
    that they meet the requirements of regulation 8.  In this  context  one
    question  that  has  arisen  in  this  case  is  "Are  the   appellants
    nevertheless  excluded  from  qualifying  as  extended  family  members
    because their presence in the UK has hitherto been  either  illegal  or
    unlawful? "

25.   It seems to us that so far as the Directive is  concerned,  the  range
    of OFMs to whom there is a duty to facilitate their entry or  residence
    is defined by EU law rather than national law, although in the case  of
    OFMs EU law affords national law some discretion as to whether to admit
    or let reside those eligible for the exercise of  that  discretion.  We
    know that imposition of such a requirement in respect  of  Article  2.2
    family matters  is  unlawful.  On  that  very  point  Metock  expressly
    overruled the earlier ECJ case, Akrich which had held  that  there  was
    such a requirement.  But whether or not the scope afforded  by  Article
    3.2(a) for Member States to regulate the entry and  residence  of  OFMs
    "in accordance with national law" would  prevent  recourse  to  such  a
    requirement in some shape or form is less clear.

26.   Happily we do not need to wrestle with that  issue  because,  even  if
    the Citizens Directive is construed as  not  preventing  Member  States
    imposing some kind of lawful presence test on OFMs  in  their  national
    laws, equally it does not mandate them to do so.  In the UK all depends
    therefore, on what is achieved by the 2006 Regulations.  As  Mr  Deller
    was quick to acknowledge, the 2006 Regulations contain  no  such  test.
    Article 37 of the Directive permits Member States in any event to  make
    more generous provision than does the Directive.

27.    Hence  the  appellants  cannot  be  excluded   from   qualifying   as
    OFMs/extended family members because their presence in the UK has  been
    illegal or unlawful.

28.   Accordingly our conclusion is that  the  appellants  have  established
    that they  meet  the  requirements  of  regulation  8(2)  of  the  2006
    Regulations in full.

The regulation 17(4) issue

29.   Establishing that one is  an  OFM/  extended  family  member  is  not,
    however, the end of the matter.   The  appeals  are  against  decisions
    refusing to issue each of the appellants with a residence card.  Unlike
    the position that obtains for Article 2.2 family members -  or  CFMs  -
    who are entitled to a residence card by operation of  regulation  17(1)
    ("the Secretary of State must issue....."), the position set out in the
    2006 Regulations for extended family members affords the  respondent  a
    discretion.   Reflecting  Article  3.2  of  the   Citizens   Directive,
    regulation 17(4) states that the  Secretary  of  State  "may"  issue  a
    residence card to an extended family member if  the  EEA  spouse  is  a
    qualified person or an EEA national with a permanent right of residence
    and "(6) in all the circumstances it appears to the Secretary of  State
    appropriate to issue the residence card".  As the Tribunal noted in  YB
    (EEA reg 17(4)-proper approach) Ivory Coast  [2008]  UKAIT  00062,  the
    discretion afforded by regulation 17(4) is not unfettered, there  being
    not only the obligation to consider all the circumstances but also  the
    requirement set out in regulation 17(5) to undertake (in response to an
    application) "an extensive examination of the personal circumstances of
    the applicant and if he refuses  the  application  shall  give  reasons
    justifying the refusal....."; see also recital 6 of the Directive.

30.   The initial difficulty that confronts the Tribunal  in  these  appeals
    is that the respondent has not as yet exercised  the  regulation  17(4)
    discretion or carried out the regulation 17(5)  examination.   That  is
    because in the refusal  letter  the  respondent  did  not  accept  they
    qualified  as  extended  family  members  under  regulation   8.    The
    Immigration Judge followed suit.

31.   In such circumstances it is clear that the hands of the  Tribunal  are
    tied.  Whilst we can consider whether a discretionary power should have
    been exercised differently, we cannot seek to do that if there  has  as
    yet been no exercise of that power. It follows that the appeal can only
    be allowed to  the  extent  that  it  remains  outstanding  before  the
    Secretary of State.

32.   Ms Targett-Parker sought to persuade us that it was  implicit  in  the
    respondent's refusal letter that the regulation  17(4)  discretion  had
    been exercised but we think that plainly  wrong.   The  refusal  letter
    focused solely on eligibility under regulation 8(2).

33.   Whilst it is not for  us  in  the  first  instance  to  exercise  that
    discretion  or  undertake  the   personal   examination   enjoined   by
    regulations 17(4) and 17(5), we would observe that it seems to us  that
    these provisions are the principal mechanism the 2006  EEA  Regulations
    afford for taking into account the weight to be attached  to  the  fact
    that applicants are in the UK lawfully or unlawfully.   For  the  three
    appellants the evidence they have presented so far does  not  obviously
    establish that there is any reason apart  from  their  lack  of  lawful
    status why they cannot support themselves.  None have health  problems.
    None is a minor or someone who is  still  a  young  person  wishing  to
    complete their education.  They are in their early 40s.  They  came  to
    the UK illegally (or in the case of the first appellant  have  remained
    unlawfully).  They cannot have come  with  any  legitimate  expectation
    that they would be entitled to stay.  In Article 8 ECHR terms it is not
    immediately obvious that, despite ongoing financial dependency  on  the
    sponsor, there is family life between them or, even if there  is,  that
    it is of any great strength.  They have not been  in  the  UK  for  any
    significant period, nor is there any  evidence,  as  Ms  Targett-Parker
    conceded, to show that the presence of the three appellants in  the  UK
    has been or is essential  to  their  EEA  sponsor's  exercise  of  free
    movement rights.  Indeed, even  when  the  sponsor  had  gone  back  to
    Nigeria between 2004-2007 she continued to return to the Netherlands on
    many occasions.  The presence of the appellants  in  her  household  in
    Nigeria did not prevent her doing that and it may be very difficult for
    them to show that their  continued  presence  here  would  prevent  her
    exercising Treaty rights in the UK.  In such circumstances  it  may  be
    that the respondent will consider that their lack  of  lawful  presence
    constitutes a weighty factor counting against the issue of a  residence
    card.

34. Our intention in the preceding paragraph is not to try and  second-guess
    the respondent but rather to illustrate why it seems  to  us  that  the
    wording of Article 3.2(a) does not in itself prevent Member States from
    taking into account as a relevant consideration when  deciding  how  to
    regulate the position of OFMs/extended family  members  the  factor  of
    lawful or unlawful presence.  Ms Targett-Parker contended at the outset
    of the hearing that it does not matter how  or  why  an  OFM/  extended
    family member has come to the UK. It seems to us that in the context of
    the exercise of the discretion  afforded  by  regulation  17(4)  as  to
    whether to issue a residence card, matters relating to how and when  an
    OFM arrives in a host Member State are not irrelevant.

35.   For the above reasons we conclude:

      The First-tier Tribunal materially erred in law and  its  decision  is
    set aside.

      The decision we remake is to allow  the  appellants'  appeals  to  the
    extent that they remains outstanding before the Secretary of  State  to
    decide whether to exercise the regulation  17(4)  discretion  in  their
    favour.

Signed                                             Date


Senior Immigration Judge Storey
(Judge of the Upper Tribunal)

