
  [pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

ST (Ethnic Eritrean - nationality - return) Ethiopia CG [2011] UKUT
00252(IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 18 to 20 January 2011                      |                             |
|                                              |30 June 2011                 |


                                   Before

                      SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE P R LANE
                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE S WARD

                                   Between

                                     ST
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Eric Fripp and Emma Daykin, Counsel, instructed by
Blavo & Co.
      Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Sebastian Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                                     LAW

(A)   There is nothing in MS (Palestinian Territories) [2010] UKSC  25  that
    overrules the judgments in MA (Ethiopia) [2009] EWCA Civ 289.  Where  a
    claim to recognition as a refugee depends on whether a person is  being
    arbitrarily denied the right of return to  a  country  as  one  of  its
    nationals, that issue must be decided on an appeal under section 82 the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (paragraphs 69 to 72).

(B)   Although the  question  of  whether  a  person  is  a  national  of  a
    particular state is a matter  of  law  for  that  state,  the  question
    whether  a  national  of  a  particular  state  has  been  lawfully  or
    unlawfully deprived of the nationality of that state  is  a  legitimate
    issue for a court or tribunal to determine, in the course of deciding a
    person's entitlement to international protection (paragraph 74).

(C)   Whether arbitrary deprivation of nationality  amounts  to  persecution
    is a question of fact. The same is true of the denial of the  right  of
    return as a national; although in practice it is  likely  that  such  a
    denial will be found to be persecutory (paragraphs 76 and 82 to 89).


                              COUNTRY GUIDANCE

(1)   Although the process established by the Ethiopian authorities in  1998
    for identifying ethnic Eritreans who might pose a risk to the  national
    security of  Ethiopia,  following  the  outbreak  of  war  between  the
    countries, was not arbitrary or contrary to international law, in  many
    cases people were arbitrarily expelled to Eritrea without  having  been
    subjected to that process. Those perceived  as  ethnic  Eritreans,  who
    remained in Ethiopia during the war, and who were deprived of Ethiopian
    nationality, suffered arbitrary treatment,  contrary  to  international
    law. Those who left Ethiopia at this time  or  who  were  then  already
    outside  Ethiopia  were  arbitrarily  deprived   of   their   Ethiopian
    nationality. Also during this time, the Ethiopian  authorities  made  a
    practice of seizing and destroying identification  documents  of  those
    perceived as ethnic Eritreans in Ethiopia (paragraphs 60 to 65).

(2)   A person whose Ethiopian identity documents were  taken  or  destroyed
    by the authorities during this time and who then left Ethiopia is as  a
    general matter likely to have been arbitrarily  deprived  on  Ethiopian
    nationality. Whether that deprivation amounted to persecution  (whether
    on its own or combined with  other  factors)  is  a  question  of  fact
    (paragraphs 76 to 78).

(3)   The practices just described provide the background against  which  to
    consider today the claim to international protection of  a  person  who
    asserts that he or she is an Ethiopian national  who  is  being  denied
    that nationality, and with it the  right  to  return  from  the  United
    Kingdom to Ethiopia, for a Refugee Convention reason. Findings  on  the
    credibility and consequences of events in Ethiopia, prior to a person's
    departure, will be important, as a finding of past persecution may have
    an important bearing on how one  views  the  present  attitude  of  the
    Ethiopian authorities. Conversely, a person whose account is not  found
    to be credible may find it difficult to show that a refusal on the part
    of the authorities to accept his or her return is persecutory or  based
    on any Refugee Convention reason (paragraphs 79 to 81).

(4)   Although, pursuant to MA (Ethiopia), each  claimant  must  demonstrate
    that he or she has done  all  that  could  be  reasonably  expected  to
    facilitate return as a national of Ethiopia, the present procedures and
    practices of the Ethiopian Embassy in London will provide the  backdrop
    against which judicial fact-finders will decide  whether  an  appellant
    has complied with this requirement. A person who  is  regarded  by  the
    Ethiopian authorities as an  ethnic  Eritrean  and  who  left  Ethiopia
    during or in the immediate aftermath of the border war between Ethiopia
    and Eritrea, is likely to face very significant practical  difficulties
    in establishing nationality and the attendant right to return, stemming
    from the reluctance of the Ethiopian  authorities  to  countenance  the
    return of someone it regards  as  a  "foreigner",  whether  or  not  in
    international law the person concerned holds the nationality of another
    country (paragraphs 93 to 104).

(5)    Judicial  fact-finders  will  expect  a  person  asserting  arbitrary
    deprivation of Ethiopian nationality to approach the embassy in  London
    with all documentation emanating from  Ethiopia  that  the  person  may
    have, relevant to establishing nationality, including ID card, address,
    place of birth, identity and place of birth of  parents,  identity  and
    whereabouts of any relatives in Ethiopia and details  of  the  person's
    schooling in Ethiopia. Failing production of Ethiopian documentation in
    respect of such matters, the person should put in writing all  relevant
    details, to be handed to the embassy. Whilst persons are not  for  this
    purpose entitled to portray themselves  to  the  embassy  as  Eritrean,
    there is no  need  to  suppress  details  which  disclose  an  Eritrean
    connection (paragraph 105).

(6)   A person who left Ethiopia as described in (4) above  is  unlikely  to
    be able to re-acquire Ethiopian nationality as a  matter  of  right  by
    means of the 2003 Nationality Proclamation and would be likely first to
    have to live in Ethiopia for a significant period of time  (probably  4
    years) (paragraphs 110 to 113).

(7)   The 2004 Directive,  which  provided  a  means  whereby  Eritreans  in
    Ethiopia could obtain registered foreigner status and in some  cases  a
    route to reacquisition of citizenship, applied only to those  who  were
    resident in Ethiopia  when  Eritrea  became  independent  and  who  had
    continued so to reside up until the date of the Directive.  The finding
    to the contrary in MA  (Disputed  Nationality)  Ethiopia  [2008]  UKAIT
    00032 was wrong (paragraphs 115 and 116).

(8)   The 2009 Directive, which  enables  certain  Eritreans  to  return  to
    Ethiopia as foreigners to reclaim  and  manage  property  in  Ethiopia,
    applies only to those who were deported due to the war between Ethiopia
    and Eritrea and who still have property in Ethiopia (paragraphs 117 and
    118).

(9)   A person who left Ethiopia as described in (4) above, if  returned  to
    Ethiopia at the present time, would in general be likely to be able  to
    hold property, although the bureaucratic obstacles  are  likely  to  be
    more severe than in the case of Ethiopian citizens. Such a person would
    be likely to be able to work, after acquiring a work  permit,  although
    government employment is unlikely to be available. Entitlement  to  use
    educational and health services is, however,  much  more  doubtful.  At
    best, the person will face a bureaucratic battle to acquire them. He or
    she will have no right to vote (paragraphs 119 to 124).

(10)  Such a person would be likely  to  feel  insecure,  lacking  even  the
    limited security afforded  by  the  2004  Directive.  Tensions  between
    Ethiopia and Eritrea remain high (paragraph 125).

(11)  The following CG cases on Ethiopia are superseded or replaced, as  the
    case may be, by the  present  determination:  GG  (Return  -  Eritrean)
    Ethiopia CG [2002] UKIAT 05996;  NB  (Mixed  Ethnicity  -  Ethiopian  -
    Eritrean) Ethiopia CG [2002] UKIAT  06526;  AA  (Children  -  Eritrean)
    Ethiopia CG UKIAT 06533; TG (Mixed Ethnicity) Ethiopia CG [2002]  UKIAT
    07289; and DA (Ethnicity - Eritrean - Country Conditions)  Ethiopia  CG
    [2004] UKIAT 00046.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


                               A. PRELIMINARY

1.     Senior  Immigration  Judge  Susan  Ward  and  I  heard  evidence  and
    submissions in  this  case  over  three  days  in  late  January  2011.
    Tragically,  three  days  later  my  colleague  suffered   a   cerebral
    haemorrhage and it was therefore decided, with  the  agreement  of  the
    parties, that the determination would be mine alone.  Susan died on  27
    May.

2.    Prior to the hearing, this case  had  been  identified  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal as suitable for giving country guidance in the case of certain
    persons  from  Ethiopia  whose  claims  to  be  refugees  involved  the
    assertion that, whether or not entitled to Ethiopian nationality  as  a
    matter of international law, they have been denied such nationality  by
    the Ethiopian authorities.

3.    The Tribunal has benefited from detailed written and oral  submissions
    from the representatives.   We  heard  oral  evidence  from  a  legally
    qualified witness, as regards the dealings between  the  appellant  and
    the Ethiopian Embassy in London.  We also heard oral evidence from  two
    expert witnesses.  A summary  of  the  oral  evidence  is  set  out  in
    Appendix A to this determination.


                       B. THE APPELLANT AND HIS APPEAL

4.    The appellant was born in Ethiopia on 1 October 1979.  At the time  of
    his birth Eritrea was a province of Ethiopia, having  been  annexed  in
    1962.  Both of the appellant's parents were Ethiopian  nationals.   His
    father was Oromo but his mother was Tigrina with her roots in  Eritrea,
    a fact which was to have important consequences for the appellant.

5.    For  some  years  prior  to  1991,  an  armed  struggle  for  Eritrean
    independence had been waged by the Eritrean People's  Liberation  Front
    (EPLF).  In that year, the Marxist  dictatorship  known  as  the  Derg,
    which had ruled Ethiopia since 1974, was overthrown  by  the  Ethiopian
    People's Revolutionary Democratic Front (EPRDF).  The EPRDF  had  close
    links with the EPLF and, as a result,  arrangements  were  made  for  a
    referendum on Eritrean independence.  The referendum took place in  May
    1993.   Amongst  those  who  voted  were  ethnic  Eritreans  living  in
    Ethiopia, otherwise than within the then province of Eritrea.  The vote
    was overwhelmingly in favour of independence,  which  occurred  in  the
    same year.

6.    The appellant's father had died in 1992.   Thereafter,  the  appellant
    lived with his mother.  She owned and operated a bar  in  Addis  Ababa,
    which was frequented by Eritreans and from which  she  ran  a  form  of
    savings club known as a "Eqoob".

7.    Following independence, relations between Eritrea, run as a  one-party
    state by the popular Front for Democracy and Justice  (essentially  the
    EPLF  under  another  name),  and  the  Tigre-dominated  government  of
    Ethiopia deteriorated.  In May 1998  war  broke  out  between  the  two
    countries, with serious consequences for many ethnic  Eritreans  living
    in Ethiopia.  Large numbers were rounded up, held in camps and forcibly
    removed across the border to Eritrea.  One of these was the appellant's
    mother.  At the time, the appellant believed that she had been taken as
    a result of neighbours informing the authorities  about  her  clientele
    and the financial activities being carried on in the bar.

8.    On  24  July  1999,  the  appellant  was  detained  by  the  Ethiopian
    authorities.  He was held in harsh conditions, interrogated and beaten.
     The appellant was released on 28 August 1999, subject to reporting and
    residence conditions.  On 6 September 1999 he was summoned back by  the
    authorities but preferred to go into hiding,  before  leaving  Ethiopia
    for the United Kingdom, which he reached in late September 1999.

9.    The appellant claimed asylum on 30 September 1999 and was  interviewed
    by the respondent in respect of that claim on 20  February  2001.   The
    respondent decided  on  7  February  2005  to  refuse  the  appellant's
    application but the appellant became aware of  that  decision  only  in
    April 2006.  His subsequent notice of appeal against the  decision  was
    treated by the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal as being  out  of  time,
    which in turn led to judicial review proceedings.  As a result of those
    proceedings, the AIT accepted the notice of appeal and the  appellant's
    case came before Immigration Judge Sullivan at Hatton Cross  on  2  May
    2008.

10.   The Immigration Judge found the  appellant's  account  of  his  family
    background and experiences in Ethiopia to be credible.  The one  matter
    in respect of which she did not make an express finding was whether (as
    the appellant alleged) his Ethiopian ID card had been taken from him by
    the authorities, following his detention.  Mr Fripp urged us to  regard
    the Immigration Judge's positive  findings  as  encompassing  what  the
    appellant had said about his ID card.  Mr Kandola did not demur; and  I
    accordingly do so.

11.   Despite those positive findings, Immigration Judge Sullivan  dismissed
    the appellant's appeal.  She did  so  because,  following  the  country
    guidance determination in  MA  (Disputed  Nationality)  Eritrea  [2008]
    UKAIT 00032, she found that:-

         "41.     ...There is a presumption that a State  will  treat  a  de
             jure national as one of its own.  In  addition  there  is  the
             Appellant's own evidence that the local Ethiopian  authorities
             had a record of his dual nationality and that he had  held  an
             Ethiopian identity card confirming that dual  nationality.   I
             am satisfied that it is reasonably  likely  that  he  will  be
             accepted as an Ethiopian national.


         42.       The  appellant  has  given  evidence,  supported  by   Mr
             Woubeshet, that he approached the Ethiopian embassy in  London
             for a passport on 23 April 2008.  He was asked for documentary
             evidence but had none.  He was  asked  if  he  had  family  in
             Ethiopia who could go to his  local  authority  there  to  ask
             about his nationality.  He said  that  he  had  no  family  in
             Ethiopia and was told that the embassy  could  not  issue  him
             with a passport.  In  my  view  his  account  falls  short  of
             evidence that the Ethiopian authorities do not accept  him  as
             an Ethiopian national.  It is evidence in  my  view  that  the
             information he was able to give the Embassy staff on 23  April
             2008 was not sufficient to prove his nationality".


12.   The Immigration Judge went  on  to  find  that,  upon  his  return  to
    Ethiopia as a national of that country, the appellant would not face  a
    real risk of persecution or  other  serious  harm.   Rightly  observing
    that, given his past persecution, there had  to  be  "good  reasons  to
    consider that such persecution will not be repeated",  the  Immigration
    Judge found such reasons in the cessation of  the  hostilities  between
    Ethiopia and Eritrea and the absence of evidence to  suggest  that  the
    Ethiopians had the same level of suspicion  regarding  those  of  part-
    Eritrean descent as they had in 1999 (paragraph 49).   The  Immigration
    Judge was also  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  was  at  risk  of
    detention by the authorities, given the passage of time  and  the  fact
    that the  appellant  himself  had  not  been  the  focus  of  the  1999
    investigation  (which  had  concentrated  on   his   mother's   alleged
    activities).

13.   Reconsideration of the Immigration Judge's decision was ordered  under
    section 103A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  1992  but,
    following a hearing before  Senior  Immigration  Judge  Moulden  on  17
    December 2008, the AIT found that there was no material error of law in
    the determination of Immigration Judge Sullivan.

14.   Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal was granted by that  court
    on 14 July 2009.  The  reason  was  the  very  recent  judgment  in  MA
    (Ethiopia) [2009] EWCA Civ  289  (see  below).   In  the  light  of  MA
    (Ethiopia), Moses LJ considered that there was "a  real  prospect  that
    the applicant will establish that both IJ  and  SIJ  erred  in  law  in
    applying a presumption that he was not at risk of being  denied  status
    as a national by reason  of  his  legal  right  to  be  regarded  as  a
    national, particularly in the context of his accepted ill-treatment  in
    the past".

15.   Following the grant of permission, agreement was reached  between  the
    parties that the appeal should be allowed, to the extent of  its  being
    remitted to  (now)  the  Upper  Tribunal,  to  make  such  findings  as
    necessary but, however, so as "not to disturb any previous  finding  by
    the Tribunal, unaffected by this appeal, accepting the  credibility  of
    the history provided to it or the past persecution of  the  Appellant".
    A consent order to that effect was made on 14 October  2009.   Thus  it
    was that the case came before us for hearing on 20 January 2011.


                          C. ETHIOPIAN LEGISLATION

16.   Whilst the appellant's appeal  against  the  2005  decision  has  been
    pending, there have been a number of decisions from  the  AIT  and  the
    Court of Appeal in Ethiopian cases  of  the  kind  with  which  we  are
    concerned.  Before turning to those decisions, however, it is necessary
    to  refer  to  some  provisions  of  Ethiopian  legislation   regarding
    citizenship and the position of Eritreans living in Ethiopia.

Proclamation on Ethiopian Nationality (22 December 2003)

17.   For our purposes, the relevant provisions are as follows:-

         "2.      Definitions


             ....'Foreigner'  means  a  person  who  is  not  an  Ethiopian
             national;


            'Domicile' means the residence of a  person  as  defined  under
             Article 183 of the Civil Code of Ethiopia;


            'Authority' means the Security, Immigration and Refugee Affairs
             Authority.


             ACQUISITION OF ETHIOPIAN NATIONALITY


         3. Acquisition by descent


             1/  Any person shall be an Ethiopian national by descent where
                  both or either of his parents is Ethiopian.


             ......


         4. Acquisition By Law


            Any foreigner  may  acquire  Ethiopian  nationality  by  law  in
             accordance with  the  provisions  of  Articles  5-12  of  this
             Proclamation.


         5. Conditions to be fulfilled.


            A foreigner who applies to acquire Ethiopian nationality by  law
             shall:


            1/    have attained the age of majority and be  legally  capable
                  under the Ethiopian law;


            2/    have established his domicile in Ethiopia and  have  lived
                  in Ethiopia for a total of at least four  years  preceding
                  the submission of his application;


            3/    be able to communicate in any one of the languages of  the
                  nation/nationalities of the country;


            4/    have sufficient and lawful source of  income  to  maintain
                  himself and his family;


            5/    be a person of good character;


            6/    have no record of criminal convictions;


            7/    be able to  show  that  he  has  been  released  from  his
                  previous nationality or the possibility of obtaining  such
                  a release upon the acquisition of Ethiopian nationality or
                  that he is a stateless person; and


            8/    be required to take the oath of  allegiance  stated  under
                  Article 12 of this Proclamation.


         6. Cases of Marriage


            ......


         7. Cases of Adoption


            ......


         8. Special Cases


            A foreigner who has made  an  outstanding  contribution  in  the
             interest  of  Ethiopia  may  be   conferred   with   Ethiopian
             nationality by law irrespective of the conditions stated under
             Sub-Articles (2) and (3) of Article 5 of this Proclamation.


         9. Children of a Naturalised Person


            ......


         10.      Submission of an application for naturalisation


             1/  An application to  obtain  Ethiopian  nationality  by  law
                  shall be accompanied with relevant documents and shall  be
                  submitted to the authority.


             2/  .....


         11.      Examining and Deciding upon an Application


             1/  An application to  obtain  Ethiopian  nationality  by  law
                  shall be examined by  the  Nationality  Affairs  Committee
                  established under Article 23 of this Proclamation.


             2/  The Committee  shall  submit  its  recommendation  to  the
                  authority, following the examination  of  the  application
                  and documents submitted  to  it  as  well  as  such  other
                  additional information furnished on its demand.


             3/   Where   the   recommendation   of   the   Committee   for
                  Naturalisation obtains the approval of the authority,  the
                  applicant shall be required to appeal before the Committee
                  to take the oath of allegiance stated under Article 12  of
                  this Proclamation and shall be issued with  a  certificate
                  of naturalisation.


         12.      Oath of Allegiance


            .........


         13.      National Identity Card


             1/  Any Ethiopian national, if he  has  attained  the  age  of
                  majority, shall be issued with a national identity card.


             2/  Minor children shall be entered in the  national  identity
                  cards of their parents.


             3/  National identity cards shall be issued by  the  authority
                  or by any office delegated by the authority.


             RIGHTS OF NATIONALITY


         14.      State Protection


             1/  The State shall protect the rights and lawful interests of
                  its nationals.


             2/  The State shall take such measures as may be necessary  to
                  ensure the protection of the rights and  lawful  interests
                  of its nationals residing abroad.


         15.      Non-Extradition


            No Ethiopian national may be extradited to another state.


         16.      Change of Nationality


            Any Ethiopian national  shall,  subject  to  the  provisions  of
             Article 19 of this Proclamation, have the right to change  his
             nationality.


         17.      Non-Deprivation of Nationality


            No Ethiopian may be deprived of his nationality by the  decision
             of any government authority  unless  he  loses  his  Ethiopian
             nationality under Article 19 or 20 of this Proclamation.


         18.      Equality of Nationals


            All Ethiopian nationals shall have equal rights and  obligations
             of citizenship regardless of the manner in  which  nationality
             is obtained.


            LOSS OF ETHIOPIAN NATIONALITY


         19.      Renunciation of Ethiopian nationality


             1/  Any Ethiopian who has acquired or has been guaranteed  the
                  acquisition of the nationality of another state shall have
                  the right to renounce his Ethiopian nationality.


             ......


             3/  The renunciation of  the  nationality  of  a  minor  child
                  pursuant to Sub-Article  (1)  of  this  Article  shall  be
                  effected by the joint decision of his  parents  or,  where
                  one of his parents is a foreigner, by the decision of  the
                  Ethiopian parent.


             ......


             6/  Any Ethiopian who is not  issued  with  a  certificate  of
                  release in accordance with Sub-Article(5) of this  Article
                  shall have the right to appeal to the competent court.


         20.      Loss of Ethiopian Nationality upon  Acquisition  of  Other
             Nationality


             1/  Without prejudice the provisions of Article 19(4) of  this
                  Proclamation,  any  Ethiopian  who  voluntarily   acquires
                  another nationality shall be deemed  to  have  voluntarily
                  renounced his Ethiopian nationality.


             2/  Any Ethiopian who requires another nationality  by  virtue
                  of being born to a parent having a foreign nationality  or
                  by being born abroad shall be deemed to  have  voluntarily
                  renounced his Ethiopian nationality unless he has declared
                  to the authority his option to retain it by renouncing his
                  other nationality within one year after attaining the  age
                  of majority, or unless there has been an  earlier  express
                  renunciation of  his  Ethiopian  nationality  pursuant  to
                  Article 19(3) of this Proclamation.


             3/  An Ethiopian who acquires,  in  the  absence  of  his  own
                  initiative, another nationality by the  operation  of  the
                  law  in  connection  with  any  ground  other  than  those
                  specified under Sub-Article/2/ of this  Article  shall  be
                  deemed  to  have  voluntarily  renounced   his   Ethiopian
                  nationality, if he:


                  1.    starts  exercising  the  rights  conferred  to  such
                      acquired nationality or


                  2.   fails to declare  his  option  to  the  authority  to
                      retain his Ethiopian nationality  by  renouncing  his
                      other nationality within a period of one year.


             4/   A person who retains another nationality in  addition  to
                  Ethiopian  nationality  shall  be  considered  solely   an
                  Ethiopian  national  until  the  loss  of  his   Ethiopian
                  nationality pursuant to Sub-Articles (2) or  (3)  of  this
                  Article.


         21.      Effects of Loss of Nationality on Spouses and Children


            A person's loss of Ethiopian nationality shall have no effect on
             the nationalities of his spouse and children.


         22.      Re-admission to Ethiopian Nationality


             1/  A person  who  was  an  Ethiopian  national  and  who  has
                  acquired foreign nationality by law shall  be  re-admitted
                  to Ethiopian nationality if he:


                  a)   returns to domicile in Ethiopia;


                  b)   renounces his foreign nationality; and


                  c)   applies to the authority for re-admission.


             2/  The provisions of Sub-Article (1) of  this  Article  shall
                  also  apply  to  a  person  who  has  lost  his  Ethiopian
                  nationality   pursuant   to   Article   20(2)   of    this
                  Proclamation.


         23.      National Affairs Committee


            [Composition]


             2/  The Committee shall have the following powers  and  duties
                  to


                  a)   examine applications to obtain Ethiopian  nationality
                      by law;


                  b)   examine evidences  submitted  by  a  person  for  the
                      rebuttal of his presumed  renunciation  of  Ethiopian
                      nationality   pursuant   to   Article   20   of   his
                      Proclamation;


                  c)   ascertain that the requirements stated under  Article
                      22  of  this  Proclamation  are  fulfilled  when   an
                      application for re-admission to Ethiopian nationality
                      has been submitted.


             3/  The Committee shall consider any case in  accordance  with
                  Sub-Article (2) of the Article when it is referred  to  it
                  by the authority.  The Committee  shall  also  submit  its
                  findings and recommendations to the authority.


             ......


         25.      Repeal


            The Ethiopian Nationality Law of 1930  (as  amended)  is  hereby
             repealed.


         26.      Transitory Provisions


            Any person who has retained, until the coming into force of this
             Proclamation, his Ethiopian nationality pursuant to the former
             Nationality Law shall continue to be an Ethiopian national.


            ......."


Directive issued to determine the Status of Eritrean  Citizens  residing  in
Ethiopia (23 January 2004)

         "1.      Introduction


            When Eritrea became an independent  country  by  the  Referendum
             held in Eritrea in 1993, persons of Eritrean origin  who  were
             Ethiopian nationals became Eritrean nationals or  their  right
             to Eritrean nationality was established.  Numerous persons  of
             Eritrean origin have continued to  reside  in  Ethiopia  since
             long before the Eritrean  independence.   Since  it  has  been
             found necessary to determine the  residence  status  of  those
             Eritrean nationals who have continued to live in Ethiopia, the
             Security, Immigration and Refugee Affairs Authority has issued
             this Directive.


         2. Objective


            The objective of this Directive is to provide the means  to  any
             person of Eritrean origin who was a resident in Ethiopia  when
             Eritrea  became  an  independent  State  and   has   continued
             maintaining permanent residence  in  Ethiopia  up  until  this
             Directive is issued to confirm whether he or she has  acquired
             Eritrean nationality, and to determine his or  her  status  of
             residence in Ethiopia.


         3. Basic Assumptions of the Directive


             3.1 With regard to nationality, based on Article 33(1) of  the
                  Constitution  of  the  Federal  Democratic   Republic   of
                  Ethiopia that states that no Ethiopian national  shall  be
                  deprived of his or her Ethiopian nationality  against  his
                  or her will and Article 33(2)  that  guarantees  that  any
                  national has the right to  change  his  or  her  Ethiopian
                  nationality;


             3.2 Pursuant to Article 17 of  the  new  Nationality  Law  'No
                  Ethiopian may be deprived of his or her nationality by the
                  decision of any Government organ unless he  or  she  loses
                  his or her Ethiopian nationality on his or her own will';


             3.3 Based  on  the  Universal  Declaration  of  Human  Rights,
                  adopted by Ethiopia, that  provides  under  Article  15(2)
                  that no one shall be arbitrarily deprived of  his  or  her
                  nationality nor denied the right  to  change  his  or  her
                  nationality;


             3.4 As it is established by the experience of other  countries
                  that  according  to  international  custom  when  a  State
                  secedes from another under any circumstances, in order  to
                  resolve conflicts regarding nationality  between  the  new
                  and the existing country, individuals are given a  limited
                  period to chose their nationality;


             3.5  As  stipulated  under  Article  20   of   the   Ethiopian
                  Nationality  Law  an  Ethiopian   who   acquires   another
                  nationality  is  deemed  to  have  voluntarily   renounced
                  Ethiopian nationality  and  loses  his  or  her  Ethiopian
                  nationality;


             3.6 As it is necessary to consider  the  historical  situation
                  whereby, before Eritrea was recognised as  an  independent
                  State, its people,  as  they  had  Ethiopian  nationality,
                  established their residence all over Ethiopia and acquired
                  wealth and property, and have also established strong ties
                  through  marriage  with  Ethiopians  and   having   raised
                  children and grandchildren;


             The abovementioned laws and situations have been taken as  the
             basis for the issuance of the Directive.


         4. Issues of Nationality


             4.1 A person having  an  Eritrean  passport  or  any  document
                  conferring Eritrean nationality or a  person  serving  the
                  Eritrean government in the sector reserved exclusively for
                  Eritrean  nationals  is  considered  as  having   Eritrean
                  nationality.


             4.2 A person of Eritrean origin who has not opted for Eritrean
                  nationality shall be deemed as having decided to  maintain
                  his or her Ethiopian nationality and his or her  Ethiopian
                  nationality shall be guaranteed.


             4.3 An Eritrean registered in accordance with  this  Directive
                  and who desires to regain his or her Ethiopian nationality
                  may be readmitted to  his  or  her  Ethiopian  nationality
                  based on Article 22 of the new Nationality Proclamation.


         5. Registration


             5.1  The  following  persons  shall  be  registered  with  the
                  authority.


                 In accordance with this Directive, a person whose Eritrean
                  nationality has been established based on Article 4.1  has
                  to be registered in a place and time to be notified by the
                  authority.


             5.2 Registration procedure for Eritreans who were required  to
                  register in accordance with this Directive:


                  (a)  An Eritrean resident in Addis  Ababa,  in  accordance
                      with the time schedule to be announced  by  the  Main
                      Department for Immigration and  Nationality  Affairs,
                      shall appear and register in person before  the  Main
                      Department.


                  (b)  An Eritrean who resides in the Regions  shall  appear
                      and register in person before the branch  offices  of
                      the Main Department for Immigration  and  Nationality
                      Affairs or before a delegated organ.


         6. Residence Permit and Travel Document


             6.1 An Eritrean person residing in Ethiopia  will  be  granted
                  permanent  residence  permit  in   accordance   with   the
                  Immigration Proclamation.


             6.2 Having the permanent residence permit, if  he  or  she  is
                  unable to  obtain  a  travel  document  from  his  or  her
                  country, he or she may be issued a foreigner passport  for
                  the purpose of travel.


         7. Cancellation of Residence Permit


             7.1 Residence  permit  may  be  cancelled  for  the  following
                  reasons:


                  (a)  where the residence permit was acquired by submitting
                      fraudulent information;


                  (b)  where the bearer of the residence permit is found  to
                      be an undesirable foreigner.


             7.2 In addition to the reasons mentioned in Article 7.1, if he
                  or she resided continuously for more than a  year  outside
                  Ethiopia.


             7.3 Returning resident's permit


                       An Eritrean who has been issued a  residence  permit
                  and who  leaves  Ethiopia  permanently  shall  return  the
                  residence permit to the Authority.


         8. Ownership of Immovable  Property  and  the  Rights  to  Use  the
             Property


             8.1 The right to own a  house  and  immovable  property  shall
                  remain guaranteed.


             8.2 The right to use  the  agricultural  land,  for  a  person
                  resident in a rural area, shall be respected.


         9. Conditions of Work


             9.1 For Government employment, he or she shall be  treated  in
                  accordance  with  the  law  applicable  for  any   foreign
                  national.


             9.2 He or she has the right to engage in a private  employment
                  without being required to have a work permit.  However, he
                  or she is not permitted to engage  in  private  employment
                  that may be connected with security.


         10.      Social Services


             -   The right to use educational and health services shall  be
                  afforded in the  same  manner  as  the  nationals  of  the
                  country.


         11.      Service Charges


             -   The permanent residence permit holder shall be treated  in
                  the same manner as  the  nationals  of  the  country  with
                  respect to charges for different services.


         ..."


Council of Ministers Directive to Enable Eritreans  Deported  from  Ethiopia
due to the War Launch[ed]  by  the  Eritrean  Government  on  Ethiopia  [to]
Reclaim and Develop their Properties in Ethiopia (May 2009)

18.   The following is an unofficial translation of what, for our  purposes,
    are the relevant provisions of the 2009 Directive:-

         "WHEREAS, it has  become  necessary  to  facilitate  the  condition
         whereby Eritreans who, due to  the  invasion  of  Ethiopia  by  the
         Eritrean Government, were deported from Ethiopia upon being  deemed
         a threat to national security could reclaim their properties  which
         currently are under the custody of their agents in Ethiopia,  under
         the  administration  of  government  organs  and  in  blocked  bank
         accounts  as  well  as  to  settle  the  problems  that  had   been
         encountered in this regard;


         The Council of Ministers has issued this Directive.


          Short Title


         This Directive may be cited as the 'Council of Ministers  Directive
         to  Enable  Eritreans  Deported  from  Ethiopia  due  to  the   War
         Launch[ed] by the Eritrean Government on Ethiopia [to] Reclaim  and
         Develop their Properties in Ethiopia'.


         2. Scope of Application


             1.  This Directive is applicable to Eritreans who, due to  the
                  invasion of Ethiopia  by  the  Eritrean  government,  were
                  deported from Ethiopia  upon  being  deemed  a  threat  to
                  national security.


             2.  Notwithstanding the provision of sub-article one  of  this
                  article, this Directive is not applicable to Eritreans who
                  have close ties  with  commercial  and  security  entities
                  which  are  particularly  administered  by  the   Eritrean
                  government.


         3. Property Administration


            Eritreans deported from Ethiopia who used to own property  or  a
             business enterprise in Ethiopia can, pursuant  to  Article  5,
             carry  on  commercial  activities  upon  presentation  of  the
             necessary proof, if the property or the business has not  been
             sold or wound up and it is being managed by their agents.


         4. Money Deposited in Banks


            Ethiopians deported from Ethiopia are entitled to:


             1.     Operate  bank  accounts  wherein  they  have  personally
                  deposited  money  upon  presentation   of   the   relevant
                  evidence;


            2.    Received the proceeds from the sale of their  property  by
                  government  administration  [organs]  and   deposited   in
                  blocked  bank  accounts  without  interest  in   Ethiopian
                  currency upon presentation of proof.


            3.    Property or money  can  be  restituted  pursuant  to  sub-
                  articles 1 and 2 of this Article after a  government-owned
                  debts are paid without interest and penalty.


         5. Engage in Investment


            Eritreans deported from Ethiopia are:


            1.    Entitled to engage in commercial and investment activities
                  as local investors in Ethiopia by virtue of Article (5) of
                  Proclamation No. 280/2002;


            2.    Duty-bound to operate their money  through  an  accredited
                  bank in accordance with a procedure to be laid down by the
                  committee established under Article 8.


         6. Issuance of Visa


            The National Information and Security Service shall  issue  visa
             and residence permit [sic] to Eritreans deported from Ethiopia
             on the basis of the powers vested in it and its procedures.


         7. Identifying Eritreans not Covered by the Directive


            The National Information and Security Service shall  investigate
             whether Eritreans who apply to  benefit  from  this  Directive
             used to or still  work  in  collaboration  with  Eritrean  and
             security entities located in Eritrea or other countries  prior
             to or after the war and submit [its findings] for  a  decision
             to  the  Committee  established  under  Article  8;  it  shall
             implement this Directive in accordance  with  the  Committee's
             decision.


         8. Application of the Directive


            ...


            2.    A  four-member  Committee  ...  shall  be  established  to
                  implement this Directive.


         9. Powers and Duties of the Committee


            ...


         10.      Effective Date


            This Directive shall enter into force as of May 15, 2009."




                            D. RELEVANT CASE LAW

MA & Others (Ethiopia - mixed ethnicity - dual nationality (Eritrea)  [2004]
    UKIAT 00034

19.   The AIT was not satisfied that the  evidence  before  it  showed  that
    Ethiopians of  Eritrean  or  part  Eritrean  ethnicity  fell  within  a
    category which on that basis alone established they had a  well-founded
    fear of persecution.  However the Tribunal accepted that if the reality
    of the situation for  an  individual  was  such  that  he  or  she  was
    effectively deprived of citizenship which led to  treatment  which  can
    properly be categorised as  persecution  then,  subject  to  the  other
    requirements of the Refugee Convention,  there  would  be  a  right  to
    refugee status.  The Tribunal considered that the case of  Lazarevic  v
    SSHD  [1997]  Imm  AR  251  established  that  arbitrary  deprival   of
    citizenship can but did not necessarily amount to persecution.  It  was
    "the consequences of the deprivation of citizenship which  may  in  the
    particular circumstances of the case  amount  to  persecution.   If  it
    leads to treatment which can properly be categorised as causing serious
    harm, it will amount to persecution" (paragraph 33).

20.   The AIT then went on to consider the issue of whether,  if  the  three
    appellants before them were at real risk of  persecution  in  Ethiopia,
    they did not qualify  as  refugees  because  they  could  look  to  the
    Eritrean authorities for protection.  The Tribunal found that it  would
    be an issue of fact in each  case  as  to  whether  a  claimant  was  a
    national of a particular state.  If the evidence showed a claimant  was
    such a national or entitled to nationality of a country, then he  would
    not be deemed to be lacking  the  protection  of  the  country  of  his
    nationality, if without any valid reason based on a well-founded  fear,
    he had not availed himself of the protection of that country.  In  most
    cases that would involve making an application for his  nationality  to
    be recognised. "Putting it simply a claimant cannot decline to take  up
    a nationality properly open to him without a good reason, which must be
    a valid reason based on a well-founded fear.  A claimant cannot benefit
    from his own inaction unless that inaction has a proper  basis  because
    he is fearful  of  the  consequences"  (paragraph  45).   The  Tribunal
    accepted that the protection offered by a state of  second  nationality
    must be "effective", as envisaged in the Australian case  of  Jung  Kim
    Koe [1997] 306 FCA (2nd May 1997).

EB (Ethiopia) [2007] EWCA Civ 809

21.   The appellant in EB was a female Ethiopian national whose  father  was
    of Eritrean origin.  On appeal, the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal
    found that EB had been  deprived  of  her  identity  documents  by  the
    Ethiopian authorities, prior to her departure from  that  country,  and
    that the reason for the deprivation had been to make it more  difficult
    for EB to prove her Ethiopian nationality.  The AIT concluded  that  EB
    was, consequently, stateless but dismissed her  appeal  on  the  ground
    that the removal of identity documents had not itself resulted in  ill-
    treatment and she was not otherwise  at  risk  of  such  treatment,  if
    returned to Ethiopia.

22.   Longmore LJ identified the issue between the parties as  follows.   EB
    contended that she had effectively lost her nationality or  citizenship
    when her identity documents were removed by the action of the executive
    arm of the state of Ethiopia (albeit not in the manner described by the
    appellant).  The Secretary of State, whilst accepting that  deprivation
    of  citizenship  by  arbitrary  action  would  prima  facie  constitute
    persecution, submitted that the mere removal of identity documents  did
    not constitute persecution.  The AIT had found that EB suffered no ill-
    treatment whilst she was in Ethiopia and she would accordingly not have
    a well-founded fear of persecution if she were hypothetically  returned
    there (albeit that this  could  not  currently  happen).   Longmore  LJ
    continued as follows:-

         "63.     To my mind the important finding [of the AIT] is that  the
             removal of EB's identity documents was not an  activity  which
             resulted in ill-treatment of EB while in Ethiopia.   What  the
             AIT do not appear to have considered is whether the removal of
             the documents was itself ill-treatment, done as  it  was  with
             the motive of making it difficult for EB in  future  to  prove
             her Ethiopian nationality.  The reason why  the  AIT  did  not
             consider this is because they considered  that  even  loss  of
             nationality was not sufficient to constitute persecution.   If
             that is right it would no doubt follow that for a state merely
             to make it difficult to prove one's nationality would  not  be
             persecution either.  The  AIT  considered  that  the  previous
             decision of the Immigration Appeal Tribunal in MA (Ethiopia) v
             Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2004]  UKIAT  324
             compelled their conclusion.  MA (Ethiopia) was itself based on
             the decision of the Court of Appeal in Lazarevic  v  Secretary
             of State for the Home Department [1997] 1 WLR 117."

23.   In Lazarevic the Court of Appeal held  that,  even  if  draft  evaders
    from Yugoslavia had a well-founded fear when they  left  that  country,
    they were  not  to  be  considered  refugees  since  their  apprehended
    persecution was  not  for  a  Refugee  Convention  reason.   A  genuine
    conscientious objector would have such a reason, based on membership of
    a particular social group or political opinion, but an  ordinary  draft
    evader would not.  The arbitrary deprivation of  citizenship,  however,
    was capable of  constituting  persecution,  for  the  reason  given  by
    Professor Hathaway:-

         "If a state arbitrarily  excludes  one  of  its  citizens,  thereby
         cutting him off from enjoyment of all  those  benefits  and  rights
         enjoyed by citizens and duties owed by a  state  to  its  citizens,
         there is in my view no difficulty in accepting  that  such  conduct
         can amount to persecution.  Such a person  may  properly  say  both
         that  he  is  being  persecuted  and  that  he  fears  (continuing)
         persecution in the future."  The Law of Refugee Status (1991) pp104-
         105 (original emphases).

24.    In  the  light  of  Lazarevic,  Longmore  LJ  considered   that   the
    Immigration Appeal Tribunal had erred in MA  (Ethiopia)  in  concluding
    that an effective deprival of citizenship "does not by itself amount to
    persecution but the impact and consequences of that decision may be  of
    such severity that it  can  be  properly  categorised  as  persecution"
    (paragraph 33).  Longmore LJ explained that the reasoning in Lazarevic,
    properly interpreted, was that  Yugoslavia's  refusal  of  re-entry  to
    draft evaders failed to be persecutory because it was not  "persecution
    for a Convention reason, not because  it  did  not  lead  to  treatment
    constituting 'serious  harm'".   In  EB's  case,  the  removal  of  her
    identity documents was plainly for a Refugee Convention reason, whether
    categorised as "race" or "membership of a particular social group".

25.   Longmore LJ explained  that  the  reason  why  actual  deprivation  of
    citizenship by arbitrary action would prima facie amount to persecution
    was that such action "does away with that citizen's  individual  rights
    which attach to her citizenship.  One of those most basic rights is  to
    be able freely to leave and freely to re-enter one's  country.   (There
    may  well  be  others  such  as  the   right   to   vote.)    Different
    considerations  might  arise  if  citizens  were  deprived   of   their
    nationality by duly constituted legislation or proper judicial decision
    but a deprivation by executive action would almost always be  arbitrary
    and, if EB had in fact been deprived of her citizenship by the  removal
    of her identity documents by state agents, it would certainly have been
    arbitrary" (paragraph 67).

26.   Longmore LJ considered these "virtually self-evident" propositions  to
    be buttressed by Article 15  of  the  Universal  Declaration  of  Human
    Rights, that "everyone has the right to a nationality" and that "no-one
    shall be arbitrarily deprived of  his  nationality",  and  by  the  USA
    authority of Trop v Dulles (1958) 356 US 86.  That case  concerned  the
    constitutionality of legislation authorising a court marshal to deprive
    deserters in time of war of their US nationality.  Warren CJ  described
    denationalisation as follows:-

         "There may be  involved  no  physical  mistreatment,  no  privative
         torture.   There  is  instead  the   total   destruction   of   the
         individual's  status  in  organised  society.   It  is  a  form  of
         punishment more primitive than torture, for  it  destroys  for  the
         individual the  political  existence  that  was  centuries  in  the
         development.  The punishment strips the citizen of  his  status  in
         the national  and  international  political  community.   His  very
         existence is at sufferance of the country in which  he  happens  to
         find himself.  While any one country may accord  him  some  rights,
         and presumably as long as he remained  in  this  country  he  would
         enjoy the limited rights of an alien, no country need do so because
         he is stateless.  Furthermore, his enjoyment of  even  the  limited
         rights of  an alien might be subject to termination at any time  by
         reason of deportation.  In short, the expatriate has lost the right
         to have rights" (pp101-102).

27.   Returning to the facts of  EB's  case,  Longmore  LJ  considered  that
    there could be "no difference between"  the  seizure  of  her  identity
    documents to make it more difficult for her to prove nationality in the
    future "and an actual deprivation of citizenship.   Her  precariousness
    is the same; the 'loss of the right to have rights' is  the  same;  the
    'uncertainty and the consequent psychological hurt' is the same".   The
    IAT in MA (Ethiopia) were in Longmore LJ's view "wrong to conclude that
    some  further  (presumably  physical)   ill-treatment   was   required"
    (paragraph 70).

28.   At paragraph 71, Longmore LJ recognised that  this  did  not  conclude
    the question "since the hypothetical question whether EB  would  suffer
    persecution ... on her return is the critical question which has to  be
    addressed".   This  was  so,  notwithstanding  that  the   matter   was
    hypothetical because Ethiopia would not currently allow her  to  return
    to its country.  "Once it  is  clear  that  EB  was  persecuted  for  a
    Convention reason while in Ethiopia, there is no basis on which it  can
    be said that that state of affairs has now changed.  I would  therefore
    conclude  that  EB  has  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  for  a
    Convention reason and that  she  is  now  entitled  to  the  status  of
    refugee."

29.   Jacob LJ agreed with the judgment  of  Longmore  LJ.   Notwithstanding
    the prima facie establishing of refugee status, the question still  had
    to be asked, whether EB would have a well-founded fear  of  persecution
    if returned today.  "But in the absence of contrary  evidence,  someone
    who has  been  deprived  of  nationality  because  of  race  would,  if
    returned, be in a near-impossible position - unable to vote,  to  leave
    the country or even unable to  work.   They  may  well  be  treated  as
    pariahs precisely because they had their nationality taken away.   They
    have 'lost the right to have rights' (Warren CJ's  vivid  words).   And
    they have already been put in the position that their home  state  will
    not let them in - they cannot even go home."  There being "no  rebuttal
    evidence  showing  that  the  claimant  would  not  suffer  from  being
    stateless in the ways I have identified", and given the length of  time
    that EB's appeal had  been  pending,  Jacob  LJ  did  not  consider  it
    necessary or desirable for her  appeal   to  be  remitted  to  the  AIT
    (paragraph 75).

30.   Although agreeing on the legal issues raised in the  appeal,  Pill  LJ
    dissented on whether EB's appeal should be allowed outright or,  as  he
    considered to be appropriate, remitted to the AIT.   This  was  because
    the  question  of  whether  the  removal   of   documents   constituted
    persecution "is essentially a question for a fact- finding Tribunal and
    this Tribunal should not assume facts, as Jacob LJ has  done,  contrary
    to the findings of the Tribunal.  That would be  to  arrogate  to  this
    court the role contemplated by Parliament for the Tribunal"  (paragraph
    59).

MA (Disputed Nationality) Ethiopia [2008] UKAIT 00032

31.   I now come to the case Immigration Judge Sullivan sought to  apply  in
    the appeal of the present appellant.  The  AIT's  determination  in  MA
    (Disputed Nationality) Ethiopia [2008] UKAIT 00032  replaced  in  March
    2008, the guidance in MA & others (Ethiopia - Mixed  Ethnicity  -  Dual
    Nationality), insofar as that guidance held good  in  the  wake  of  EB
    (Ethiopia).  The appellant in MA (Disputed Nationality) had  also  been
    an appellant in MA and Others.  She had arrived in the  United  Kingdom
    in March 1999, claiming that both  she  and  her  husband  were  ethnic
    Eritreans from Ethiopia.  Her husband had been deported to Eritrea from
    Ethiopia.  If returned to Ethiopia, MA said that she feared deportation
    to Eritrea, in respect of which  country also she asserted  a  fear  of
    persecution.

32.   The AIT heard evidence  from  Nigel  Beaumont  of  the  Returns  Group
    Documentation Unit of  the  Border  and  Immigration  Agency.   In  the
    present proceedings, it is  relevant  to  mention  that  the  issue  of
    whether Mr Beaumont would give evidence was raised.  In  the  light  of
    the respondent's decision  that  he  would  not  be  called,  Mr  Fripp
    expressed concerns as to the extent to which Mr Beaumont's evidence, as
    given to the Tribunal in 2007,  could  properly  play  a  part  in  the
    present determination.  The record of his  evidence  (including  cross-
    examination by Mr Fripp) is nevertheless set out at paragraphs 23 to 43
    of the reported determination.  There is no reason for me not  to  have
    regard to what is there recorded.  What relevance it might play in  the
    determination of the present appeal is, however, another matter.

33.   Mr Beaumont's duties involved seeking to obtain  travel  documentation
    that would enable persons from Ethiopia to be removed to  that  country
    from the United Kingdom.  This normally happened when appeal rights had
    been exhausted and there was no  barrier  to  removal.   Where  certain
    criteria were met, the Ethiopian authorities would permit a  person  to
    be removed on the basis of an EU letter, which meant that  it  was  for
    immigration control in the country of return to carry out  any  further
    checks they might wish to make.  If the person in  question  was  found
    not to have the nationality of that country, then  the  United  Kingdom
    would accept them back.  At the time of giving  his  evidence,  the  EU
    letter process was a pilot scheme.  It was to be distinguished from the
    process of laissez passer, which followed a process of interview at the
    embassy, and which in Mr Beaumont's view did not need to later  involve
    nationality checks at the point of return.  Nevertheless, there was  an
    agreement that such a person would be taken back by the United Kingdom,
    if not accepted.  There were  also  cases  involving  emergency  travel
    documents (ETDs).

34.   Paragraph 37 records that Mr Beaumont:-

         "... was asked whether there were any underlying reasons  behind  a
         person being rejected simply because the embassy did not accept the
         person was an Ethiopian national.  He said that no such information
         would be given by the Ethiopians.  They would  say  they  were  not
         persuaded or the person was not very compliant at interview and did
         not want to be removed and would not comply so as to avoid removal,
         and they could be told that the person had  given  no  information.
         If that happened then they went back to the caseowner  to  try  and
         provide any supporting evidence they  might  have.   He  was  asked
         whether they could get them documented if there was  no  supporting
         evidence and the person said they were Eritrean.  He said no,  they
         did not have documents about Eritrea.  There was nothing they could
         do with that."

35.   At paragraph 39, Mr Beaumont said that his unit  "would  not  tend  to
    submit the form if the person did not say they were  Ethiopian,  as  it
    would just annoy the embassy.  It could be completed on  their  behalf,
    based on the information they had given earlier and they  could  put  a
    covering note or sheet with the form.  There was also  the  possibility
    of  prosecution  under  section  35  [of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    (Treatment  of  Claimants,  etc)  Act  2004  (deportation  or  removal:
    cooperation)] for non-compliance which could be held out as  a  threat.
    A person could not be allowed to stay just because they refused to give
    information."  At paragraph 41, Mr Beaumont indicated that, in one case
    where a  person  was  claiming  to  be  Eritrean,  the  United  Kingdom
    authorities had a copy  of  the  Ethiopian  passport  which  was  "good
    supporting evidence, and a travel document had been  issued".   He  had
    never seen an Ethiopian laissez passer saying anything other than  that
    the person was of Ethiopian nationality.  At paragraph 42, Mr  Beaumont
    was recorded as telling Mr Fripp that  his  team  did  not  sit  in  on
    interviews at the embassy and very little information was given to  his
    team by that embassy.

36.   At paragraph 81,  the  Tribunal  held  that  in  a  case  of  disputed
    nationality the first question to be considered was "Is the person a de
    jure national of the country concerned?"  That was a legal question, to
    be answered by examining whether a person fulfilled the nationality law
    requirements of  his  or  her  country.   It  might,  nevertheless,  be
    relevant in deciding what was the legal answer to that question to  see
    whether the authorities had issued a passport to the  person  concerned
    or whether, as in the case of EB, they had taken steps to  deprive  the
    person of the documentary means of proving nationality.   If  a  person
    had not been shown to be a de jure national of the  country  concerned,
    then he or she would either be a national  of  another  country  or  be
    stateless.

37.   If, however, it was concluded that a person was a  de  jure  national,
    the next question would be a purely  factual  one:  "Is  it  reasonably
    likely that the authorities of the  state  concerned  will  accept  the
    person concerned if returned as one of its own  nationals?"   That  was
    the approach said to have been approved by the Court of  Appeal  in  EB
    (paragraph 85).  There was a presumption  that  the  country  concerned
    would afford a de jure national of the  same  treatment  as  any  other
    national.  In EB, armed police had taken the appellant's ID  cards  and
    school papers, together  with  identity  documents  including  a  birth
    certificate.  That had been found by the Tribunal to have been  carried
    out, as against people such as EB, first to make it more difficult  for
    them in the future  to  prove  their  Ethiopian  nationality.   The  MA
    (Disputed Nationality) Tribunal observed that the Court of  Appeal  had
    found the earlier MA Tribunal to  have  been  wrong  in  assuming  some
    further (presumably physical) ill-treatment was required.

38.   At paragraph 90, the Tribunal found that the facts of the case  before
    them were different from  EB.   There  had  been  "no  removal  of  the
    appellant's documents".  The Tribunal refused to accept the  submission
    on behalf of the appellant that her Ethiopian passport in her own name,
    which she had used to travel, was not in fact validly issued to her.

39.   Turning to  the  findings  of  the  Claims  Commission  in  The  Hague
    regarding the international law ramifications of the border war between
    Eritrea and Ethiopia, the Tribunal  found  that,  in  response  to  the
    exceptional situation facing it at the outset of the war, Ethiopia  had
    devised and implemented a system which applied reasonable  criteria  to
    identifying individual  dual  nationals  thought  to  pose  threats  to
    Ethiopia and  that  the  loss  of  Ethiopian  nationality  after  being
    identified through this process was  not  "arbitrary  and  contrary  to
    international law" (paragraph 92).   The  Tribunal  accepted  that  the
    appellant before them was not a person who was liable  to  be  deported
    since she was  not  a  person  who  had  taken  part  in  the  Eritrean
    independence referendum.  She would not have been required to register,
    because she had not taken part in the referendum.   Whilst  the  Claims
    Commission found that some family members had been  forcibly  expelled,
    contrary to international law, because those  family  members  did  not
    hold Eritrean nationality,  the  Commission  could  not  determine  the
    extent to which this  had  happened;  although  Ethiopia  was  adjudged
    liable to Eritrea for erroneously depriving at  least  some  Ethiopians
    who were not dual nationals of their Ethiopian nationality.

40.   At paragraph 95,  the  Tribunal  accepted  the  Secretary  of  State's
    submission that the best appellant MA could show  was  that  she  might
    have been faced with a risk of arbitrary deprivation of nationality  at
    some point in the past but,  as  regards  the  present,  "there  is  no
    identifiable provision of Ethiopian law under which the appellant could
    have lost her nationality and nor is there any  identifiable  executive
    or administrative act to the  effect  that  she  is  not  an  Ethiopian
    national".  Considering the 2004  Directive  issued  to  determine  the
    resident  status  of  Eritrean  nationals  residing  in  Ethiopia,  the
    Tribunal found there was nothing in paragraphs 4 to 6 of the Directive,
    concerning registration entitlement to a residence permit,  which  were
    limited in a way suggested on behalf of the  appellants  (namely,  that
    they applied only to persons who were in continued residence in Eritrea
    up to the issuing of the Directive).  At paragraph  102,  the  Tribunal
    concluded that  "it  is  reasonably  likely  that  the  authorities  of
    Ethiopia will accept the appellant, if returned,  as  one  of  its  own
    nationals".

41.   At paragraph 107,  the  Tribunal  commented  on  the  evidence  of  Mr
    Beaumont.  Where there was supporting evidence in the form of a copy or
    expired passport, ID card, birth certificate, etc, then "an  individual
    can be removed to Ethiopia on a European Union letter.  Such  cases  do
    not require the person to  go  and  be  interviewed  at  the  Ethiopian
    Embassy."  The appellant  did  not  have  such  information  and  would
    therefore need to be  interviewed.   At  paragraph  109,  the  Tribunal
    concluded that appellant MA, after such an  interview,  in  respect  of
    which  the  embassy  "would  have  been  provided  with   the   biodata
    information which in the appellant's case would show that  her  parents
    were born in Eritrea and she herself was born in  Ethiopia,"  would  be
    likely to be issued with emergency travel  documentation.   That  would
    not be the case, however, if she said at interview  that  she  did  not
    want to return to Ethiopia.

MA (Ethiopia) [2009] EWCA Civ 289

42.   MA appealed from the AIT to the Court of Appeal.  In April  2009  that
    Court unanimously  dismissed  her  appeal.   There  were  two  reasoned
    judgments, of Elias LJ and Stanley Burnton LJ.  Mummery LJ agreed  with
    both.

43.   Elias LJ held that it was neither  necessary  nor  desirable  for  the
    concepts of de jure and de facto nationality to be employed as they had
    been by the AIT.  The issue in asylum  cases  was  always  whether  the
    applicant had a well-founded fear of  persecution  on  return  and  she
    would have  that  well-founded  fear  if  there  was  a  real  risk  of
    persecution.  In the case of MA (Disputed Nationality)  the  issue  was
    perceived to be whether MA would face the  risk  of  being  denied  her
    status as a national, it being assumed that this would, if established,
    constitute  persecution  to   the   requisite   standard.    In   those
    circumstances "to have recourse to the concepts of de jure and de facto
    nationality is  likely  to  obscure  rather  than  to  illuminate  that
    question" (paragraph 42).  Owing to what was accepted by  both  parties
    to be the application  of  the  wrong  standard  of  proof,  the  AIT's
    analysis of what it called the "hypothetical question" of treatment  if
    returned to Ethiopia was wrong in  law.   The  question,  however,  was
    whether that error was material.  It had also been  necessary  for  the
    Tribunal to engage with the question of the  denial  of  the  right  of
    return, given that the appellant's case was that this was part  of  the
    persecution itself (paragraph 43).  The question of risk needed  to  be
    looked at in the round, and the issues relating to  it  should  not  be
    compartmentalised (paragraph 48).  However, Elias LJ considered that it
    had become apparent during the hearing before the AIT that the  outcome
    "depended  upon  whether  the  Ethiopia  authorities  would  allow  the
    appellant to return to Ethiopia.   I  do  not  accept  the  appellant's
    submission that the AIT simply had to determine this  question  to  the
    usual standard of proof.  It is a question which can, at least in  this
    case, be put to the test.  There is no reason why the appellant  should
    not herself make a formal application to the embassy to seek to  obtain
    the relevant documents.  If she were refused, or if she came up against
    a brick wall and there was a failure to respond to the request within a
    reasonable period such that a refusal could properly be  inferred,  the
    issue would arise why she had been refused.  Again,  reasons  might  be
    given for the refusal.  Speculation by  the  AIT  about  the  embassy's
    likely response, and reliance on expert  evidence  designed  to  assist
    them to speculate in a more informed manner about that question,  would
    not be necessary" (paragraph 49).  Where the essential issue is whether
    someone will or will not be  returned,  "the  Tribunal  should  in  the
    normal case require the  applicant  to  act  bona  fide  and  take  all
    reasonably practicable steps to seek to obtain the requisite  documents
    to enable her to return".  Elias LJ acknowledged that  there  might  be
    cases where it would be  unreasonable  to  require  this  "such  as  if
    disclosure of identity might put the  applicant  at  risk,  or  perhaps
    third parties, such as relatives of the applicant who may be at risk in
    the home state if it is known that the applicant  has  claimed  asylum.
    That is not this case, however."

44.   Such an approach was, Elias LJ considered, consistent with  the  well-
    established principle that, before an applicant for  asylum  can  claim
    the protection of a surrogate state "he or  she  must  first  take  all
    steps to secure protection from the home state.  That was the  approach
    adopted in Bradshaw [R v Secretary of State for the Home Department ex-
    parte Bradshaw [1994] Imm AR 359] ....  It can be seen as an aspect  of
    the duty placed on an applicant to cooperate  in  the  asylum  process.
    Paragraph 205 of the UNHCR Handbook expressly states that an  applicant
    for asylum must, if necessary, make an  effort  to  procure  additional
    evidence to assist the decision maker."  Bradshaw involved an assertion
    of statelessness, but the  court  held  that  the  person  making  that
    assertion should make an application for citizenship of  the  countries
    with which she was most closely connected.

45.   Elias LJ and Stanley Burnton LJ were in agreement that the use of  the
    "real risk" test in such circumstances would produce "absurd  results".
    If the expert evidence showed that three out of ten in the  appellant's
    position were not allowed to return, that would constitute a real  risk
    "but it would be strange if by  the  appellant's  wilful  inaction  she
    could prevent the Tribunal from having the best evidence  there  is  of
    the state's attitude to her return ... it would in my  view  be  little
    short of absurd if she could succeed in  her  claim  by  requiring  the
    court to speculate on a question which she was in a  position  actually
    to have resolved" (paragraph 53).

46.   Elias LJ held that the Tribunal had erred by  not  first  establishing
    that the appellant had taken all reasonably practicable steps to obtain
    authorisation to return.  Although remittal would in such circumstances
    be appropriate, in the present case, MA's witness  statement  indicated
    that she had gone to the embassy to ask for a passport but got  nowhere
    "having  told  the  staff  that  she  was  Eritrean.   That  could  not
    constitute a bona fide attempt to obtain the  necessary  authorisation"
    (paragraph 55).  That meant her appeal had to be dismissed.  Elias LJ's
    judgment continued as follows:-

         "57.     I should add, however, that she would still now be able to
             make an application to the embassy for the  requisite  papers,
             and if her application were refused, she could  make  a  fresh
             application for asylum on  the  basis  of  the  new  evidence.
             Whether that would succeed would  depend  on  the  reason  for
             refusal.   I  respectfully  agree  with  the  observations  of
             Stanley Burnton LJ at para [87] that if the reasons were  that
             she did not want to return, or the embassy was  genuinely  not
             satisfied that she could establish her status or, I would add,
             that she had misled them over her nationality, then she  would
             not establish that  she  was  being  deprived  of  any  rights
             relating to nationality at all, let  alone  for  a  Convention
             reason, and her claim would fail.  However,  absent  any  such
             explanation or reason given, it would plainly be open  to  the
             Tribunal to infer that the reason for  the  refusal  would  be
             related  to  her  Eritrean  origins,   and   would   therefore
             constitute a  denial  of  her  nationality  for  a  Convention
             reason.  Of course, if she were permitted  to  return,  it  is
             conceded that she would have no asylum claim based on a  well-
             founded fear of persecution open to her."

47.   Elias LJ concluded by dealing with "two miscellaneous  matters".   The
    first was whether the refusal of authorisation to  return  to  Ethiopia
    could constitute persecution if, as in the case of MA, she had no  wish
    to return to that  country.   Elias  LJ  considered  this  "deceptively
    attractive argument" to be wrong.  "The question is whether objectively
    there is a real risk of persecution on return.  If there is  not,  then
    of course her unwillingness to return is not founded  on  any  fear  of
    persecution and she falls outside Art 1A(2) of the Refugee  Convention.
    If there is, and she is unable to return, she falls within the terms of
    the Article even if she would prefer not to return even if  there  were
    no such risk.  There must be numerous  cases  where  someone  genuinely
    fears persecution in his own country  but  is  not  unhappy  that  that
    should be so if it means he can sustain a better standard of living for
    himself and his family in England" (paragraph 58).

48.   The second miscellaneous matter concerned what the effect was  of  the
    decision of the court in EB.  For appellant MA, it was  contended  that
    the majority judgments "clearly establish that someone deprived of  his
    nationality  for  a  Convention  reason  thereby  necessarily   suffers
    persecution within the meaning of the Convention".  Although  Elias  LJ
    accepted there were passages in the judgments in EB that supported that
    interpretation, he did  not  think  it  was  possible  to  state  as  a
    universal proposition "that deprivation of nationality must be  equated
    with persecution.  Persecution is a matter of fact, not  law.   Whether
    ill-treatment amounts to persecution will depend upon what results from
    refusing to afford the full status of a de jure national in the country
    concerned."  Treating someone less favourably than  a  person  afforded
    the full rights and benefits of nationality "would  be  discrimination,
    but discrimination does not necessarily amount  to  persecution.   That
    would be a matter of fact in each case depending upon  the  nature  and
    degree  of  the  disadvantage  suffered.   Generalised  references   to
    'deprival of nationality'  will  often  tend  to  obscure  rather  than
    illuminate what is in issue" (paragraph 59).

49.   However, an arbitrary refusal of the right to return to  Ethiopia  was
    of a different order:-

         "60.     In my judgment, however, the correctness or  otherwise  of
             EB does not arise directly in this case since if the appellant
             were able to establish that she has been  arbitrarily  refused
             the right to return to Ethiopia for a Convention reason,  that
             would in my view amount to persecution.  It would  negate  one
             of the most fundamental rights attached to nationality, namely
             the right to live in the home country and all that  goes  with
             that.  Denial of that right to abode would necessarily prevent
             the applicant from exercising a wide range of other  rights  -
             if not all - typically attached to  nationality,  as  well  as
             almost  inevitably  involving  an  interference  with  private
             and/or family life  in  breach  of  Art  8  for  the  European
             Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and  Fundamental
             Freedoms 1950 (European Convention)."  (paragraph 60)

50.   Stanley Burnton LJ began by noting the "unfortunate  tendency  in  the
    law of asylum to treat findings of fact as decisions on points of  law,
    and binding authority in subsequent cases".  Such was the case with  EB
    (Ethiopia), which was "regarded as authority for the  proposition  that
    the removal of a person's nationality by the authorities of his or  her
    home state is as a matter of law sufficiently serious ill-treatment  as
    to constitute persecution which, if done for reasons referred to in Art
    1A(2) of the Convention  Relating  to  the  Status  of  Refugees  1951,
    entitles that person to refugee status" (paragraph 61).

51.   Stanley Burnton LJ was "troubled by this proposition".  What is  meant
    by persecution is a question of law  but  whether  ill-treatment  in  a
    particular case constituted persecution "is a mixed  question  of  fact
    and law: it is the application of the denotation of persecution to  the
    particular facts".  He did  not  consider  that  a  refusal  to  confer
    nationality could without more be regarded as persecutory; although  it
    could do so "if the consequences are sufficiently  serious"  (paragraph
    66).  Furthermore, deprivation of nationality could be "one  aspect  of
    ill-treatment by the state that in its totality amounts to sufficiently
    serious ill-treatment as to constitute persecution".

52.   At paragraph 69, Stanley Burnton LJ noted that a well-founded fear  of
    persecution for reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership of a
    particular social group or political  opinion  "is  a  prerequisite  of
    refugee status.  The second requirement is that the  person  is  either
    unable or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to  avail  himself  of  the
    protection of  the  country  of  his  nationality  or  former  habitual
    residence.  In  ... Lazarevic ...  Simon Brown  LJ  ...  addressed  the
    question whether inability to  return  is  qualified  by  the  need  to
    establish a current fear of persecution.  He held that it  is  not  but
    that 'an asylum seeker unable to return to his country  of  origin  may
    indeed be entitled to recognition as a refugee provided only  that  the
    fear or actuality of past persecution still plays a causative  part  in
    his presence here'."

53.  Stanley Burnton LJ observed that Lazarevic concerned Yugoslav  citizens
    who  had  evaded  military  service  "and  could  not  return   because
    Yugoslavia refused to accept the return of asylum  seekers".   Although
    they  were  thus  denied  the  basic  individual  right  conferred   by
    nationality, if they were to  be  returned  they  would  be  safe  from
    persecution.  Hutchison LJ said at 11.26:

         "If a state arbitrarily  excludes  one  of  its  citizens,  thereby
         cutting him off from enjoyment of all  those  benefits  and  rights
         enjoyed by citizens and duties owed by a  state  to  its  citizens,
         there is in my view no difficulty in accepting  that  such  conduct
         can amount to persecution.  Such a person  may  properly  say  both
         that  he  is  being  persecuted  and  that  he  fears   (continued)
         persecution in the future.  I see no reason, given  the  scope  and
         objects of the  Convention,  not  to  accept  Professor  Hathaway's
         formulation ... however, even  accepting  that  refusal  to  permit
         return can constitute persecution for a Convention reason, I  would
         not myself accept that that would be so in the case of  those  who,
         like these applicants, are anxious at all costs not to return:  how
         can they be said to be harmed by such a refusal?  ..."

54.   At paragraph 71, Stanley Burnton LJ had no doubt that  when  Hutchison
    LJ held arbitrary exclusion could amount to  persecution  "he  did  not
    mean to say that  it  does  amount  to  persecution".   That  would  be
    inconsistent with the  general  principle  and  would  render  a  mixed
    question of fact and law into one of law.  Stanley Burnton LJ  was  not
    persuaded by Longmore LJ's suggestion in EB that Hutchison LJ used  the
    word "can" because it is only if  ill-treatment  is  for  a  Convention
    reason  that  it  constitutes  persecution.   "That  explanation,  with
    respect, fails to take into account the wording  of  Art  1A(2),  which
    requires both 'persecution' and that the  persecution  should  be  'for
    reasons of race...' etc.  In other words there  are  two  questions  to
    consider under  the  Convention:  was  the  ill-treatment  sufficiently
    serious to amount to 'persecution' and, if so, was it for a  Convention
    reason?  Hutchison LJ was considering only the former, as the very next
    heading  in  his  judgment  demonstrates:  it  is  'Persecution  for  a
    Convention Reason?'"

55.   At paragraph 74, Stanley Burnton LJ turned to  analyse  the  judgments
    in EB.  What had happened to appellant EB in  Ethiopia,  including  the
    removal of her identity documents, meant that she had "in  effect  lost
    her Ethiopian nationality".   Nevertheless,  if  effective  nationality
    were restored, it was accepted that she would cease to  be  a  refugee.
    It was submitted on her behalf  "that  the  refusal  of  the  Ethiopian
    Government to permit EB's  return  was  itself  persecution".   Stanley
    Burnton LJ considered this submission was "impossible to reconcile  ...
    with the last sentence  of  the  above  citation  from  Hutchison  LJ's
    judgment in Lazarevic".

56.   At paragraph 76, Stanley Burnton LJ considered the concession made  by
    the Secretary of State  in  EB,  that  deprivation  of  citizenship  by
    arbitrary action "would have prima facie been  persecution  within  the
    terms of the Refugee Convention", as a "curious concession".   It  was,
    nevertheless, the basis of Longmore LJ's judgment.  The curious  nature
    of the concession arose "because it is  implicit  in  it  that  once  a
    person claiming asylum has shown to the appropriate standard  that  she
    has in fact been deprived of her citizenship, it is for  the  Secretary
    of State to show that that deprivation did not amount  to  persecution.
    But it is trite law that it is for the claimant to prove persecution or
    a well-founded fear of it, not for the Secretary of State to prove that
    there has not been persecution" (paragraph 76).  So far as  Jacob  LJ's
    judgment was concerned, Stanley Burnton LJ  assumed  that  the  serious
    consequences of the loss of nationality, such  as  inability  to  vote,
    leave the country or inability to work, "had either been found  by  the
    Tribunal as facts or  assumed  by  him,  subject  to  evidence  to  the
    contrary".  If found as facts, there were "no  comparable  findings  in
    the present case"; insofar as it was an assumption, it was based on the
    Secretary of State's concession "and in any event could not be  binding
    on subsequent courts or  Tribunals  because,  as  I  stated  above,  it
    related to questions of fact rather than law" (paragraph 76).

57. In MA's case there was no evidence that the appellant had been  deprived
    of her Ethiopian  nationality.   She  left  Ethiopia  on  an  Ethiopian
    passport in her name.  It was conceded that she  would  not  face  ill-
    treatment on account of her ethnicity or otherwise on return.   Needing
    a travel document, having given away her passport  to  her  agent,  the
    appellant had adduced no evidence that she had been  unable  to  obtain
    one "let alone evidence that she is unable  to  do  so  for  Convention
    reasons.  She did go to the embassy, but not surprisingly did  not  get
    beyond  the  receptionist  because,  on  her  account  in  her  witness
    statement, she said she was  Eritrean."   Stanley  Burnton  LJ  saw  no
    reason why the appellant "should not be  required  to  take  reasonable
    steps" to obtain travel documentation (paragraph 77).   As  with  Elias
    LJ, he found that to require a person to take reasonable steps to apply
    for a passport or travel document "involves no risk of harm at all.   I
    take into account that there may be cases in which the appellant  to  a
    foreign embassy may put relatives or friends who are in the country  of
    origin at risk of harm.  If there is a real risk they will suffer  harm
    as a result of such an application, it would not be reasonable for  the
    person claiming asylum to make it.  The present is not  such  a  case."
    Refugee status 'is not a matter of choice.  A person cannot be entitled
    to refugee  status  solely  because  he  or  she  refuses  to  make  an
    application to her embassy" (paragraph 83).

58.   At paragraph 86, Stanley Burnton LJ assumed that  MA  had  established
    he left Ethiopia owing to a well-founded  fear  of  persecution  for  a
    Convention reason "I say that I assume this  because,  given  that  she
    accepted that she had  no  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  if  she
    returned, it is a precondition of her claim, but was not the subject of
    this appeal, and it is not clear to me that there was a finding in  her
    favour on this".  However,  making  that  assumption  in  MA's  favour,
    Stanley Burnton LJ reserved his  opinion  "as  to  whether,  if  MA  is
    ultimately refused a passport  or  emergency  travel  document  by  the
    Ethiopian authorities in this country, she will qualify as a  refugee".
    The matter needed to be considered in due course "having regard to  the
    circumstances of that refusal, including the reasons  for  it  and  its
    consequences for her".



                               E.  DISCUSSION


1)  The weight to be given to the expert evidence

59.   At this point it is necessary to consider the  weight  that  I  should
    place on the evidence of the two experts.  Mr Schrder's  expertise  in
    Ethiopia is, I find, well-established (paragraphs 81, 114, and  118  of
    Appendix A).  Dr Campbell's expertise was challenged by Mr Kandola  but
    I consider him, like Mr Schrder, to be someone well qualified to speak
    with the required authority  on  the  subject  matter  of  this  appeal
    (paragraphs 38, 56, 60 to 66, 70 and 75 of Appendix A).   Both  experts
    have, where appropriate, provided  satisfactory  information  regarding
    the sources of the views they have formed. To a material extent,  their
    opinions are compatible with those of other informed observers (see eg.
    paragraphs 61 to 66 below).  I have given the evidence of each of  them
    significant weight.


2)  The actions of Ethiopia following the outbreak of war  with  Eritrea  in
    1998

60.   The events following the outbreak of war between Ethiopia and  Eritrea
    in 1998 have been the subject of considerable judicial attention,  both
    in the United Kingdom and  elsewhere,  but  nevertheless  require  some
    analysis here.  This is particularly so because, as we shall see,  what
    happened to a person in Ethiopia at that time  may  have  an  important
    bearing upon whether, in 2011, that person is able to make good a claim
    to be a refugee.

61.     As far as  events  in  1998  and  1999  are  concerned,  the  expert
    evidence is essentially in line with the published  reports,  including
    the Human Rights Watch 2003 Report "Eritrea and Ethiopia - the Horn  of
    Africa War: Mass Expulsions and  the  Nationality  Issue".   Given  the
    close links between the then newly established Ethiopian Government and
    the independence movement in Eritrea, it is wholly  believable  that  a
    significant number of ethnic Eritreans were encouraged to vote  in  the
    referendum of 1993, without any attention being drawn  to  what  (under
    the terms of the then current 1930 Nationality Law)  were  the  serious
    consequences of being regarded as having become a national  of  another
    state; namely, loss of Ethiopian nationality.

62.   The Ethiopia-Eritrea Claims Commission,  established  pursuant  to  an
    agreement signed in  Algiers  in  December  2000  between  Eritrea  and
    Ethiopia, made its "partial award" in December 2004.  In  MA  (Disputed
    Nationality), the  Secretary  of  State  relied  upon  the  finding  in
    paragraph 72 of the award.  This concerned "dual nationals deprived  of
    their Ethiopian nationality and expelled for  security  reasons".   The
    Award described a process instituted by Ethiopia, after the outbreak of
    war, whereby Ethiopian residents who had acquired Eritrean  nationality
    were scrutinised, with a view to expelling to Eritrea those  considered
    to pose a threat to Ethiopia's security.  At paragraph 66 of the Award,
    it is said that "Ethiopia  insisted  that  it  did  not  view  Eritrean
    nationality alone as  sufficient  to  deem  anyone  a  security  threat
    subject to loss of nationality and  expulsion".   Additional  ties  and
    actions were required.  The principal indicators "were raising money on
    behalf of Eritrea or participating in organisations promoting  Eritrean
    government interests or encouraging  closer  links  between  expatriate
    Eritreans  and  Eritrea.   Involvement  in   two   organisations   drew
    particular scrutiny" (paragraph  66).   The  first  of  these  was  the
    Popular Front for Democracy and Justice  (PFPJ);  the  second  was  the
    system  of  Eritrean  community  associations.    Ethiopia's   national
    security agency (SIRAA), using a "decentralised structure" involving "a
    complex process by which  a  tier  of  security  committees,  including
    committees at the wereda, tabia and kebele  level,  identified  persons
    meeting the criteria as potential security  threats.   SIRAA  officials
    apparently  reviewed  recommendations  and  controlled  this  process."
    Those  identified  were  individually  detained,  taken  to  collection
    centres and then expelled.  Noting the deprivation of nationality was a
    serious  matter  and  should  not  be   undertaken   arbitrarily,   the
    Commission, at paragraph 72,  recognised  the  "exceptional  situation"
    faced by Ethiopia at the time and found "that  the  loss  of  Ethiopian
    nationality  after  being  identified  through  this  process  was  not
    arbitrary and contrary to international law".

63.   In my view, too much should not be  read  into  this  finding  of  the
    Commission.  It is a striking feature of the Human Rights Watch  Report
    that,  in  very  many  cases,  people  were  identified  to  the  local
    authorities merely as being "Eritrean" and that this label, without any
    of the indicators described in the Claims Commission's Award, was often
    enough for a person to be  expelled.   Indeed,  at  paragraph  78,  the
    Commission made it quite plain that its findings at paragraph  72  were
    limited to those who had been through the process  overseen  by  SIRAA.
    The Commission rejected Ethiopia's assertion "that no-one was  expelled
    except for holders of Eritrean nationality found to be  security  risks
    through the  process  previously  described".   On  the  contrary,  the
    evidence showed "an unknown, but considerable, number of dual nationals
    were expelled without having been subject to this process".

64.   In any event, the  Claims  Commission  found  that  the  treatment  of
    Ethiopian/Eritrean dual nationals who remained in Ethiopia  during  the
    war, and who were deprived of Ethiopian nationality, being required  to
    register as aliens (the so-called "yellow-card people"), was "arbitrary
    and contrary to  international  law"  (paragraph  75).   There  was  no
    evidence  that  dual  nationals  in  this  group  threatened  Ethiopian
    security, according to the Commission, and given the rights  associated
    with citizenship, the wide-scale deprivation of  Ethiopian  nationality
    of such persons could not be accepted as lawful.

65.   Similarly, at paragraph 76, the  Claims  Commission  found  that  dual
    nationals who were in third countries "or who left Ethiopia  to  go  to
    third countries" at this time were determined by Ethiopia no longer  to
    be Ethiopian nationals.  The evidence showed that  those  who  went  to
    Ethiopian diplomatic or consular establishments  abroad,  in  order  to
    seek clarification or assistance, "were sent away".   Members  of  this
    group "were also arbitrarily deprived of their Ethiopian citizenship in
    violation of international law".

66.   The fact that the Ethiopian authorities, during this time, seized  and
    destroyed identification documents of  Eritreans  has  been  judicially
    accepted, as can be seen from the case of EB.  Dr Campbell said in oral
    evidence that during his interviews in Ethiopia  in  2010  he  had,  in
    fact, come across some people whose papers had not been so removed; but
    the clear thrust of  his  and  Dr  Schrder's  evidence  was  that  the
    practice of document destruction was widespread.

67.    It  was  no  doubt  for  these  reasons  that  Mr  Kandola,  for  the
    respondent, very  reasonably  accepted  that  the  Immigration  Judge's
    positive findings of fact in relation to the present appellant properly
    extended to that part of his evidence,  which  concerned  his  ID  card
    being removed by the authorities who detained him.

68.   The terms upon which the present appeal has been remitted require  the
    preservation of the credibility findings of Immigration Judge Sullivan.
     It is, however, necessary to place those positive findings within  the
    context of the circumstances appertaining in Ethiopia at  the  relevant
    time.  In the light of the findings of the  Claims  Commission,  it  is
    quite possible that the detention  and  expulsion  of  the  appellant's
    mother, and what must be assumed to be the  associated  deprivation  of
    her Ethiopian nationality, were carried out  pursuant  to  the  process
    described in paragraph 72 of the Award and  thus  were  not  undertaken
    arbitrarily, for the  purposes  of  international  law.   Even  if  her
    involvement  with  the  savings  scheme  had  not,  in  reality,   been
    undertaken with a view to helping the Eritrean  authorities  (including
    associated organisations), the appellant's own  evidence  includes  his
    uncle learning from the kebele "concrete information about his mother's
    involvement with the EPLF".  But none of that, of  course,  provided  a
    justification for the detention and ill-treatment of the appellant  and
    the seizure of his ID card,  or  for  the  continued  interest  in  the
    appellant, which prompted to him ignore his  reporting  conditions  and
    flee abroad. In other words, what happened to the appellant was not the
    ordinary application of the process described in paragraph  72  of  the
    Award.


3)  The approach to refugee claims based on deprivation of nationality

69.   As can be seen from the synopses above of  the  case  law,  there  are
    difficult legal issues that arise from the judgments in  EB  (Ethiopia)
    and MA (Ethiopia).  Before I come to those, however, it is necessary to
    deal with a submission of  Mr  Kandola,  regarding  the  Supreme  Court
    judgments in MS (Palestinian Territories) [2010] UKSC 25.  In  essence,
    Mr Kandola submitted that the effect of  MS  (Palestinian  Territories)
    had been impliedly to overrule MA  (Ethiopia),  insofar  as  that  case
    permitted or required the Tribunal to concern itself with  the  process
    of removal, in determining the appeal of a person in  the  position  of
    the appellant.

70.   MS (Palestinian Territories) involved  an  attempt,  by  means  of  an
    appeal under the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,  to
    challenge  removal  directions  made  under  paragraph  8(1)(c)(iv)  of
    Schedule 2 to the Immigration Act 1971, on the basis that the place  to
    which MS was to be removed was not a  country  or  territory  to  which
    there was reason to believe  he  would  be  admitted.   Confirming  the
    determination of the AIT and, later, the Court of Appeal,  the  Supreme
    Court held that an appeal under the 2002 Act did not encompass  such  a
    challenge.

71.   I do not find that MS (Palestinian Territories) has  any  effect  upon
    the status of MA (Ethiopia).  Unlike MA and the present  appellant,  MS
    did not assert that any  refusal  or  failure  on  the  part  of  those
    controlling  return  to  the  Palestinian  Territories  to  admit   him
    constituted persecution or was otherwise relevant to a claim to refugee
    status.   MS's  wish  was  to  appeal  the  decision  to  make  removal
    directions, on the basis that such directions could not, in  his  case,
    lawfully be made. By contrast, MA and the present  appellant  made  the
    issue of ability to return a central feature  of  their  claims  to  be
    refugees from Ethiopia.  As Elias LJ said:-

         "(43)    I also  accept,  as  Ms  Giovannetti  concedes,  that  the
             tribunal should have dealt with  the  question  of  Ethiopia's
             attitude to return as part of its assessment whether there was
             a real risk of persecution.  It is true that the tribunal will
             not generally be concerned about the process  of  removal;  it
             must determine asylum status without  regard  to  that  issue,
             which is a matter for the Secretary of  State.   So  the  fact
             that it may, for example, prove to be impossible  in  practice
             to return someone seeking  asylum  has  no  relevance  to  the
             determination  of  their  refugee  status.   But   where   the
             applicant contends that the denial of the right to  return  is
             part of the persecution itself, the Tribunal must engage  with
             that question."

72.   I need now to turn to the correct approach to  cases  of  the  present
    kind, in the light of the relevant case law.  In this regard, it may be
    helpful to set out Article 1A(2) of the Refugee Convention:-

         "Article 1A: For the purposes of the present Convention,  the  term
         'refugee' shall apply to any person who -


            ...


         (2)      owing to a  well-founded  fear  of  being  persecuted  for
             reasons  of  race,  religion,  nationality,  membership  of  a
             particular social group or political opinion, is  outside  the
             country of his nationality and is unable  or,  owing  to  such
             fear, is unwilling to avail himself of the protection of  that
             country; or who, not having a nationality  and  being  outside
             the country of his former habitual residence as  a  result  of
             such events, is unable or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to
             return to it."



(a) Did the applicant hold the nationality of the state  in  question  prior
to the alleged deprivation?

73.   Although not an issue between the parties in the present case,  it  is
    worth reiterating that a person who claims to be  a  refugee  from  the
    country of his or her asserted nationality bears the burden of  proving
    that he or she has, or had, that nationality.  This is plain  from  the
    starred (binding) decision in Asif Khan [2002] UKIAT  04412.   What  is
    less clear  is  whether  the  standard  of  proof  is  the  balance  of
    probabilities or that there is merely a reasonable  likelihood  of  the
    appellant being of the nationality asserted.  A third  possibility,  in
    the light of Karanakaran [2000] EWCA  Civ  11,  is  that  there  is  no
    particular standard of proof, the ultimate question being  whether,  in
    the light of all the evidence, there is a reasonable likelihood or real
    risk of persecution, if effect is given to  the  immigration  decision.
    The matter may fall for decision in due course; but it is not an  issue
    in the present case because it is common ground that,  under  the  then
    extant Nationality Law of 1930, the appellant at birth was an Ethiopian
    national and remained so until the events of 1998/1999.


(b) Did the applicant suffer arbitrary deprivation of his nationality,  such
as to constitute persecution and/or suffer other  persecution,  causing  him
to be outside the country of his nationality/former habitual residence?

74.   Although the question of  whether  a  person  is  a  national  of  any
    particular state is a matter of law  for  that  state  (KK  and  Others
    (Nationality: North Korea) [2011] UKUT 92 (IAC), the question whether a
    national of a particular state has been lawfully or unlawfully deprived
    of the nationality of that state is a legitimate issue for a  court  or
    tribunal in another state to determine, in the  course  of  deciding  a
    person's entitlement to international protection.  This is evident from
    the judgments in EB (Ethiopia) and MA (Ethiopia).

75.   In Adjami and Harrington "The scope and content of Article 15  of  the
    Universal Declaration of Human Rights", Refugee Survey Quarterly [2008]
    93 at 101-103, it is said that:-

         "Article 15(2) of the UDHR does not expound upon  what  constitutes
         the arbitrary deprivation  of  nationality.   Implicit  in  Article
         15(2)  however,  is  a  distinction  between  the  deprivation   of
         nationality -  which  is  the  withdrawal  of  nationality  already
         conferred, protected by human rights standards - and the denial  of
         access to nationality.  Various human rights norms  have  developed
         to give content to the right to be free from arbitrary  deprivation
         of nationality.   International  law  recognises  some  permissible
         grounds for the deprivation of  citizenship.   But  deprivation  of
         nationality even  on  permitted  grounds  must  be  accompanied  by
         important procedural and substantive safeguards.  Since the concept
         of arbitrariness is a standard of reference in  international  law,
         it  usefully  provides  guiding   principles   to   interpret   the
         prohibition on arbitrary deprivation of  nationality  enshrined  in
         Article  15  of  the  UDHR.   As  set  forth  below,  arbitrariness
         encompasses both procedural and substantive prohibitions.


         First and foremost, the prohibition against arbitrariness  mandates
         procedural fairness and due process to constrain states from taking
         unilateral action in denationalising individuals or groups in  such
         a way as to violate the right to due process.  ...


         The  notion  of  arbitrariness,  however,   comprises   more   than
         procedural fairness.  International jurisprudence interpreting what
         constitutes arbitrary action in  various  contexts  instructs  that
         standards of  necessity,  proportionality  and  reasonableness  are
         relevant to the enquiry...


         In the context of nationality, the substantive scope of  prohibited
         arbitrariness includes  at  least  two  elements:  the  prohibition
         against  ethnic  discrimination   and   the   prohibition   against
         statelessness.


         The prohibition of racial and ethnic  discrimination  is  found  in
         Article 2 of the UDHR and every major  international  and  regional
         human rights instrument, and also represents a  rule  of  customary
         international  law.   It  therefore  limits  state  discretion   in
         deprivation of nationality: any deprivation of nationality based on
         racial or ethnic discrimination will be judged arbitrary...


         Other UN human rights organs have upheld  the  principle  that  the
         prohibition of racial  and  ethnic  discrimination  constrains  the
         deprivation of citizenship.  The  former  UN  Commission  on  Human
         Rights has stated that 'arbitrary  deprivation  of  nationality  on
         racial, national, ethnic, religious, political or gender grounds is
         a violation of human rights and fundamental freedoms'."

76.   It is  plain  that  the  circumstances  in  which  the  appellant  was
    deprived of his ID  card  were,  particularly  when  read  against  the
    background and expert evidence, such as to make  it  very  likely  that
    this was done with a view impeding his ability to  establish  Ethiopian
    nationality in the future.  On the authority of EB (Ethiopia),  removal
    of the ID card was itself ill-treatment that was capable  of  amounting
    to persecution.  As a matter of law, no further ill-treatment needed to
    be found; but, in the light of  MA  (Ethiopia),  the  act  of  removing
    identity documents in these circumstances can but need not as a  matter
    of law constitute persecution.

77.    Although not referred to in either of the Court of Appeal  cases,  it
    is helpful at this point to remind ourselves  that  Article  9  of  the
    Qualification  Directive  (2004/83/EC)  has  this  to  say  about  what
    constitutes persecution:

    Article 9

    Acts of Persecution

      Acts of persecution within the meaning of Article  1A  of  the  Geneva
    Convention must:


        (a)      be sufficiently serious by their nature or  repetition  as
             to constitute a severe violation  of  basic  human  rights,  in
             particular the rights from  which  derogation  cannot  be  made
             under  Article  15(2)  of  the  European  Convention  for   the
             Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms; or


        (b)       be  an  accumulation  of  various   measures,   including
             violations of human rights which is sufficiently severe  as  to
             affect an individual in a similar manner as mentioned in (a).


    Acts of persecution as qualified in paragraph 1, can, inter alia,  take
             the form of:


        (a)      acts of physical or mental  violence,  including  acts  of
             sexual violence;


        (b)      legal, administrative, police,  and/or  judicial  measures
             which are in themselves discriminatory or which are implemented
             in a discriminatory manner;


        (c)      prosecution or punishment, which  is  disproportionate  or
             discriminatory;


        (d)      denial of judicial redress resulting in a disproportionate
             or discriminatory punishment;


        (e)      prosecution or punishment for refusal to perform  military
             service in a conflict, where performing military service  would
             include crimes or acts falling under the exclusion  clauses  as
             set out in Article 12(2);


        (f)      acts of a gender-specific or child-specific nature."

78.   I have to say that I find it difficult  to  decide  whether  the  mere
    removal  of  the  appellant's  ID  card  crossed   the   threshold   of
    persecution.  What I am sure about, however, is that when one puts that
    act in the context of what was happening to  ethnic  Eritreans  in  the
    summer of 1998 and views it by reference to the attitude evinced by the
    Ethiopian  authorities  since  that  time  towards   persons   in   the
    appellant's position, the removal of the card is  part  of  an  ongoing
    deprivation of nationality that has had a very serious effect upon  the
    appellant.  Seen in that light, which is the only sensible way in which
    it can be seen, the action was persecutory.  Even if that were  not  so
    however, when one combines  it  with  the  detention  and  beating  the
    appellant received,  it  is  undoubtedly  the  case  that  he  suffered
    persecution prior to his departure from Ethiopia.  The persecution  was
    for a Convention reason, namely, race,  nationality,  membership  of  a
    particular social group and political opinion (actual or imputed).

79.   It might be thought that, in cases of this kind, everything  turns  on
    the  present  attitude  of  the  Ethiopian  authorities,   as   regards
    recognition of the appellant in 2011 as a refugee.  It is,  of  course,
    the case that, as counsel for EB accepted in the Court of  Appeal,  "if
    effective nationality were to be restored, the claimant would cease  to
    be a refugee" (paragraph 44).  However, findings as to the  credibility
    and consequences of events in Ethiopia, prior  to  departure,  will  be
    highly important to the determination of an appeal of the present kind.



80.   On the one hand, a finding of past persecution of this kind  may  have
    an important bearing on how one  views  the  present  attitude  of  the
    authorities.   A  person  who  is  found  to  have  suffered  arbitrary
    deprivation of citizenship may find it relatively  easy  to  show  that
    present bureaucratic problems are, in reality,  part  of  a  continuing
    pattern of hostility towards that person and that  the  deprivation  of
    nationality for Convention reasons  is,  thus,  ongoing.  It  may  also
    inform the view that a judicial fact-finder takes of difficulties  that
    the person is reasonably likely  to  face  on  a  hypothetical  return,
    leading to a finding that the person would, in fact, face ill-treatment
    amounting to persecution on such a return.

81.   On the other hand, a person  whose  account  is  found  to  be  wholly
    incredible may well  fail  to  demonstrate  that  they  are  an  ethnic
    Eritrean, who suffered  difficulties  in  the  aftermath  of  the  1998
    conflict.  In short, there may not be any Eritrean element at  all.  In
    such circumstances, a person's claimed  lack  of  documentation  and/or
    contacts in Ethiopia may be found to  be  wholly  unbelievable.   As  a
    result, a refusal on the part of the Ethiopian  authorities  (including
    the London Embassy) to accept the return of the  person  concerned  may
    well be found not to be persecution or based on any Refugee  Convention
    reason.


(c) The "Right to Return"

82.   It is clear from the judgments in  EB  (Ethiopia)  and  MA  (Ethiopia)
    that the refusal to permit a person to return to a state of which  that
    person is a  national  or  would  be  a  national  (but  for  arbitrary
    deprivation of nationality) is a denial of  one  of  the  basic  rights
    stemming from nationality.  More difficult, however,  is  the  question
    whether refusal of the right to return is necessarily  persecutory  for
    the purposes of the Refugee Convention.

83.   At para 60 of MA (Ethiopia), having just found, for the reasons  given
    by Stanley  Burnton  LJ,  that  deprivation  of  nationality  does  not
    necessarily amount to persecution, Elias LJ said this:-

         "[60]    In my judgment, however, the correctness or  otherwise  of
             EB does not arise directly in this case since if the appellant
             were able to establish that she has been  arbitrarily  refused
             the right to return to Ethiopia for a Convention reason,  that
             would in my view amount to persecution.  It would  negate  one
             of the most fundamental rights attached to nationality, namely
             the right to live in the home country and all that  goes  with
             that.  Denial of that right of abode would necessarily prevent
             the applicant from exercising a wide range of other  rights  -
             if not all - typically attached to  nationality,  as  well  as
             almost  inevitably  involving  an  interference  with  private
             and/or family  life  in  breach  of  Art  8  of  the  European
             Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and  Fundamental
             Freedoms 1950 (European Convention)."

84.   That passage appears to indicate that arbitrary refusal of  the  right
    to return to Ethiopia is persecution, in every case.  However,  Stanley
    Burnton LJ, at paragraph 70, relied upon the judgment of  Hutchison  LJ
    in Lazarevic, who had held that  arbitrary  exclusion  "can  amount  to
    persecution" but that "even accepting that refusal to permit return can
    constitute persecution for a Convention  reason,  I  would  not  myself
    accept that that would be so in the  case  of  those  who,  like  these
    applicants, are anxious at all costs not to return:  how  can  they  be
    said to be harmed by such a refusal?" (p1126).

85.   At paragraph 71, Stanley Burnton LJ had "no doubt that when  Hutchison
    LJ said that arbitrary exclusion can amount to persecution, he did  not
    mean to say that it does amount to persecution.  The  latter  statement
    would be inconsistent with  the  general  principle  to  which  I  have
    referred: it would be to render a mixed question of fact and  law  into
    one of law."  The thrust of Stanley Burnton  LJ's  judgment  is  clear.
    Even as regards the aspect of nationality that concerns  the  right  to
    return home, the question whether  denial  of  that  right  constitutes
    persecution will be one of fact.  Furthermore,  that  factual  question
    may turn on whether the person concerned truly wants  to  return  home.
    Picking up on the last sentence of p1126 in Lazarevic, Stanley  Burnton
    LJ said:-

         "[72]    The last sentence of the above citation  is  also,  in  my
             respectful view, very good sense.  Those who claim  asylum  in
             this country do not wish to return to their country of origin,
             sometimes because they do have a genuine fear  of  persecution
             but also,  as  the  many  cases  determined  by  the  Tribunal
             demonstrate, because life is better here.  They  are  economic
             migrants.  They therefore do not  want  their  nationality  of
             origin, if that means that they will  have  to  return.   Many
             deliberately dispose of their passports  on  arrival  in  this
             country, in order to render their return more  difficult,  and
             sometimes  render  it  more  difficult   to   identify   their
             nationality..."

86.   His Lordship went on to  say  that,  if  appellant  MA  had  kept  her
    passport "there would have  been  no  difficulty  in  her  proving  her
    nationality and it would be difficult, if not impossible to see on what
    basis, consistent with the concession made on her behalf, she could  be
    entitled to refugee status as someone who was unable to return  to  her
    country of origin".  Elias LJ, however, at paragraph 58,  rejected  the
    "deceptively attractive argument" that denial  of  re-entry  could  not
    constitute  persecution  if  the  appellant  "wishes...to  be   refused
    authorisation to be returned to Ethiopia".   Elias  LJ  considered  the
    question to be whether objectively there was a real risk of persecution
    on return.  If not, the appellant's unwillingness would not be  founded
    on any fear of persecution and she would fall outside Art 1A(2) of  the
    Refugee Convention.  However, if there was such an objective risk,  and
    she was unable to return, then she fell within the terms of the Article
    "even if she would prefer not to return even  if  there  were  no  such
    risk.  There must be  numerous  cases  where  someone  genuinely  fears
    persecution in his own country but is not unhappy that that  should  be
    so if he can sustain a better standard of living for  himself  and  his
    family in England."

87.   The first point to make about refusal of the right to return  is  that
    it matters not whether a person who has been  arbitrarily  deprived  of
    their nationality is, as a result, regarded as stateless or as a person
    who, in terms of international law, still possesses  that  nationality,
    albeit that the  rights  associated  with  it  cannot  in  practice  be
    exercised.  The challenging issue is whether deprival of the  right  of
    return is per se persecution.

88.   Since Mummery LJ agreed with both Elias LJ  and  Stanley  Burnton  LJ,
    the apparent tension between the two reasoned judgments means  we  need
    to look beyond MA (Ethiopia) in order to seek the answer.  The  passage
    from Hutchison LJ's judgment  in  Lazarevic,  referred  to  by  Stanley
    Burnton LJ, would seem to lend support to the proposition that a denial
    of the right to return can, but need not, amount to persecution.   Less
    helpful, perhaps,  is  Revenko  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2001] QB 601, which held that a stateless  person  who  was
    unable to return to the country of his former  habitual  residence  was
    not, by reason of those facts alone, a refugee.  It was also  necessary
    to  establish  a  present  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  for   a
    Convention reason.  Stanley Burnton LJ considered the case  of  Revenko
    authority "for the proposition that a denial of return is not of itself
    persecution" (paragraph  64).   In  EB  (Ethiopia),  however,  Pill  LJ
    considered the same case to be  "authority  for  the  proposition  that
    statelessness does not necessarily confer  refugee  status".   The  key
    point in Revenko, it seems, was that the new rules  of  citizenship  of
    the newly independent state of Moldova, on whose  geographic  territory
    the applicant had been born when Moldova was part of the USSR, did  not
    admit the applicant to citizenship of Moldova.  There does  not  appear
    to have been  any  issue  regarding  the  arbitrary  deprivation  of  a
    relevant nationality, such as is the case here.

89.   Given that the right of return is, in the circumstances with which  we
    are  concerned,  one  of  the  "bundle"  of  rights   associated   with
    nationality, and since there was no  express  or  implied  disagreement
    amongst the court in MA  (Ethiopia),  regarding  Stanley  Burnton  LJ's
    finding that deprival of citizenship itself is not per se  persecutory,
    I consider that it is necessary to read what Elias LJ said at paragraph
    60 of the judgments in such a way as to be compatible with the views of
    Stanley Burnton LJ (with which  Mummery  LJ  agreed).   Accordingly,  I
    conclude that  whether  the  denial  of  a  right  of  return  will  be
    persecutory is an issue of fact, to be decided in all the circumstances
    of the particular case.  However, whilst strenuously avoiding  concepts
    of prima facie persecution, I find that, compatibly with paragraph  60,
    the  denial  of  a  right  of  return  is  very  likely  to  constitute
    persecution, in very many cases.

90.   In a case such as the present, where persecution caused  a  person  to
    leave the country of his nationality, the present denial of a right  of
    return falls to be viewed as part of the overall ill-treatment  of  the
    person concerned, even though he would not today be at real risk of the
    kinds of persecutory treatment (here,  detentions  and  beatings)  that
    forced him to leave. Accordingly, in the case of the appellant  I  have
    no hesitation in concluding that, viewed in this light, a denial of his
    right of return would be persecutory.

91.   I make that finding, notwithstanding it is plain  that  the  appellant
    does not, in fact, want to return to Ethiopia.  It is probable that, in
    saying what he did at paragraph 72 of MA (Ethiopia), Stanley Burnton LJ
    had in mind a wholly bogus claimant for asylum.   As  we  have  already
    seen, in the circumstances of Ethiopian cases, such a person  may  well
    face very considerable difficulties  in  persuading  a  judicial  fact-
    finder that a refusal by the Ethiopian embassy to process  his  or  her
    claim is persecution for  a  Refugee  Convention  reason.   So  viewed,
    paragraph 72 is, I find, not incompatible with the clear exposition  by
    Elias LJ at paragraph 58 of what many would in any event have  regarded
    as representing the law.


4)  Refusal of Right to Return

92.   Having established that (a) the deprivation of  a  person's  right  to
    return to the country of his or her nationality can be persecution  and
    (b) it would be persecution on the facts of  the  appellant's  case,  I
    need to determine whether the appellant has, in fact, been deprived  of
    that right. As we have seen, MA (Ethiopia) is binding authority for the
    proposition that, where an applicant contends that the  denial  of  the
    right of return is part of the persecution itself,  then  the  Tribunal
    deciding the appeal must engage with that question.

93.   MA (Ethiopia) establishes that a  person  seeking  to  rely  upon  the
    denial of a right of return from the United Kingdom to his or her  home
    country must take "all reasonably practicable steps to seek  to  obtain
    the requisite documents" to facilitate the person's  return  (paragraph
    50 of the judgments).  The test is not whether the applicant has  shown
    there is a real risk that he or she would be refused a right of  return
    for reasons engaging the Refugee Convention.   Instead,  the  applicant
    must show, on the balance of probabilities, that all  reasonable  steps
    have been taken.  It is then for the Tribunal to make  findings  as  to
    the reasons for the embassy of the  country  concerned  to  enable  the
    applicant to return as a national (paragraph 57).

94.   On this basis, it is important to make plain the ambit of any  country
    guidance to be given by the Upper Tribunal on this issue.  The  general
    attitude and practices of the Ethiopian Government,  operating  through
    its London Embassy, as disclosed by the evidence in the  present  case,
    are no more than the backdrop against which each individual claimant in
    an Ethiopian asylum case of the present kind must take  all  reasonably
    practicable  steps  on  a  bona  fide   basis   to   secure   Ethiopian
    acknowledgement of his or her Ethiopian nationality. That attitude  and
    practice will also, of course, inform judicial fact-finders in deciding
    whether an individual has, in fact, taken all such steps.

95.   Although not an expert witness, Mr Hart  has  considerable  experience
    of attending at the Ethiopian Embassy in connection  with  applications
    by persons asserting a well-founded  fear  of  persecution  as  regards
    Ethiopia.  Mr Hart's evidence, as to his visit with  the  appellant  to
    the embassy on 10 December 2010, his  telephone  conversation  with  Mr
    Haileselassie on 24 December and his description of other visits to the
    embassy, was not shaken under cross-examination.  I regard his evidence
    as entirely credible.

96.   There is no doubt that the receptionist, seated  behind  the  "window"
    dividing the public area from the private area of the relevant room  of
    the embassy, was an unhelpful individual, who merely said that  without
    a birth certificate or kebele ID card, there  was  "no  way"  that  the
    appellant could obtain recognition of his Ethiopian citizenship.   When
    pressed, the receptionist "explained that the embassy are not  able  to
    help those of Eritrean ethnicity who approached them who claim a  right
    to live in Ethiopia based on previous residence there".

97.   owever, However, as is often the case in life, it is necessary to  get
    beyond the unhelpful  receptionist.  This  is  what  Mr  Hart  did,  by
    speaking on the telephone from  within  the  embassy  to  Haileselassie
    Suba.  As is apparent from paragraph 25  of  Appendix  A,  an  ID/birth
    certificate would be expected by the embassy,  in  connection  with  an
    application for return  as  a  citizen,  failing  which  the  situation
    "becomes much more difficult", in that the relevant kebele  would  need
    to make enquiries about family in Ethiopia, failing  which  information
    as to the applicant's last permanent address would be needed,  so  that
    that could be verified.  The efficiency of kebele  record  keeping,  as
    regards house numbers and who live in those houses, has  been  attested
    by the expert witnesses.

98.   At this point, when Mr Hart asked  the  appellant  for  the  permanent
    address, the appellant indicated that he had this but did not have  the
    details with him.   As  I  understood  Mr  Kandola's  submissions,  the
    Secretary of State's position was that, at this  point,  the  appellant
    was not doing all that could reasonably be expected of  him,  since  he
    should have given the address there and then.  In the circumstances  of
    the present case, I do not consider that anything of significance turns
    on this.  Given that Mr Hart was conversing on the  telephone  with  Mr
    Haileselassie and having to attempt at the same time to  converse  with
    the  appellant,  whose  knowledge  of  English  was  limited,  it   was
    reasonable of Mr Hart to have proceeded  as  he  did.  I  also  do  not
    consider that the appellant can be criticised for what he said.

99.   In any  event,  the  production  of  the  appellant's  address  on  24
    December did not take matters further.  Mr Haileselassie chose  instead
    to introduce further requirements, comprising details of  next  of  kin
    and evidence of  "substantial  contact  in  Ethiopia",  which  had  not
    featured in his previous conversation with Mr Hart.  On  the  contrary,
    the new information contradicted the indication  given  on  4  December
    that details of an address at least provided one  possible  avenue  for
    the  Ethiopian  authorities  to  take  the  matter  further.   Now,  by
    contrast, Mr Hart was told that having an address  did  not  count  and
    "writing to the relevant local authority in this case would  not  help"
    (paragraph  29  of  Appendix  A).   Mr   Haileselassie   rejected   the
    possibility of a meeting with the consular section of the  embassy,  in
    the case of the appellant.  Mr Hart's evidence was also that he told Mr
    Haileselassie on 24 December that, in addition to place  of  residence,
    he now had details of  the  appellant's  school,  place  of  birth  and
    appellant's father.  None of this, however, made any difference.

100.  The interchange between the appellant and Mr Hart  and  the  Ethiopian
    Embassy in December 2010 fits well with the expert evidence, both as to
    the procedures and attitudes of the London Embassy and  elsewhere.   In
    particular, it chimes with  the  evidence  of  Mr  Schrder,  that  the
    authorities "had no interest whatsoever in getting back the  10,000  to
    15,000 Eritreans who had fled Ethiopia for third countries"  (paragraph
    96 of Appendix A).  The evidence of Mr Hart and the appellant  is  also
    compatible with the interviews held by Dr Campbell with Messrs  Tesfaye
    and Haileselassie Suba.

101.  The letters from  the  embassy,  like  the  Nationality  Proclamation,
    appear unremarkable on the surface.  However, as the experts explained,
    in practice  a  very  different  view  has  often  been  taken  by  the
    authorities of what  is  meant  by  acquiring  a  foreign  nationality,
    leading  to  the  loss  of  Ethiopian  citizenship.  Those   whom   the
    authorities regard as ethnic Eritreans are often viewed as foreign  and
    as has having lost Ethiopian nationality,  in  circumstances  that  can
    only be described as arbitrary.  The appellant's own position is a good
    instance.  He was not old enough to vote in the independence referendum
    or to make any informed view as  to  acquiring  Ethiopian  citizenship.
    Yet, over ten years  after  the  events  that  compelled  him  to  flee
    Ethiopia, there appears to be no recognition in practice on the part of
    the Ethiopian authorities that he, and  others  in  his  position,  are
    anything other than "foreigners".  The tendency of Ethiopian  officials
    to blur the issues of ethnicity and nationality was a common thread  in
    the evidence of both experts.  Accordingly, not only  is  it  wrong  to
    expect, without more, that the Ethiopian authorities will  today  apply
    their laws to persons such as the appellant, in the way we would expect
    those laws to be applied if the  relevant  decisions  under  them  were
    being made by the respondent and her officials in the  United  Kingdom;
    the fact that they will not is compatible with  the  arbitrary  way  in
    which the Ethiopian authorities have acted in the past.

102.  There  was  some  discussion  at  the  hearing  about  what  kinds  of
    application forms those in the  position  of  the  appellant  might  be
    expected to complete.  The evidence on this issue did not take  matters
    very far.  It did, however, highlight a point of some importance.  In a
    case where the claim to international protection rests on the arbitrary
    deprivation or denial of nationality, a decision by the state concerned
    to permit the individual to return as a national of that  country  will
    be a complete answer to that claim.  If, however,  the  result  of  the
    approach to the embassy is merely that the state  will  facilitate  the
    return of the individual, but not as one of  its  nationals,  then  the
    issue will be whether the  effects  of  the  arbitrary  deprivation  of
    nationality are such,  in  all  the  circumstances,  as  to  constitute
    persecution. As we shall see, it  appears  to  be  the  case  that,  at
    present, the Ethiopian authorities will not  accept  the  return  of  a
    person in the position of the  appellant,  unless  they  consider  that
    person to be a national.

103.  Accordingly, the requirement identified in MA (Ethiopia) to  take  all
    reasonable steps to obtain the requisite documentation for return must,
    I  find,  involve  taking  all  such  steps  to  procure  documentation
    (ideally, but not necessarily, in the form of  a  passport)  that  will
    effect return on the basis of the individual concerned being recognised
    as a national of Ethiopia.

104.  In the present case, I find the appellant has, on  the  basis  of  the
    law and guidance as it was at  the  date  of  the  hearing,  taken  all
    reasonably practicable steps to that end.  He  sought  to  put  himself
    forward as  a  national  of  Ethiopia.   Unlike  the  appellant  in  MA
    (Ethiopia) he did not present himself as an  Eritrean  national  or  as
    someone who regarded themselves in the broader sense  as  Eritrean,  as
    opposed to Ethiopian.  Albeit not at the initial  visit,  it  was  made
    clear on the appellant's behalf that he had details of his last address
    in Ethiopia, his school, place of birth and information  regarding  his
    father.  The terms on which Mr Haileselassie conducted the conversation
    with Mr Hart on 24 December made it plain that these details  were  not
    going to get  the  appellant  anywhere.   The  expert  evidence  of  Mr
    Schrder suggested that, in the intervening  period,  Mr  Haileselassie
    may well have  consulted  Addis  Ababa  and  been  informed  about  the
    appellant's detention in 1998.  That  is  possible;  but  the  evidence
    strikes me more forcibly as an example of the way  in  which  Ethiopian
    officials can  (again,  according  to  Mr  Schrder)  give  an  initial
    appearance  of  helpfulness,  only  to  turn  negative  when  met  with
    persistence.  I infer that the reason for the  appellant's  failure  is
    rooted in the perception of him by Mr Haileselassie and the  government
    he represents as an ethnic Eritrean or  "foreigner"  who,  owing  to  a
    disregard or, at best, arbitrary application of the nationality laws of
    Ethiopia, is not regarded by  the  authorities  there  as  one  of  its
    nationals or, indeed, as a person whom it wishes to see return  in  any
    capacity.

105.  For the future, I consider that it would in general be  reasonable  to
    expect  a  person  asserting  deprivation  or   denial   of   Ethiopian
    nationality, in order to make good a claim to international  protection
    to approach the Ethiopian Embassy  in  London  with  all  documentation
    emanating from Ethiopia that the person may have,  including  ID  card,
    address, place of birth,  identity  and  place  of  birth  of  parents,
    identity and whereabouts of any relatives in Ethiopia  and  details  of
    schooling in Ethiopia.  Failing production of  Ethiopian  documentation
    in respect of such matters, the person concerned should put in  writing
    all relevant details, to  be  handed  to  the  embassy.   Plainly,  the
    requirement to take all reasonable endeavours does not entitle a person
    to portray themselves as Eritrean.  On the other hand, if supplying the
    details that I have just described  discloses  an  Eritrean  connection
    (for example, place of birth of parent), there is no  reason  why  that
    should be suppressed.

106.  I  accept  the  evidence  of  the  expert  witnesses  regarding  birth
    certificates.   Most  Ethiopians  in  Ethiopia  do  not  procure   such
    documentation, since the relevant information is held at kebele  level.
    In the circumstances of a person who has a relative in Addis Ababa able
    and willing to undertake the task, the requirement of reasonable  steps
    may well include the obtaining from the embassy of a power  of  mandate
    for that relative to approach  the  relevant  office  in  Ethiopia.   A
    person without a suitable relative would, on the evidence, be  unlikely
    to secure the services of a lawyer in order to obtain the  certificate.
    In any event, given the interaction between SIRAA and the  kebeles,  it
    will in most cases be unnecessary for an individual to take such  steps
    to obtain a birth certificate, particularly where other information  is
    available.

107.  It may well be sensible for the respondent, in cases of this kind,  to
    require under section 35 of  the  2004  Act  the  co-operation  of  the
    claimant, at an earlier stage in the process, so  that  the  respondent
    can liaise with the Ethiopian embassy before the case reaches the First-
    tier Tribunal (if indeed it ever does). Such a  course  would  not,  of
    course, be appropriate in every case; for instance, where  there  needs
    to be an independent judicial assessment of whether such contact  might
    put the applicant or third parties at risk. But, apart from such cases,
    it is difficult to see why the respondent  could  not  assist  in  this
    regard.

5)  Re-acquisition of Ethiopian nationality

108.  Since I have found the appellant is, in 2011, being  deprived  of  his
    Ethiopian nationality  and  of  the  associated  right  of  return,  in
    circumstances that amount  to  persecution  for  a  Refugee  Convention
    reason, the appellant is entitled to recognition as a refugee. However,
    since Senior Immigration Judge Ward and I heard detailed evidence about
    other issues within the ambit of the proposed country guidance,  it  is
    necessary to make findings about them. This is particularly  so,  given
    that the question whether deprivation  of  nationality  and/or  of  the
    right of return amounts to persecution turns, ultimately, on the facts.

109.   The  first  such  issue  concerns  the  possibility  that  an  ethnic
    Eritrean, such as the appellant, might be able to re-acquire  Ethiopian
    nationality.

110.  The 2003 Nationality Proclamation replaced the  Ethiopian  Nationality
    Law  of  1930.   It  contains  a  code  which  in  many   respects   is
    unremarkable.  For example, it lays down that a  person  is  to  be  an
    Ethiopian national where both or either of the  parents  is  Ethiopian.
    It also  contains  provisions  relating  to  acquisition  of  Ethiopian
    nationality by a process of naturalisation.  The code contains what  in
    effect is a prohibition on  dual  nationality;  but  there  is  nothing
    arbitrary or even exceptional about that. Many countries  have  such  a
    prohibition.

111.  Article 22 (readmission to Ethiopian nationality) was the  subject  of
    some discussion at the hearing.  Article 22 appears to provide  that  a
    person has a right to be readmitted to  Ethiopian  nationality,  having
    lost it as a result of acquiring a foreign nationality, if  the  person
    concerned returns to domicile in Ethiopia  and  renounces  his  foreign
    nationality.  Mr Schrder's report, however, stated that it appears  in
    practice that the conditions in Article 5 in respect of  naturalisation
    are applied by SIRAA, in respect of an application  under  Article  22.
    Amongst  those  conditions  are  that  the  applicant  has  established
    domicile in Ethiopia and lived in that country "for a total of at least
    four years"; has sufficient and lawful income to maintain  himself  and
    his family; is a person of good character and has no record of criminal
    convictions; as well as being able to show "that he has  been  released
    from his previous nationality or the possibility of  obtaining  such  a
    release upon the acquisition of Ethiopian nationality or that he  is  a
    stateless person".

112.  Mr Schrder said he had established that persons who had gone back  to
    Ethiopia and who wanted to re-acquire Ethiopian  nationality  had  been
    told that they should wait for four years, although "in  some  cases  a
    four year requirement might not be imposed".  He was  also  categorical
    that the reacquisition  of  citizenship  could  not  be  achieved  from
    abroad.

113.  Given the evidence we have already  encountered  about  the  arbitrary
    behaviour of the Ethiopian  authorities,  together  with  the  evidence
    concerning the behaviour of embassy staff, and  in  the  light  of  the
    background evidence, which discloses a generally  problematic  approach
    to the rule of law in Ethiopia, I find that there is considerable force
    in Mr Schrder's evidence regarding the way in which Article 22 of  the
    1999 Proclamation  is  applied  in  practice.   The  terms  of  Article
    22(1)(a), requiring a return to  "domicile"  in  Ethiopia,  confirm  Mr
    Schrder's  understanding,  that  a  person  cannot  be  readmitted  to
    Ethiopian nationality from abroad.  Then there  is  the  difficulty  of
    Article 22(1)(b), which requires the renunciation  of  the  applicant's
    foreign nationality.  It is not a part of the Secretary of State's case
    in the present appeal that the appellant is, or is entitled  to  be,  a
    citizen of Eritrea.  In the circumstances, there may well therefore  be
    difficulties in  him  demonstrating  to  the  Ethiopians  that  he  has
    renounced the Eritrean nationality, which the Ethiopians regard him  as
    having.  Particularly given the uncertainty as to what might  be  meant
    by returning to domicile, it is likely, in my view, that a  person  who
    sought to utilise Article  22  would  find  that,  notwithstanding  the
    apparent language of entitlement, he or  she  would  have  to  live  in
    Ethiopia for a significant period of time, and that  the  reference  to
    four years in Article 5(2) is, in  many  cases,  likely  to  provide  a
    yardstick.  Furthermore, given the previous conflict  between  Ethiopia
    and Eritrea, and the unchallenged evidence  that,  in  2011,  relations
    between the countries are far from ideal, it is  difficult  to  believe
    that SIRAA would readmit to Ethiopian  nationality  a  person  who,  in
    their eyes at least, might constitute some kind of security risk.


6)  Ability to return to Ethiopia as a non-national

114.   As  with  the  issue  of  re-acquiring  Ethiopian  nationality,   the
    appellant's entitlement to refugee status means that it is not strictly
    necessary in his case to decide what his position might be, if her were
    able to return to Ethiopia as  a  non-national.  However,  one  of  the
    consequences of holding that a denial of a  person's  right  of  return
    can, but need not be, persecution is that it might, on the facts  of  a
    particular case, be necessary to consider the position where a  person,
    although being denied the right of return he  or  she  possesses  as  a
    national, may nevertheless be able to return to their country as a non-
    national.

(i) 2004 Directive for Determining Status of Eritrean Citizens in Ethiopia

115.   The  evidence  of  the  experts  regarding  the  2004  Directive   is
    summarised at paragraphs 48, 51 to 54 and 92 to 97 of Appendix A.  Both
    witnesses were categoric that the 2004 Directive, which provided a  way
    for Eritreans in Ethiopia to obtain registered foreigner status in that
    country, or in some cases a route to  the  reacquisition  of  Ethiopian
    citizenship, applied only to those who were resident in  Ethiopia  when
    Eritrea became independent and who had continued so to reside up  until
    the date of the Directive.  That, after all, is exactly what Article  2
    (objective) indicates.  It is confirmed by  the  high-level  source  in
    SIRAA, referred to by Mr Schrder in paragraph 71 of his second  report
    (paragraph 97 of Appendix A); the same official who had in 2000  signed
    Mr Schrder's own deportation order.  The fact that the 2004  Directive
    was so restricted is further borne out by the evidence, which I accept,
    from the experts, to the effect  that  the  opportunities  in  Ethiopia
    itself for making use of the 2004  Directive  were  extremely  limited,
    with registration being possible only between March and June 2004.

116.  My finding in this regard directly contradicts that in  paragraph  100
    of the determination in MA (Disputed Nationality).  I consider  that  I
    have had the benefit of more extensive evidence than was  available  to
    the AIT in that case.  On the strength of  that  evidence  and  of  the
    plain wording of the provision regarding the Directive's  objective,  I
    find that the appellant, and others in  his  position,  are  unable  to
    avail themselves of the 2004 Directive.

(ii) 2009 Directive Enabling  Deported  Eritreans  to  Reclaim  and  Develop
their Properties in Ethiopia

117.  The experts' evidence on this Directive is  summarised  at  paragraphs
    55 to 63, 72, 74, 98, 115 and 116 of Appendix A.  As the title  to  the
    Directive indicates, and as was confirmed to Dr Campbell by the  letter
    of 2 December 2009 from the Ethiopian Ambassador to  London,  the  2009
    Directive, enabling  certain  Eritreans  to  return  as  foreigners  to
    Ethiopia to reclaim and manage their property, applies  only  to  those
    who were deported due to the war between  Ethiopia  and  Eritrea.   For
    that reason, I find that it would not assist the appellant  or  persons
    in his position to return in 2011 to Ethiopia.  I accept  the  evidence
    regarding the genesis  of  the  2009  Directive,  which  was  that  the
    Ethiopians saw it as a means of improving their country's international
    position and of undermining the position of Eritrea, by encouraging its
    wealthier residents to leave.

118.  Even if the appellant had been a  person  deported  to  Eritrea  as  a
    security  risk,  I  find  that  he   would   still   have   significant
    difficulties, if he were unable to demonstrate that he was a citizen of
    Eritrea or some other country, since a passport would  in  practice  be
    required for the issuance of a visa.  There is also  the  obvious  fact
    that, in order to make use of the 2009 Directive, a person will have to
    show that they have property in Ethiopia,  since  the  purpose  of  the
    Directive is to reconnect people with such property.

7)  The position  of  the  appellant,  were  he  to  be  returned  today  to
Ethiopia, as a person not regarded by the Ethiopian authorities  as  one  of
its nationals

119.  Mr Beaumont's  evidence  to  the  AIT  in  MA  (Disputed  Nationality)
    (paragraphs 31 to 35 above)  suggests  that,  in  2007  at  least,  the
    Ethiopian authorities would not take back anyone who was  not  regarded
    by them as a national. In the present case, we heard no evidence to the
    contrary.  For  the  purposes  of  giving  country  guidance   it   is,
    nevertheless, necessary to consider the position of a person,  such  as
    the present appellant,  on  the  assumption  that  he  is  returned  to
    Ethiopia as a non-national. There are  two  reasons  for  this.  First,
    despite what appears at present to be the  practical  position,  things
    may change and it may transpire that returns can  be  effected  without
    the Ethiopians recognising the returnee  as  one  of  their  nationals.
    Secondly, despite my findings in  the  present  case  and  the  general
    likelihood of a denial of  the  right  to  return  being  found  to  be
    persecutory, there might be cases where the  assessment  of  whether  a
    person is a refugee requires a judicial fact-finder to hypothesise that
    the person concerned has returned, in order to assess  whether  his  or
    her circumstances would be so problematic as to amount to persecution.

120.  We have already seen  that  the  2004  and  2009  Directives  are  not
    applicable to a person in the position of the appellant,  returning  to
    Ethiopia today.  A much more difficult question,  however,  is  whether
    notwithstanding this, the appellant would  be  able  to  work  and  own
    property.  There is nothing in the evidence of the expert witnesses  or
    otherwise that clearly points to the appellant being unable to  do  so.
    Notwithstanding what I have said about the inapplicability of the  2009
    Directive, it is pertinent to observe that Article 8 of that instrument
    states that the right to own  a  house  and  immovable  property  shall
    remain guaranteed.  In the light of this, having hypothesised that  the
    Ethiopians would have let the appellant return  as  a  non-national,  I
    consider that the  evidence  points  towards  him  and  others  in  his
    position being able to hold property.  Nevertheless, here as elsewhere,
    it is plain from the evidence regarding the problematic  way  in  which
    Ethiopian  bureaucracy  operates,  that  the  appellant  is  likely  to
    experience more practical impediments in the field of  owning  property
    than would be the case if he were an Ethiopian citizen.

121.  So far as employment is concerned, the 2009 Directive carries with  it
    the right to engage in private employment "without  being  required  to
    have a work permit" (Article 9.2).  It is, accordingly, likely that the
    appellant would be permitted to work, albeit  only  after  acquiring  a
    work permit.

122.  The right to use educational and health services, however, appears  to
    be much more doubtful.  The 2009 Directive guarantees this, for persons
    falling within its ambit but I do not consider it has been shown to  be
    likely that  these  rights  would  be  extended  automatically  to  the
    appellant.  At best, he would face a  bureaucratic  battle  to  acquire
    them and, given the common thread of the evidence, it  is  likely  that
    the eventual result would be somewhat arbitrary.

123.  Even  under  the  2009  Directive,  it  is  apparent  that  government
    employment would be unlikely to  be  available.   Viewed  on  its  own,
    however, that effective prohibition is highly unlikely in any  case  to
    constitute persecution.

124.  Nowhere in the evidence is  there  any  suggestion  that,  as  someone
    regarded as a foreigner, the appellant would have the  right  to  vote.
    Such a right is plainly a significant element of  the  "right  to  have
    rights" as a citizen of a particular country (Trop v Dulles).

125.  Overlying all of this  is  the  insecurity  which  the  appellant  and
    others like him are, I find, highly likely to  experience,  as  persons
    perceived as Eritreans in Ethiopia in 2011.  Such  persons  would  lack
    even the limited security of registration under the 2004 Directive.  As
    I have already found, tensions  between  Ethiopia  and  Eritrea  remain
    high.  There are unresolved issues regarding the border.  Eritrea is  a
    repressive regime, haemorrhaging population, particularly young  people
    seeking to avoid its draconian form of military service.  All  of  this
    is highly likely, in my view, to aggravate the feeling of insecurity of
    someone in Ethiopia in  the  position  I  am  here  hypothesising.   Of
    course, in the event of a resumption of armed conflict between the  two
    countries, it is by no means clear that ethnic Eritreans who have  been
    formally recognised as Ethiopian citizens will not  face  difficulties.
    Nevertheless, it is apparent that, in such a scenario, ethnic Eritreans
    who are not citizens would have more to fear.

126.  In the  scenario  presently  under  consideration,  I  find  that  the
    appellant's history of detention is, at worst, likely to  increase  the
    bureaucratic obstacles he is likely to face in establishing himself  in
    employment but I do not find there is a reasonable likelihood  that  it
    would entirely negate his prospects of undertaking  economic  activity.
    The same is true of the appellant's failure to continue  his  reporting
    conditions.  However, the fact that the authorities are likely to  have
    a record of his detention etc (as to which I accept the expert evidence
    regarding the authorities' predilection and ability for record keeping)
    would be a  feature  which  is  likely  to  aggravate  the  appellant's
    anxieties as to  his  position,  should  hostilities  between  the  two
    countries resume.  Whether such  hostilities  will  break  out  is,  of
    course, no more than speculation; what matters, however, is the  effect
    of such a fear on a person in the appellant's hypothetical position.

127.  Such, I find, is the state of affairs that the appellant  would  face,
    if returned today to Ethiopia in the circumstances  I  have  described.
    Does that state of affairs constitute persecution?  It is common ground
    that, at the present time, a person in the appellant's  position  would
    not face a real  risk  of  physical  ill-treatment,  whether  from  the
    authorities or non-state elements, such as to constitute Article 3 ill-
    treatment or persecution.  Nevertheless, looking at matters overall and
    acknowledging that the threshold for persecution is a high one, I  have
    concluded that the state of  affairs  would  be  persecutory  for  this
    appellant.  Notwithstanding that he is relatively young and  apparently
    able-bodied, the accumulated difficulties he would face,  arising  from
    what ex hypothesi is an arbitrary deprivation of citizenship/refusal to
    recognise citizenship, based  on  the  discriminatory  grounds  of  the
    appellant's  ethnicity,  crosses  the  persecution  threshold  by  some
    margin,  applying  Article  9  of  the  Qualification  Directive   (see
    paragraph 77 above).


 LEGAL AND COUNTRY GUIDANCE FINDINGS

128.  Before setting out the country guidance findings, it  may  be  helpful
    to summarise  the  relevant  law.  Both  here  and  in  paragraph  129,
    references to paragraphs are to paragraphs of this determination.

 (A)        There is nothing in MS (Palestinian Territories) [2010] UKSC  25
    that overrules the judgments in MA  (Ethiopia)  [2009]  EWCA  Civ  289.
    Where a claim to recognition as a refugee depends on whether  a  person
    is being arbitrarily denied the right of return to a country as one  of
    its nationals, that issue must be decided on an appeal under section 82
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (paragraphs 69 to 72).

(B)   Although the  question  of  whether  a  person  is  a  national  of  a
    particular state is a matter  of  law  for  that  state,  the  question
    whether  a  national  of  a  particular  state  has  been  lawfully  or
    unlawfully deprived of the nationality of that state  is  a  legitimate
    issue for a court or tribunal to determine, in the course of deciding a
    person's entitlement to international protection (paragraph 74).

(C)   Whether arbitrary deprivation of nationality  amounts  to  persecution
    is a question of fact. The same is true of the denial of the  right  of
    return as a national; although in practice it is  likely  that  such  a
    denial will be found to be persecutory (paragraphs 76 and 82 to 89).

129.  The country guidance is as follows.

(1)   Although the process established by the Ethiopian authorities in  1998
    for identifying ethnic Eritreans who might pose a risk to the  national
    security of  Ethiopia,  following  the  outbreak  of  war  between  the
    countries, was not arbitrary or contrary to international law, in  many
    cases people were arbitrarily expelled to Eritrea without  having  been
    subjected to that process. Those perceived  as  ethnic  Eritreans,  who
    remained in Ethiopia during the war, and who were deprived of Ethiopian
    nationality, suffered arbitrary treatment,  contrary  to  international
    law. Those who left Ethiopia at this time  or  who  were  then  already
    outside  Ethiopia  were  arbitrarily  deprived   of   their   Ethiopian
    nationality. Also during this time, the Ethiopian  authorities  made  a
    practice of seizing and destroying identification  documents  of  those
    perceived as ethnic Eritreans in Ethiopia (paragraphs 60 to 65).

(2)   A person whose Ethiopian identity documents were  taken  or  destroyed
    by the authorities during this time and who then left Ethiopia is as  a
    general matter likely to have been arbitrarily  deprived  on  Ethiopian
    nationality. Whether that deprivation amounted to persecution  (whether
    on its own or combined with  other  factors)  is  a  question  of  fact
    (paragraphs 76 to 78).

(3)   The practices just described provide the background against  which  to
    consider today the claim to international protection of  a  person  who
    asserts that he or she is an Ethiopian national  who  is  being  denied
    that nationality, and with it the  right  to  return  from  the  United
    Kingdom to Ethiopia, for a Refugee Convention reason. Findings  on  the
    credibility and consequences of events in Ethiopia, prior to a person's
    departure, will be important, as a finding of past persecution may have
    an important bearing on how one  views  the  present  attitude  of  the
    Ethiopian authorities. Conversely, a person whose account is not  found
    to be credible may find it difficult to show that a refusal on the part
    of the authorities to accept his or her return is persecutory or  based
    on any Refugee Convention reason (paragraphs 79 to 81).

(4)   Although, pursuant to MA (Ethiopia), each  claimant  must  demonstrate
    that he or she has done  all  that  could  be  reasonably  expected  to
    facilitate return as a national of Ethiopia, the present procedures and
    practices of the Ethiopian Embassy in London will provide the  backdrop
    against which judicial fact-finders will decide  whether  an  appellant
    has complied with this requirement. A person who  is  regarded  by  the
    Ethiopian authorities as an  ethnic  Eritrean  and  who  left  Ethiopia
    during or in the immediate aftermath of the border war between Ethiopia
    and Eritrea, is likely to face very significant practical  difficulties
    in establishing nationality and the attendant right to return, stemming
    from the reluctance of the Ethiopian  authorities  to  countenance  the
    return of someone it regards  as  a  "foreigner",  whether  or  not  in
    international law the person concerned holds the nationality of another
    country (paragraphs 93 to 104).

(5)    Judicial  fact-finders  will  expect  a  person  asserting  arbitrary
    deprivation of Ethiopian nationality to approach the embassy in  London
    with all documentation emanating from  Ethiopia  that  the  person  may
    have, relevant to establishing nationality, including ID card, address,
    place of birth, identity and place of birth of  parents,  identity  and
    whereabouts of any relatives in Ethiopia and details  of  the  person's
    schooling in Ethiopia. Failing production of Ethiopian documentation in
    respect of such matters, the person should put in writing all  relevant
    details, to be handed to the embassy. Whilst persons are not  for  this
    purpose entitled to portray themselves  to  the  embassy  as  Eritrean,
    there is no  need  to  suppress  details  which  disclose  an  Eritrean
    connection (paragraph 105).

(6)   A person who left Ethiopia as described in (4) above  is  unlikely  to
    be able to re-acquire Ethiopian nationality as a  matter  of  right  by
    means of the 2003 Nationality Proclamation and would be likely first to
    have to live in Ethiopia for a significant period of time  (probably  4
    years) (paragraphs 110 to 113).

(7)   The 2004 Directive,  which  provided  a  means  whereby  Eritreans  in
    Ethiopia could obtain registered foreigner status and in some  cases  a
    route to reacquisition of citizenship, applied only to those  who  were
    resident in Ethiopia  when  Eritrea  became  independent  and  who  had
    continued so to reside up until the date of the Directive.  The finding
    to the contrary in MA  (Disputed  Nationality)  Ethiopia  [2008]  UKAIT
    00032 was wrong (paragraphs 115 and 116).

(8)   The 2009 Directive, which  enables  certain  Eritreans  to  return  to
    Ethiopia as foreigners to reclaim  and  manage  property  in  Ethiopia,
    applies only to those who were deported due to the war between Ethiopia
    and Eritrea and who still have property in Ethiopia (paragraphs 117 and
    118).

(9)   A person who left Ethiopia as described in (4) above, if  returned  to
    Ethiopia at the present time, would in general be likely to be able  to
    hold property, although the bureaucratic obstacles  are  likely  to  be
    more severe than in the case of Ethiopian citizens. Such a person would
    be likely to be able to work, after acquiring a work  permit,  although
    government employment is unlikely to be available. Entitlement  to  use
    educational and health services is, however,  much  more  doubtful.  At
    best, the person will face a bureaucratic battle to acquire them. He or
    she will have no right to vote (paragraphs 119 to 124).

(10)  Such a person would be likely  to  feel  insecure,  lacking  even  the
    limited security afforded  by  the  2004  Directive.  Tensions  between
    Ethiopia and Eritrea remain high (paragraph 125).

(11)   The following CG cases on Ethiopia are  superseded  or  replaced,  as
    the case may be, by the present determination: GG (Return  -  Eritrean)
    Ethiopia CG [2002] UKIAT 05996;  NB  (Mixed  Ethnicity  -  Ethiopian  -
    Eritrean) Ethiopia CG [2002] UKIAT  06526;  AA  (Children  -  Eritrean)
    Ethiopia CG UKIAT 06533; TG (Mixed Ethnicity) Ethiopia CG [2002]  UKIAT
    07289; and DA (Ethnicity - Eritrean - Country Conditions)  Ethiopia  CG
    [2004] UKIAT 00046.


Decision

130.  I re-make the decision in this  appeal  by  allowing  the  appellant's
    appeal on Refugee Convention grounds.  The appellant is not entitled to
    the grant of humanitarian protection.





                               Signed
                                   Date




                               Senior Immigration Judge P R Lane
                               (Judge of the Upper Tribunal)
                                 Appendix A

                          SUMMARY OF ORAL EVIDENCE

The Appellant

1.    The appellant was  asked  about  his  two  written  statements,  dated
    respectively  23  April  2008  and  11  January  2011.   In  his  first
    statement, the appellant said that his  mother  was  Eritrean  and  his
    father Ethiopian.  The appellant had been born  in  Addis  Ababa.   The
    appellant's father died in December 1992, following a career as a  high
    school teacher.  His mother used to own a  bar  in  Ethiopia.   At  the
    outbreak of way between Ethiopia and Eritrea in May 1998, the appellant
    was 18 years old.  Although he had passed his school exams and hoped to
    go to university, the appellant could not do so because, following  the
    outbreak of hostilities, students in Ethiopia were required to  provide
    evidence of nationality and the appellant's ID  could  not  be  renewed
    because of his dual nationality.  He therefore turned to assisting  his
    mother run her bar, which she was able to do until 22 July  1999,  when
    the appellant returned to find his mother missing.

2.    On 24 July, the appellant was at home when  he  was  arrested  by  the
    authorities and taken to a detention  centre,  where  he  was  held  in
    unsanitary conditions.  He was interrogated on  three  occasions  about
    his mother's involvement with the EPLF.  During  these  interrogations,
    the appellant was beaten.  He  remained  detained  for  over  a  month.
    Further beatings and interrogations followed.

3.    The appellant did not know whether  or  not  the  appellant  had  been
    involved with the  EPLF,  although  she  did  have  good  contacts  and
    relationships with Eritreans.  She took part in a  cultural  system  of
    saving called "ekued", which was common in Ethiopia, and which  led  to
    many people, including Eritreans, visiting her bar.  The appellant  got
    to know that the local authority had been informed by neighbours  about
    gatherings at the bar.  During his interrogations,  the  appellant  was
    accused  of  collaborating  with  his  mother,  by  raising  money  for
    Eritreans, in order to topple  the  Ethiopian  regime.   The  appellant
    denied the allegations and was eventually released on condition that he
    signed on once a week at the local  police  station.   On  3  September
    1999, however, the appellant's uncle learned that the  local  authority
    had gained concrete information about his mother's involvement with the
    EPLF, following the arrest, detention and confession of a lady who  had
    also been part of the  saving  system.   On  his  uncle's  advice,  the
    appellant went into hiding, before leaving  Ethiopia  on  26  September
    1999.

4.    The  uncle  who  assisted  the  appellant  was  pure  Ethiopian.   The
    appellant learned that his mother had been deported to Eritrea in 1999.
     The appellant's old ID card had been  confiscated  whilst  he  was  in
    prison and he said that he would need a new one in  order  to  live  in
    Ethiopia.  However, he  would  be  unable  to  do  this  as  the  local
    authority still had information on him.

5.    On 23 April 2008 the  appellant  attended  the  Ethiopian  Embassy  in
    London, together with a witness, Mr DW.  The appellant enquired  as  to
    whether the Ethiopians would issue him with an Ethiopian passport.   He
    was given a form, which he completed and handed  to  the  receptionist.
    Asked for evidence to  confirm  he  was  an  Ethiopian,  the  appellant
    produced an ARC card which he was told was unacceptable.  He was  asked
    for a birth certificate, driving licence or old passport.  He  did  not
    have any of these documents.  He was then asked whether he  had  family
    in Ethiopia who could confirm he was Ethiopian or who would be able  to
    go to the local authority in his local area to enquire about  him.   He
    told the receptionist his mother had been deported to Eritrea  and  his
    father was dead.  He had  no  siblings  and  did  not  know  anyone  in
    Ethiopia.  He was then told the Embassy would not be able to issue  him
    with a passport.   Mr  DW  asked  to  speak  to  someone  in  a  higher
    authority, and was told that this was Mr Haile Selassie.   The  request
    was unsuccessful.

6.    In the statement of January 2011, the  appellant  described  attending
    the Ethiopian Embassy again, on 10 December 2010, in the company of  Mr
    Durand Hart, with a view to getting  confirmation  of  the  appellant's
    citizenship.  Before the visit, the appellant had spoken to Mr Hart and
    provided him with background information.

7.    When they arrived at the Embassy, Mr Hart spoke to  the  receptionist.
    The appellant was only spoken to once by the receptionist, who  did  so
    in Amharic and asked the appellant whether he had proof of nationality.
     He replied he did not.  After this point, it was Mr Hart who "did  all
    the talking with both the  receptionist  and  Mr  Haileselassie  Subba"
    (paragraph 6).

8.    The appellant said  that  he  had  not  had  contact  with  anyone  in
    Ethiopia since 2005/2006, at which point his mother was in Eritrea.  He
    had no remaining family in Ethiopia.  A feeling that his life  was  "in
    limbo" had made the appellant depressed and an insomniac.

9.    Cross-examined, the appellant confirmed that his old ID card had  been
    confiscated whilst he had been in detention and that there had been  an
    ID card issued by the local authority.  It was of a standard form, such
    as was issued to all Ethiopians.

10.   The appellant was shown document R2, described as an application  form
    for Ethiopian nationals who left Ethiopia without a travel document and
    requesting passport.  The appellant said that the form he had completed
    when in the London Embassy in 2008 had not  been  this  form.   He  had
    thought that the one he had been given  had  been  a  visa  and  travel
    application.  He did not believe that he had been asked to state  which
    schools in Ethiopia he had attended.   Nor  had  he  been  asked  about
    previous employers or close relatives in Ethiopia.  The form had  asked
    for  his  full  name  and  address,  house  number  and  kebele  (local
    district).  Having signed it, he returned the form to the receptionist.
     The appellant said the form had asked whether he had got documents  to
    prove nationality.

11.   When the appellant recently attended the Embassy with Mr Hart, he  had
    not been given a form.  In 2008, the appellant said that he  had  taken
    details of his permanent address with him.  It was put to the appellant
    that Mr Hart's statement indicated that he had asked the appellant  for
    a permanent address in Ethiopia but had not  been  provided  with  one.
    The appellant replied that in 2010 he had had only minimal conversation
    with the receptionist.  The 2008 form had asked him to  provide  an  ID
    card and birth certificate.  The appellant said  he  had  never  had  a
    birth certificate.  He did not know whether  a  death  certificate  had
    been issued in respect of his father.  The appellant's uncle  had  died
    in 2001, by which time the appellant was in the United Kingdom.

12.   The  appellant  was  asked  whether  he  could  get  birth  and  death
    certificates from the registers in Ethiopia.  He said when  his  father
    had died, his mother should have approached the  authorities  and  that
    when his uncle died, the appellant  was  already  here.   Mr  Hart  had
    advised the appellant regarding documents that might be  acceptable  to
    the Ethiopian Embassy, but the appellant was  unable  to  produce  any.
    Asked if he had got his school documents, the appellant said that  when
    he fled the country in fear of his life he did not take these with him.
     He had left with a passport, that had been furnished by an agent.

13.   The appellant said that when his father had married  his  mother,  his
    father's family had not approved and contact had  not  been  maintained
    with that side of the family.  Only one particular uncle  had  remained
    close.  His mother's family had remained in Ethiopia but were not there
    now.  Again, they had not approved of the marriage and had  nothing  to
    do with the appellant and his parents.

14.   Re-examined, the appellant confirmed that on his second visit  to  the
    Embassy he had not been  given  a  form.   The  receptionist  had  been
    reluctant to give them her name.  In 2008, the receptionist had  handed
    the appellant a form which she obtained from a rack near to her window.

15.   The uncle to whom the appellant had made reference as being close  was
    a paternal uncle.

16.   In answer to a question from the  Tribunal,  the  appellant  confirmed
    that in December 2010 when he went to the Embassy,  he  knew  that  the
    Ethiopian authorities required an ID  card  and  birth  certificate  to
    establish identity.  Asked whether, since he knew he did not have these
    documents, he might have tried to obtain them, the appellant said  that
    he did not know how to get the documents,  given  that  his  uncle  had
    died.  Although he had not taken information regarding his  address  in
    Ethiopia, he had been prepared to tell the authorities what it was, had
    they asked.

17.   In answer to further questions from Mr Kandola,  arising  out  of  the
    Tribunal's questions, the appellant said he would  have  been  able  to
    remember his address.  It was put to the appellant that paragraph 8  of
    Mr Hart's statement indicated that Mr  Hart  had  asked  the  appellant
    whether he could provide a permanent address  but  Mr  Hart  understood
    that the appellant "didn't have the details with him".   The  appellant
    said that this must have been referring to documentation, which he  did
    not have.  Asked if he had told Mr Hart in advance  that  he  knew  his
    address in Ethiopia, the appellant said that  he  had.   The  appellant
    then said  that  he  had  told  Mr  Hart  that  he  could  provide  the
    information but did not have documentation.

18.   In answer to questions arising from Mr Fripp, the appellant  confirmed
    that in his 2008 statement he said that he had been born at home.   The
    birth had not been registered.

Mr Hart

19.   Mr Durand Hart spoke to his witness  statement  of  10  January  2011.
    There, he explained that he was a non-practising barrister, employed as
    an advocate by Lawrence Lupin Solicitors of Wembley.  In the course  of
    his work he had dealt with many Ethiopian disputed  nationality  cases.
    He had been instructed by the  appellant's  solicitors  to  attend  the
    Ethiopian Embassy  on  Friday  10  December  2010,  together  with  the
    appellant, in order to ascertain the position of the Ethiopian  Embassy
    regarding the appellant's eligibility for  Ethiopian  citizenship.   Mr
    Hart had visited the Ethiopian Embassy on many occasions and had become
    familiar through his visits with the procedures.  Nevertheless, he  was
    conscientious of the need to maintain an open mind on each occasion.

20.   Prior  to  his  visit  with  the  appellant,  Mr  Hart  had  read  the
    appellant's account and met the appellant outside the Embassy building.
     The pair walked down the road and Mr Hart took instructions  from  the
    appellant concerning his history.  He asked the appellant if he had any
    proof of his Ethiopian nationality.  The appellant explained he used to
    have an Ethiopian  ID  document,  but  that  had  been  ceased  by  the
    authorities in 1999.  The appellant told Mr  Hart  that  he  identified
    himself as Ethiopian.  Asked about any  further  proof  that  could  be
    provided, the appellant said he had no documentary evidence due to  his
    flight and the seizure of his documents but he might be able to provide
    witnesses who had known  him  in  Ethiopia.   However,  some  of  those
    witnesses would be of Eritrean origin.

21.   The  pair  then  went  to  the  Ethiopian  Embassy.   Mr  Hart  had  a
    conversation with the receptionist, who would not give  her  name,  and
    told her that he was there to help the appellant apply for confirmation
    of Ethiopian citizenship by way of a passport or  otherwise.   He  told
    the receptionist that the appellant was born in Ethiopia and had  grown
    up in Addis Ababa.  He said that the appellant's father was  Ethiopian,
    from Wolega City and that his mother was Eritrean.  He did not  explain
    that the appellant's mother had been deported.  Mr Hart emphasised that
    the appellant genuinely considered himself Ethiopian.

22.   There was then a short conversation between the receptionist  and  the
    appellant in Amharic and the receptionist then told Mr Hart that if the
    appellant  had  proof  he  was  Ethiopian,  he  could   get   Ethiopian
    citizenship but, if not, then he could not.  Mr Hart asked  what  proof
    was acceptable to the Embassy and was told that  the  appellant  needed
    either a birth certificate or a kebele ID card and that if he  did  not
    have these documents there was "no way that he could obtain recognition
    of Ethiopian citizenship".  Pressed on this, and being  told  that  the
    appellant might be able to provide witnesses, the receptionist  alluded
    to problems between  Ethiopia  and  Eritrea  and  "explained  that  the
    Embassy are not able to help those of Eritrean ethnicity  who  approach
    them who claim a right to live in Ethiopia based on previous  residence
    there".

23.   Mr Hart was then asked to call Mr Haileselassie Subba on his  internal
    extension, which he did.  Mr Hart had spoken on previous occasions with
    this gentleman.  He was the Head of Legal Affairs at the  Embassy.   At
    the second attempt, Mr Hart was able to speak on the  telephone  to  Mr
    Haileselassie, explaining to him his purpose in coming to  the  Embassy
    on that day.  He told Mr Haileselassie the background,  including  that
    the appellant's father, who had died in 1992,  was  Ethiopian  and  his
    mother had been an Eritrean, deported in 1999.

24.   Mr  Haileselassie  identified  two  possible  issues:  the  first  was
    supplying documents  to  Ethiopian  nationals;  the  second  issue  was
    naturalising foreign people "which he said was a long process  just  as
    in Britain".  Mr Haileselassie said that the appellant was entitled  to
    choose to  take  Ethiopian  nationality  through  his  father,  as  the
    appellant was now an adult.  The appellant could choose the nationality
    of either parent, but not both, since under Ethiopian  nationality  law
    there was no  concept  of  dual  nationality.   But  if  the  appellant
    considered himself to  be  Eritrean  "he  would  not  be  eligible  for
    Ethiopian citizenship".  Mr  Haileselassie  would  not  comment  on  Mr
    Hart's question as to whether it was possible that the appellant, as  a
    minor, would have been deemed to have taken  his  mother's  nationality
    and therefore be  treated  as  an  alien.   However,  Mr  Haileselassie
    expressed  scepticism  that  the  appellant  would  have  had  relevant
    documents seized from his house by the Ethiopian authorities in the way
    described.  Officially, there was a proper process to go through and if
    citizenship was taken away, this would always be done  "formally".   Mr
    Haileselassie made it clear that he was "talking about a point  of  law
    on a theoretical basis".

25.   Mr Hart was told by Mr Haileselassie that the appellant  should  bring
    proof of his  Ethiopian  citizenship  to  the  Embassy  by  way  of  an
    ID/certificate.  These documents were said to be  "the  most  important
    factor" and if the appellant did not  have  them  then  "the  situation
    becomes much more difficult".  In the  absence  of  documentation,  the
    local administration in  Addis  Ababa  could  make  enquiries,  if  the
    appellant had family in Ethiopia; but if he did  not,  then  he  should
    provide his last permanent address, which could be  verified.   Without
    any of this, it would be difficult to accommodate the appellant.

26.   It was at this  point,  according  to  Mr  Hart,  that  he  asked  the
    appellant if he could  provide  a  permanent  address.   The  appellant
    indicated that he could but "I  understood  that  he  didn't  have  the
    details with him".  Mr Hart told Mr Haileselassie  that  there  was  an
    address, which would follow.

27.   Mr Haileselassie addressed the second issue,  explaining  that  people
    often approached the Embassy and did not tell  the  truth  about  their
    background.  It was possible that the appellant  was  not  telling  the
    truth about his background, despite the details provided, and that  the
    Embassy might, therefore, be dealing with possible naturalisation of  a
    foreigner who may have resided in Ethiopia.  In order  to  qualify  for
    naturalisation one had to reside in Ethiopia for at  least  four  years
    continuously  and  to  have  travelled  to  Ethiopia  with  their   own
    documents.  Given the absence of documentation held by  the  appellant,
    this scenario was considered to be "more theoretical than practical".

28.   Mr  Haileselassie  described  the  appellant's  as  "a  difficult  and
    unusual case".

29.   On 24 December 2010 Mr Hart received details of the  appellant's  last
    address in Ethiopia.  The same day he telephoned Mr  Haileselassie  and
    explained the purpose of his telephone call, recapping the  details  of
    the case.  Mr Haileselassie said he remembered.  Mr Hart  said  he  had
    details of the appellant's address and offered to supply  this  to  the
    Embassy, asking what the next steps were for acquiring confirmation  of
    citizenship.  Mr Haileselassie "began by explaining  that  it  was  not
    just address details that were required but also details of next of kin
    and evidence of substantial contact in Ethiopia".  He then asked for  a
    moment and Mr Hart was put on hold, before Mr Haileselassie  came  back
    on the telephone to say that "without all of these details the  Embassy
    could not [be] satisfied that [the appellant] was not a  foreigner  who
    had simply been living in Ethiopia".  Simply having an address did  not
    count and that "writing to the relevant local authority  in  this  case
    would not help".  Mr Haileselassie said he did  not  know  whether  the
    appellant's  mother  had  been  deported.   Mr  Hart  took   this   "as
    defensiveness...on the issue of deportations of Eritreans from Ethiopia
    as I had simply mentioned this as a fact of the case and had not  drawn
    particular attention to it".  Mr Haileselassie explained that  in  some
    cases it was possible to arrange a meeting at the consular  section  of
    the Embassy but that in this case "he was not  prepared  to  waste  the
    very  limited  resources  of  the  Embassy  by  pursuing  the  matter".
    Considering that Mr Haileselassie was unprepared to assist further,  Mr
    Hart terminated the call.

30.   Mr Hart said that he had not seen the document R2 before  the  hearing
    on 19 January.  He said that there  was  in  the  public  area  of  the
    Embassy a stand with some documents in  it  but  he  had  not  seen  an
    application form for recognition as an Ethiopian national.   The  forms
    he had seen were more to do with visa applications.  Mr Hart formed the
    view that the Embassy was not prepared to help those they  regarded  as
    Eritreans.  He had seen the same receptionist on other occasions,  when
    she had been more explicit in this regard than she had been in the case
    of the appellant.  She had made it clear that, as Eritreans, they  were
    not welcome at the Embassy.  Asked about Mr Haileselassie referring  to
    the "second issue" of "naturalising foreign people", Mr Hart said  that
    he would have to speculate, that this was to do  with  the  appellant's
    mother being Eritrean, in the eyes of Mr Haileselassie.  Again, Mr Hart
    could only speculate as to Mr Haileselassie's refusal  to  comment  and
    whether the appellant  would  have  been  taken  to  have  assumed  his
    mother's nationality.

31.   Cross-examined, Mr Hart said  he  had  visited  the  Embassy  on  many
    occasions and was familiar with  its  procedure.   He  had  gone  there
    around twenty times in all.  Mr Hart accepted that the vast majority of
    those with whom he had gone to the Embassy considered themselves to  be
    Eritrean but that this was because they had  been  put  in  a  position
    where they had to choose one nationality or the other.   When  pressed,
    many such people would ultimately say that they were  Eritrean.   Asked
    how the Embassy distinguished between Eritrean ethnicity  and  Eritrean
    nationality, Mr Hart said he thought that they looked at ethnicity  and
    citizenship as being the same, contrary to how such matters were viewed
    in the United Kingdom.

32.   None of the other people with whom Mr Hart went  to  the  Embassy  had
    been given application  forms,  primarily,  he  thought,  because  they
    considered themselves to be Eritrean.  The present appellant,  however,
    in Mr Hart's view considered himself to be Ethiopian.  In the  case  of
    the appellant, the intention was to take matters as far  as  one  could
    and, although the initial conversation with Mr Haileselassie  had  been
    unpromising, Mr Hart had  tried  to  pursue  the  matter  by  providing
    further details, in the form of the private  address,  but  had  hit  a
    "brick wall".

33.   Although not an expert, Mr Hart said that he had become familiar  with
    the approach of the Embassy to disputed nationality cases.  However, in
    the other cases with which he had been concerned,  they  had  not  even
    reached the stage of ascertaining what  documents  might  be  required.
    Pressed on this, Mr Hart said he could not remember in the other  cases
    what documents had been said to be necessary  although  there  had,  he
    recalled,  been  similar  comments  regarding  ID   cards   and   birth
    certificates.  Although in some cases the  applicants  had  had  these,
    they had not resulted in things being taken any further.

34.   Re-examined, Mr Hart said that he had never been given a form  by  the
    Embassy and that the Embassy had never produced a written indication or
    response in respect of an applicant for  recognition  as  an  Ethiopian
    citizen.  He had asked; but had never been given such a thing.  Mr Hart
    was unsure whether such a request had been made to Mr Haileselassie  as
    opposed to those on reception, but had there been any merit in  asking,
    Mr Hart would have done so.  In some previous  cases,  those  concerned
    had considered themselves to be Eritreans and the  Embassy  accordingly
    would not deal with  them,  regarding  them  as  possessing  already  a
    nationality.  Mr Hart recalled an instance in 2007 when a young man who
    had been born in  Ethiopia  of  Eritrean  parents  had  in  fact  taken
    documentation  with  him  to  the  Embassy  and  Mr  Haileselassie  was
    "positive at first about  a  confirmation  of  Ethiopian  citizenship".
    However, on hearing the facts, which included that the father had  been
    deported to Eritrea, Mr Haileselassie indicated that it  would  not  be
    possible to confirm Ethiopian citizenship, as the appellant "considered
    himself to be Eritrean".  The young  man  concerned  did  not  have  an
    Eritrean passport or ID card, had never lived in Eritrea  and  did  not
    have formal Eritrean citizenship.

35.   In  the  past,  Mr  Haileselassie  had  been  more  forthcoming  about
    Eritreans living in Ethiopia  without  status  and  there  having  been
    deportations  from  Ethiopia.   Now,  however,  Mr  Hart  regarded   Mr
    Haileselassie as adopting a more "formal" line.

36.   In answer to questions from the Tribunal, Mr Hart  confirmed  that  he
    had told Mr Haileselassie on 24 December that he told Mr  Haileselassie
    that he now had details of the appellant's school and place of birth of
    the appellant's father.  As he had already indicated, however, Mr  Hart
    said  that  this  did  not  elicit  any  positive  response   from   Mr
    Haileselassie.

37.   Mr Hart said that he did not know of what arrangements might  be  made
    for obtaining birth certificates in Ethiopia, in respect of a person in
    the United Kingdom, where there were no family members in Ethiopia.

Dr John Campbell

38.    Dr  Campbell  spoke  to  his  expert  report  of  28  November  2010,
    commissioned in respect of the present proceedings.  Dr Campbell is the
    Head of Department  and  a  Senior  Lecturer  in  the  Anthropology  of
    Development, School of Oriental  and  African  Studies,  University  of
    London.  His previous posts include time spent at universities in Ghana
    and Tanzania.  Between 1987 and 1988 he was Project Manager  for  Oxfam
    UK in Ethiopia.  Between 2007 and 2009, he was in receipt of a research
    grant from the UK Economic and Social Research Council in respect of  a
    project entitled "Refugees and the Law: an Ethnography of  the  British
    Asylum System".

39.   Dr Campbell's instructions were to:-

    (i)    set out the background to expulsions, and flight, of persons  of
         Eritrean  or  part-Eritrean  background  from  Ethiopia  after  the
         outbreak of war in 1998;


    (ii)   discuss the present situation of  relevant  persons  inside  and
         outside Ethiopia, in relation to the  implementation  of  the  2004
         "Directive issued to determine the  residence  status  of  Eritrean
         nationals residing in Ethiopia";


    (iii)  assess whether the account given by the appellant is  consistent
         with known events in Ethiopia at the time;


    (iv)   assess what prospect arises for the appellant on the  background
         facts, as to whether the Ethiopian authorities would accept him  as
         a citizen and afford relevant core rights and protection on return;
         and


    (v)    assess whether the appellant, if admissible to  Ethiopia,  faces
         any other significant difficulty in that country, given  his  part-
         Eritrean heritage  and  other  accepted  aspects  of  his  personal
         history.

40.    Dr  Campbell  summarised  his  evidence  as  follows.    As   regards
    Ethiopia's treatment of persons of Eritrean or part-Eritrean  or  part-
    Eritrean background, after the outbreak of war in 1998:-

    (a)     Ethiopia  violated  national  and  international  law  in   its
         treatment of such individuals;


    (b)    in effect Ethiopia deprived many  thousands  of  individuals  of
         their nationality, specifically:-


         (i)      those who had fled the country or were in a third  country
             during  the  war,  and  who  had  applied  to  the   Ethiopian
             Embassies/Consulates for  assistance,  but  who  were  refused
             recognition as Ethiopians; and


         (ii)      those  who  remained  resident  in  Ethiopia  during  and
             following the war, who were  specifically  stripped  of  their
             entitlement to nationality and some of  whom  were  eventually
             registered as aliens with a permanent right to reside and work
             in Ethiopia, under the 2004 Directive.

41.   Based on "objective  evidence",  and  the  expert's  own  research  in
    Ethiopia in April 2010, the present situation is that:-

    (a)    the Ethiopian government has failed to provide  any  information
         about the process, number or legal  status  of  persons  registered
         under the 2004 Directive;


    (b)    an unknown but probably very large number of Eritreans have  not
         been registered under the 2004 Directive;


    (c)    Ethiopia stopped registering persons under  the  Directive  some
         years ago; and


    (d)     those  who  were  not  registered  face  continued  ethnic  and
         political discrimination and, as such, remain vulnerable  to  abuse
         of their human and civil rights, due to statelessness, with a  risk
         of deportation, should  hostilities  resume  between  Ethiopia  and
         Eritrea.

42.   Apart from the "minor exception" of the appellant's  claims  regarding
    his treatment whilst in detention, Dr Campbell regarded the appellant's
    account  as  consistent  with  the  objective  evidence.   Dr  Campbell
    considered there was no prospect that the Ethiopian  authorities  would
    accept the appellant is entitled to Ethiopian nationality and, even  if
    the appellant lied regarding his ethnicity (suppressing the  fact  that
    he is part-Eritrean), the information he would be required  to  provide
    would be scrutinised by the federal police in Addis Ababa who,  in  all
    likelihood, would find the arrest warrant in respect of the  appellant,
    as a result of which he had been taken  into  detention.   Even  if  he
    somehow was allowed to  return,  the  appellant  would  on  arrival  be
    rendered stateless, since the authorities were  no  longer  registering
    Eritreans under the 2004 Directive.

43.   In oral evidence, Dr Campbell was asked if he had ever seen  the  form
    identified as R2.  He said that he had not.  Dr Campbell had downloaded
    copies of forms from the Ethiopian Embassy website, which he said  were
    completely different.  He produced a  document,  labelled  A5,  sourced
    from the Embassy website on 23 September 2009, concerning  "replacement
    of lost or stolen Ethiopian passports".

44.   Dr Campbell described the background to the  2004  Directive.   Before
    the border war in 1998, agreement had been reached between Ethiopia and
    Eritrea, whereby Eritreans who had been enjoyed  Ethiopian  citizenship
    would  be  required  to  choose  their  nationality.   This  agreement,
    however, had not been implemented before the border war erupted in  May
    1998.  The Ethiopians began to arrest, detain and deport a  wide  range
    of individuals of Eritrean ethnicity, including those who had voted  in
    the 1993 referendum on Eritrean independence, was born  in  Eritrea  or
    who had at least one parent born there and those regarded as supporters
    of the Eritrean government.  Asked to comment on the Human Rights Watch
    Report on Eritrea and Ethiopia, entitled "The Horn of Africa War:  Mass
    Expulsions and the Nationality Issue" (January 2003), Dr Campbell  said
    that the report was well researched.  It was a reliable document.

45.   Dr Campbell said that the categories of those  who  were  expelled  by
    the Ethiopians widened, so that it included a number who  had  no  real
    connection with  Eritrea,  to  the  point  where  the  exercise  became
    arbitrary.  He  described  Ethiopia  as  being  a  xenophobic  society,
    involving denunciation of individuals by  neighbours,  sometimes  as  a
    result of jealousy  or  a  desire  to  get  hold  of  the  property  of
    Eritreans.  Asked to comment on the appellant's account, involving  his
    mother's activities  at  the  bar,  Dr  Campbell  said  that  what  the
    appellant had described, and which had been accepted by the Immigration
    Judge, would in his view definitely put someone within  the  categories
    subject to deportation in 1998.  During the detention  and  deportation
    process,  the  Ethiopian  authorities  removed  and/or  destroyed   the
    identity  documents  and  other  papers  held  by  those  regarded   as
    Eritreans.  Dr Campbell said, however, that he had come across  in  the
    course of his interviews in Ethiopia in 2010 some people  whose  papers
    had not  been  so  removed.   Decisions  to  remove  were  very  rarely
    rescinded, although Dr Campbell was aware of a particular village  that
    had remained loyal to Ethiopia and  whose  inhabitants  did,  in  fact,
    secure a "reprieve".  Documents had been seized  in  part  to  make  it
    difficult or impossible for those  concerned  to  return  to  Ethiopia.
    Minor officials often  seized  the  property  of  those  who  had  been
    deported.  Money held in banks went to the government, albeit that this
    was portrayed as a failure on the part of the person concerned  to  pay
    taxes.

46.   Dr Campbell was asked about the parts of  his  report  concerning  the
    legal measures  taken  by  the  Ethiopian  government  in  relation  to
    nationality, in the first decade of the 21st Century.  The proclamation
    of December 2003 entitled "Proclamation on Ethiopian  Nationality"  set
    out the right to citizenship for dual nationals,  including  Ethiopians
    of  Eritrean  origin  and  Eritrean  citizens.   This  decree  formally
    repealed the Nationality Law of  1930  and  redefined  an  individual's
    entitlement to citizenship of Ethiopia, solely by reference to  whether
    both or either parent was "Ethiopian".  Certain classes of  individuals
    were  deemed  to  have  renounced  their  entitlement  to  citizenship;
    specifically "dual nationals" who were  deemed  to  have  "voluntarily"
    acquired another nationality if they were born  abroad  or  born  to  a
    parent having foreign nationality and/or if they  continued  to  retain
    foreign nationality.  Dr Campbell said that those deported  to  Eritrea
    from Ethiopia were amongst  those  deemed  to  have  acquired  Eritrean
    nationality and, thus, to have lost  Ethiopian  nationality.   Many  of
    those  so  deported  were,  in  the  event,  actually  given   Eritrean
    citizenship by the government of that country.

47.   Children under the age of 16 were not required to  have  an  ID  card.
    Child deportees, now of adult age,  were  not  regarded  as  having  an
    entitlement to Ethiopian  citizenship.   Birth  certificates  were  not
    routinely issued by the  Ethiopians  and  most  inhabitants  would  not
    possess them.  Nevertheless, the kebele, covering a group of 500 to 600
    households, would know a good  deal  about  the  inhabitants  of  those
    households, including who was eligible for  conscription.   There  was,
    however, no compulsory military service  in  Ethiopia  at  the  present
    time.  Information of the kind described was, however,  still  gathered
    by the kebele.

48.   Dr Campbell then turned to the 2004  "Directive  issued  to  determine
    the resident status of Eritrean nationals residing in  Ethiopia".   The
    Directive  was  made  because  the  2003  Directive  had  not  assisted
    Eritreans living in Ethiopia.  The status of these people needed to  be
    clarified.  However, the 2004 Directive dealt only with those Eritreans
    who had lived in Ethiopia prior to Eritrean independence  and  who  had
    continued to do so thereafter.  Accordingly, it  did  not  cover  those
    outside Ethiopia.

49.   Dr Campbell was asked about the Eritrea-Ethiopia  Claims  Commission's
    decision, done at  The  Hague  on  17  December  2004;  in  particular,
    paragraph  76,  which  concerned  dual  nationals  who  were  in  third
    countries or who left Ethiopia to go to third countries.  According  to
    the report, the government of Eritrea contended  that  an  undetermined
    number of persons found by the Commission to be dual nationals had been
    present in other countries  when  Ethiopia  determined  they  would  no
    longer be accepted as Ethiopian nationals.  The Commission  found  that
    there was no evidence indicating that such people could  reasonably  be
    presumed, merely by reference to their presence in third countries,  to
    be security threats.  The only means by which they could contest  their
    treatment  was   to   approach   Ethiopian   diplomatic   or   consular
    establishments abroad "and the evidence showed that those who did so to
    seek clarification or assistance were sent away".  The Commission found
    that such people had  been  arbitrarily  deprived  of  their  Ethiopian
    citizenship in violation of international law.

50.    Dr  Campbell  endorsed  these  findings,  stating  that   they   were
    consistent with everything else that he had seen.

51.   Returning to the 2004 Directive, Dr Campbell said that  its  objective
    was to provide the means to any  person  of  Eritrean  origin  who  was
    resident in Ethiopia and who had remained residing in Ethiopia up until
    the  Directive  was  issued,  to  confirm  whether  they  had  acquired
    Ethiopian nationality and to determine their  status  of  residence  in
    Ethiopia.  Such Eritreans could apply to the immigration authority  for
    a "permanent residence  permit".   This  entitled  the  holder  to  own
    property, use agricultural land, engage in private employment and enjoy
    education and health services.  It did  not,  however,  amount  to  the
    grant of Ethiopian citizenship.  The person concerned  was  allowed  to
    reside in Ethiopia as a "foreign national" or "alien".  Thus, they  did
    not possess political rights, such as the right to vote.

52.   The ability to take advantage of the 2004 Directive was subject  to  a
    temporal limitation.  Dr Campbell believed that the period in  question
    had expired at the latest in 2006/2007.  At the time that the Directive
    ceased to operate, there were still those trying to  make  use  of  its
    provisions.  Anyone who persisted with such attempts was  detained  for
    three months  and  then  released  without  being  given  the  relevant
    documentation.  In fact, Dr Campbell categorised the way in  which  the
    2004 Directive had been implemented as arbitrary.   A  huge  amount  of
    discretion lay in the hands of  local  officials,  some  of  whom  were
    susceptible to bribery.  Dr Campbell  knew  of  a  particular  instance
    where a woman and her mother had wished to be registered but  had  been
    jailed for their pains.  Eventually, a judge had ordered that the woman
    was entitled to a kebele card, pursuant to the Directive.

53.   Dr Campbell was asked about the part  of  his  report  concerning  the
    present situation of ethnic Eritreans, inside and outside Ethiopia,  in
    relation to the implementation of the 2004 Directive.  So far as  those
    outside Ethiopia were concerned, Dr Campbell had formed the  view  that
    the evidence was that Ethiopian Embassies/Consulates had, from 1998  to
    the present day, refused to recognise Ethiopian-born, ethnic  Eritreans
    as their nationals.  This had been documented by the Claims  Commission
    and Refugees  International  and  had  also  been  documented  in  many
    countries including Sudan, Egypt, Australia, Kenya, India, the USA  and
    the United Kingdom.

54.   It was put  to  Dr  Campbell  that  the  respondent's  case  was  that
    applicants who did the right thing should not  be  turned  away  by  an
    embassy or consulate.  Dr Campbell said that  that  had  not  been  his
    experience.

55.   Dr Campbell turned to the Directive  of  April  2009,  issued  by  the
    Ethiopian Council of Ministers,  but  not  published  in  any  official
    government gazette or similar publication.  The Directive purported  to
    allow deported Eritreans to reclaim  their  property  in  Ethiopia.   A
    literal reading of the  Directive  suggested  that  deported  Eritreans
    might be allowed to return to Ethiopia;  certainly,  in  Dr  Campbell's
    evidence, that was how the Directive was understood in Ethiopia,  where
    it was criticised as a "move that could endanger nationality security".

56.   In May 2009 Dr Campbell wrote  to  the  Ethiopian  Embassy  in  London
    asking for an interview to discuss the 2009 Directive.   Having  spoken
    with the First Secretary of  the  Embassy,  who  could  speak  only  in
    general terms about the Directive and was unable to provide Dr Campbell
    with a copy, the latter  wrote  to  the  Prime  Minister  of  Ethiopia,
    enquiring about the Directive.  Dr Campbell's letter,  which  had  been
    sent via the Embassy, was intercepted by the Ambassador who replied  to
    Dr Campbell in a letter dated 2 December 2009,  a  copy  of  which  was
    annexed to the report.  The letter stated that steps had been taken  to
    implement the Directive, for example, "necessary visas have been issued
    by  the  Ethiopian  immigration,  Ethiopian  Embassies  and  Consulates
    abroad".  The letter went on  to  assert  that  Ethiopia  had  deported
    Eritreans who were deemed a threat to national security during the 1998-
    2000 border  war,  a  conflict  "that  was  launched  by  the  Eritrean
    government".  Ethiopia had ensured  as  much  as  possible  that  every
    deportee had delegated an agent who could administer their property  in
    Ethiopia.  After a decade, when it was felt the threat of most of these
    people to national  security  was  "minimal  or  manageable",  Ethiopia
    issued Directives "that will allow deportees to claim properties  which
    were under the custody of their agents in Ethiopia"  etc.   The  letter
    went on to say that "Ethiopia did not deport its own nationals, nor was
    there any property of Ethiopians confiscated".  If  it  were  the  case
    that Eritreans had been deported who claimed to be Ethiopians "then  we
    will be forced to consider them as Eritreans as dual citizenship is not
    permissible under the current nationality  laws".   The  letter  denied
    that Ethiopia had confiscated Eritrean  deportees'  property.   If  the
    government had undertaken the custody of such a property, then that was
    in the absence of any legal representative of the deportee having  been
    appointed.  Any request for Ethiopian  citizenship  would  "proceed  in
    accordance with  the  current  Ethiopian  nationality  law.   Eritreans
    opting for Ethiopian citizenship shall be treated accordingly."

57.   Dr Campbell considered that the reference to  Ethiopia  not  deporting
    its own nationals depended upon the Ethiopian  authorities'  view  that
    ethnic Eritreans were in fact foreigners, thus blurring the distinction
    between ethnicity and citizenship.   The  letter  displays  a  lack  of
    remorse or even understanding that Ethiopia had violated  international
    law, even though the Claims Commission had so found.

58.   The background to the 2009 Directive could be seen,  according  to  Dr
    Campbell, in a visit to the USA of the Ethiopian  Prime  Minister,  who
    had been faced with a plea from wealthy Eritreans that they  should  be
    able to  reclaim  their  property  in  Ethiopia.   The  timing  of  the
    Directive was also calculated to undermine the  regime  in  Eritrea  by
    wooing rich Eritreans out of Asmara.  Although on the face  of  it,  it
    looked as if foreigners could return to  reclaim  their  property,  the
    important point was that, in order to make use of  the  Directive,  one
    had to have another nationality, so as to enter Ethiopia as  a  foreign
    national.  Some Eritrean citizens had, Dr Campbell  said,  returned  to
    Ethiopia pursuant to the Directive.

59.   As a general matter, Dr Campbell  considered  that  a  person  in  the
    position of the appellant, approaching the Ethiopian Embassy, if saying
    anything regarded by that  Embassy  as  constituting  a  "statement  of
    Eritrean-ness", would be unable to make the necessary application.

60.   A person wishing to take advantage of the 2009 decree  would  have  to
    have a passport.  He or  she  would  also  need  to  provide  proof  of
    ownership of the relevant property.  The information supplied would  be
    coordinated by the authorities in Ethiopia, who might grant a temporary
    visa, which one would take to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in  Addis
    Ababa in order to get a further temporary visa.   That  Ministry  would
    seek to verify the applicant.  According to Dr  Campbell's  source,  30
    applications under the 2009 Directive had been approved by the  Council
    of Ministers.  70 further cases were pending.  Dr Campbell had asked to
    interview people who had returned to Ethiopia pursuant to the Directive
    but  this  had  not  happened.   Again,  Dr  Campbell's  investigations
    suggested that the process had ended up being somewhat arbitrary.

61.   A footnote to Dr Campbell's report dealt with a discussion he had  had
    with an official of the International Organisation for  Migration,  who
    handled the voluntary assisted returns programme to Ethiopia.  She told
    Dr Campbell that failed Ethiopian asylum seekers were specifically told
    not to identify themselves as Eritrean or  as  Ethiopians  of  Eritrean
    origin, because it was widely known that the Embassy  would  refuse  to
    assist them.  Dr Campbell said that he understood the IOM  were  unable
    to assist such a person  in  connection  with  a  third  or  subsequent
    attempt to obtain documentation from the Embassy.

62.   On 17 June 2009 Dr Campbell interviewed Mr  Retayeh,  First  Secretary
    at  the  London  Embassy.   The  interview  was  recorded   and   later
    transcribed.   Dr  Retayeh   chaired   the   Embassy   committee   that
    interviewed/screened all documented and  undocumented  individuals  who
    applied for travel documents  in  order  to  return  to  Ethiopia.   Mr
    Retayeh believed that the 2009 Directive applied to deported Ethiopians
    and also those who fled in anticipation of being  expelled  during  the
    war.  The last assumption is a false one, as  was  made  clear  by  the
    letter from the Ambassador, to which Dr Campbell had earlier referred.

63.   The interview dealt with the 2004 decree and the 2009  Directive.   Mr
    Retayeh confirmed that those registered under the 2004 decree were  not
    registered  as  Ethiopian  citizens,  but  as  Eritreans.   Mr  Retayeh
    considered that such people would be able to apply to  reacquire  their
    property, pursuant to the 2009 Directive.  Those registered  under  the
    2004 decree could live and work in Ethiopia but as far  as  citizenship
    was concerned, they were Eritreans and not Ethiopians.

64.   At paras 104 to 132, Mr  Retayeh  described  what  he  said  were  the
    procedures  employed  for  someone  seeking  through  the  Embassy   to
    establish their Ethiopian citizenship.  If such  people  did  not  have
    documents, then Mr Retayeh said it was difficult to ascertain  if  they
    were Ethiopian or Eritrean, given that they spoke the same language and
    they looked the  same.   Accordingly,  the  procedure  adopted  was  to
    interview the person concerned, asking where they were born, where they
    grew up, where they went to school "and the whole thing  in  Ethiopia".
    This information would then be  sent  to  Addis  Ababa,  to  the  local
    authorities (kebele) to say whether the person concerned was  from  the
    area in question.  If a positive response was received, then they could
    confirm that a person was Ethiopian.  If not, they were not  Ethiopian.
    Asked whether this could mean that the  person  was  Eritrean  but  not
    necessarily from Eritrea, Mr Retayeh responded by saying that  his  own
    ancestors were from Eritrea but he had been born in Addis  Ababa.   The
    information obtained would be passed on  to  the  "immigration  office"
    (described by Dr Campbell as SIRAA) in order to check out.  If both the
    local authorities and the immigration authorities had no  record,  then
    the person concerned would not be treated  as  Ethiopian.   The  kebele
    system was based upon a register of house numbers, together with  their
    occupants.

65.   In the light of this, Dr Campbell inferred that, were the  appellant's
    details to get as far as SIRAA,  then  the  fact  of  his  having  been
    arrested and detained would become apparent.

66.   At paragraph 124, Mr Retayeh said that every  Wednesday  and  Thursday
    the Embassy had an arrangement with the Home Office,  who  would  bring
    people for an interview and the same procedure would be adopted, asking
    which kebele the person came from and  which  house  number  they  were
    living in, as well as telephone numbers "and everything".  There was  a
    registration system for schools and students were registered.   If  the
    Embassy got the go-ahead from Addis Ababa, then they would  issue  "the
    document they want.  Otherwise it's very difficult...that guy may be an
    Eritrean and not an Ethiopian."

67.   Dr Campbell said the deportation of Eritreans  by  Ethiopia  had  been
    deliberate and clear.  Victims  that  had  been  identified  by  voting
    records or had been informed on by neighbours or were  interrogated  in
    detention centres and Dr Campbell accordingly expected that a record of
    those so held would have been kept by the authorities.  This  had  been
    confirmed during his 2010 visit to Ethiopia.

68.   Dr Campbell was asked to comment on the evidence of Mr Hart.  He  said
    this was the first occasion when he had encountered such  an  elaborate
    response by the London Embassy; but the end result had been  the  same.
    The outcome was  entirely  consistent  with  his  own  interviews  with
    Ethiopian officials and he was not surprised about  it  in  the  least.
    The application forms would be sent to Addis Ababa,  assuming  one  had
    got that far; and then SIRAA would look at it, together with the  other
    relevant  organisations.   Tesfaye  Yetayeh  had  been   dealing   with
    undocumented cases at the London Embassy for three years.  Dr  Campbell
    considered that it was plain that, if one was found  to  be  an  ethnic
    Eritrean and/or  to  have  been  deported,  the  application  would  be
    refused.

69.   Cross-examined, Dr Campbell was  asked  whether  the  appellant  would
    have been deemed to have lost his nationality.  Dr Campbell  said  that
    there were different levels.  If one could not  produce  the  necessary
    documentation, the assumption is  that  there  was  no  entitlement  to
    nationality.  Also if any document contained the word  "Eritrean",  one
    would be refused an application form.  If one did manage to get as  far
    as filling in the form, it would be sent to Addis Ababa.   Document  A5
    made it plain that precise details were required, including  the  house
    and house number where the person had lived in Ethiopia.   Accordingly,
    one had to submit correct information.  The kebele would have a  record
    of house numbers and the relevant inhabitants.  If  the  appellant  got
    this far, the authorities would discover about his mother and  his  own
    detention and he would be refused.

70.   Dr Campbell said that his two year ESRC grant  had  involved  studying
    Ethiopians and Eritreans in the UK asylum system.   This  had  required
    him to interview officials, Home Office Presenting Officers, judiciary,
    Treasury Solicitor and other officials.  He hoped that the  work  would
    eventually be published in the International Journal of  Refugees  Law.
    Dr Campbell had visited Ethiopia in 1987, 1991, 1996  and  April  2010.
    His earlier visits had been to do with his role in development.  He had
    interviewed  in  2010  some  40  individuals   in   Ethiopia.    Having
    ascertained that the  Ethiopian  authorities  were  not  interested  in
    helping him  in  this  regard,  Dr  Campbell  had  used  contacts  with
    researchers and had  contacted  potential  interviewees  by  telephone,
    being able to set up interviews in most if not all cases.

71.   Dr Campbell said that he had spoken with Mr Tesfaye on  16  June  2009
    and with Mr  Haileselassie  Subba  on  5  February  2010.   The  latter
    conversation had not been  recorded.   However,  Haileselassie  Subba's
    statement was identical to that of Mr Tesfaye.

72.   Dr Campbell was asked about paras 82 and  83  of  the  record  of  the
    conversation with Mr Tesfaye.  Here, Dr Campbell asked about  a  person
    of Eritrean ethnicity in Ethiopia who had documentation to show that he
    had not been involved with the Eritrean regime, that he had property in
    Ethiopia and that he was not a security problem and had been allowed to
    return (it would seem, under the 2009 Directive).  Mr Tesfaye said that
    such a person "will not be a  citizen  of  Ethiopia.   He  will  be  an
    Eritrean.  He will be registered."  He then,  however,  added  "If  you
    renounce [presumably, citizenship of Eritrea], as any  other  countries
    or nationals are doing, to renounce your previous nationality and claim
    and Ethiopian nationality, then according to the law that case will  be
    considered".  Meanwhile, pursuant to the  2009  Directive,  the  person
    concerned would be allowed to work and would  have  their  property  in
    Ethiopia returned.  The application for Ethiopian nationality would  be
    considered "and at the end of the day you  will  be  granted  maybe  an
    Ethiopian nationality".

73.   Dr Campbell said that such an application  for  Ethiopian  nationality
    had to be made.  However, one had to have a nationality that one  could
    renounce, so as to be considered for Ethiopian nationality.

74.   So far as the Ethiopian bureaucracy was concerned,  Dr  Campbell  said
    that his meeting with Haileselassie Subba arose because Dr Campbell had
    applied for a visitor's visa to go to Ethiopia  to  undertake  research
    but this had been caught up in the bureaucracy  and  got  lost  in  the
    system.  He considered that the relevant ministry had not been sure how
    to respond to the application.  The meeting  with  Haileselassie  Subba
    had come about because the Ethiopian authorities wanted to know why  Dr
    Campbell sought a meeting with officials in  Addis  Ababa.   There  was
    concern about Dr Campbell's questioning of ethnic Eritreans; but  after
    their conversation, he obtained his visa.  The interview  with  Tesfaye
    Yetayeh had been formally set up in order to discuss the Directives  of
    2004 and 2009 and the issue of the Diaspora.   Dr  Campbell  had  asked
    permission to record the interview.  It was known that Dr Campbell  was
    an academic who was intending to publish his results,  albeit  that  he
    had  not  told  them  that  the  interview  might  be  used  in   legal
    proceedings.

75.   Re-examined,  Dr  Campbell  said  that  he  was  planning  a  book  on
    stateless Ethiopians, as well as a pending article in  the  IJRL.   The
    funding for his research had been in the sum of 400,000.   During  the
    time of his full-time research, he had not produced expert reports  but
    he had been producing such reports for the Tribunal since  2002/3.   He
    had been an expert in HB (Ethiopia) and indirectly in MA (Eritrea).

76.   Although the distinction between ethnicity  and  nationality  appeared
    to be acknowledged by the Ethiopians in the 2009 decree, in the broader
    sense  Dr  Campbell  said  that  they  did  not  acknowledge  any  such
    dichotomy.  Many embassies refused to acknowledge an individual who was
    regarded as of Eritrean ethnicity.  The  official  view  was  that  the
    deportees and their offspring were foreigners.  This was  part  of  the
    xenophobia prevalent in Ethiopia.  The  Claims  Commission  found  that
    extensive "mistakes" had been made in connection with  the  deportation
    process.  The Ethiopian government had  not  acknowledged  any  of  the
    negative things said about them in the  Claims  Commission's  findings,
    preferring to focus instead on various awards under which  Eritrea  had
    been ordered to pay Ethiopia sums of money.

77.   In answer to a question from the Tribunal, Dr Campbell said that,  "if
    the person concerned was suspected to be Eritrean, the fact that he  or
    she was seeking  to  go  voluntarily  to  Ethiopia  would  not  make  a
    difference.  Footnote 21 of his report stated that in the USA, Ethiopia
    would only issue travel documents to  persons  who  proved  that  their
    parents were born in Ethiopia, provided proof  of  birth  in  Ethiopia,
    were able to speak the language and proved that they had  family  still
    residing in Ethiopia.  This had proved to be a particular  [problem  in
    relation to 108 detained immigrants and 4452 non-detained criminal  and
    non-criminal cases.

78.   Requested by Mr Fripp, Dr Campbell said that he was unable  to  assist
    in answering the question of  what  would  happen  where  an  Ethiopian
    claimant made a false claim to the embassy to be  Eritrean.   It  would
    depend upon what the individual had told the officials at the reception
    window.  Mr Fripp asked what attitude the Ethiopians would  take  to  a
    finding by the United Kingdom Tribunal that a person was not  Eritrean.
    Dr Campbell replied in similar terms.  If such a person went  with  the
    IOM for an interview, and if they  did  not  disqualify  themselves  by
    making a reference to being Eritrean, they would be allowed to fill out
    the application form and the authorities in Addis Ababa would  consider
    it.

79.   Asked if in such a case he would expect a clear or unequivocal  answer
    to emanate from Addis Ababa, Dr Campbell said that in  most  cases  the
    refusal came at the "window" in the embassy.  He was not aware  of  any
    written communication to  the  effect  that  an  application  had  been
    refused.  Mr Hart's evidence  had  been  in  conformity  with  what  Dr
    Campbell regarded as past practice by the embassy.

80.   Finally, Dr Campbell said that all of this had  been  compatible  with
    what Mr Beaumont had said in the case of MA.

Mr Gnter Schrder

81.   Mr Schrder spoke to his reports of  22  April  2008  and  6  December
    2010.  He concentrated on the more recent report.  Mr  Schrder  is  by
    training a historian and social anthropologist who has worked for  many
    years as an independent researcher and consultant, following events  in
    the Horn of Africa since 1965.  He first visited Eritrea  in  1983  and
    Ethiopia in 1985.  He had been called upon in more than  200  cases  by
    the German courts, lawyers and social services to provide  an  expert's
    opinion relating to asylum requests by Eritreans and Ethiopians.  Since
    2006  he  has  also  provided  such  opinions  for  asylum   cases   in
    Switzerland, Belgium and the United Kingdom.  Mr Schrder keeps  up  to
    date on developments in countries of the Horn  through  local  contacts
    and information sources with the respective Diaspora  communities.   He
    has an extensive network of resource persons with various political and
    social  backgrounds  from  and  in  Eritrea  and  Ethiopia.   He   also
    scrutinises scholarly publications and the internet.  He was  stationed
    in Ethiopia from 1991 to 2000 and in Eritrea from 2003 to  2004.   This
    enabled him to have personal knowledge of the  operational  methods  of
    the security services of the current Ethiopian government.

82.   At paragraph 64 of  the  2010  report,  Mr  Schrder  dealt  with  the
    Eritrean Nationality Law of 1992.  This conferred Eritrean  citizenship
    on all persons having lived in Eritrea before 1 January 1993 and  their
    descendants in the male or female line.  Eritrean  nationality  had  to
    proved to  the  Eritrean  authorities  through  documents  or  reliable
    witnesses.  Accordingly, many ethnic Eritreans in  Ethiopia  approached
    the Eritrean diplomatic office  in  Addis  Ababa  and  applied  for  an
    Eritrean ID card as proof of nationality.  Before 24 May 1993, this had
    no international consequences and did not  lead  automatically  to  the
    loss of Ethiopian nationality under the then existing 1930  Nationality
    Law of Ethiopia.  Under that law, the mere filing of  nationality  with
    another country automatically led to the loss of Ethiopian citizenship.
     Accordingly, Mr Schrder said that - although this view was not shared
    by everyone - after 24 May 1993, anyone in Ethiopia who had an Eritrean
    ID card should, in law, have lost Ethiopian nationality under the  1930
    law.  However, the Ethiopian authorities at first did not follow up  on
    this point and many of those who took  out  ID  cards  did  so  without
    realising what the consequences might be.  On the contrary, Mr Schrder
    said that such persons were encouraged to obtain ID cards and  to  take
    part in the referendum.  In 1991, the Ethiopian government had in  fact
    been allied with the Eritrean Liberation People's Force, who took power
    in Eritrea.  The two governments were allies  and  needed  each  other.
    Eritreans  needed  the  recognition  of   independence,   through   the
    referendum and wanted the endorsement of the Ethiopian  government,  so
    as to gain international recognition.  Conversely, the TPLF in Ethiopia
    was a minority political force and needed the  military  and  political
    support of Eritrea.  Being from the minority Tigre population (5 out of
    55 million people), the TPLF was short of qualified  personnel  to  run
    the country and relied on Eritreans to "fill the gaps".  This  was  the
    reason  why  the  Ethiopians  did  not  raise  the  issue  of  loss  of
    nationality at that time.

83.   Mr Schrder was not able to say whether  the  appellant's  mother  had
    voted in the referendum.  Some 60,000 Eritreans  in  Ethiopia  did  so,
    however.  The appellant himself would have been too young to vote.   At
    the  time,  some  250,000  ethnic  Eritreans  lived  in  Ethiopia.    A
    substantial number of these did not  take  out  an  Eritrean  ID  card.
    There were various reasons for this, including  a  fear  by  some  that
    there might be a backlash from non-Eritrean Ethiopians.  Others were so
    deeply assimilated into Ethiopian life as not to regard  themselves  as
    Eritrean.  The mother of the present Prime  Minister  of  Ethiopia  was
    Eritrean, as was the  Ambassador  to  Germany.   Their  citizenship  of
    Ethiopia was not questioned.

84.   Asked about the Human Rights Watch Report  at  appellant's  bundle  3,
    page 37, Mr Schrder disputed the figure of 50,000  Eritreans  residing
    in Ethiopia in 1998.  He put the figure as lower.  He said there was  a
    general tendency to overestimate the size of the community.   In  part,
    this was due to the fact that Eritreans were  a  mainly  urban  people,
    operating in professions such  as  banking,  transportation  and  civil
    construction, and were as a result highly  visible.   This  meant  that
    Ethiopians tended to exaggerate the number of  Eritreans  in  Ethiopia.
    Mr Schrder  estimated  some  100,000  ethnic  Eritreans  had  acquired
    Eritrean nationality before May  2003.   From  1994,  ethnic  Eritreans
    scaled down their expressions of Eritrean identity  in  Ethiopia.   The
    new kebele cards listed citizenship and then  "nationality",  which  Mr
    Schrder said meant ethnic community.  These cards posed  problems  for
    people of mixed origin.  Most ethnic Eritreans  who  obtained  the  new
    cards entered Tigre or Amhara as  their  ethnicity.   The  1994  census
    reflected what Mr Schrder called this "ethnic mimicry".

85.   The Amharic community in Ethiopia, which formed the old  elite,  found
    themselves disenfranchised  with  the  rise  of  the  Tigreyans.   They
    resented this and tended to look with hostility  at  the  Eritreans  in
    Ethiopia.  In particular, they thought  it  unfair  that  the  Eritrean
    authorities were expelling Ethiopians from Eritrea, whilst in Ethiopia,
    ethnic Eritreans were being recruited to play a major role.  Meanwhile,
    the Amharic business community considered that ethnic Eritreans  gained
    an unfair advantage by not abiding by official exchange rates.

86.   Turning to the outbreak of war in 1998, Mr Schrder agreed  with  what
    the Human Rights Watch had to say at Article 3, P38 and  went  further.
    The problems had not started in 1998.  The TPLF and the  EPLF  had  had
    problems, even when they were both fighting the Dirk  regime.   It  had
    always been an alliance of convenience and thus Eritrean investors  had
    been refused licences to invest in Ethiopia,  even  before  the  border
    war.  Meanwhile, before the war, files had begun  to  be  collected  on
    Eritreans in Ethiopia.  They included such information as who had voted
    in the referendum and travelled  to  Eritrea.   Accordingly,  when  the
    deportations began, the Ethiopian authorities were  not  starting  from
    scratch.  Some of those deported were not, Mr Schrder  said,  innocent
    but had been political organisers in Ethiopia.

87.   As soon as the border war had started, there was a  180  turn  by  the
    Ethiopian  authorities  regarding  their  relationship  with   Eritrea.
    Everything changed officially in  two  days.   Mr  Schrder  knew  this
    because he was there at the time.  Official sanction was given  to  the
    already  present  anti-Eritrean  sentiment  in  the  country  and  this
    explained the denunciation of ethnic Eritreans by their neighbours.

88.   Putting all this in the context of the appellant's case,  Mr  Schrder
    said that the activities of  the  appellant's  mother,  running  a  bar
    frequented by Eritreans and organising a  savings  scheme,  would  have
    been viewed with  mistrust  even  before  the  outbreak  of  war.   The
    authorities would most likely have had a file on her.   She  would  not
    have been  popular  with  the  public,  as  bar  owners  tended  to  be
    associated with prostitution; whilst any evident prosperity on her part
    would have been viewed with envy.  It  was  easy  to  allege  in  these
    circumstances that the appellant's mother  had  been  collecting  money
    bound for Eritrea.

89.   In 1994, the Ethiopian government said that anyone who  had  exercised
    rights  of  Eritrean  nationality  had  as  a  result  lost   Ethiopian
    citizenship.   This  meant  taking  out  an  ID  card,  voting  in  the
    referendum or even working as local staff with  the  Eritrean  Embassy.
    These views were, according to Mr Schrder "retrospective".

90.   Mr Schrder was  asked  about  paragraph  66  of  his  second  report,
    concerning mixed marriages and the offspring of such relationships.  In
    a mixed marriage, he said that the Ethiopians considered that  Eritrean
    citizenship took precedence as regards the status of  the  child,  over
    Ethiopian citizenship.  This was because of the actions of the  parent.
    This view was not confined to minor children.  Again, the stance on the
    part of the Ethiopians was retrospective.  The Eritrean ethnicity of  a
    parent, evidenced by such things as voting  in  the  referendum,  could
    well have occurred whilst the child was a minor.  Thus, by the  actions
    of a parent, a child could be categorised as  Eritrean.   Such  a  view
    could well  have  been  behind  the  detention  of  the  appellant,  as
    described by him.  When the appellant left Eritrea, Mr Schrder said he
    would not have been regarded as an Ethiopian citizen.  His release from
    detention could well have been only a temporary reprieve, so far as the
    authorities were concerned, and he could well have been  earmarked  for
    deportation.  Listening to TV and radio in Ethiopia during  this  time,
    Mr Schrder had been shocked at the language being used, which reminded
    him of the Nazis' behaviour towards the Jews.

91.   Amongst those deported had been people who had not taken out  Eritrean
    ID cards, and  even  the  Ethiopian  spouses  of  persons  regarded  as
    Eritrean.  Of the 75,000 or so deported. Mr  Schrder  said  45,000  to
    50,000 would have had ID cards.  Mr Schrder  reiterated  that  he  was
    convinced that the authorities would have  regarded  the  appellant  as
    Eritrean at the time he had left the country.

92.   Turning to the 2004 Directive, Mr Schrder  said  that  this  followed
    immediately  the  December   2003   Nationality   Proclamation.    That
    Proclamation had not specifically dealt with the Eritrean issue and  so
    the Directive was issued by the Ministry, rather than  the  Council  of
    Ministers.  It was not officially published.  It needed to be read as a
    Directive of August 1999, which required all Eritreans in  Ethiopia  to
    register.  A substantial number of Eritreans who had not taken  out  an
    Eritrean ID card wanted to register, as they felt insecure and  thought
    it was better to do this than to  live  in  limbo  in  Ethiopia.   This
    meant, however, that a number of people who  had  not  previously  been
    regarded by the Ethiopians as Eritrean were  now  so  regarded  because
    they had registered  under  the  2004  Directive.   Some  who  went  to
    register were turned away on the basis that they did not need to do  so
    since they had not voted or been  given  an  Eritrean  ID  card.   This
    confusing picture could be attributed to the fact that much depended on
    the whim of the officer in charge of  the  registration  process  in  a
    particular place.

93.   The 2004 Directive also resulted in a large number of Eritreans  being
    registered  who,  in  fact,  had  already  registered  under  the  1999
    Directive.  Others who registered had not  done  so  in  1999  but  had
    either hidden their Eritrean background or gone into hiding to see  how
    matters developed.  The 2004 Directive provided an opportunity for this
    class of person to legalise  their  status  in  Ethiopia.   There  were
    announcements as to when and  where  people  could  register.   It  was
    possible  to  register  only  in  Ethiopia,  for  those  living  there.
    Registration was possible only  between  March  and  June  2004,  on  a
    national basis.  In any particular place, however, registration  lasted
    only for two weeks.  Some of those who had registered in 1999  had,  by
    2004, decided that they wanted to get their Ethiopian nationality back.
     Those who did register in 2004, however, as  Eritreans  were  given  a
    special residence permit, unlimited in time (as opposed  to  being  six
    months or one year).  Mr Fripp asked whether these were  the  so-called
    "yellow card people".  Mr Schrder did not know.

94.   Those who in 2004 asked  for  Ethiopian  nationality,  as  opposed  to
    registration, were in fact also given an unlimited residence permit and
    allowed to apply under  paragraph  22  of  the  2003  Proclamation  for
    readmission to Ethiopian nationality.

95.   Some people  who  had  not  registered  in  1999  now  asked  to  have
    recognition  of  their  Ethiopian  citizenship.   Some  of  these  were
    referred to the Nationality and  Immigration  Department  (SIRAA);  but
    sometimes they were just given a paper there and then, confirming  that
    they were Ethiopian.

96.   Mr Schrder was asked why there were  no  equivalent  "liberalisation"
    processes provided for people outside Ethiopia.  Mr Schrder said  that
    the 2004 Directive had been  intended  for  international  consumption.
    Foreign  governments  had  not  been  pleased  with  the   deportations
    undertaken by Ethiopia and behind the scenes had been advising Ethiopia
    to do something.  The Directive took the "steam out of the discussion".
     The Ethiopians were able to say that  they  had  taken  all  necessary
    steps.  However, the authorities had no interest whatsoever in  getting
    back the 10,000 to 15,000 Eritreans who had  fled  Ethiopia  for  third
    countries.  The authorities were not bothered about such people and  no
    general amnesty relating to them was therefore published.

97.   Mr Schrder was asked about paragraph 71 of the second  report,  where
    he quoted the Head of the  Immigration  and  Nationality  Affairs  main
    department of SIRAA  whilst  confirming  that  the  Directive  excluded
    Eritreans deported  to  Eritrea  or  living  in  third  countries.   Mr
    Schrder said that the source of this information was reliable and that
    the person in question was a high official in SIRAA.  The  official  in
    question had, in fact, signed the deportation order in  respect  of  Mr
    Schrder in 2000.   Mr  Schrder  had  several  discussions  with  this
    person.  SIRAA was directly  under  the  Prime  Minister's  office  and
    issues relating to Eritreans were taken  at  the  highest  level.   The
    official in question had lost his position two years after  making  the
    statement, as he was regarded  as  too  lenient  in  respect  of  other
    issues.

98.   Mr Schrder was asked about the 2009 Directive.   He  said  that  this
    did not deal with  nationality  and  residence  issues  and  was  of  a
    different quality.  It referred to property.  He  considered  that  the
    appellant in the present appeal would not qualify under it  as  he  did
    not have sufficient property in Ethiopia.  People who could  return  in
    order to file claims to regain property would enter Ethiopia as a  kind
    of visitor.  They would not  have  residence  rights.   They  would  be
    regarded as visiting aliens.   Previously,  Eritreans  could  not  even
    visit Ethiopia, if they had  a  different  nationality.   If  Eritreans
    wanted to remain and invest  in  Ethiopia,  including  administering  a
    business, then they were able to file for resident status as a  foreign
    investor.  Nowhere in the 2009 Directive  was  it  stated  that  anyone
    could obtain  citizenship.   However,  a  person  who  had  resided  in
    Ethiopia  for  four  years  would  be  able  to  file   get   Ethiopian
    citizenship, under the ordinary citizenship laws.

99.   Mr Schrder said that security is one of  the  biggest  areas  in  the
    Ethiopian government.   There  was  no  Ministry  of  the  Interior  in
    Ethiopia.  All  passport  applications  would  be  scrutinised  by  the
    security office, which had a large  electronic  database,  as  well  as
    fingerprinting.  Applications from those abroad would be very carefully
    vetted.  Any such application would have  to  be  cross-checked  for  a
    "possible Eritrean skeleton in the  cupboard".   Anyone  applying  from
    abroad who was able to  get  through  the  relevant  embassy  would  be
    scrutinised in Addis Ababa.  If  the  kebele  were  to  think  that  an
    application for a kebele  ID  card  had  an  Eritrean  background,  the
    application would have to be approved by the security department.  Such
    kebele ID cards, if issued, would  record  the  holder's  ethnicity  as
    "Eritrean".

100.  Anyone found to have obtained an ID card through illegal  means  could
    be arrested, fined or sent to a refugee camp for illegal residents.

101.  There was a network of  informants  at  kebele  level  but,  with  the
    growth of population, Mr Schrder thought  that  it  was  possible  for
    people to hide their ethnic origin by going to a new area.  However, if
    caught in a police raid and their files accessed, then the truth  could
    emerge.

102.  Mr Schrder said that he thought that a person with the background  of
    the appellant would have a record, kept in Addis Ababa.   In  1999  the
    security apparatus would have created a record in respect of him,  both
    as regards his mother's deportation and his own  arrest.   There  would
    definitely be a record of the  latter.   It  would  not  disappear  and
    would, according to Mr Schrder, be electronic.   Mr  Schrder  thought
    that in the appellant's case Haileselassie Subba in the London  Embassy
    had probably checked back with  Addis  between  the  first  and  second
    telephone conversations with Mr Hart: hence, his unhelpfulness  in  the
    second conversation.

103.  Asked if the evidence given by Mr Hart  was  surprising,  Mr  Schrder
    said that Ethiopian officials were very polite and did not want to give
    a positive answer, adopting a diplomatic  approach.   If  pressed  they
    would procrastinate before, at the  end  of  the  day,  giving  a  flat
    refusal, which would not be in writing.  Anyone who persisted would  be
    stopped abruptly and the official in question would become  unfriendly.
    Such officials were, according to Mr Schrder,  more  direct  in  their
    dealings with their own nationals.

104.  At para 139 of his second report, Mr Schrder said that it  "still  is
    the general policy of  the  Ethiopian  authorities  not  to  take  back
    Ethiopian citizens of Eritrean origin living in third countries,  whose
    asylum request had been  denied.   Officials  of  Ethiopian  diplomatic
    missions  never  would  state  this  position  officially  to   foreign
    government officials but it is the applied practice."  The report  went
    on to state that, according to a confidential statement of an Ethiopian
    diplomat in Germany, the Ethiopian government would sometimes authorise
    a mission to issue a travel document, allowing such a person to  return
    to Ethiopia "in order to appease Western governments".   The  official,
    however, made it plain that this did not mean that the person concerned
    would be reinstated into Ethiopian nationality.  He/she at  best  would
    be treated as a foreign national with residence in Ethiopia or sent  to
    a refugee camp for Eritreans.  It was made clear  by  the  source  that
    such exceptions to the general rule "are kept as low as possible and in
    no way signify that Ethiopia would open her doors again to this  'riff-
    raff', which did not 'make it' in the western world".

105.  Mr Schrder said in this regard that the culture of Ethiopia  in  part
    accounted for this attitude.  It did not want to be seen to  have  made
    mistakes and so their line was that they had deported  only  those  who
    had renounced Ethiopian citizenship or were a security risk.  A  formal
    written statement that a person was not wanted back in  Ethiopia  would
    cause problems with the foreign government concerned, and so the people
    at the embassy would never produce  a  written  communication  to  that
    effect.

106.  Asked if foreign governments were,  nevertheless,  not  aware  of  the
    true position, Mr Schrder said that this was so; but the Germans,  for
    example, considered it a minor issue compared with the  generally  good
    relationship that they had with Ethiopia.  The Germans were content, as
    in the United Kingdom, for cases to go  through  the  relevant  courts.
    Ethiopian diplomats tended to regard other diplomats as  gullible.   Mr
    Schrder's contact, source of the confidential statement just  referred
    to, came as a result of his longstanding relationship with the Horn  of
    Africa and the body of contacts he had built up over  the  years.   The
    source in question  was  the  son  of  one  of  the  Protestant  church
    ministers whom Mr Schrder had met in Ethiopia,  whilst  working  as  a
    consultant.  In Ethiopia, Mr  Schrder  said  that  he  had  access  to
    information not normally available to a researcher, as a result of  his
    contacts.

107.  Mr Schrder said that anyone who had been  out  of  Ethiopia  for  ten
    years could not be expected to be taken back.   The  authorities  would
    regard the matter as "closed".  Birth certificates were  not  usual  in
    Ethiopia.  At the age of 18, one would go to the kebele for an ID card.
     95%  of  the  population  were  not  registered  at  birth.   In  most
    interactions, a birth certificate was not needed, for example, to go to
    school.  The majority  of  birth  certificates  which  were  issued  to
    Ethiopians were issued to persons abroad.  A person who was abroad  and
    needed a birth certificate could send a relative to the relevant office
    in Addis Ababa, provided the relative had a power of mandate.   Such  a
    power of mandate had to be legalised by the embassy.  This was  usually
    offered only to Ethiopia's own citizens.  In the case of the appellant,
    Mr Schrder considered it was unlikely that the embassy would give  him
    such a mandate, although he really did  not  know.   Asked  whether  he
    could mandate a lawyer, Mr Schrder said  one  needed  three  witnesses
    acceptable to the registration office in order  to  register  a  birth.
    Thus, in the appellant's case, the  chances  of  him  getting  a  birth
    certificate were "pretty much nil".  Mr Schrder knew of a  person  who
    had no problems regarding mixed nationality but had  still  taken  four
    years to get a birth certificate.

108.  In the case of  the  Claims  Commission,  various  financial  payments
    ordered to be made by one side or the other, resulted in Ethiopia being
    entitled to "a few million dollars".  There was, however, no  machinery
    for  financially  compensating  those  who  had  been  deported.    The
    Ethiopians were, however, pleased with the finding  of  the  Commission
    that Eritrea had started the war.

109.  Asked about paragraph 28 of Dr Campbell's  report,  concerning  ethnic
    Eritreans from Ethiopia being  refused  recognition  as  nationals,  as
    regards various countries, including Australia, the USA and the  United
    Kingdom,  Mr  Schrder  said  this  was  correct  and  the  policy  was
    consistently applied internationally by  the  Ethiopians.   There  were
    some 15,000 to 20,000 people in this position in  third  countries  and
    the Ethiopians would not,  as  a  matter  of  principle,  accept  them.
    Although a general amnesty was always possible at  some  point  in  the
    future, it was not on the horizon.

110.  The letter to Dr Campbell from the Ambassador in London  was  regarded
    by Mr Schrder as consistent with what he  had  understood  to  be  the
    case.  It reflected the position of the Ethiopian government.  Whatever
    evidence a person might seek to  produce  in  connection  with  showing
    Ethiopian citizenship, the authorities would deny it.

111.  Asked about the letter from Haileselassie Subba to  the  UKBA  (P1  in
    respondent's bundle), Mr Schrder said that this letter left  out  "all
    the complicated issues".

112.  Mr Schrder was asked if there might be people who had  registered  in
    1999 but had not reregistered in 2004.  Mr Schrder  said  he  was  not
    aware of anyone.  He considered that the 2004 Directive applied to  all
    Eritreans, even those who had  registered  under  the  1999  Directive.
    However, some had been too frightened to go and register in 2004.

113.  Cross-examined, Mr Schrder  was  asked  about  his  evidence  to  the
    effect that a record would definitely have been kept of an arrest.   He
    was asked if this applied to a mere arrest, not leading  to  a  charge,
    some ten years ago.  Mr Schrder said that such a record would be kept,
    in respect  of  any  matter  that  was  considered  to  be  politically
    sensitive.  If the appellant had been arrested, it must have meant that
    there was already information in the system and so he would  have  been
    "picked up".  The kebele applications for ID cards had to  be  approved
    by the security authorities, which presupposed that records existed.

114.  Asked as to the sources of his knowledge, Mr Schrder said  that  some
    was in the public domain.  For example, budgets, published since  1997,
    indicated  that  30  million   bil   had   been   allocated   for   the
    computerisation of the National Security Department from 1997 to  2005.
    The security apparatus was 80%  staffed  by  Tigreyans,  who  were  ex-
    freedom fighters, with whom Mr Schrder had longstanding  contact.   Mr
    Schrder had been deported from Ethiopia in 2000 for  alleged  Eritrean
    activities.  At the time he had an Ethiopian wife  who  had  stayed  on
    after the deportation.  When she had wanted to leave, the kebele  would
    not give her the requisite clearance because they knew that Mr Schrder
    had been deported, even though his deportation  had  been  communicated
    only to him.  His wife needed high placed contacts  to  enable  her  to
    leave Ethiopia.  Another  instance  of  which  Mr  Schrder  was  aware
    concerned a woman from Aroma who, returning to Ethiopia from  the  USA,
    had been shown a thick file on the activities of  her  and  her  sister
    whilst in the USA and Germany over the past  ten  years.   Mr  Schrder
    himself had seen his own file and had seen in it lists  of  people  who
    had visited him, as well as his contacts.

115.  Asked why the appellant had been released from  detention  instead  of
    being bussed  to  the  Eritrean  border,  Mr  Schrder  said  that  the
    deportation process had not  been  uniform.   Some  had  been  released
    because  the  detention  camps  were  full.   It  was  unlikely  in  Mr
    Schrder's view that  the  reason  for  the  release  was  because  the
    authorities were unsure of his nationality status.  In the  climate  of
    the day, they would have considered him to  be  an  Eritrean  national.
    His mother's nationality would have been assumed to have conferred such
    nationality on the appellant.  Even though Human Rights Watch  had  not
    spoken of releases of this kind at the time, Mr Schrder said  that  it
    did happen.  The appellant would  have  had  very  little  opportunity,
    following release on 28 August, to register under the 1999 Directive.

116.  Asked whether it was surprising that the 2009 Directive had  not  been
    made available, Mr Schrder said he thought it had  been  published  by
    the Council of Ministers and therefore  should  have  appeared  in  the
    gazette but it  had  been  "delayed".   He  said  that  this  sometimes
    happened.  On certain occasions, materials were published years  later.
    Asked about the sources mentioned in the footnotes to  paragraph  28(b)
    of Dr Campbell's report, Mr Schrder said that  he  was  aware  of  the
    sources but had not cited them in his own report.  Asked whether  these
    sources had suggested that embassies refused Ethiopian nationality  and
    gave reasons why people were refused, Mr Schrder said he would have to
    check but he believed that  the  sources  indicated  that  the  embassy
    officials had acted in line with what  was  described  in  the  present
    appeal before the Tribunal: that is to say, they had  refused  to  deal
    with the matter.

117.  Mr Schrder said he knew of instances in Germany where applicants  had
    not been given application forms to fill in.  In  other  cases,  ethnic
    Eritreans had been unable  to  get  an  extension  of  their  Ethiopian
    passports.

118.  Asked if he was pro-Eritrean, Mr Schrder said that he  had  been  the
    first foreign national banned from the  newly  established  country  of
    Eritrea as they had not liked  one  of  his  reports.   That  was  not,
    however,  until  Mr  Schrder  had  subsequently  been  deported   from
    Ethiopia.  After that, he had been invited to Eritrea to celebrate  the
    ten year  anniversary  of  independence.   He  kept  his  own  personal
    opinions separate from his report.  Mr Schrder said that  as  well  as
    Eritrea and Ethiopia, he had been banned from Libya, Afghanistan,  Iran
    and Iraq; but that this "comes with the job".  He harboured  no  grudge
    against the Ethiopians for deporting him.

119.  Asked about paragraph 66 of his second report, concerning  persons  of
    mixed origins, and whether  a  child  could  opt  at  age  18  to  take
    Ethiopian nationality, Mr Schrder said that if the Eritrean parent had
    been politicised or done anything else that the Ethiopians regarded  as
    "Eritrean", then the child would be regarded  as  Eritrean.   This  was
    especially the case with the appellant, whose father  was  deceased  at
    the relevant time.

120.  Asked about paragraph 84, concerning  the  2004  Directive,  where  Mr
    Schrder said that all those registered as Eritrean nationals under the
    registration exercise had the option  to  apply  for  reinstatement  of
    Ethiopian citizenship, Mr Schrder explained that  persons  registering
    in the "window" of time afforded by the Directive  had  the  option  of
    asking  for  a  reinstatement  of   citizenship.    That   process   of
    reinstatement began after the registration under  the  2004  Directive.
    The  majority  of  Eritreans  who  so  registered  did   so   ask   for
    reinstatement and of those,  the  majority  were  granted  citizenship,
    after a process lasting three or four years.

121.  There were some 50,000 Eritreans  present  in  Ethiopia  as  refugees,
    including those expelled but returned to Ethiopia and  were  considered
    not to come within the terms of the 2004 Directive.  These people  only
    had temporary residence, with refugee status.  Mr Schrder  was  unable
    to say why this class of person  had  not  been  covered  by  the  2004
    Directive, although he considered that it showed the  general  attitude
    of the Ethiopians towards Eritreans.

122.  Mr Schrder was asked about paragraph 93  of  the  report,  concerning
    the Nationality Law of 2003, where he said that  "it  appears  that  in
    practice the Regulations of 5 of this Proclamation are  actually  also
    applied in the case of  applications  for  readmission  into  Ethiopian
    citizenship".  Mr Schrder  said  this  referred  to  persons  who  had
    acquired Eritrean citizenship and gone back to Ethiopia and who  wanted
    to reacquire Ethiopian nationality.  They were told  that  they  should
    wait for four years.  The readmission provisions did not actually state
    the length of time in  Ethiopia  to  be  spent  before  readmission  to
    citizenship.  In some cases  a  four  year  requirement  might  not  be
    imposed.

123.  Mr Schrder's attention was drawn  to  paragraph  110  of  his  report
    where he said that "open legal discrimination of  persons  of  Eritrean
    descent living in Ethiopia has  largely  ceased".   Persons  readmitted
    into Ethiopian  citizenship,  however,  were  said  according  to  that
    paragraph to be barred  from  servicing  government  offices  including
    elected bodies and that in this important  aspect  such  citizens  were
    only second  class  citizens.   Mr  Schrder  was  asked  whether  this
    cessation of discrimination extended to those seeking the reacquisition
    of Ethiopian citizenship.  Mr Schrder said that there was no longer  a
    legal basis for reacquiring  citizenship  if  one  was  Eritrean.   The
    matter was considered  closed  with  the  2004  Directive.   Thus,  the
    ordinary Nationality Law applied.  Reacquisition of  citizenship  could
    not be achieved from abroad.

124.  Mr Schrder was asked about the source cited in a report of 2008  that
    "those who moved to Canada or the US are okay".  Mr Schrder said  this
    was in the context of the informant describing how  Eritreans  who  had
    Ethiopian citizenship nevertheless did not feel secure.   Things  could
    change again at any time.

125.  Re-examined, Mr Schrder thought that the source quoted  in  paragraph
    112 would have been a person who had reacquired citizenship through the
    process of the 2004 Directive.  The person  concerned  having  in  fact
    gone to Kenya because he did not feel secure in Ethiopia.  Eritrea  and
    Ethiopia were still at loggerheads.  Those involved in the events  from
    1998 to 2004 were often still shattered.  There was still anti-Eritrean
    feeling in Ethiopia.  Eritreans in Ethiopia now realised that one could
    not rely on the law to protect them if things went wrong again.   There
    were frequently round-ups of Eritreans, whenever  a  particular  event,
    such as a bomb, occurred.  These round-ups were not large but enough to
    engender insecurity.

126.  Under the 2003 Proclamation, readmission  to  citizenship  required  a
    return to domicile.

127.  Asked about paragraph 4.2 of  the  2004  Directive,  which  states  "A
    person of Eritrean origin who has not opted  for  Eritrean  nationality
    shall be deemed as having decided to  maintain  his  or  her  Ethiopian
    nationality and his or her Ethiopian nationality shall be  guaranteed",
    Mr  Schrder  said  that  although  this  looked  positive,   Ethiopian
    provisions of this kind were famous for what was not said in them.   It
    was not explained by what was meant by having "not opted  for  Eritrean
    nationality".  That was accordingly  open  to  a  wide  interpretation.
    Only after enquiry by the security apparatus if it were concluded  that
    the claim was true, would nationality be confirmed.  Thus,  taking  the
    case of a young adult whose mother had been deported,  approaching  the
    authorities under the 2004 Directive and seeking to use Article 4.2, it
    would be very difficult for him to prove that  he  had  not  opted  for
    Eritrean nationality.  It might come down to the toss of  a  coin.   Mr
    Schrder thought, nevertheless, that  quietly,  the  authorities  might
    have thought that they had on occasions made mistakes and so had  given
    nationality back to certain people.  It had been  said  that  deportees
    and third country nationals had not been included in  the  registration
    process under Regulation 5 of the Directive.  The  2004  Directive  had
    clearly been addressed to people in Ethiopia and not to deportees.


128.  Mr Schrder was asked about the Human  Rights  Watch  Report  (Article
    3/39) that stated "Finally, on August 14 1999, the Ethiopian government
    ordered people of Eritrean origin aged 18 and older, who had  voted  in
    the 1993 referendum on Eritrea's independence, as well as those who had
    formally acquired Eritrean citizenship, to register for alien residence
    permits with the Security, Immigration and  Refugee  Affairs  Authority
    within two weeks or face unspecified legal action.  Prior to this time,
    the Ethiopian government had not applied the alien registration rule to
    Eritreans in Ethiopia.  The order seems to have been motivated in  part
    by the desire to justify after the fact the deportation  of  people  or
    Eritrean origin by formally categorising them as aliens, as well as  to
    drive those of Eritrean origin who remain in Ethiopia to leave."

129.  Mr Schrder was asked whether a failure to obey  the  1999  Directive,
    in the case of someone who did not see themselves as Eritrean, would be
    seen as some sort of admission by the authorities.   Mr  Schrder  said
    that the appellant probably would not have heard of the Directive after
    his release.  However, it would have been unwise for  him  to  seek  to
    register under it, as he did not want to have  more  contact  with  the
    authorities, in view of his experiences in detention.   In  any  event,
    registering  under  this  Directive  was  not  a   protection   against
    deportation, as some individuals found out.  It also meant that one was
    admitting one was Eritrean.  Others, however, thought that registration
    might afford some form of protection, against their  better  knowledge.
    Finally, it would be  unrealistic  to  have  expected  the  authorities
    detaining the appellant to have told him about the 1999 Directive.






























                                 APPENDIX B

                            DOCUMENTARY MATERIAL




|     |Document                                       |Date            |
|Item |                                               |                |
|     |                                               |                |
|1    |United Nations Development Programme           |22 July 1998    |
|     |Asmara-Eritrea, "Update on Deportees 12-19 July|                |
|     |1998"                                          |                |
|2    |A Legasse, "The Uprooted: Case material on     |26 July 1998    |
|     |Ethnic Deportees from Ethiopia concerning Human|                |
|     |Rights Violations"                             |                |
|3    |Eritrean Relief and refugee Commission, "A     |27 July 1998    |
|     |Preliminary Report on the Eritrean nationals   |                |
|     |Expelled from Ethiopia During June-July 1998 (A|                |
|     |Synopsis of their Social Characteristics and   |                |
|     |Manners of Deportation)"                       |                |
|4    |N Klein, "Mass Expulsion from Ethiopia: Report |August 1998     |
|     |on the Documentation of Eritreans and          |                |
|     |Ethiopians of Eritrean origin from Ethiopia,   |                |
|     |June-August 1998"                              |                |
|5    |Amnesty International, "Human Rights Abuses in |21 May 1999     |
|     |a year of armed conflict"                      |                |
|6    |C Calhoun, Politics Abroad, "Ethiopia's Ethnic |Winter 1999     |
|     |Cleansing"                                     |                |
|7    |Home Office form, "SEF (Self-Completion)"      |12 January 2001 |
|8    |Home Office form, "SEF (Interview)"            |20 February 2001|
|9    |Eritrea-Ethiopia Claims Commission, "The       |01 August 2001  |
|     |Commission's Mandate/Temporal Scope of         |                |
|     |Jurisdiction"                                  |                |
|10   |H Byrne, INS Information Resource Center,      |January 2002    |
|     |"Eritrea and Ethiopia: Large-scale Expulsions  |                |
|     |of Population Groups and Other Human Rights    |                |
|     |Violations in Connection with the              |                |
|     |Ethiopian-Eritrean Conflict, 1998-2000"        |                |
|11   |Human Rights Watch, "The Horn of Africa War:   |January 2003    |
|     |Mass Expulsions and the Nationality Issue (June|                |
|     |1998 - April 2002)"                            |                |
|12   |US Department of State, "Ethiopia Country      |31 March 2003   |
|     |Reports on Human Rights Practices 2002         |                |
|13   |Federal Negarit Gazeta of the Federal          |23 December 2003|
|     |Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, "Proclamation |                |
|     |No. 378/2003. A Proclamation on Ethiopian      |                |
|     |Nationality"                                   |                |
|14   |Ethiopian nationality Proclamation No. 378/2003|23 December 2003|
|15   |Letter from the Ethiopian Community Centre in  |19 March 2004   |
|     |the UK                                         |                |
|16   |Letter from the Ethiopian Community Centre in  |04 August 2004  |
|     |the UK                                         |                |
|17   |Constitution of Ethiopia                       |08 December 2004|
|18   |Eritrea-Ethiopia Claims Commission, "Partial   |17 December 2004|
|     |Award: Civilian Claims/Eritrea's Claims 15, 16,|                |
|     |23 and 27-31 Between the State of Eritrea and  |                |
|     |the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia"   |                |
|19   |Home Office letter, "Reasons for Refusal"      |28 January 2005 |
|20   |M Lynch, Refugee's International, "Lives on    |February 2005   |
|     |Hold: The Human Cost of Statelessness"         |                |
|21   |Home Office letter, "Notice of Decision"       |07 February 2005|
|22   |C Barnes, Writenet, "Ethiopia: A Sociopolitical|01 May 2006     |
|     |Assessment"                                    |                |
|23   |L Thomas, FMRS, "Refugees and Asylum Seekers   |June 2006       |
|     |from Mixed Eritrean-Ethiopian Families in Cairo|                |
|     |'The Son of the Snake'"                        |                |
|24   |Home Office, Letter Sent to the Ethiopian      |02 February 2007|
|     |Embassy in case of MA                          |                |
|25   |North Kensington Law Centre, Letter Sent to the|07 February 2007|
|     |Ethiopian Embassy in case of MA                |                |
|26   |Tsol, Letter sent to the Tribunal in case of MA|27 February 2007|
|27   |Tsol, Letter sent to the Tribunal in case of MA|30 March 2007   |
|28   |UK Border Agency, "Country of Origin           |18 January 2008 |
|     |Information Report: Ethiopia"                  |                |
|29   |Expert Report of Gnter Schrder, "Expert      |22 April 2008   |
|     |Report Re" appellant  (dob 01/10/1079)" [sic]  |                |
|30   |Witness Statement of appellant                 |23 April 2008   |
|31   |M Lynch and K Southwick, Refugees              |30 May 2008     |
|     |International, "Ethiopia-Eritrea: Stalemate    |                |
|     |takes its toll on Eritreans and Ethiopians of  |                |
|     |Eritrean Origin"                               |                |
|32   |Determination of IJ R Sullivan                 |01 July 2008    |
|33   |Refugees International, "Ethiopia-Eritrea      |07 July 2008    |
|     |Voices: No longer stateless but Still in Limbo |                |
|34   |Letter from Haileselassie Subba, Head of Legal |26 February 2009|
|     |and Consular Affairs, Embassy of the Federal   |                |
|     |Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, London        |                |
|35   |UK Border Agency, "Operational Guidance Note:  |01 March 2009   |
|     |Ethiopia"                                      |                |
|36   |M Lynch and K Southwick, Refugees              | March 2009     |
|     |International, "Nationality Rights for All: A  |                |
|     |Progress Report and Global Survey on           |                |
|     |Statelessness                                  |                |
|37   |Appellant's Grounds of Application for         |05 March 2009   |
|     |Permission to Appeal to Court of Appeal        |                |
|38   |United Nations Committee on the Elimination of |11 March 2009   |
|     |Racial Discrimination, "Reports Submitted by   |                |
|     |States Parties under Article 9 of the          |                |
|     |Convention: Ethiopia"                          |                |
|39   |Open Society Justice Initiative,               |01 April 2009   |
|     |"Discrimination in Access To Nationality       |                |
|40   |Consent Order and Statement of Reasons         |06 October 2009 |
|41   |Determination of SIJ Moulden                   |23 December 2009|
|42   |Human Rights Watch, "World Report Events of    |20 January 2010 |
|     |2009, Ethiopia"                                |                |
|43   |US Department of State, "Ethiopia Country      |11 March 2010   |
|     |Reports on Human Rights Practices 2009         |                |
|44   |Expert Report of John Campbell, "Expert Report"|01 December 2010|
|     |- appellant                                    |                |
|45   |Expert Report of Gnter Schrder, "Expert      |06 December 2010|
|     |Report Re appellant                            |                |
|46   |Letter to the Ethiopian Embassy                |17 December 2010|
|47   |Letter to the Home Office Presenting Officer's |21 December 2010|
|     |Unit                                           |                |
|48   |Witness Statement of Durand Hart               |10 January 2011 |
|49   |Email from Marney Morgan, Returns Liaison Unit,|11 January 2011 |
|     |UK Border Agency                               |                |
|50   |Supplementary Witness Statement of appellant   |11 January 2011 |
|51   |Witness Statement of Derege Woubeshet          |23 February 2011|
|52   |Eritrea-Ethiopia Claims Commission, summary    |undated         |
|     |from                                           |                |
|     |http://www.pca-cpa.org/showpage.asp?pag_id=1151|                |
|53   |Directive Issued to Determine the Residence    |undated         |
|     |Status of Eritrean nationals Residing in       |                |
|     |Ethiopia, 2004                                 |                |


