
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Hussein and Another (Status of passports: foreign law) [2020] UKUT 00250
(IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard by Skype at Field House                 |Decisions & Reasons sent out  |
|                                              |on                            |
|On 24 June 2020                               |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                    MR C. M. G. OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT

                                   Between

                           ALI ABDULRASUL HUSSEIN
                        QUMAYL ALI JAWAD ABDULRASOOL
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr H Semega-Janneh, instructed by Duncan Lewis
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


   1.    A person who holds a genuine passport, apparently  issued  to  him,
      and not falsified or altered, has to be regarded as a national of  the
      State that issued the passport.

   2. The burden of proving the contrary lies on the claimant in  an  asylum
      case.

   3. Foreign law (including nationality law) is a matter of evidence, to be
      proved by expert evidence directed specifically to the point in issue.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. These proceedings constitute the appeal of Mr Hussein ('the appellant')
    with permission, against the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal,  and
    the application of Mr Abdulrasool ('the applicant') for  permission  to
    appeal, together with his appeal if permission be granted.






 2. The appellant and the applicant are father and son: the latter was born
    in 2000.  They made asylum claims, which were refused; the applicant in
    addition claims that he is so dependent on his parents that it would be
    disproportionate  to  remove  him  from  the   United   Kingdom.    The
    appellant's  wife  and  two  minor  children  were  included   in   the
    appellant's claim as his dependents.



 3. At a hearing before Judge McAll on 3 January 2020 the appellant and the
    applicant gave oral evidence, as did the appellant's elder brother; and
    submissions were made on their behalf  by  Mr  Janneh.   There  was  no
    appearance by or on behalf of the  Secretary  of  State.   Judge  McAll
    considered the appellant's claimed history in detail and  decided  that
    he did not accept that he was being told the whole truth.  He concluded
    that the appellant  had  fabricated  important  parts  of  his  account
    supporting his asylum claim.  He  decided  that  the  appellant  was  a
    national of Tanzania and could be returned to  Tanzania.   He  did  not
    believe the applicant's asylum claim either, and concluded in  addition
    that there was no good article 8 reason why he  should  not  leave  the
    United Kingdom and return to his country of nationality.  He  dismissed
    both appeals.



 4. The appellant and the applicant applied to the First-tier Tribunal  for
    permission  to  appeal.   Judge  Simpson  granted  permission  to   the
    appellant and refused  it  to  the  applicant.   Her  reasons  are  not
    intelligible.  The  grounds  of  appeal  she  was  considering  do  not
    challenge the judge's primary conclusions as to credibility  and  fact.
    In relation to the appellant,  they  challenge  the  judge's  reasoning
    leading to his conclusion that the appellant is a national of Tanzania.
     In relation to the applicant they challenge the judge's conclusion  on
    the basis that he did not appreciate that although over  18  he  should
    have been treated as a dependant of his parents for article 8 purposes.



 5. The principal question relates to  the  appellant's  nationality.   Two
    points are clear.  He was born in Somalia; and he  entered  the  United
    Kingdom using a Tanzanian passport.  He  now  claims  that  he  is  not
    entitled to the Tanzanian passport.  If he is of Tanzanian nationality,
    his asylum claim  is  wholly  unmeritorious:  there  is  no  basis  for
    thinking that he will be persecuted in  Tanzania.   If  he  is  not  of
    Tanzanian nationality, he claims first that his asylum claim should  be
    considered on the basis that he is a national of Somalia, and  secondly
    that he should not in any event be returned  to  Tanzania,  because  he
    might have to  suffer  the  consequences  of  what  he  claims  is  his
    fraudulent acquisition and use of a Tanzanian passport.



 6. The Tanzanian passport that the appellant  used  to  enter  the  United
    Kingdom is his second: it was issued in 2017.   His  claim  before  the
    judge was that he obtained it, and its predecessor, issued in 2005  and
    valid for ten years, simply by paying money to  members  of  the  Khoja
    Shiah Community whilst he was in Kenya.  He says  that  both  passports
    are fakes.  The 2005 passport was used to obtain work permits in Kenya.
    After its expiry he did not immediately need a new one.  But in 2017 he
    wanted to get work and obtained a new passport.



 7. That passport has been used first to travel from  Kenya  to  Dubai  and
    back to Kenya, then from Kenya to the United  Kingdom  in  2018  for  a
    visit to the appellant's brother, and  back  to  Kenya,  then  for  the
    appellant's most recent travel to the United Kingdom in December  2018.
    On the last two occasions the appellant has travelled  on  visit  visas
    issued by the United Kingdom government.  It has  thus  been  seen  and
    (presumably) inspected on at least ten  occasions  on  the  appellant's
    entry and exit through  international  airports,  and  twice  by  entry
    clearance officers.  There is clearly no good  reason  to  believe  the
    appellant's claim, made for the purpose of his asylum application, that
    it is not a genuine document.



 8. The grounds, however, in line with the case as put to the judge,  argue
    that the appellant cannot be a national of Tanzania and  so  cannot  be
    entitled to the passport.  That argument is based on  assertions  about
    the law of Tanzania, in  particular  relating  to  the  acquisition  of
    nationality and the holding of dual nationality.  There appears also to
    be some sort of assertion that as the appellant  was  born  in  Somalia
    there is a  presumption  of  the  continuation  of  Somali  nationality
    despite the production and use of a Tanzanian passport.



 9. Those grounds cannot be accepted.  First, foreign law is  a  matter  of
    fact and must be proved by evidence.  It is not sufficient  to  produce
    Tanzanian statutes and assert that the statute represents the whole  of
    the law on the subject.  A moment's consideration shows why that is so:
    it is absurd to suggest that a person who had  access  to  the  Queen's
    Printer's copy of the British Nationality Act 1981  would  be  able  to
    deduce reliably from it the status of any postulant for nationality: it
    has been subject to numerous amendments, and it says nothing about  the
    operation of policy or prerogative.  Foreign law needs to be proved  by
    expert   evidence   directed   precisely   to   the   questions   under
    consideration, so that the Tribunal can reach an informed view  in  the
    same way as anybody taking advice on an unfamiliar area of law.  It  is
    surprising that this well-known principle has  apparently  escaped  the
    notice of the appellant's professional advisers: if authority is needed
    it can be found in CS [2017] UKUT 00199 (IAC).; see also R(MK)  v  SSHD
    [2017] EWHC 1365 (Admin) at [5]-[8].  There is no evidential  basis  in
    the present case for any of  the  arguments  about  Somali,  Kenyan  or
    Tanzanian law that were made before the First-tier Tribunal or  in  the
    grounds.






10. Secondly, there is no presumption of the  continuance  of  nationality.
    There is a presumption about the continuance of domicile, but that is a
    totally different matter.  On the evidence, a person who shows that  he
    had a particular nationality at birth may not be subject to any serious
    challenge about still having that nationality, if there is no  evidence
    to the contrary: but where there is evidence of a different nationality
    the matter has to be determined on the evidence, and in a refugee claim
    the burden of proof is on the claimant.  In this case, it  was  and  is
    for the appellant to establish to the requisite standard that he is  at
    risk of persecution in any country whose nationality he  has,  and  the
    starting-point is for him to establish his nationality.



11. Passports have international recognition as assertions and evidence  of
    nationality.   On  their  face  they  constitute  an  address  by   the
    authorities of one State to the authorities of  another  at  diplomatic
    level.  The authority in  whose  name  the  passport  is  issued  makes
    demands on the basis that the individual named in  the  passport  is  a
    national of and is entitled to be regarded as a national of the issuing
    state.  Other States  recognise  that  by  treating  the  holder  as  a
    national of that State,  and,  in  most  circumstances,  endorsing  the
    passport to indicate that  they  have  done  so,  particularly  when  a
    national border is crossed.  Passports are the lubrication that  allows
    international  travel:  without  a  reliable   passport   system   each
    individual would have to prove identity, nationality and good  standing
    by individualised evidence at every international border.



12. It is simply not open to an individual to opt out  of  that  system  by
    denouncing his own passport; and it is not open to any State to  ignore
    the contents of a passport simply on the basis of a claim by its holder
    that the passport does not mean what it says. It is considerations such
    as these that lie behind the passage in the UNHCR  Handbook,  paragraph
    93:



             "93. Nationality may be proved by the possession of a national
             passport. Possession of such a passport creates a prima  facie
             presumption that the holder is a national of  the  country  of
             issue, unless the passport itself states otherwise.   A person
             holding a passport showing him to be a national of the issuing
             country,  but  who  claims  that  he  does  not  possess  that
             country's  nationality,  must  substantiate  his  claim,   for
             example, by showing that the passport is a so-called "passport
             of convenience" (an apparently regular national passport  that
             is sometimes issued by a national authority to non-nationals).
              However, a mere assertion by the holder that the passport was
             issued to him as a matter of convenience for  travel  purposes
             only  is  not  sufficient  to   rebut   the   presumption   of
             nationality.   In certain  cases,  it  might  be  possible  to
             obtain  information  from  the  authority  that   issued   the
             passport.  If such information cannot be obtained,  or  cannot
             be obtained within reasonable time, the examiner will have  to
             decide on the credibility  of  the  applicant's  assertion  in
             weighing all other elements of his story."



13. Of course the target of these observations is a passport that genuinely
    has been issued by the named State to the person named in it, and  that
    is why, all over the world and particularly at  international  borders,
    such attention has to be  given  to  the  detection  of  forgeries  and
    alterations in passports.  A document detected as  deceptive  will  not
    have the effect of a genuine passport.  But the converse is also  true:
    a document not detected as a forgery does have that effect, both at the
    diplomatic level and in the way its holder is perceived  in  a  country
    that is not his country of nationality.



14. In the present case, nobody except the appellant and those speaking  on
    his behalf  say  that  there  is  anything  wrong  with  his  Tanzanian
    passport.  It has survived scrutiny on many occasions.  The  appellant,
    who says it is not genuine, has no expert evidence in support  of  that
    claim, and is not entitled to be regarded as generally  credible.   His
    argument that he cannot, by Tanzanian law, be of Tanzanian  nationality
    is unsupported by any evidence; and in any event would also  depend  on
    believing him about his actions and activities over the whole of a very
    long period, which there is no good reason to do: as  the  judge  said,
    his account is fabricated.



15. There is no reason to think the appellant's  passport  is  not  exactly
    what it appears to be.  It is clear evidence that the  appellant  is  a
    national of Tanzania, and it is evidence  at  such  a  level  that  the
    Secretary of State is not entitled to treat the appellant as not  being
    a national of Tanzania.  It follows that he falls to be  treated  as  a
    national of Tanzania for the purposes of his asylum claim.



16. He has no well-founded fear of persecution in Tanzania.  He claims that
    he will be subject to prosecution there for passport offences, but that
    would not in any event be  a  fear  of  persecution  as  his  claim  in
    relation to his passports is that he obtained them simply in  order  to
    benefit from the possibility of illegally obtaining work in Kenya.  Any
    punishment would be for that,  and  would  not  be  persecution  for  a
    "Convention reason".  But, in any event, for the reasons  given  above,
    there is no proper basis for saying that he would  be  subject  to  any
    process in relation to his passport, because  there  is  no  reason  to
    suppose that  there  is  anything  wrong  with  his  use  of  Tanzanian
    passports.



17. The judge reached unchallenged views on  the  appellant's  credibility;
    his view that the appellant was a Tanzanian national is one that he was
    bound to reach on the evidence before him.  Any error he may have  made
    in reaching that view was accordingly wholly immaterial.  I dismiss the
    appellant's appeal against his decision.



18. The applicant is, as I  have  said,  the  appellant's  son.   He  is  a
    national of Kenya: he may also have other nationalities.  His claim  to
    be at risk of persecution in his country of nationality  is  no  longer
    maintained.  He has claimed to have a mental  disorder,  but  as  Judge
    McAll noted, there is no medical evidence of that, except  that  he  is
    prescribed   Citalopram   and   is   receiving    counselling.      His
    representatives had adduced evidence that he would experience "lack  of
    care" in Somalia, but as  he  is  a  national  of  Kenya,  and  as  the
    respondent proposes his removal to Kenya, that  is  wholly  irrelevant,
    even if true.  The judge dismissed his appeal  on  article  8  grounds,
    writing as follows:




             "77.  The Respondent submits that Appendix FM does  not  apply
             to QA as he is an adult child and there is no  clear  evidence
             of dependency above and beyond the normal feelings  and  bonds
             that an adult child has with their parents.  Whilst  I  accept
             that QA has never lived a life independent of his parents  and
             siblings I do not accept his claim that he is  dependent  upon
             them.  He is of an age that he is able to find and  hold  down
             employment and there are no medical reasons or  other  reasons
             to prevent him from doing that.  QA is a citizen of Kenya  and
             he is not at risk upon return back there  and  he  can  safely
             return back there where he has spent his entire life and where
             he has family,  social  and  cultural  ties.   QA  claims  his
             grandmother is seriously ill and lives in Mombasa and  she  is
             unable to support  him.   There  is  no  medical  evidence  to
             support that claim and there is no explanation as to  how  his
             seriously ill grandmother was abandoned by the family in  2018
             leaving her alone and with no form of support.   I  find  QA's
             account does not ring true.  There is also nothing to  prevent
             his mother and siblings from returning with him if the  family
             wish to retain the links that they enjoyed before they came to
             the UK.






             78.  In terms of QA's claim to have established a private life
             it is  argued  by  the  Respondent  that  there  are  no  very
             significant obstacles  to  QA  returning  back  to  Kenya  and
             integrating back into the community there  and  so  he  cannot
             meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE  (1)(vi)  and  given
             his age and the limited time he has been in the UK none of the
             remaining requirements under the Immigration Rules can be met.
              Given my findings of fact above I accept that submission  and
             find QA does not meet the requirements of 276ADE.






             79.  Paragraph 334 of the Immigration Rules  states  that  the
             applicant will be granted asylum if  the  provisions  of  that
             paragraph apply.   The burden of proof rests on the  Appellant
             to show that he or she falls within the definition of  refugee
             in  Regulation  2  of  The  Refugee  or  Person  in  Need   of
             International  Protection  (Qualification)  Regulations   2006
             ("the Regulations 2006") as  read  with  1(A)  of  the  Geneva
             Convention.  In essence this defines a refugee as someone who,
             owing to a well-founded fear of being persecuted  for  reasons
             of race, religion, nationality,  membership  of  a  particular
             social group, or political opinion, is outside the country  of
             his nationality and is unable  or,  owing  to  such  fear,  is
             unwilling to avail himself of the protection of that  country;
             or who, not having a nationality and being outside the country
             of his former habitual residence as a result of such events is
             unable or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to return  to  it.
             Ill-treatment does not cross the threshold  of  severity  into
             persecution,  even  taken  cumulatively,  unless   there   are
             particularly strong and credible elements.   What  constitutes
             the act of persecution itself is defined at  Regulation  5  of
             the Regulations 2006.






             ...






             90.  ...  From the evidence before me I find  no  evidence  of
             dependency above and beyond the normal levels of dependency an
             adult son aged 19 years old who has never lived  independently
             outside of the family home.  I am satisfied that QA is capable
             of living independently should he wish to do so and that is  a
             matter for him.  If QA does not wish to take that step at this
             time he does have support from his family and there is nothing
             to prevent his mother and siblings joining him in Kenya and as
             his father has shown since 1999 he can apply for work  permits
             that would also allow him to live  in  Kenya.   The  Appellant
             also has an option of applying for Kenyan  nationality  if  he
             wishes and joining  him  by  that  route.   QA  also  has  his
             grandmother  with  whom  he  could  live.   I  find  that  the
             Respondent is not interfering with QA's family life he is just
             not allowing him to enjoy it in the UK when  there  are  other
             alternatives available to him which are proportionate and that
             the family can and should take up.






             91.  Given QA's age and the time he has been in the UK and the
             fact I have found  he  faces  no  very  significant  obstacles
             returning to Kenya and integrating back into society  there  I
             am  satisfied  he  does  not  meet  the  requirements  of  the
             Immigration Rules and that weighs in the balance  against  him
             when considering the proportionality test under Article 8.






             92.  I have also considered whether QA's  removal  is  in  the
             public interest (Section  117B  NIAA  2002).   QA  does  speak
             English, he is well educated and if allowed to remain  in  the
             UK I am satisfied that he would seek to extend that  education
             and eventually find  gainful  employment.    His  initial  and
             short-term presence in the UK would therefore be a  burden  on
             the UK tax-payers.  QA entered the UK with  no  intentions  of
             leaving and he has lied on his visa application, QA  has  also
             fabricated  an  asylum  claim.   I  must  remind  myself  that
             effective immigration controls are  in  the  public  interest.
             Taking all the evidence in the round  I  find  it  is  in  the
             public interest for QA to be removed."






19. The grounds supporting the application for permission to appeal run  to
    12 pages.  They are under the following heads: "1.   Error  in  finding
    that the Appellant is not dependent on his parents. 2. Error in  giving
    inadequate reasons why the Appellant is not dependent on  his  parents.
    3.  Error in failing to take into account relevant  considerations  [in
    assessing whether the Applicant is dependent on his parents].  4. Error
    in taking into account irrelevant considerations [in finding  that  the
    Applicant is not dependent on his parents]. 5.   Error  in  failing  to
    properly and adequately carry  out  a  proportionality  exercise  under
    Article 8(1) ECHR [sic]."  Before me, Mr Clarke was prepared to  accept
    that  the  evidence  before  the  judge  was  sufficient  to  establish
    dependence, and that to that extent the judge was in error.



20. The error, however, was purely technical.  The question is not  whether
    the applicant falls into one  or  another  category,  but  whether  his
    removal would be proportionate - an exercise that has to  be  conducted
    with regard to  paragraph  2  of  Article  8,  not  paragraph  1.   The
    applicant's father's claim  has  failed.   The  other  members  of  the
    applicant's family make claims that are entirely dependent on those  of
    the appellant.  None of them have any right to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  If they are removed  to  different  countries  (Tanzania  and
    Kenya) there is no reason to suppose that they will not readily be able
    to live together if they choose to do so: the appellant's story is that
    his Tanzanian passport enables him to live and work in Kenya.   If  the
    applicant is to maintain his dependence on his parents, he can no doubt
    live with them.



21. There is nothing in the evidence supporting  the  applicant's  case  to
    suggest that, it would be  disproportionate  to  remove  him  from  the
    United Kingdom.  If he leaves with his parents, family  life  would  be
    subject to only slight interference, entirely consonant with  the  need
    to maintain immigration  control.   In  those  circumstances  the  only
    substance to his claim against removal would be something tying him  to
    the United Kingdom, and  on  the  evidence  there  is  nothing  of  any
    substance at all.  Even if for some reason his parents are not removed,
    there is  still  nothing  making  it  disproportionate  to  remove  the
    applicant.  He is in good health and there is no reason to  suppose  he
    cannot look after himself.  He is  over  18,  and  although  he  is  at
    present dependent on his parents there is no basis for saying  that  he
    needs to be. He is educated; he is accustomed to life in  Kenya,  where
    he lived for many years.  On the evidence, there is  not  the  remotest
    prospect of his establishing that despite not meeting the  requirements
    of the Immigration Rules he is nevertheless a person who should not  be
    expected to return to the country of his nationality.






22. I grant permission to appeal solely because of the stance taken  by  Mr
    Clarke.  I dismiss the appeal because I am not persuaded that there was
    any real error by the judge in looking at  matters  of  substance.   If
    there was an error by the judge, it was wholly immaterial.



23. The judge made an order anonymising the Appellant  and  the  Applicant.
    There does not appear to have been any reason for that other than  that
    these were protection appeals.  Both are adults and there is no  reason
    why the ordinary principles of open justice should not apply  to  them;
    and no facts now capable of contest could merit continuing  the  order.
    I direct that their names may be  published  in  conjunction  with  any
    report of these proceedings.



24. For the reasons I have given, both appeals are dismissed.














                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                          Date: 17 July 2020
