
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

NM (Art 15(b): intention requirement) Iraq [2021] UKUT 00259 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard remotely from Field House      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 July 2021                      |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER
                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     nm
                         (anonymity directioN MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, an anonymity order is made. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a  Court
    directs otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
    publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant
    or members of his family. This direction applies  to,  amongst  others,
    all parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise
    to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms N Wilkins, Counsel, instructed by Barnes Harrild
                    and Dyer Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr J Holborn, Counsel, instructed by the Government
                    Legal Department

    1. In order for an applicant, who relies upon medical grounds,  to  meet
       the requirements for humanitarian protection under Article  15(b)  of
       the  Qualification  Directive  ("QD")  s/he  must  demonstrate   that
       substantial grounds exist for believing there to be a  real  risk  of
       serious harm by virtue of actors of harm (as defined by Article 6 QD)
       intentionally depriving that individual of appropriate health care in
       that country.


    2. To establish the intentionality requirement the individual will  have
       to show by evidence a sufficiently strong  causal  link  between  the
       conduct of a relevant actor  and  the  deprivation  of  health  care.
       Reliance on a degradation of health care infrastructure/provision  on
       the basis of the generalised economic and/or security consequences of
       an armed conflict in the country of  origin  will  not,  in  general,
       suffice.


    3. By contrast, Article 3 ECHR cases based on  medical  grounds  do  not
       require intentionality on the part of a third party.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This appeal concerns  three  principal  issues,  all  relating  to  the
    Council Directive 2004/83/EC of 29 April 2004 on minimum standards  for
    the qualification and  status  of  third  country  nationals  stateless
    persons as refugees or as  persons  who  otherwise  need  international
    protection and the content of the protection granted, better  known  as
    the Qualification Directive ("QD"). The issues are:

          a) the status of the  QD  and  its  jurisprudence  following  the
             United Kingdom's departure from the European Union and whether
             the Upper Tribunal has jurisdiction to  consider  it  in  this
             appeal;

          b) whether the appellant is entitled to  humanitarian  protection
             on the basis of Article 15(b) QD ("Article 15(b)");

          c) whether the appellant is entitled to  humanitarian  protection
             on the basis of Article 15(c) QD ("Article 15(c)").

 2. A protection claim based on the Refugee Convention has been  determined
    against the appellant and this is no longer a live issue. Further,  the
    respondent has conceded that the appellant's removal  from  the  United
    Kingdom would violate Article 3  ECHR  ("Article  3"),  a  position  in
    respect of which further details  will  be  provided,  below.  We  will
    address these matters briefly at the end of our decision.

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq, born in  1994.  He  is  of  Kurdish
    ethnicity, a Sunni Muslim, and originates from  Kirkuk  city.  He  left
    Iraq in 2015 and arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  February  2016,
    claiming asylum on the day of entry.  This  claim  was  refused  and  a
    subsequent appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was dismissed in  November
    of that year. An onward appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  unsuccessful.
    Further submissions were made to the respondent in October 2019.  These
    were based largely on the fact that the appellant  was  then  suffering
    from kidney failure, was in receipt of regular dialysis,  and,  it  was
    claimed, that a return to Iraq would violate  Article  3.  The  further
    submissions were rejected the  following  month,  but  were  deemed  to
    constitute fresh protection and human rights claims, thus attracting  a
    right of appeal.



Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The First-tier Tribunal found that the appellant was suffering from end-
    stage chronic kidney disease and was receiving  essential  dialysis,  a
    cessation of which could place him at risk of death within a  few  days
    or weeks. Whilst it was found that an uncle could assist the  appellant
    with access to his original CSID or a replacement, which in turn  would
    permit travel to Kirkuk and  the  obtaining  of  a  biometric  document
    (INID), the judge concluded that there would be insufficient  means  by
    which the appellant could access appropriate medical  treatment  either
    in Kirkuk or Baghdad. In addition, as an attempted  relocation  to  the
    IKR would not be viable on this basis, the judge went on to  allow  the
    appellant's appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds ("Article 8"). He  reached
    no conclusion on Article  3  and  expressly  dismissed  the  appeal  on
    Refugee Convention and humanitarian protection grounds.



Procedural history in the Upper Tribunal

 5. The First-tier Tribunal's decision was challenged on the basis that the
    judge had failed to consider Article 3 at all and that  his  assessment
    of Article 15(c) was flawed. Permission to appeal was  granted  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal. Following this, the respondent provided a rule  24
    response in which it was conceded that the judge had erred  by  failing
    to consider Article 3, albeit that there was no  error  in  respect  of
    Article 15(c).

 6. The respondent subsequently implemented the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal as it related to  Article  8  and  granted  the  appellant  30
    months' discretionary leave to remain on 28 August 2020.

 7. When the appeal came before Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer on 17 November
    2020, the respondent maintained the position set out  in  her  rule  24
    response and  additionally  accepted  that  the  judge's  treatment  of
    Article 15(c) was erroneous. By her decision promulgated on 23 November
    2020, Judge Plimmer concurred with the parties'  agreed  position,  set
    the judge's  decision  aside,  preserved  the  core  findings  of  fact
    summarised above, and issued directions.

 8. At a case management review hearing 17  December  2020,  Judge  Plimmer
    extended time for the appellant  to  provide  a  notice  under  section
    104(4B) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, as amended
    ("NIAA  2002"),   with   the   effect   that   the   appeal   continued
    notwithstanding  the  grant  of  discretionary  leave.  An  attempt  to
    resurrect a claim based on the Refugee  Convention  was  rejected.  The
    live issues were therefore limited to Article 3 and Article 15(c).

 9. In compliance with further directions, the  parties  provided  position
    statements, in which  the  respondent  conceded  that  the  appellant's
    appeal should be allowed on Article  3  grounds  on  the  basis  of  an
    inaccessibility to vital medical treatment. In response, the  appellant
    confirmed that he relied not only on Article 3 and Article  15(c),  but
    also Article 15(b).

10. Following a further case management hearing  on  4  March  2021,  Judge
    Plimmer confirmed that Article 15(b) was a live issue in the appeal and
    there has been no objection to this from the respondent.

11. In compliance with directions, an agreed consolidated bundle was  filed
    with the Upper Tribunal, together with skeleton arguments and  a  brief
    reply from the appellant.

12. At the hearing, no live  evidence  was  called  and  instead  we  heard
    submissions from Ms Wilkins and Mr Holborn. We are grateful to  Counsel
    for their concise written and oral arguments and  we  confirm  that  we
    have taken account of everything said, together with  the  accompanying
    relevant evidential references. We will address the  pertinent  matters
    arising from their respective submissions when dealing  with  the  core
    issues, below.



The first issue: jurisdiction

13. The first issue  which  arises  is  whether  we  have  jurisdiction  to
    consider the body of EU law which  underpins  humanitarian  protection,
    specifically Articles 15(b) and (c),  following  the  United  Kingdom's
    exit from the European Union. On this,  both  parties  are  agreed.  Ms
    Wilkins submitted that the route to jurisdiction  lies  either  through
    the implementation of the QD into domestic law through The  Refugee  or
    Person in Need of International Protection (Qualification)  Regulations
    2006 ("the 2006 Regulations"), or because the  QD  has  direct  effect,
    relying specifically  on  sections  2  and  3  of  the  European  Union
    (Withdrawal) Act 2018. Mr Holborn has put the respondent's position  in
    short form, submitting simply that the QD continues to have  effect  by
    virtue of section 4(2)(b) of the 2018 Act. We note that  this  was  the
    same position seemingly adopted before, and accepted by, the  Court  of
    Appeal in G v G [2020] EWCA Civ 1185, at paragraph 50, and  again  when
    that case went up to the Supreme Court ([2021] UKSC  9;  [2021]  2  WLR
    705, at paragraph 84). Neither the Court  of  Appeal  nor  the  Supreme
    Court deemed it necessary to examine the precise legislative basis  for
    the conclusion that the relevant EU law was retained and applicable.

14. Jurisdiction is of course a matter for the Upper Tribunal to  determine
    for itself, whether or not the parties are in  agreement.  Having  said
    that, we do take the parties' position  into  account,  as  we  do  the
    willingness of the Court of Appeal and the Supreme Court in G  v  G  to
    accept that the relevant EU law is retained. Soon after the hearing  in
    the present appeal,  the  decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Ainte
    (material deprivation - Art 3 - AM (Zimbabwe) [2021] UKUT  00203  (IAC)
    was promulgated. There too, the parties collectively submitted that the
    QD has the status of retained EU law. The Tribunal noted what was  said
    in G v G and was content to proceed on the basis that the QD  continues
    to have direct effect (see paragraph 65).

15. In all the circumstances, we respectfully  agree  with  the  conclusion
    reached in Ainte, although we do so without having conducted a detailed
    examination of the precise legal basis on which the retained status  is
    said to be founded.



The second issue: Article 15(c)

16. Whilst Article 15(c) obviously follows after Article 15(b), we  address
    it here as it reflects the order in which the parties put forward their
    respective cases.

17. Article 15(c) provides as follows:

         "Serious harm consists of:

         ...

         (c) serious and individual threat to a civilian's life or person by
         reason of indiscriminate violence in situations of international or
         internal armed conflict."

18. The  QD  was  partially  transposed  into  domestic  law  through  2006
    Regulations. By regulation 2, "serious harm" is defined by reference to
    the Immigration Rules, paragraph 339CA of  which  precisely  replicates
    the wording of Article 15(c).

19. There is no dispute between the parties as to the general  approach  we
    should adopt when assessing whether the appellant can succeed by virtue
    of Article 15(c). Having regard to relevant authorities including,  but
    not limited to Elgafaji [2009] EUECJ C- 465/07; [2009] Imm AR  477,  QD
    (Iraq) [2009] EWCA Civ 620; [2010] Imm AR 132, and the other cases  and
    discussion set out by the Upper Tribunal in  SMO,  KSP  &  IM  (Article
    15(c); identity documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT 400 (IAC), at paragraphs
    203-207. Put shortly, we direct ourselves as follows:

          a) It is for the appellant to show  that  there  are  substantial
             grounds for believing that  he  would  face  a  real  risk  of
             serious harm, as defined in Article 15(c);

          b) The  appellant  does  not  have  to  show  that  he  would  be
             specifically targeted by reason of factors particular  to  his
             personal characteristics;

          c) However, personal characteristics are relevant to the question
             of whether the appellant can meet the risk  threshold,  having
             regard to the "sliding  scale"  applicable  in  Article  15(c)
             cases and the country information;

          d) Personal characteristics should be considered individually and
             cumulatively;

          e) It follows  that  the  assessment  of  risk  is  highly  fact-
             specific.

20. In the context of  the  present  case,  SMO  clearly  holds  particular
    relevance, dealing as it does with Articles 15(c) and (b)  against  the
    country information. Although SMO was eventually remitted by the  Court
    of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal by consent on a discrete issue, neither
    party suggested that we ought not to take account of the  analysis  and
    conclusions relevant to the issues before us. In our view, that must be
    right. The basis of the remittal was very narrow, relating only to  the
    issue of identity documentation. In this appeal, there is  a  preserved
    finding that the appellant could obtain his CSID (or, if  necessary,  a
    biometric identity document). Further, neither party  argued  that  the
    relevant analysis  and  conclusions  on  the  wider  issues  should  be
    departed from. Ms Wilkins accepted that the updated country information
    before us (the most recent of which is dated May  2021)  only  went  to
    show that the situation on the ground had not materially improved since
    SMO.

21. Before turning to the  examination  of  the  particular  facts  of  the
    appellant's case, we set out the relevant passages from  SMO,  as  they
    bear on the Article 15(c) issue in the appellant's home area of  Kirkuk
    (although we emphasise that we have taken account of all references  to
    SMO set out in Ms Wilkins' skeleton argument). The  general  conclusion
    on the Kirkuk Governorate is set out at  paragraph  257,  the  relevant
    part of which states:

         "We take account of indirect forms of violence, as required by  HM2
         and as described above but we do not consider  that  the  level  of
         risk to an ordinary civilian purely on account of his  presence  in
         Kirkuk, or any part of it, is such as to cross  the  Article  15(c)
         threshold.  The existence  and  actions  of  permanently  operating
         attacks cells, the coercion brought to  bear  on  sections  of  the
         rural population by ISIL and the other forms of  indirect  violence
         from ISIL and other  groups  (including  the  PMU)  are  not  at  a
         sufficiently high level to cross that threshold when considered  as
         a whole."

22. At paragraph 285, the Tribunal concluded that:

         "With one exception, however, we do not consider that the  risk  to
         an ordinary civilian, even in parts of those territories  in  which
         ISIL exerts a degree of physical and psychological control over the
         population, is such as to engage Article 15(c) in the generality of
         cases.   The  evidence   clearly   shows   that   the   degree   of
         indiscriminate violence characterising the current  armed  conflict
         taking place in Baghdad, Diyala, Kirkuk, Ninewah, Salah Al-Din  and
         Anbar is not at such a high level  that  substantial  grounds  have
         been shown for believing that any  civilian  returned  there  would
         solely on account of his presence there  face  a  real  risk  of  a
         threat to his life or person."

23. In applying the "sliding scale" approach, the Tribunal analysed a large
    number of specific personal characteristics  which  might  enhance  the
    risk to an individual and, at paragraphs 313 and 314,  condensed  these
    down to eight:

              i. An actual or perceived association with ISIL;

             ii.  Current  personal  association  with  local  or   national
                 government or the security apparatus;

            iii. Opposition to or criticism of the GOI,  the  KRG  or  local
                 security actors;

             iv. Membership of a national, ethnic or religious  group  which
                 is either in the minority in the area in question,  or  not
                 in de facto control of that area;

              v. LGBTI individuals, those not conforming  to  Islamic  mores
                 and wealthy or Westernised individuals;

             vi. Humanitarian or medical staff  and  those  associated  with
                 Western organisations or security forces;

            vii. Women and children without genuine family support;

           viii. Individuals with disabilities.

24. On the basis of SMO and the current country information, in  particular
    the EASO "Common analysis and guidance note" of January  2021,  we  are
    prepared to accept that the Kirkuk Governorate remains one of the  very
    few areas in Iraq where, whilst not reaching such a high  level  as  to
    permit all civilians to succeed  under  Article  15(c),  indiscriminate
    violence is at a high level and that a correspondingly lower  level  of
    individual elements is required to make out a  claim  for  humanitarian
    protection. It is in this context that we assess  the  significance  of
    relevant personal characteristics in the appellant's case.

25. Ms Wilkins relied on three personal characteristics  of  the  appellant
    which, in her submission, permit the appellant  to  meet  the  relevant
    threshold: (a) his Kurdish ethnicity; (b) his Sunni faith; and (c)  his
    disability. We will consider each of these in some detail  shortly.  It
    is worth noting here, however, that the appellant does not hold the two
    personal characteristics deemed by the Tribunal  to  be  of  particular
    importance, namely an actual or perceived association with ISIL,  or  a
    personal association with local or national government or the  security
    apparatus. Indeed, the appellant has no political profile of any  sort,
    actual or perceived.

26. The appellant is undoubtedly  a  member  of  an  ethnic  and  religious
    minority in his home area and there is no question of him being able or
    expected to conceal this from enquirers. Thus, in general terms, two of
    the relevant personal characteristics apply. However, on the  basis  of
    the  considerations  set  out  below,  we  have  concluded  that  these
    characteristics are not,  when  assessed  individually,  sufficient  to
    disclose a risk under Article 15(c).

27. First, as  is  made  clear  at  paragraph  300  of  SMO,  there  is  no
    presumption that members of an ethnic and/or religious minority are  at
    an enhanced risk in  any  given  area.  A  "contextual  evaluation"  is
    required.

28. Second, in our judgment the appellant's  Kurdish  ethnicity  and  Sunni
    faith are, in the context of Kirkuk, effectively  interlinked:  members
    of the Kurdish population are almost exclusively  Sunni  (by  contrast,
    the Fayli Kurds, who now predominantly reside in Baghdad, are Shia) and
    it is somewhat artificial to disassociate the two and assess  potential
    risks connected to ethnicity and religion entirely independently.

29. Third, whilst in no way decisive, we note that Sunni Kurds are not  one
    of the religious and/or ethnic minorities which feature in the specific
    risk profiles set out in section 2.15 of the January 2021 EASO  country
    guidance note. A reasonable inference can be drawn from this that Sunni
    Kurds are not regarded as one of the most vulnerable minority groups.

30. Fourth, Kirkuk has a sizeable Kurdish Sunni  minority  population.  The
    EASO country guidance  note  describes  the  Governorate  as  having  a
    "diverse  and  mixed  population",  with  Sunni   Muslims   being   the
    "predominant religious group".

31. Fifth, significant emphasis was placed on the existence of  checkpoints
    in or around the Kirkuk metropolitan area and operated by the Shia PMU.
    It is said that these pinch-points would  present  the  appellant  with
    real difficulties arising from his ethnicity, religion, and disability.
    We consider the last of these in more detail, below. In  terms  of  the
    first two characteristics, we accept there to be a risk, albeit in  our
    judgment a relatively low one, of the appellant being repeatedly  asked
    questions on identity, his reasons for a particular journey,  or  being
    the subject of a "shakedown" (a term which we take to mean  the  casual
    extraction of cash) whilst at the checkpoint if  his  journey  requires
    him to pass through one (or more). There is a consequent possibility of
    any delay in the progression of the journey  to  the  hospital  in  the
    centre of the city, which in turn might have an effect on the  efficacy
    of the dialysis. We also take account of the fact, as we understand  it
    to be, that the appellant would be required to attend dialysis  at  the
    hospital three times a week. That would necessitate  regular  journeys,
    perhaps of a greater  frequency  than  applicable  to  other  civilians
    without his medical condition.

32. However, there are  countervailing  considerations  which,  when  taken
    cumulatively,  go  to  materially  reduce  the  risk  of  problems   at
    checkpoints. The appellant will be documented and  will,  we  find,  be
    able to state a compelling reason for making the  journey  (namely,  to
    attend essential medical  treatment).  He  has  no  connection  to  any
    political or other group, and any  imputation  of  such  a  connection,
    given his background and circumstances, is not reasonably likely. It is
    significant that there is an absence  of  specific  evidence  from  the
    appellant to show whether in fact he would have  to  pass  through  any
    checkpoints between his  home  district  within  Kirkuk  city  and  the
    hospital. Indeed, we were not taken to any evidence as to where in  the
    city the home district actually  is.  Assuming  there  are  checkpoints
    within the urban area, Ms Wilkins was only able to speculate  that  the
    appellant might have to pass through at least one on  the  way  to  and
    from the hospital.  We find it surprising that no meaningful effort was
    made to explain or demonstrate to us the  likely  route  the  appellant
    would have to take.  As Mr Holborn submitted, this left a  gap  in  the
    evidence to support Ms Wilkins' claim that the appellant would have  to
    travel through checkpoints.  In any event, assuming that  a  checkpoint
    would be on the relevant route, we do not  consider  that  in  all  the
    circumstances of this case it would cause this appellant  any  material
    hardship or delay. We do not regard the fact of the appellant's absence
    from Iraq  for  a  relatively  significant  period  as  constituting  a
    particular trigger for delay. There is no evidence that he is obviously
    "Westernised" or that he has otherwise rejected or  is  now  unable  to
    generally conform to social/cultural norms.

33. Fourth, in respect of any checkpoints on the route between Baghdad  and
    Kirkuk city, we bear in mind the points made in the preceding paragraph
    and also take account of the preserved  finding  that  the  appellant's
    uncle would be able to provide at least a degree of assistance  to  him
    on return. We find that whilst the  assistance  would  be  unlikely  to
    constitute 24-hour a day care, it would encompass support at  least  on
    the initial journey.

34. Fifth, we do not accept that any process of "Arabisation" is such  that
    it creates an enhanced risk to all Sunni  Kurds  or  the  appellant  in
    particular.

35. We now turn  to  the  appellant's  disability.  Paragraph  312  of  SMO
    confirms  that  the  inclusion  of  the  category   of   persons   with
    disabilities was  premised  on  the  then-current  EASO  report,  which
    recorded that, in the Tribunal's words, "there is sadly discrimination,
    inadequate provision of healthcare  and  a  higher  risk  of  violence,
    particularly against those  with  mental  illness."  The  January  2021
    country guidance note contains a section on those with disabilities  to
    similar effect. Relevant passages include:

         "Adults and children with disabilities are  at  a  higher  risk  of
         violence than non-disabled, and those with mental illness could  be
         particularly vulnerable.

         ...

         In  the  case  of  persons  living   with   mental   and   physical
         disabilities,   the   individual   assessment   whether   or    not
         discrimination and mistreatment by society  and/or  by  the  family
         could amount to persecution should take into account  the  severity
         and/or repetitiveness of the acts  or  whether  they  occur  as  an
         accumulation of various measures.

         Not all individuals under this profile would face the level of risk
         required to establish  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution.  The
         individual assessment of whether  or  not  there  is  a  reasonable
         degree of likelihood for the applicant to face  persecution  should
         take into  account  risk-impacting  circumstances,  such  as:  age,
         nature  and  visibility  of  the  mental  or  physical  disability,
         negative perception by the family, etc."

36. It is common ground that the appellant is very unwell in  this  country
    and that this would apply on return to Iraq. We are bound to  say  that
    we agree with Mr Holborn's submission that there is a  lack  of  up  to
    date  evidence,  medical  or  otherwise,  on  the  issue  of  how   the
    appellant's illness might manifest itself on  a  day-to-day  basis,  in
    particular if or when he had to pass  through  a  checkpoint.  For  the
    avoidance of any doubt, we remind ourselves of the  specific  direction
    issued by Judge Plimmer on 4 March 2021 for the appellant to  file  and
    serve a consolidated bundle "containing only the evidence  relevant  to
    resolve the  remaining  issue  in  dispute"  (that  being  whether  the
    appellant was entitled to humanitarian  protection  with  reference  to
    Articles 15(b) and (c)). In answer to the Tribunal's enquiry as to  why
    there was an absence of such evidence, Ms  Wilkins  sought  to  suggest
    that the directions limited the evidence that could be  adduced.    The
    absence of relevant medical evidence is in no way attributable  to  the
    Tribunal's directions, and it was entirely a matter for  the  appellant
    and his representatives to adduce evidence in support of his case under
    Article 15(c).

37. There is no expert evidence to demonstrate  that  the  appellant  would
    present as a person with mental illness (we do not seek to suggest that
    people suffering from particular  conditions  would  always  act  in  a
    certain way: our approach is simply to  assess  how,  for  example,  an
    uninformed member of a PMU militia manning a checkpoint might  perceive
    the appellant).  We  note  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  found  that
    patients who stopped dialysis would present with  symptoms  of  nausea,
    vomiting, and impaired consciousness. This finding is predicated on the
    relevant medical treatment having ceased. In the present case,  we  are
    proceeding from the premise  that  the  appellant  would  be  receiving
    dialysis. In any event, in our judgment such symptoms are  unlikely  to
    be interpreted as significant mental illness so as to attract  societal
    stigmatisation. Indeed, there is a strong argument to suggest that  the
    appellant's predicament would be perceived for what  it  is,  namely  a
    significant physical  health  condition  requiring  essential,  regular
    medical treatment at the general hospital.

38. We do not regard the appellant's age as having any material bearing  on
    an enhanced risk. Nor would there be any animosity emanating  from  his
    family. To an  extent,  the  opposite  is  true:  the  uncle  would  be
    supportive. We accept that the appellant's condition will be visible to
    the extent that he will look  unwell.  Whilst  not  wishing  to  unduly
    speculate  (noting  that  the  EASO  evidence  provides   no   in-depth
    analysis), we would observe that on the evidence  before  us  there  is
    nothing  to  indicate  that  the  appellant   would   look   physically
    disfigured, nor is he an amputee. It may be that either of these  could
    give rise to adverse attention on the basis of unjustified prejudice.

39. One particular matter relied on by Ms Wilkins in respect of checkpoints
    is the ability or otherwise of the appellant  to  escape  if  one  were
    attacked by ISIL. SMO and the current country information do show  that
    the remnants  of  that  organisation  continue  to  launch  attacks  on
    military/police targets and  checkpoints  in  various  parts  of  Iraq,
    including the Kirkuk Governorate, although  there  are  only  very  few
    references to such  attacks  having  taken  place  within  Kirkuk  city
    itself. Notwithstanding this, we accept that there is a  risk  of  such
    attacks and/or IED devices being deployed in the  urban  area.  On  the
    evidence before us, though, we find that that the appellant has  failed
    to show that there are substantial grounds that he would  face  a  real
    risk (as opposed to simply a risk) of a serious and  individual  threat
    to his life or person by  reason  of  indiscriminate  violence  in  the
    context of his presence at checkpoints or  during  the  course  of  his
    thrice-weekly journeys to and from the hospital.

40. Further, whilst we are prepared to accept that the appellant's mobility
    will be more restricted than that of an individual without his illness,
    there is no medical evidence to  indicate  that  he  would  be  unable,
    whether alone or with practical support, to walk or be driven away from
    a specific location  if  necessary.  Without  wishing  to  put  it  too
    bluntly, it would be very difficult for any  civilian,  able-bodied  or
    not, to extract themselves from the epicentre of  an  explosion  or  an
    ambush launched against a checkpoint.

41. Taking all of the above into account, we conclude that the  appellant's
    disability would not of itself give rise to an enhanced risk such  that
    he could bring himself within Article 15(c).

42.  Thus  far  we  have   considered   the   three   particular   personal
    characteristics on an individual basis and have concluded that none  of
    them is sufficient for the appellant to succeed. We  now  consider  the
    same characteristics on a cumulative  basis  and  against  the  general
    backdrop indicated by  SMO  and  the  current  country  information  of
    continuing instability in the Kirkuk  region,  including  a  degree  of
    sectarian animosity and ISIL activity.

43. Ultimately, we conclude that even combining  his  ethnicity,  religion,
    and disability, and applying  a  lower  level  of  individual  elements
    necessary to meet the required threshold, the appellant has  failed  to
    show substantial grounds that he would face  a  real  risk  (again,  as
    opposed to simply a risk) of a serious and  individual  threat  to  his
    life or person by reason of indiscriminate violence. This applies  both
    to his situation in Kirkuk city and any journey  from  Baghdad  to  the
    home area. Put shortly, and on the particular facts of this  case,  the
    appellant's status as a Sunni Kurd returnee  from  the  United  Kingdom
    with end-stage kidney failure is not sufficient  to  bring  him  within
    Article 15(c).



Issue 3: Article 15(b)

44. Article 15(b) provides as follows:

         "Serious harm consists of:

         ...

         (b) torture or inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment  of  an
         applicant in the country of origin."

45. Two leading authorities of the Court of Justice of the  European  Union
    ("CJEU") were the subject of submissions before us. The first of  these
    is M'Bodj [2014] EUECJ C-542/13; [2015] Imm AR 513.  Mr  M'Bodj  was  a
    Mauritanian  national  residing  in  Belgium  who  had  sought  welfare
    benefits following the after-effects of an assault suffered in the host
    state. His application was refused, but  he  was  subsequently  granted
    indefinite leave to remain in Belgium by virtue of his  ill-health  and
    the absence of appropriate treatment in Mauritania. The reference  made
    by the Belgian Cour constitutionelle essentially sought  a  preliminary
    ruling on the question  of  whether  relevant  provisions  of  the  QD,
    including Article 15(b), required a Member State to grant a  person  in
    Mr M'Bodj's position social welfare  and  health  care  benefits  under
    domestic legislation. The CJEU began its analysis  by  stating  that  a
    grant of the benefits would be required if third country nationals such
    as Mr M'Bodj could be said to have been conferred subsidiary protection
    status. Article 15(b) is considered from paragraph 32 onwards.   It  is
    helpful to set out the relevant passages in full:

         "32      Article 15(b) of Directive 2004/83 defines serious harm as
         the torture or inhuman or degrading treatment or  punishment  of  a
         third country national in his country of origin.

         33 It is clear from that provision that it is  applicable  only  to
         the inhuman or degrading treatment of an applicant in  his  country
         of origin. It  follows  that  the  EU  legislature  envisaged  that
         subsidiary protection should be granted  only  in  those  cases  in
         which such treatment occurred in the applicant's country of origin.

         ...

         35 Accordingly, Article 6 of Directive 2004/83 sets out a  list  of
         those  deemed  responsible  for  inflicting  serious  harm,   which
         supports the view that such harm must take the form of  conduct  on
         the part of a third party and that it cannot  therefore  simply  be
         the result of general shortcomings in  the  health  system  of  the
         country of origin.

         36 Similarly, recital 26  in  the  preamble  to  Directive  2004/83
         states that risks to which the population of a country or a section
         of  the  population  is  generally  exposed  do  not  normally   in
         themselves create an  individual  threat  which  would  qualify  as
         serious harm. It follows that the  risk  of  deterioration  in  the
         health of a third country national suffering from a serious illness
         as a result of the absence of appropriate treatment in his  country
         of origin is not sufficient, unless that third country national  is
         intentionally deprived of health care, to warrant that person being
         granted subsidiary protection.

         37 That interpretation is also supported by recitals 5, 6, 9 and 24
         in the preamble to Directive 2004/83, from  which  it  is  apparent
         that, while the directive is intended to complement and add to,  by
         means  of  subsidiary  protection,  the  protection   of   refugees
         enshrined in the Convention relating to  the  Status  of  Refugees,
         signed in Geneva on 28 July 1951,  through  the  identification  of
         persons genuinely in need of international protection (see, to that
         effect, judgment in Diakit�, EU:C:2014:39, paragraph 33), its scope
         does  not  extend  to  persons  granted  leave  to  reside  in  the
         territories of the Member States for other reasons, that is,  on  a
         discretionary basis on compassionate or humanitarian grounds.

         38 The requirement to interpret Article 15(b) of Directive  2004/83
         in a manner consistent with Article 19(2) of the Charter  (see,  to
         that effect, judgment in Abed El  Karem  El  Kott  and  Others,  C-
         364/11, EU:C:2012:826, paragraph 43 and the case-law cited), to the
         effect that no person may be returned to a State in which there  is
         a serious risk that that person will be subjected  to  inhuman  and
         degrading treatment, and having due regard for  Article  3  of  the
         ECHR, to which Article 15(b), in essence, corresponds (judgment  in
         Elgafaji, EU:C:2009:94, paragraph 28), is not such as to call  that
         interpretation into question.

         39 It should be noted in that regard that, according to  the  case-
         law of the European Court of Human Rights that, while non-nationals
         subject  to  a  decision  authorising  their  removal  cannot,   in
         principle, claim any entitlement to remain in the  territory  of  a
         State in order to continue to benefit from medical, social or other
         forms of assistance and services provided by that State, a decision
         to remove a foreign national suffering from a serious  physical  or
         mental illness to a country where the facilities for the  treatment
         of the illness are inferior to those available in  that  State  may
         raise an issue under Article 3  ECHR  in  very  exceptional  cases,
         where the humanitarian grounds against removal are compelling (see,
         inter alia, European Court of Human Rights, judgment in N.  v.  the
         United Kingdom [GC], no. 26565/05, � 42, ECHR 2008).

         40 None the less, the fact that a third country national  suffering
         from a serious illness may not, under Article 3 ECHR as interpreted
         by the European Court of Human Rights, in highly exceptional cases,
         be removed to a country  in  which  appropriate  treatment  is  not
         available does not mean that that person should be granted leave to
         reside in a Member State by  way  of  subsidiary  protection  under
         Directive 2004/83.

         41 In the light  of  the  foregoing,  Article  15(b)  of  Directive
         2004/83 must be  interpreted  as  meaning  that  serious  harm,  as
         defined by the directive, does  not  cover  a  situation  in  which
         inhuman or degrading treatment, such as that  referred  to  by  the
         legislation at issue in the main proceedings, to which an applicant
         suffering from a serious illness may be subjected  if  returned  to
         his country of origin, is the result of the fact  that  appropriate
         treatment  is  not  available  in  that  country,  unless  such  an
         applicant is intentionally deprived of health care.

         ...

         44 In the light of the considerations set out at paragraphs  35  to
         37 above, it would be contrary to the general scheme and objectives
         of  Directive  2004/83  to  grant  refugee  status  and  subsidiary
         protection status to third country nationals  in  situations  which
         have no connection with the rationale of international protection.

         45 It follows that  legislation  such  as  that  at  issue  in  the
         proceedings before the referring court cannot be regarded, for  the
         purpose of Article 3 of Directive 2004/83, as  introducing  a  more
         favourable standard for determining who is eligible for  subsidiary
         protection. Third country nationals granted leave to  reside  under
         such  legislation  are  not,  therefore,  persons  with  subsidiary
         protection status to whom Articles 28 and 29 of the directive would
         be applicable.

         ...

         47 In the light of the  foregoing  considerations,  the  answer  to
         Question 1 is that Articles 28 and 29 of Directive 2004/83, read in
         conjunction with Articles 2(e), 3, 15, and 18  of  that  directive,
         are to be interpreted as not requiring a Member State to grant  the
         social welfare and health  care  benefits  provided  for  in  those
         measures to a third country national who has been granted leave  to
         reside in  the  territory  of  that  Member  State  under  national
         legislation such as that at issue in the  main  proceedings,  which
         allows a foreign national who suffers from an illness occasioning a
         real risk to his life or physical  integrity  or  a  real  risk  of
         inhuman or degrading treatment to  reside  in  that  Member  State,
         where there is no appropriate treatment in that foreign  national's
         country of origin or in the  third  country  in  which  he  resided
         previously,  unless  such  a  foreign  national  is   intentionally
         deprived of health care in that country."

46. In MP [2018] EUECJ C-353/16, a Sri  Lankan  national  residing  in  the
    United  Kingdom  had  asserted  that,  as   result   of   the   serious
    psychological after-effects of being tortured by the authorities of his
    home country in the past, he was entitled to succeed in his  claim  not
    only on Article 3 grounds (as the Upper Tribunal had found),  but  also
    in respect of humanitarian protection under the QD on  the  basis  that
    his ill-health had been caused by state actors and the absence  of  any
    risk of further  ill-treatment  by  those  actors  on  return  did  not
    preclude entitlement under Article 15(b). When the appeal  reached  the
    Supreme Court, a reference was made  to  the  CJEU  for  a  preliminary
    ruling on whether Article 15(b) covers a real risk of serious  harm  to
    the health of an individual on return to their country of origin  which
    resulted from previous ill-treatment for which the authorities of  that
    country were responsible.

47. Having noted the factual  differences  from  the  scenario  arising  in
    M'Bodj and the nature of protection afforded by  Article  3,  the  CJEU
    confirmed  that  intentionality  was  inherent  in  the  Article  15(b)
    analysis.  For  present  purposes,  the  following  passages   are   of
    particular relevance:

         "48  In those circumstances [the fact that  the  ill-treatment  had
         been at the hands of the authorities of  the  country  of  origin],
         both the cause of the current state of health of  a  third  country
         national in a situation such  as  that  in  the  main  proceedings,
         namely acts of torture inflicted by the authorities of his  country
         of origin in the past, and the fact that, if he were to be returned
         to his country of origin, his  mental  health  disorders  would  be
         substantially aggravated on account  of  the  psychological  trauma
         that he continues to suffer  as  a  result  of  that  torture,  are
         relevant factors to be taken into account when interpreting Article
         15(b) of Directive 2004/83.

         49  Nevertheless, such substantial aggravation cannot,  in  itself,
         be regarded as inhuman or degrading  treatment  inflicted  on  that
         third country national in his country of origin, within the meaning
         of Article 15(b) of that directive.

         50  In that regard, it is appropriate to examine, as  requested  in
         the order for reference, the effect that may result from a lack, in
         the country of  origin  of  the  person  concerned,  of  facilities
         offering appropriate care for the physical and mental after-effects
         resulting from the torture inflicted by  the  authorities  of  that
         country.

         51  In that respect, it should be recalled that the Court has  held
         that the serious harm referred to in  Article  15(b)  of  Directive
         2004/83 cannot simply be the result of general shortcomings in  the
         health system of the country of origin. The risk  of  deterioration
         in the health of a third country national who is suffering  from  a
         serious  illness,  as  a  result  of  there  being  no  appropriate
         treatment in his country of origin, is not sufficient, unless  that
         third country national is intentionally deprived of health care, to
         warrant that person being granted subsidiary  protection  (see,  to
         that effect,  judgment  of  18  December  2014,  M'Bodj,  C-542/13,
         EU:C:2014:2452, paragraphs 35 and 36).

         ...

         57  It is therefore for the national court  to  ascertain,  in  the
         light of  all  current  and  relevant  information,  in  particular
         reports by international organisations and  non-governmental  human
         rights organisations, whether, in the present case, MP  is  likely,
         if returned to his country of origin,  to  face  a  risk  of  being
         intentionally deprived of appropriate care  for  the  physical  and
         mental after-effects resulting from the torture he was subjected to
         by the authorities of that country. That will be  the  case,  inter
         alia, if, in circumstances where, as in  the  main  proceedings,  a
         third country national is at risk of committing suicide because  of
         the trauma resulting from the torture he was subjected  to  by  the
         authorities of his country  of  origin,  it  is  clear  that  those
         authorities, notwithstanding their obligation under Article  14  of
         the Convention against Torture, are not prepared to provide for his
         rehabilitation. There will also be such a risk if  it  is  apparent
         that the authorities of that country have adopted a  discriminatory
         policy as regards access  to  health  care,  thus  making  it  more
         difficult  for  certain  ethnic  groups  or   certain   groups   of
         individuals,  of  which  MP  forms  part,  to  obtain   access   to
         appropriate care for the physical and mental after-effects  of  the
         torture perpetrated by those authorities.

         58  It follows from the foregoing that Articles 2(e) and  15(b)  of
         Directive 2004/83, read in the light of Article 4 of  the  Charter,
         must be interpreted as meaning that a third country national who in
         the past has been tortured by the authorities  of  his  country  of
         origin and no longer faces a risk of being tortured if returned  to
         that country, but whose physical and psychological health could, if
         so returned, seriously deteriorate, leading to a  serious  risk  of
         him committing suicide on account  of  trauma  resulting  from  the
         torture he was subjected to, is eligible for subsidiary  protection
         if there is a real risk of him being intentionally deprived, in his
         country of origin, of appropriate care for the physical and  mental
         after-effects of that torture, that being a matter for the national
         court to determine."

48. The following essential points regarding Article 15(b) arise  from  the
    judgments in M'Bodj and MP:

          a) Serious harm (as defined) can  encompass  a  deterioration  in
             health as a result of the absence of appropriate treatment;

          b) The risk of  serious  harm  must  arise  in  the  individual's
             country of origin;

          c) The infliction of such harm must take the form of conduct by a
             third party (an "actor of  persecution  or  serious  harm"  as
             defined in Article 6 QD) and cannot simply be  the  result  of
             "general shortcomings in the health system of the  country  of
             origin";

          d) It follows that in order to establish the  nexus  between  the
             serious harm and the conduct of a third party, the  individual
             must  show   intentionality,   i.e.   that   they   would   be
             intentionally deprived  of  relevant  healthcare  by  a  third
             party;

          e) The intentionality requirement under Article  15(b)  has  been
             found to apply even where an individual can benefit  from  the
             protection of Article 3 on the basis  of  ill-health  and  the
             unavailability of appropriate healthcare  in  the  country  of
             origin.

49. On behalf of the appellant, Ms Wilkins accepted that there is a limited
    distinction between the protection afforded by Article 3 and that under
    Article 15(b). In our judgment, that position is correct.  On  the  one
    hand, the intentionality requirement under Article  15(b),  as  clearly
    established in  the  CJEU's  jurisprudence,  precludes  entitlement  to
    humanitarian protection under the QD in what is often referred to as  a
    "pure medical claim". Whether the  illness  in  question  is  naturally
    occurring or a consequence of the conduct of a third party,  where  the
    deterioration  in  health  as  a  result  of  the   unavailability   of
    appropriate  care  in  the  country  of  origin  is  due  to   "general
    shortcomings in the health system of the country of origin", there will
    be no causal link between the conduct of a third party and the  serious
    harm (see paragraph 35 of M'Bodj and paragraph 51 of MP).

50. On the other hand, the "pure medical  claim",  in  which  there  is  no
    question of intentionality and is  therefore  not  covered  by  Article
    15(b), can, in appropriate cases, fall within the scope of  Article  3,
    as confirmed in numerous well-known judgments of the European Court  of
    Human Rights including N v United Kingdom [2008] Imm AR  657  and  more
    recently in Paposhvilli v Belgium (App No 41738/10); [2017] Imm AR 876,
    and as recognised by the CJEU in M'Bodj and MP.

51.  Claims  based  on  non-intentional  material  deprivation,   or   dire
    humanitarian conditions which are "naturally occurring", can also  fall
    within the ambit of Article 3 (see SHH v United Kingdom (2013) 57  EHRR
    18 and the detailed analysis provided in Ainte (material deprivation  -
    Art 3 - AM (Zimbabwe)) [2021] UKUT 203 (IAC), at paragraphs 19-35).  In
    Ainte the Upper Tribunal concluded that the risk of  being  exposed  to
    Article 3  ill-treatment  as  the  result  of  very  poor  humanitarian
    circumstances in Somalia arose not because of the  intentional  conduct
    or omissions of the authorities, but as a result of a plague of locusts
    and the effect of  this  on  successive  harvests.  From  this  factual
    premise,  the  Tribunal  went  on  to  conclude  that  there   was   no
    jurisprudential distinction between health cases  and  those  concerned
    with non-intentional material deprivation,  and  that  the  appropriate
    threshold was now that set out in Paposhvili (supra) and AM  (Zimbabwe)
    [2020] UKSC 17; [2020] Imm AR 1167. Ultimately, it was  found  that  Mr
    Ainte would not, despite acknowledged difficulties,  be  exposed  to  a
    risk of inhuman or degrading circumstances on return to Somalia.

52. We make one observation on Ainte. At paragraphs 66 and 67, the Tribunal
    recorded the parties' agreement that if the Article 3  claim  was  made
    out, entitlement to humanitarian protection under Article  15(b)  would
    automatically follow. With respect, and recognising that the point  was
    not the subject of argument and was immaterial to the  core  issues  in
    that case, we find it difficult to  see  how  that  position  could  be
    correct. Indeed, such an approach would not accord with M'Bodj and  MP,
    which we note were not  authorities  drawn  to  the  attention  of  the
    Tribunal in Ainte. If, as  we  find  to  be  the  case,  Article  15(b)
    requires intentionality, and given that the Tribunal analysed Article 3
    on the basis of non-intentional material deprivation, success under the
    latter would not necessarily lead to success under the former.

53. The clear focus of the Tribunal in Ainte was upon  the  Strasbourg  and
    domestic authorities on Article 3. There  was  no  exploration  of  the
    authorities that distinguished Article 15(b)  from  Article  3  or  the
    authorities that suggested the requirement of  intentionality  for  the
    purposes of Article 15(b). That is not meant in any way as a  criticism
    of the Tribunal or the representatives that  appeared  before  it.  The
    distinction  we  have  highlighted  here  became  obvious  because  the
    respondent has accepted that this  appellant's  return  to  Iraq  would
    breach Article 3 but not Article 15(b), whereas in Ainte Article 3  was
    not conceded and the Tribunal's legal  enquiry  was  dominated  by  the
    question of whether Article 3  can  be  engaged  in  cases  of  extreme
    material deprivation and the appropriate threshold to apply.

54. Notwithstanding the distinction in coverage described above, there is a
    significant overlap between the protection afforded by  Article  3  and
    that under Article 15(b). Obvious examples include a risk of torture by
    state authorities or serious ill-treatment by non-state actors  against
    which  the  state  is  unable  or  unwilling  to   provide   sufficient
    protection.  In  both  scenarios  the  presence  of  intentionality  is
    immediately apparent.

55. Ms Wilkins' principal argument on Article 15(b) is that the appellant's
    case is not a "pure medical claim", but rather one which  is  based  on
    the conduct, direct or indirect, of a party or parties involved in  the
    ongoing conflict in Iraq. The  degradation  in  health  care  has  been
    caused, at least in part, by that conflict. Thus, intentionality can be
    shown. This proposition is,  she  submits,  further  supported  by  the
    respondent's concession that the Article 3 threshold has been met.

56. The first question we must decide  is  whether  Article  15(b)  can  in
    principle apply to a case concerning  an  individual  with  significant
    health  conditions  (whether  naturally  occurring  or  the  result  of
    deliberate  ill-treatment)  who  can  show  substantial   grounds   for
    believing there would face a real risk of serious harm by virtue of the
    intentional deprivation  of  healthcare  in  their  country  of  origin
    because of the effects of an ongoing conflict.

57. In our judgment, the answer to this question  must  be  "yes".  We  can
    think of no principled reason why the protective  coverage  of  Article
    15(b) should not extend to such a scenario. Provisions of the QD  must,
    like EU legislation in general, be given  an  interpretation  which  is
    purposive and ensures the effectiveness of what is set out, subject  to
    any relevant limitations. Here, significant ill-health will  constitute
    a  relevant  personal  characteristic   in   any   fact-specific   risk
    assessment. The introduction of such an individual into a conflict zone
    (even at the lower end of a spectrum of  intensity)  is  also,  in  our
    view, a factor which the protection  afforded  by  Article  15(b)  must
    contemplate.

58. Our view from first principles is supported by the case-law of the CJEU
    itself. In MP, it was said that the deprivation of health care  in  the
    country of origin could lead to success under Article  15(b),  provided
    that intentionality was established. Examples given were the refusal of
    the authorities to provide for rehabilitation (by which we take to mean
    appropriate health care) or the adoption of a health care policy  which
    was discriminatory against a  group  of  which  the  individual  was  a
    member. Whilst MP was not concerned with a country in which an  ongoing
    conflict was taking place, the point is that deprivation of health care
    could engage Article 15(b). Its engagement could not  be  precluded  or
    otherwise weakened simply by  the  addition  of  a  conflict  into  the
    equation.

59. Finally, we take account of the complementary nature of  the  ECHR  and
    the QD, as recognised in the case-law, whilst at the same time  bearing
    in mind that provisions of  EU  law  will  bear  their  own  autonomous
    meanings. Article 3 has been found to be engaged  in  situations  where
    dire humanitarian conditions existed because of  an  ongoing  conflict,
    thus establishing intentional conduct on the part of third parties (see
    Sufi and Elmi (2012) 54 EHRR 9, at paragraph  282  and  MI  (Palestine)
    [2019] EWCA Civ 1782; [2019] Imm AR 75, at paragraph 32). This  may  be
    said to lend at least some support  to  the  proposition  that  Article
    15(b) should similarly apply.

60. The second question is the key to the point  of  law  arising  in  this
    appeal, namely the meaning  of  the  intentionality  requirement  under
    Article 15(b). Ms Wilkins submits that it should be viewed broadly  and
    encompasses cases in which, to quote from her reply to the respondent's
    skeleton argument, "lack of access to healthcare is due to the  ongoing
    effects of conflict on the  security  and  economic  situation  in  the
    country, e.g. damaged hospitals, diversion of resources,  departure  of
    medical professionals, lack of livelihood opportunities/a safety  net."
    In this way, it is submitted that intentionality can be established  by
    direct or indirect conduct of third parties.

61. By contrast, Mr Holborn asserts that the appellant's case is, in truth,
    simply a  "pure  medical  claim"  and  that  the  appellant's  position
    impermissibly extends the scope of Article 15(b) to  effectively  cover
    "any country dealing with the  aftermath  of  almost  any  conflict  or
    political unrest, even if that conflict had long ceased and the "actors
    of harm" were no longer active."

62.  In  our  judgment,  the  position  contended  for  by  Ms  Wilkins  is
    unsustainable and we prefer that put forward by Mr Holborn.

63. As a starting point, the existence of the intentionality requirement at
    all  shows  that  something  more   than   the   general   impoverished
    circumstances of a country is required. The difference  must  be  given
    substance.

64. Whilst we accept that there is no authority dealing with the particular
    set of circumstances with which we are concerned (namely a  combination
    of ill-health, deprivation of health care, and ongoing  conflict),  the
    examples of intentional conduct set  out  in  MP  are,  to  an  extent,
    illuminating. Both the deprivation of health care on an  individualised
    basis  and  the  denial  of  access  to  health  care  by   virtue   of
    discriminatory  policies  aimed  at  particular  groups  indicates  the
    importance of a clearly identifiable causal link  between  conduct  and
    outcome. Beyond those examples, we conceive of others which  could,  if
    the evidence supported it,  disclose  intentionality  on  the  part  of
    relevant  actors:  the  targeting  of  hospitals  or  other  healthcare
    institutions; the prevention of medical  aid  getting  into  particular
    locations; or preventing medical professionals from working.  It  might
    also be possible to show by evidence that the  wilful  failure  by  the
    authorities to prevent non-state actors from pursuing one or  other  of
    the aforementioned practices amounted to intentional conduct.

65. All of the above  bear  a  reasonable  relationship  with  one  of  the
    definitions of "intentional" set out in the Oxford  English  Dictionary
    (3rd Edition): something "done on purpose". They do not require the ill-
    health itself to have been caused by a third party, nor do they require
    there to be a specific targeting of the individual concerned. What they
    do illustrate is the need to  imbue  intentionality  with  a  necessary
    degree of causation between the conduct of the actors and the  risk  of
    inhuman or degrading treatment consequent on the deprivation of  health
    care.

66. As we understand Ms Wilkins' submissions, the  overall  degradation  of
    health care in a country  in  which  conflict  was  ongoing  would,  of
    itself, be sufficient to make out a case under Article  15(b)  because,
    at very least, engagement in conflict necessarily has adverse  economic
    and general security consequences which in turn will have an impact  on
    the provision of such care.

67. Relying on such indirect consequences is, in our view,  stretching  the
    concept of intentionality too far. It would necessitate the importation
    of threadbare, or indeed non-existent,  causation  and  would  lead  to
    significant difficulties in the practical application of the provision.

68. It is perhaps uncontroversial to assume that an armed conflict within a
    state is likely to have implications  for  its  economy  and  security.
    However, by positing a number of questions, one can see  the  potential
    difficulties in establishing a proper causal link (i.e. intentionality)
    between the conduct of  relevant  actors  and  the  real  risk  of  the
    deprivation of health care in any given case. For example:

          a) Would conflict in only limited locales establish causation  in
             respect of the degradation of health care throughout the whole
             country, thus extending the potential  protection  of  Article
             15(b) to an entire population?

          b) If intentionality can be established by ongoing conflict,  why
             not in respect of the consequences of historical  conflict  as
             well?

          c) If the authorities have had to divert financial  resources  to
             defend the country  against  an  insurgency  in  a  particular
             region, but was making every  (albeit  inadequate)  effort  to
             maintain health care everywhere else, how can it  properly  be
             said that the actor holds any intention to deprive?

          d) A non-state actor  may  engage  in  conflict  solely  to  take
             control of a particular region, or indeed the entire  country,
             but permits all forms of medical care to continue in so far as
             is possible. Again, where lies the intention to deprive?

          e) How would decision-makers be able to disentangle  inadequacies
             in, for example, a health care  system  consequent  on  purely
             political/economic decisions from those arising as a result of
             expenditure on an ongoing conflict?

          f) What if the health care was inadequate as a result of  general
             shortcomings  before  the  conflict  in  question  began?  The
             existence of the conflict may or may not have exacerbated  the
             problems, but to impute an intention to a third party at  that
             later stage would appear artificial.

69. The overall effect of our concerns is that the appellant's position  is
    unprincipled, unworkable and tantamount to the adoption of an  approach
    under Article 15(b) which would in effect cover "pure medical  claims".
    This would be contrary to the CJEU authorities.

70. Ms Wilkins has referred us to the respondent's guidance on Humanitarian
    Protection, version 5.0, dated 7 March 2017. It may be  said  that  the
    wording of what is said under the  sub-heading  "General  violence  and
    other severe humanitarian conditions" in internal page  12  could  have
    been drafted more clearly so as to avoid any doubt as  to  the  limited
    distinction between the protection offered by  Article  3  and  Article
    15(b). However, when this section is read in conjunction with  that  on
    "Medical cases" in internal page 16, the  overall  sense  is  tolerably
    clear. It does not assist the appellant.

71. In any event, whatever the guidance might state, it  cannot  of  course
    operate as any aid to the interpretation of Article 15(b).

72.  We  conclude  that  in  order  to  show  entitlement  to  humanitarian
    protection under Article 15(b) in cases based on  medical  grounds  and
    return to  a country in which there is an ongoing  armed  conflict,  an
    individual must show by evidence that  substantial  grounds  exist  for
    believing there to be a real risk of serious harm by virtue  of  actors
    of harm (as defined by  Article  6  QD)  intentionally  depriving  that
    individual of appropriate health care in that country. To establish the
    intentionality requirement the individual will have to show by evidence
    a sufficiently strong causal link between the  conduct  of  a  relevant
    actor and the deprivation of health care. Reliance on a degradation  of
    health care infrastructure/provision on the basis  of  the  generalised
    economic and/or security consequences  of  an  armed  conflict  in  the
    country of origin will not, in general suffice.

73. By contrast, Article 3 cases based on medical grounds  do  not  require
    intentionality on the part of a third party.

74. We end this aspect of our analysis by observing that, to a  significant
    extent, and in the light of the Charter of Fundamental Freedoms of  the
    European  Union  and  the  ECHR,  Article  3  and  Article  15(b)   are
    complementary,  with  the  consequence  that  there  is   no   material
    protection gap. This is in effect, what the CJEU meant when stating  at
    paragraph 28 of Elgafaji [2009] Imm AR 477; EUECJ C-465/07 that Article
    15(b) "corresponds, in essence, to Article 3 of the ECHR."  (see  also,
    paragraph 38 of M'Bodj and paragraph 206 of SMO, in which the  Tribunal
    stated that Article 15(b) was "essentially" - therefore not precisely -
    coterminous with Article 3). It would, however, be incorrect  to  state
    that the  two  provisions  are  entirely  commensurate.  If  (which  we
    seriously doubt) SMO purported  to  find  that  there  was  equivalence
    across the board, we would respectfully disagree.

75. We now turn to the country information in order to discern whether  the
    appellant can  make  out  his  Article  15(b)  case  in  light  of  our
    conclusions on the correct legal approach.

76. A certain amount of the country information was considered in  SMO  and
    Ms Wilkins has placed relatively  significant  reliance  thereon,  with
    particular reference to paragraphs 326-331  of  that  decision.  Before
    considering that evidence, it is right to  place  it  in  context.  The
    Tribunal had already concluded that the element of  intentionality  was
    absent from the prevailing situation in Iraq  and  therefore  the  less
    stringent approach to Article 3 under Sufi and Elmi did not apply  (see
    paragraph 322). Whilst, as we have seen, Article 3 does  not  precisely
    mirror Article 15(b),  SMO  does  not  perhaps  provide  the  level  of
    assistance to the appellant's case that Ms Wilkins has suggested.

77. Having considered what is said in SMO, we see no material  support  for
    the contention that there  is  a  real  risk  of  the  appellant  being
    intentionally deprived of appropriate health care by any of the  actors
    of harm in Kirkuk city, or indeed on a journey  from  Baghdad  to  that
    location. The Tribunal accepted that the humanitarian situation in  the
    formally contested areas was "very problematic", but the  evidence  did
    not refer, for example, to the targeting of health care facilities, the
    prevention of medical supplies getting through to particular areas,  or
    the denial of access to care for any particular ethnic and/or religious
    group.

78. Reliance has been placed on a  UNHCR  report  from  May  2019  entitled
    "International Protection Considerations with Regard to People  Fleeing
    the Republic of Iraq" (quoted in the respondent's CPIN of January  2021
    entitled "Iraq: Medical and healthcare provision"):

         "Over the past decades, Iraq's public health care system has seen a
         steady decline as a result of cycles of conflict, years of economic
         sanctions, funding shortfalls, corruption and neglect. The conflict
         against ISIS [Islamic State of Iraq and Syria] severely damaged  or
         destroyed many healthcare facilities and despite the rehabilitation
         of part of these facilities, capacity has not yet  reached  pre-war
         levels. 'Public health facilities are often poorly  maintained  and
         recurring shortages of medicines are a major  concern,  as  is  the
         lack of qualified health workers. Conditions are relatively  better
         in the KR-I [Kurdistan  Region  of  Iraq];  however,  the  region's
         health care infrastructure has been overstretched as  a  result  of
         high numbers of displaced persons, and the rise in conflict-related
         injuries and disabilities."

79. This extract takes the appellant's case no  further  for  two  reasons.
    First, it does not disclose intentionality  on  the  part  of  relevant
    actors, as we have interpreted that term. Second, and in any event,  it
    expressly refers to the ongoing effects of historical conflict. That in
    itself highlights one of the problems with  the  appellant's  principal
    case on the scope of Article 15(b) (see paragraph 68(b), above).

80. We have considered the report from Physicians for Human  Rights,  dated
    April 2021. This ostensibly deals with  the  challenges  faced  by  the
    Iraqi health sector in response to Covid-19. However, what it  says  in
    more general terms does not in our view assist  the  appellant's  case,
    but once again illustrates the difficulties with it. Weaknesses in  the
    health care infrastructure are  put  down  to  "Decades  of  conflicts,
    coupled with international sanctions  and  lack  of  attention  to  the
    health sector." Further, "the long-term neglect of  the  health  sector
    has also had a demonstrably negative impact  on  the  country's  health
    infrastructure." This clearly does not disclose intentionality  in  any
    proper sense. Rather, it recognises the complex,  interrelated,  causes
    of the deficiencies in the health care system in Iraq. At its  highest,
    the consequences of conflict (in a general sense,  absent  evidence  of
    the targeting of facilities, supplies, or suchlike) over the course  of
    time would constitute a broad reason for the current situation. In  our
    view, it is far from sufficient  to  establish  a  case  under  Article
    15(b).

81. The EASO country information note discussed earlier in our decision  in
    relation to Article 15(c) does not add anything to the evidential issue
    under Article 15(b).

82. Having considered the country information to which we have specifically
    been referred and more generally, we have not found any which indicates
    that the appellant as an individual  or  a  member  of  any  particular
    cohort of the population would be targeted such as to  deprive  him  of
    health care. In short,  the  evidence  before  us  does  not  discloses
    substantial grounds for believing that the appellant would face a  real
    risk of being intentionally deprived of relevant health care  in  Iraq.
    Therefore, the Article 15(b) claim must fail.

83. Even if our  interpretation  of  Article  15(b)  was  said  to  be  too
    restrictive, we conclude that the appellant could not  succeed  in  any
    event. He has not adduced evidence of  relevant  medical  provision  in
    Kirkuk city. The only evidence on this specific issue has come from the
    respondent in the form of the MedCOI note referred to in a letter of 15
    January 2021. This indicates that there was provision for  dialysis  at
    Kirkuk  General   Hospital.   Therefore,   on   the   assumption   that
    intentionality bears a broader meaning, the case is simply not made out
    on the evidence.

84. Bringing all of the above together, we conclude that   the  appellant's
    case is, and always has been, a  "pure  medical  claim"  and  that  the
    appropriate protection comes from Article 3, not Article 15(b).



Article 3

85. We can deal with this issue briefly.  We  find  that  the  respondent's
    concession on Article 3, as set out in her  position  statement  of  25
    January 2021, was considered and properly made. As the grant  of  leave
    given to the appellant in August 2020 was on the basis of Article 8, it
    is incumbent on us to state our conclusion on the Article 3  issue.  We
    do so by following the respondent's concession and concluding that  the
    appellant's removal from the United Kingdom would expose him to a  real
    risk of ill-treatment, contrary to  Article  3.  It  follows  that  his
    appeal must be allowed on that basis.



The Refugee Convention

86. For the sake of completeness, we reiterate the uncontroversial position
    that the appellant is  not  a  refugee  and  his  appeal  falls  to  be
    dismissed on that basis.



Anonymity

87. We have maintained the anonymity order because this is an international
    protection case, wherein the importance of facilitating  the  discharge
    of the United Kingdom's obligations under the  Refugee  Convention  and
    the ECHR outweighs the principle of open justice.



Notice of Decision

88. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law and that  decision  has  been  set
    aside.

89. We re-make the decision by:

          a) Dismissing the appeal on Refugee Convention grounds;

          b) Dismissing the appeal on humanitarian protection grounds;

          c) Allowing the appeal on Article 3 ECHR grounds.


Signed: H Norton-Taylor                 Date: 3 September 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed: H Norton-Taylor                 Date: 3 September 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor


APPENDIX: ERROR OF LAW DECISION

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: [ ]


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|At a remote hearing via Skype for Business|                                 |
|                                          |                                 |
|On 17 November 2020                       |                                 |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     NM
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Wilkins, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                         DECISION AND DIRECTIONS (V)

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) an Anonymity Order is  made.   Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or
Court orders otherwise,  no  report  of  any  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
Appellant.  This prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.

      1. The  appellant  has  appealed  against  a  decision  of  First-tier
         Tribunal  ('FTT')  Judge  TR  Smith  sent  on  18  February   2020,
         dismissing his  appeal  on  international  protection  grounds  and
         allowing it on human rights grounds.

      2. I maintain the anonymity direction made  by  the  FTT  because  the
         appellant, a citizen of Iraq, has made a  claim  for  international
         protection.

      3. The grounds of appeal challenged  the  FTT's  approach  to  Article
         15(c) of the QD as well as the failure to directly address  Article
         3 of the ECHR, in the light of, inter alia,  the  appellant's  very
         serious chronic kidney disease which requires dialysis three  times
         a week.

      4. At the hearing before me both representatives agreed that there was
         an error of law in the FTT's decision, such that it should  be  set
         aside and remade in the Upper Tribunal ('UT'), albeit the  findings
         of fact are  preserved  as  they  have  not  been  challenged.   In
         particular:

          i) The respondent accepted that the FTT clearly erred in  law  in
             failing to address Article 3, yet found a breach of Article  8
             apparently on the basis that the appellant  could  not  access
             the necessary dialysis to treat his chronic kidney disease  in
             his home area of Kirkuk.

         ii) Although the challenge to Article 15(c) is less strong for the
             reasons set out in the respondent's rule 24 notice, Mr Howells
             pragmatically accepted that when addressing the risk on return
             for Article 3 or Article 15(b) purposes, it would  be  prudent
             to consider the wider circumstances,  including  the  risk  of
             indiscriminate violence at the date of the UT hearing, and  in
             all  the  circumstances   Article   15(c)   should   also   be
             reconsidered at the  UT  hearing.   I  am  satisfied  that  Mr
             Howells was correct to make this concession.  When making  the
             findings on Article 15(c), and applying the requisite 'sliding
             scale',  the  FTT  failed  to   address   all   the   relevant
             circumstances including the cumulative  impact  of:  the  very
             serious nature of the appellant's disability and the extensive
             medical treatment required;  the  appellant's  Kurdish  ethnic
             origin, and; the country background evidence relevant to both.

        iii) Both representatives accepted that this case might be suitable
             to be linked to a case due to be heard by a Presidential panel
             on 26 and 27 January 2021 on the application of AM  (Zimbabwe)
             v SSHD [2020] UKSC  17  but  that  a  further  telephone  case
             management hearing should be held on 17 or 18 January 2020  to
             determine this.  This is because  the  appellant  has  already
             been granted  leave  to  remain  (based  upon  the  Article  8
             findings) and the respondent required further time to consider
             the proper approach to Article 3 and Article 15, in the  light
             of updated country background evidence.  With this is mind the
             representatives agreed to the following directions:

                 1. Within 7 days of the date of this hearing the  appellant
                    shall  file  and  serve  a  summary  of  his  considered
                    position on Article 3 and Article 15;

                 2. By 4pm on Friday 11 December 2020 the  respondent  shall
                    file and serve  a  position  statement  summarising  her
                    position on Article 3 and Article 15  and  any  evidence
                    relied upon;

                 3. By 4pm on Wednesday 16 December 2020 the appellant shall
                    file and serve an  updated  position  statement  clearly
                    indicating  whether  he  wishes  to  pursue  his  appeal
                    (bearing in mind that he has already been granted  leave
                    on the five-year route to settlement).

                 4.  The  matter  will  be  listed  for  a  telephone   case
                    management hearing before  UTJ  Plimmer  at  9am  on  17
                    December 2020 (preferably) or 9am on 18 December 2020.



Decision

      5. The decision of the FTT is set aside and shall be  re-made  in  the
         UT, with the FTT's findings of fact preserved.


Signed: Melanie Plimmer
Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer

Dated: 17 November 2020

