

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Ali (s. 76 - "liable to deportation") Pakistan [2011] UKUT 00250 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham (Sheldon Court)           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 22 March 2011                              |                             |
|                                              |24 May 2011                  |


                                   Before

                      Mr C M G Ockelton, Vice President
                    Designated Immigration Judge McCarthy

                                   Between

                                 mr amir ali
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Muman, instructed by J M Wilson Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Cantrell, Home Office Presenting Officer

The phrase "liable to deportation" in s 3(5) of  the  Immigration  Act  1971
includes, in the case of a person  within  s  3(5)(a),  the  notion  of  the
Secretary of State's deeming deportation  to  be  conducive  to  the  public
good.  The provision of s 32(4) of the UK Borders Act 2007,  that  a  person
subject to automatic deportation is a person whose deportation is  conducive
to the public  good,  is  not  identical.   Such  a  person  is  "liable  to
deportation" within the meaning of s3(5), so becoming a person  whose  leave
may be revoked under s 76(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
2002, only if the Secretary of  State  has  deemed  his  deportation  to  be
conducive to the public good.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   Introduction

   1. Section 76  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
      empowers the Secretary of State  to  revoke  indefinite  leave.  Under
      certain circumstances, one of the conditions of the  exercise  of  the
      discretion to do so is that the person  "is  liable  to  deportation".
      What precisely does that phrase mean, particularly when the person  is
      a "foreign criminal" within the meaning of s 32 of the UK Borders  Act
      2007?

   2. There are, we are told, no decided cases on the  question.  Permission
      to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted in this case so  that  the
      matter could be decided at this level. In these  circumstances  it  is
      particularly unfortunate that the Home Office Presenting  Officer  was
      not prepared to make any detailed submission on  the  wording  of  the
      relevant statutory provisions. With the help of the  parties  we  are,
      however, reasonably confident that we have been able to identify them.
      Although the journey through them is slightly convoluted,  it  appears
      to us that the answer is clear.

   The Law

   3. It is convenient to  begin  by  setting  out  the  relevant  statutory
      provisions.

   4. In the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, s 76 is,  so  far
      as relevant, as follows:

         "76      Revocation of leave to enter or remain
         (1)      The Secretary of State may revoke  a  person's  indefinite
             leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom if the person-
             (a) is liable to deportation, but
             (b) cannot be deported for legal reasons.
         (2)      The Secretary of State may revoke  a  person's  indefinite
             leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom if-
             (a) the leave was obtained by deception,
             (b) the person would be  liable  to  removal  because  of  the
                  deception, but
                  (c)  the person cannot be removed for legal  or  practical
                      reasons.

         (3)      [allows the revocation of leave granted to  a  person  who
         has ceased to be a refugee]

         (4)      In this section-
             "indefinite leave" has the meaning given by section  33(1)  of
             the Immigration Act 1971 (c. 77) (interpretation),
             "liable to deportation" has the meaning given by section  3(5)
             and (6) of that Act (deportation),
             "refugee" has the meaning given by the Convention relating  to
             the Status of Refugees done at Geneva on 28th  July  1951  and
             its Protocol, and
             "removed" means removed from the United Kingdom under-
             (a) paragraph 9 or 10 of Schedule 2  to  the  Immigration  Act
                  1971 (control of entry: directions for removal), or
             (b) section 10(1)(b) of the Immigration and  Asylum  Act  1999
                  (c. 33) (removal of persons unlawfully in United  Kingdom:
                  deception).
         ...

         (5)      A power under subsection (1) or (2) to revoke leave may be
         exercised-
             (a) in respect of leave granted before this section comes into
                  force;
             (b) in reliance on anything done  before  this  section  comes
                  into force.
         ..."

   5. We do not need to set out the provision defining  "indefinite  leave",
      but s 3  of  the  Immigration  Act  1971  is  clearly  of  importance.
      Subsections (5) and (6) are as follows:

         "(5)     A person who  is  not  a  British  citizen  is  liable  to
             deportation from the United Kingdom if-
             (a) the  Secretary  of  State  deems  his  deportation  to  be
                  conducive to the public good; or
             (b) another person to whose family he belongs is or  has  been
                  ordered to be deported.

         (6)      Without prejudice  to  the  operation  of  subsection  (5)
             above, a person who is not a British  citizen  shall  also  be
             liable to deportation from the United Kingdom if, after he has
             attained the age of seventeen, he is convicted of  an  offence
             for which he  is  punishable  with  imprisonment  and  on  his
             conviction is recommended for deportation by a court empowered
             by this Act to do so."

   6. The UK Borders Act 2007 introduced a process of automatic  deportation
      of "foreign criminals" as defined. By s 32, a "foreign criminal" is  a
      person who is not a British citizen and is  convicted  in  the  United
      Kingdom  of  an  offence,  and  either  is  sentenced  to  a  term  of
      imprisonment of  over  12  months,  or  is  sentenced  to  a  term  of
      imprisonment on conviction of a specified offence.

   7. Subsections (4) and (5) are as follows:

         "32    (4)    For the purpose of section 3(5)(a) of the Immigration
                  Act 1971 (c. 77), the deportation of a foreign criminal is
                  conducive to the public good."

             (5) The Secretary of State must make a  deportation  order  in
                  respect of a foreign criminal (subject to section 33)."

   8. Section 33 is headed "Exceptions".  The  relevant  provisions  are  as
      follows:

         "33    (1)    Section 32(4) and (5)-
                  (a)  do not apply  where  an  exception  in  this  section
                      applies (subject to subsection (7) below), and
                  (b)  are subject to sections 7 and 8  of  the  Immigration
                      Act 1971 (Commonwealth citizens, Irish citizens, crew
                      and other exemptions).

             (2) Exception 1 is where removal of the  foreign  criminal  in
                  pursuance of the deportation order would breach-
                  (a)  a person's Convention rights, or
                  (b)  the United Kingdom's obligations  under  the  Refugee
                  Convention.

             (3) Exception 2 is where the Secretary of  State  thinks  that
                  the foreign criminal was under the age of 18 on  the  date
                  of conviction.

             (4) Exception 3 is where the removal of the  foreign  criminal
                  from the United Kingdom  in  pursuance  of  a  deportation
                  order would breach rights of the  foreign  criminal  under
                  the Community treaties.

             (5) Exception 4 is where the foreign criminal [is  subject  to
                  extradition or similar proceedings].

             (6)  Exception  5  is  where  [a  hospital  order  or  similar
                  provisions] has effect in respect of the foreign criminal.

              (7)      The application of an exception-
                  (a)  does not prevent the making of a deportation order;
                  (b)  results in it being assumed neither that  deportation
                      of the person concerned is conducive  to  the  public
                      good nor that it is not conducive to the public good;
                  but section  32(4)  applies  despite  the  application  of
                      Exception 1 or 4."

   The Appellant

   9. The appellant is a national  of  Pakistan.  He  came  to  the  United
      Kingdom in 2004 with his mother: he was then aged 14.  They  came  to
      join his father, who was settled  here.  The  appellant  was  granted
      indefinite leave to remain, with his mother and other siblings, on 31
      May 2006.

  10. In November 2008 he was convicted on counts of robbery  and  handling
      stolen goods. He received concurrent sentences, the longest being  of
      21 months detention in a young offenders' institution.  There  is  no
      doubt that he is a "foreign criminal" within the meaning of the  2007
      Act.

  11. The appellant was invited to submit any reasons why he should not  be
      subject  to  automatic  deportation.  He  gave  written  reasons  and
      attended  an  interview  conducted  by  a   representative   of   the
      respondent. He observed that he had been in the  United  Kingdom  for
      nearly 15 years, that he had indefinite leave to remain, and that his
      siblings were British citizens.

  12. The Secretary of State's response was a letter dated 1 October  2009,
      reading, so far as relevant, as follows:

         "...I am writing to inform you that  the  Secretary  of  State  has
         taken note of your conviction... at Wolverhampton Crown  Court  for
         Robbery and Handling Stolen Goods. The Secretary of State  takes  a
         serious view of your conduct and, in the light of  your  conviction
         he has given careful consideration to your immigration  status  and
         the question of your liability to deportation...

         In all the circumstances,  however,  the  Secretary  of  State  has
         decided not to take any action against you on this occasion but you
         should clearly understand that, notwithstanding the fact that there
         are no conditions attached to your stay here, the provisions of the
         Immigration Act 1971 as amended by the Immigration and  Asylum  Act
         1999 relating to deportation continue to apply to you. Under  these
         provisions a person who does not have the right of abode is  liable
         to deportation if the Secretary of State deems his  deportation  to
         be conducive to the public good or if he is convicted of an offence
         and recommended for deportation by a court.

         I should warn you therefore that if  you  should  come  to  adverse
         notice in the future, the Secretary of State  will  be  obliged  to
         give further consideration to the question of whether you should be
         deported. If you commit a further offence, the Secretary  of  State
         would also need to consider the automatic deportation provisions of
         the UK Borders Act 2007.  You  should  be  aware  that  under  such
         circumstances, the Secretary of State may  be  legally  obliged  to
         make a deportation order against you..."

  13. A further  letter  was  sent  on  20  November  2009,  informing  the
      appellant of  the  Secretary  of  State's  intention  to  revoke  his
      Indefinite Leave to Remain. The relevant parts of that letter are  as
      follows:

         "...The UK Border Agency is proposing  to  revoke  your  indefinite
         leave to remain under section 76 of  the  Nationality,  Immigration
         and Asylum Act 2002. Section 76(1) gives the Secretary of State the
         power to revoke indefinite leave to enter or remain in  the  United
         Kingdom where 'the person is liable to deportation  but  cannot  be
         deported for legal reasons.'

         ...It is noted that you claim to have first arrived in  the  United
         Kingdom in 1995. Records show  that  you  were  granted  indefinite
         leave to remain in line with your mother and  siblings  on  31  May
         1996. Your rights under the European  Convention  on  Human  Rights
         have been carefully considered.  It  has  been  decided  that  your
         removal at this time may place the  United  Kingdom  in  breach  of
         Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights...

         As you remain  liable  to  deportation  because  of  your  criminal
         convictions, but cannot be  deported  for  legal  reasons,  section
         76(1) is applicable and enables the Secretary of  State  to  revoke
         your indefinite leave to remain.

         ...As part of the assessment  of  your  continuing  entitlement  to
         Indefinite Leave to Remain status, I  am  providing  you  with  the
         opportunity to respond to the points made in this  letter.  If  you
         wish to make any comments on the proposal to revoke your indefinite
         leave  to  remain  and  replace  it  with  a  limited   period   of
         Discretionary Leave you should forward them as below...

         Any comments you  wish  to  make  should  be  sent...  by  December
         2009..."

  14. The appellant made no further comments. The decision  to  revoke  his
      indefinite leave to remain was made on 29 December 2009, by Notice of
      Decision  and  accompanying  letter  both   with   that   date.   The
      accompanying letter sets out a summary of  the  appellant's  relevant
      history and of s76. It continues as follows:

         "As detailed above, you have been convicted of crimes in the United
         Kingdom which render  you  liable  to  deportation.  However,  your
         rights and those of your family members have been considered  under
         Article 8 of the ECHR. It has been concluded that at present,  your
         deportation would bring about a disproportionate interference  with
         your private and family life under Article 8 of the ECHR. In  other
         words, you cannot presently be deported for legal reasons.

         In light  of  the  above,  it  has  been  decided  to  revoke  your
         Indefinite Leave in view of the fact  that  Section  76(1)  of  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 applies to you."

  15. The letter goes on to indicate  that  there  is  a  right  of  appeal
      against that decision, but that the appellant  should  surrender  the
      letter granting him indefinite leave to remain.

  16. The Notice of Decision is in the following terms:

         On 31 May 1996 you were granted indefinite leave to remain  in  the
         United Kingdom on the grounds of settlement.

         However, the decision has been made to revoke your indefinite leave
         on 29 December 2009 and to replace it with  a  grant  of  3  years'
         Discretionary Leave. This is in recognition of  the  fact  that  we
         cannot deport you at present because there  are  ECHR  barriers  to
         removal. However we will keep your position under regular review.

         Consequently,  I  have  decided  that  you  no  longer   meet   the
         requirements of the immigration rules under which you were  granted
         leave to remain in the United Kingdom on the basis of  your  length
         of residence and, therefore, I  am  giving  you  notice  that  your
         indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom has  been  revoked
         under section 76(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
         2002. Full details for this decision are provided in  the  attached
         letter.

         This revocation of indefinite leave to enter or  remain  will  take
         effect at the end of the period when you can appeal  under  section
         82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, or  when
         an  appeal  brought  under  that  section  is  finally  determined,
         withdrawn or abandoned (or when it lapses under section 99 of  that
         Act).

  17. The appellant  appealed  to  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal.
      Following the abolition of that Tribunal, his appeal took  effect  as
      an appeal to the Immigration and Asylum  Chamber  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal. Following a hearing on 12 July 2010, Immigration Judge Meah
      dismissed his appeal, concluding  that  the  power  under  s  76  was
      exercisable in his case. The Immigration Judge also clearly took  the
      view that it was rightly exercised.  Permission  to  appeal  to  this
      Tribunal was refused by the First-tier Tribunal, but granted  on  re-
      application to the Upper  Tribunal.  Senior  Immigration  Judge  Warr
      noted that the ambit of s 76 was "new territory" and said that it was
      right to grant permission to appeal to consider  the  appellant's  as
      yet untested arguments.

   Discussion

  18. As we remarked at the hearing, it seems odd to describe a person  who
      cannot be deported as "liable to deportation". It is, however,  clear
      that the statutory provisions rule out a  conclusion  based  on  that
      simple observation. "Liable to deportation" has, as s 76(4) provides,
      the meaning given by subsections (5) and (6) of s 3 of the 1971  Act.
      It would appear to follow from that that liability to deportation for
      the purposes of s 76 can arise in three ways. They are the  ways  set
      out in  those  subsections,  and  are,  first,  the  deeming  by  the
      Secretary of State that the person's deportation is conducive to  the
      public good (s 3(5)(a)); secondly, the making of a deportation  order
      against another person to whose family the person in question belongs
      (s  3(5)(b));  and  thirdly,  the  recommendation  of  the   person's
      deportation by a court under s3(6).

  19. None of those has happened in this case. Mrs Cantrell  was  clear  in
      her acceptance that the Secretary of State has not indicated that she
      deems this appellant's deportation to  be  conducive  to  the  public
      good; there is no scope  for  the  application  of  s  3(5)(b);  and,
      although the appellant has been convicted of an offence  in  relation
      to which the court could have recommended his deportation, it did not
      do so.

  20. So far, therefore, the  appellant  is  not  "liable  to  deportation"
      within the meaning of s 76. The question, then, is whether ss 32  and
      33 of the 2007 Act make any difference.

  21. As we have said, there can be  no  doubt  that  the  appellant  is  a
      "foreign criminal" within the meaning of s 32. But s 32(5), requiring
      the Secretary of State to make a deportation order, is subject  to  s
      33, and it is clear that the Secretary of State took the view  (which
      is, of course, not contested)  that  the  appellant's  removal  would
      breach  rights  under  the  European  Convention  on  Human   Rights.
      Exception 1 in s 33(2), therefore, applies  to  this  appellant.  The
      clear consequence of that is that s 32(5)  does  not  apply  to  him:
      there is no obligation to make a deportation order against  him.  The
      position in relation to s 32(4) is a  little  more  obscure.  Section
      33(1) says that it does not apply, but that is subject to  subsection
      (7). And subsection (7) provides that s 32(4) does, after all,  apply
      "despite the application of Exception  1  or  4".  The  provision  of
      subsection (7)(b), leaving open the question of  whether  deportation
      is conducive to the public good, therefore applies only to the  other
      Exceptions.

  22. Thus the journey through s 33 takes us  back  to  where  we  started,
      which is at s 32(4). For the purpose of s 3(5)(a) of  the  1971  Act,
      the deportation of the appellant "is conducive to the public good".

  23. That provision is clearly relevant to liability to deportation  under
      s 3(5)(a), but it is not the whole story.  Liability  to  deportation
      under s 3(5)(a) arises only if the  Secretary  of  State  deems  that
      person's deportation to be conducive to the public good.  The  effect
      of s 32(4) of the 2007 Act is that, by statute,  his  deportation  is
      conducive to the public good; so that, if the Secretary of State does
      (also) deem it to be conducive to the public good, there  can  be  no
      argument about the basis for the  Secretary  of  State's  conclusion.
      But, as we see it, under s 3(5)(a) of the 1971 Act, the  decision  of
      the Secretary of State (or an officer) is a crucial requirement. That
      paragraph cannot possibly be read as if it  provided  merely  that  a
      person is liable to deportation if his deportation  is  conducive  to
      the public good.

  24. As we have said, the Presenting Officer before us accepted  that  the
      Secretary of State has reached no  such  conclusion  in  the  present
      case.  It  follows  that,  although  the  effect  of  the   statutory
      provisions is that his deportation is conducive to the  public  good,
      he is not "liable to deportation" because the Secretary of State  has
      not deemed his deportation to be conducive to the public good. She is
      presumably at  liberty  to  do  so:  but,  until  she  does  so,  the
      provisions of s 3(5)(a) of the 1971 Act do not apply to him, and,  in
      consequence, those of s 76 of the 2002 do not either.

  25. That is sufficient to dispose of this appeal. As a  result,  we  have
      not needed to consider whether it is right to describe a person whose
      Convention rights prohibit his removal as a  person  who  "cannot  be
      deported for legal reasons". Mr Muman's submission  would  have  been
      that it is not. He did not need to expand on his skeleton argument on
      the issue before us, and we reach no concluded view on this. In  case
      the  matter  arises  in  some  other  case,  however,  the  following
      observations may be apposite. First, any interpretation of the phrase
      "for legal reasons" in s 76(1) needs to be able to take into  account
      the contrast with the phrase "for legal or practical reasons" closing
      subsection 76(2). Secondly, as  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision
      letters in the present case indicate, a right under Article 8 is  not
      necessarily a permanent right. A Convention right prohibiting removal
      may reduce or vanish in the course of time or by reason of subsequent
      events. Thirdly, it is not easy to see why a  person  who  cannot  be
      deported because of a right that he has, that is protected by the law
      of the United Kingdom should not be regarded as a person who  "cannot
      be deported for legal reasons". We say no more than that.

  26. Mr Muman was also prepared to argue that  it  was  a  breach  of  the
      appellant's human rights to replace a grant of  indefinite  leave  to
      remain by a grant of three years' discretionary leave. We have  noted
      what is said in his skeleton argument. We think it is  unlikely  that
      it would have persuaded us to allow his appeal.

  27. The position is simply that, for  the  reasons  we  have  given,  the
      Secretary of State could not in  the  present  case  exercise  powers
      under s 76, and that her decision was accordingly not a  lawful  one.
      The Immigration Judge erred in concluding that it was. We  allow  the
      appellant's appeal.




                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                       VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL,
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER




