
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

R (on the application of L) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
(return of person removed: discretion) [2020] UKUT 00267 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House (Court 5) via Skype for      |Judgment Promulgated       |
|Business                                          |                           |
|On 15 June 2020                                   |                           |
|                                                  |...........................|
|                                                  |............               |
|                                                  |                           |

                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                                  The Queen
                           on the application of l
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Applicant:     Mr A Briddock, Counsel, and Mr D Gr�tters, Counsel,
                  instructed by the Camden Community Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr C Thomann, Counsel, instructed by the Government
                  Legal Department


(1) A decision to  remove  a  person  (P)  from  the  United  Kingdom  under
immigration powers will not be unlawful by reason of the  fact  that  it  is
predicated upon an earlier decision which has not, at the time  of  removal,
been found to be unlawful, but which later is so found: AB  v  Secretary  of
State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 59;  Niaz  (NIAA  2002  s.104:
pending appeal) [2019] UKUT 399 (IAC).

(2) The fact  that  P's  removal  was  not  unlawful  will  not  necessarily
preclude a court or tribunal on judicial review from  ordering  P's  return.
The fact it was lawful will, however, be a "highly material  factor  against
the exercise of such discretion": Lewis v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
Department [2010] EWHC 1749 (Admin).

(3) Where P's removal was unlawful, by reference  to  the  position  at  the
time of removal, that fact should not only  constitute  the  starting  point
for the Tribunal's consideration of the exercise of its discretion to  order
return, but is also likely to be a weighty factor in favour of  making  such
an order. The same is true where the effect  of  P's  removal  has  been  to
deprive P of an in-country right of appeal.


                                  JUDGMENT

A.  BACKGROUND

 1. The applicant is a citizen of Nigeria.  He entered the  United  Kingdom
    in 2005 as a student.  He subsequently obtained further leave to remain
    in that capacity to April 2010.  He said  that  he  met  his  wife,  an
    Italian citizen, in 2006.

 2. In January 2012, the applicant came to  the  attention  of  the  United
    Kingdom authorities, when he was arrested on suspicion  of  fraud.   He
    claimed to have lived in Italy with his wife and  daughters  from  2009
    until his arrest in 2012.  The couple had a son and  daughter  born  in
    Italy in, respectively, 2009 and 2012.

 3. On 6 December 2013, the applicant was  convicted  at  Chelmsford  Crown
    Court on two counts of cheating the Public  Revenue.   On  5  September
    2013, the applicant  was  sentenced  to  four  years  and  six  months'
    imprisonment on each count, to run  concurrently.   In  his  sentencing
    remarks, the judge described the applicant as the "prime  mover"  in  a
    criminal enterprise  of  almost  three  years'  duration,  whereby  the
    applicant and others under his control deployed  stolen  identities  in
    order  to  submit  154  successful,  but  fraudulent  VAT  returns  and
    repayment claims.  The sums secured were laundered through a series  of
    different accounts at  substantial,  and  irrecoverable,  cost  to  the
    United Kingdom taxpayer.

 4. On 23 September 2014, the  applicant  made  a  claim  for  asylum.   In
    November 2015, however, he notified the respondent's Criminal  Casework
    Directorate that he wished to withdraw  the  claim;  and  that  he  had
    applied for a residence card as a  member  of  the  family  of  an  EEA
    national, namely his wife.  That application was refused on 25 November
    2015.  The applicant lodged an appeal against the refusal.   Directions
    for the applicant's removal from the United Kingdom were cancelled,  in
    order for the respondent to ascertain the  status  of  the  appeal.   A
    renewed date for removal was then set  for  26  January  2016  and  the
    applicant served with new removal directions on 14 January 2016.

 5. Those directions were cancelled when, on 26 January 2016, the applicant
    made a fresh claim for asylum.  A  substantive  asylum  interview  took
    place with the  applicant  in  June  2016  and  on  29  July  2016  the
    applicant's representatives served further materials on the  respondent
    in connection with that claim.

 6. On 25 April  2017,  the  respondent  refused  the  asylum  claim.   The
    respondent's decision runs to 155 paragraphs.  It  began  by  accepting
    that the further submissions amounted to a fresh  asylum  claim  within
    paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules.  Given the terms  of  paragraph
    353, this meant that the respondent was satisfied that the  submissions
    had not already been considered  and  that  "taken  together  with  the
    previously considered material, [they] created a realistic prospect  of
    success, notwithstanding its rejection". As we shall see,  this  factor
    is important.

 7. The refusal decision explained why the respondent  decided  to  certify
    the applicant's asylum claim  under  section  72  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  The respondent was satisfied that the
    applicant's convictions comprised the final judgment by a court of  the
    United Kingdom of conviction of a particularly serious crime, such that
    the applicant constitutes a danger  to  the  community  of  the  United
    Kingdom.

 8. The decision letter then proceeded to consider the applicant's claim to
    be at risk of serious harm, if returned to Nigeria.  The two  bases  of
    the applicant's claim were that he is bi-sexual and  had  converted  to
    Christianity from Islam.  The applicant said that in May  2013  he  had
    returned to Nigeria for a  holiday  and  that  his  friends  there  had
    arranged a sex party involving male prostitutes. The  applicant  agreed
    to pay a substantial sum of money  towards  the  costs  of  hiring  the
    prostitutes.  The applicant left Nigeria, returning to  Italy  in  June
    2013, where he remained until August 2013  when  he  travelled  to  the
    United  Kingdom,  being  arrested   upon   arrival   and   subsequently
    imprisoned.

 9. As this meant the applicant had been unable to pay the balance  of  the
    money owed to the male prostitutes, they began to hassle his friends in
    Nigeria; and those  friends  gave  the  male  prostitutes  the  contact
    details of the applicant's family.  The applicant  also  believes  that
    the male prostitutes reported him to the Nigerian police.  He said that
    the police had been to his family home  in  Nigeria  in  January  2016,
    looking to arrest the applicant for taking part in a gay sex party  and
    having sex with another man.

10. The applicant also said he had received threats  from  his  family  and
    from friends of his father because they had discovered his bi-sexuality
    and his conversion to Christianity.  His wife had also been made  aware
    of the family's attitude.  All this had caused the applicant to  become
    anxious and depressed.

11. The decision  letter  considered  the  background  information  on  the
    attitude of the Nigerian authorities towards gay men.  It was  accepted
    that societal hostility and discrimination against LGBT persons  exists
    in  Nigeria  and  that  same  sex  relationships  there  are   illegal.
    Prosecutions are, however, rare.

12. The respondent did not  accept  that  the  applicant  had  returned  to
    Nigeria in May 2013.  Nothing in his passport  indicated  such  travel,
    there being no Nigerian entry or exit stamps.

13. The  respondent's  overall  conclusion  was  that  the  timing  of  the
    applicant's claim for asylum meant it had been fabricated in an attempt
    to frustrate his removal from the United Kingdom.   The  decision  did,
    however, consider the general evidence regarding  religious  conversion
    from Islam to Christianity in Nigeria.  It  was  concluded  that  there
    were avenues of redress available to  the  applicant,  if  he  were  to
    encounter difficulties on return in this regard.   It  was,  therefore,
    not accepted that the applicant had a well-founded fear  of  return  to
    Nigeria on the basis of the risk posed to him by  non-state  agents  on
    the grounds of religious intolerance.

14. The decision then addressed the ability of the  applicant  to  relocate
    within Nigeria, concluding that there were parts of Nigeria,  in  which
    he would not have a well-founded fear of persecution, to which it would
    be reasonable to expect the applicant to go.

15. Having considered the position regarding treatment for  mental  illness
    in Nigeria, the decision then explained why  the  respondent  concluded
    under paragraph 339D of the Immigration Rules that  the  applicant  had
    committed a serious crime, such as to deprive him of  the  benefits  of
    humanitarian protection.

16. After considering, and rejecting, the applicant's claim by reference to
    Article 8 of the ECHR, the applicant was given a  section  120  notice,
    requiring him to tell the respondent if the  applicant's  circumstances
    changed, such that he had new reasons for  wishing  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom.

17. The decision ended by informing the applicant that he had  a  right  of
    appeal against the decision, exercisable under  section  82(1)  of  the
    2002 Act.  The decision stated that the respondent had decided  not  to
    certify the applicant's human rights claim under  section  94B  of  the
    2002 Act; but this was not to be treated  as  a  "concession  that  the
    Secretary of State is satisfied that there  will  be  a  real  risk  of
    serious irreversible harm, before the appeal process is  concluded,  if
    you are removed to the country to which it is proposed to remove  you".
    If it were to be decided, during the course of the appeal,  to  certify
    under section 94B, the applicant would be informed.

18. Paragraph 151 is headed "Removal":-

         "151.    If you do not appeal, or you  appeal  and  the  appeal  is
              unsuccessful, or your human rights claim is  later  certified
              under section 94B  ...  and  if  you  do  not  leave  the  UK
              voluntarily you will be removed from the UK to Nigeria."




B. APPEAL TO THE FIRST-TIER TRIBUNAL

19. The applicant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

20. On 6 November 2017, the applicant attended a  case  management  hearing
    before that Tribunal.  It is common ground that,  by  this  stage,  the
    applicant  was  no  longer  receiving  the  services  of  Duncan  Lewis
    Solicitors,  who  had  previously  assisted  him  and   to   whom   the
    respondent's refusal decision had been sent.  It is also common  ground
    that, at the CMR hearing, the applicant informed the  Tribunal  of  his
    change of address from address A to address B.  Address A had been  the
    applicant's bail address.

21. The respondent's representative at the CMR hearing updated her  records
    with address B.  According to the grant of permission of  appeal  on  4
    April 2018, which related to the subsequent substantive hearing of  the
    applicant's appeal, the First-tier Tribunal recorded address B  on  the
    file flap of the applicant's file "although the  old  address  has  not
    been crossed through".

22.  Very  regrettably,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  sent  the   notice   of
    substantive hearing to the applicant at address A.

23.  At  the  substantive  hearing,  on  19  December  2017  there  was  no
    appearance by the applicant.  The judge conducting that  hearing  dealt
    with  the  consequences  of  the  applicant's   non-attendance   as   a
    preliminary issue:-

         "Preliminary Issue

         22.   Neither  the  Appellant  nor  his  solicitors,  Duncan  Lewis
             appeared at the hearing; there was no evidence that  they  had
             notified the Tribunal that they had withdrawn from the appeal.
              At 10.00 a.m. the Appellant had not appeared and I  adjourned
             the hearing until 11.10 a.m.  when  again  the  Appellant  had
             still not appeared and there was explanation offered  for  his
             failure to attend.  I satisfied  myself  that  notice  of  the
             hearing  had  been  sent  to  the   Appellant   and   to   his
             representatives; it was served on the Appellant on 15 November
             2017.  The matter was the subject of a case management  review
             on 6 November 2017 at which the Appellant's representative had
             not attended but the Appellant had attended in person and  the
             Respondent's representative stated  that  notes  on  her  file
             indicated that ... Duncan Lewis were  no  longer  representing
             the Appellant and that the Appellant confirmed that he and his
             wife would be giving evidence and the matter  was  listed  for
             hearing and Directions made.

         23.  The notice of hearing was sent to the Appellant at the address
             provided to the Tribunal  [address  A]  which  the  Respondent
             confirmed was the address to which he had  been  bailed.   The
             Respondent's  representative  stated  that  the   Respondent's
             bundle had been sent to the Appellant on 14/11/2017  and  that
             the Appellant had also been advised  in  the  covering  letter
             from the Respondent that it was being  sent  to  him  for  the
             hearing on 19/12/2017 and that the bundles had  been  sent  to
             the Appellant at the two addresses which  the  Respondent  had
             for him, his bail address at [Address A]  and  an  alternative
             address  at  [Address  B].   The  Respondent's  representative
             advised that Home Office records confirmed that the  Appellant
             had absconded and failed to report in accordance with his bail
             conditions.

         24.  I determined  to  hear  the  appeal  in  the  absence  of  the
             Appellant."

24. Through Mr Thomann, the respondent accepts that she has been unable  to
    confirm the correctness of what the Presenting Officer told the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge, as  recorded  in  paragraph  23  of  the  latter's
    decision, regarding service of the bundle on the applicant  at  address
    B.  That is of considerable significance, since the First-tier Tribunal
    judge was given to understand that the applicant had been put on notice
    of the date of the hearing by the respondent's covering  letter,  which
    had been sent to address B.

25. The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  upheld  the  section  72  certificate,
    meaning that the  applicant  was  not  entitled  to  recognition  as  a
    refugee, even if he were at risk of persecutory harm  in  Nigeria.   So
    far as serious harm was concerned, the judge found that  the  applicant
    had not submitted any evidence, such as a passport,  landing  stamp  or
    airline tickets, to establish he was in Nigeria in 2013, when  the  sex
    party was said by him to have taken place.  In any event, she  did  not
    find the applicant's account of the aftermath of the sex  party  to  be
    credible.

26. So far as conversion to Christianity was  concerned,  the  judge  found
    that the applicant had not filed any evidence in support of this aspect
    but that, in any event, he could relocate to an area where he would not
    be at real risk of persecution by reason of religion.

27. As a result of her findings, the First-tier Tribunal Judge agreed  with
    the respondent that the applicant was not at  real  risk  of  suffering
    serious harm, such as to entitle him to humanitarian protection.

28. The judge dismissed the applicant's appeal.  Her decision was  sent  to
    the applicant at address A.



C.  APPLICATION FOR PERMISSION TO APPEAL

29. As we have already seen, in April 2018, the First-tier Tribunal granted
    permission to appeal.  It is important for our purposes to examine  how
    this came about.

30. On 9 February 2018, the respondent wrote to the applicant at address B,
    inviting him to attend a telephone interview with  the  authorities  of
    the Nigerian High Commission, to be held  on  13  February  2018.   The
    letter said the interview was to take place at Becket House Enforcement
    Office.

31. On 13 February 2018, the applicant enquired of the First-tier  Tribunal
    about the status  of  his  appeal.   He  was  informed  (apparently  by
    telephone) that his appeal had been dismissed.   On  14  February,  new
    solicitors acting for the applicant notified the First-tier Tribunal of
    the reason for his non-attendance at the hearing in December 2017.  The
    solicitors  requested  a  copy  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge's
    decision.

32. It is common ground that the applicant did not attend Becket House  for
    the telephone  interview  with  the  Nigerian  High  Commission  on  13
    February 2018.  It is also the case that he failed  to  report  to  the
    respondent on 15 February 2018, as required by the  conditions  of  his
    immigration  bail.   The  applicant  provided  a  medical  note  as  an
    explanation for his inability to report on that day.

33. On 20  February,  the  applicant's  present  solicitors  contacted  the
    respondent to advise her that they now represented  the  applicant  and
    that they had sent a letter to the First-tier Tribunal, challenging the
    decision to dismiss his appeal without the applicant being  present  at
    the hearing.

34. On 22 February, the applicant again  failed  to  attend  his  reporting
    appointment. On 15 March, the applicant was encountered at the Quayside
    in Merseyside, attempting to board a  ferry  bound  for  Belfast.   The
    applicant was detained.

35. On 20 March, the applicant received from the  First-tier  Tribunal  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge, dismissing his  appeal.   On
    the following day, 21 March, the applicant applied  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for permission to appeal.

36. In the light of what happened next, it is important  to  establish  the
    status of that application for permission.  Rule  33  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Rules
    2014 provides that a party seeking permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal must make a written application to the First-tier Tribunal for
    permission to appeal.  Except where the party in  question  is  outside
    the United Kingdom, the application for permission must be provided, so
    that it is received by the First-tier Tribunal no later  than  fourteen
    days "after the date on which the  party  making  the  application  was
    provided with written reasons for the decision" (rule 33(2)).

37. It  is,  accordingly,  now  common  ground  that  the  application  for
    permission which the applicant made on 21 March 2018  was  not  out  of
    time, being received by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  within  the  period
    specified in rule 33(2).  The grant  of  permission  of  4  April  2018
    appears  to  proceed  on  that  basis.   Although  the  granting  judge
    described the application as "late being due on 24  Jan  2018",  having
    noted the factual position, as just described, she did not extend  time
    but merely granted permission.

38. The granting judge stated in her reasons for decision that this  was  a
    case where, had she the power, she would have used rule 32 of the First-
    tier Tribunal Rules to set aside the decision to  dismiss  the  appeal.
    We observe that, were she to have  been  deciding  the  matter  at  the
    present time, the granting judge could have exercised  that  power  and
    would, in our view, have been entirely right to do so.   The  applicant
    had been denied a fair hearing, through no fault of his own.  The First-
    tier Tribunal  Judge's  decision,  dismissing  his  appeal,  could  not
    possibly stand.

39. Unsurprisingly, therefore, on 22 May 2018 the  Upper  Tribunal  allowed
    the applicant's appeal and remitted the  matter  for  a  fresh  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal.



D. THE REMOVAL OF THE APPLICANT

40. By the time the  First-tier  Tribunal  granted  permission  to  appeal,
    however, the applicant was  no  longer  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    respondent had removed him to Nigeria on 28  March  2018.   The  events
    immediately leading up to removal are as follows.

41. Removal directions were set for 28 March 2018.  An  internal  email  of
    the respondent dated 27 March 2018 from OSCU,  replying  to  a  request
    from a senior caseworker, stated as follows:-

         "I have discussed this case with the OSCU Duty SCO.

         The out of time PTA application would not normally operate as a bar
         to removal and we would usually argue that the subject  would  have
         to apply for an injunction for removal to be stayed.

         However, we consider that the subject does have a point  about  his
         change of address and that the Tribunal has made a mistake  in  not
         updating their records  and  so  denying  him  the  opportunity  of
         attending his appeal etc.  It is possible that  the  Tribunal  will
         accept the out of time permission application due  to  the  reasons
         given.  I note that our  CID  records  show  that  we  updated  the
         subject's address around the time he says he notified  the  HO  and
         the Tribunal of the change.  And I also see that the Tribunal  sent
         the appeal determination to the subject's previous address.

         So in summary we consider that RDs should be deferred in this  case
         pending the Tribunal's decision on  the  PTA  application  and  the
         outcome of any possible further hearing.

         Please  defer  RDs  and  I  will  inform  RL  Charters  and   DEPMU
         separately."

42. Notwithstanding that advice, an official of the  respondent's  Criminal
    Casework Team 2 in Liverpool decided to make enquiries with the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  The enquiry of 28 March was as follows:-

         "Hello

         I have been advised by your call centre the  Permission  to  Appeal
         application is with yourselves pending a hearing.

         Can we request the application is placed  before  a  Judge  at  the
         earliest  as  [applicant]  has  removal  directions  set  for  this
         evening.

         It is noted he had become appeal rights  exhausted  on  25  January
         2018 and only lodged an out of time application once  he  had  been
         detained  under  Immigration  Powers  and   served   with   removal
         directions.

         As such, the current application prevents his removal.

         I would be grateful if you  could  ask  a  Judge  to  look  at  the
         application today and inform me of any outcome by email-

         Many thanks".

43. It can be appreciated that  this  communication,  although  couched  in
    terms of an out of time application, made plain the sequence of  events
    described above. It also stated  in  terms  that  the  application  for
    permission prevented the applicant's removal.

44. Later on 28 March, a  clerk  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  Newport
    emailed the following response:-

         "I have received the following direct from the Duty Judge;

         'An out of time application for leave to appeal is  not  a  bar  to
         removal.  The appeal will be considered in due course.'"

45. In purported  reliance  on  that  communication  from  the  clerk,  the
    applicant's removal directions were maintained and he was removed  from
    the United Kingdom.



E. POST-REMOVAL EVENTS

46. Following the decision of the Upper Tribunal to remit  the  applicant's
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal, that Tribunal held a case management
    hearing on 21 May 2019.  At that CMR, the respondent indicated that she
    would facilitate the provision of evidence by the applicant via a video-
    link facility from the British Deputy High Commission in Lagos.

47. At a further hearing, on 29 September  2019,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decided that it was inapt to rule on whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    could hear any the appeal by video-link, compatibly with  the  findings
    of the Supreme Court in Kiarie & Byndloss v Secretary of State for  the
    Home Department [2017] UKSC 42, as explained by the Upper  Tribunal  in
    AJ (s.49B: Kiarie & Byndloss questions) Nigeria [2018] UKUT  115.   The
    matter was adjourned in order to give the respondent an opportunity  to
    consider her position.

48. Following submissions from  the  respondent,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decided on 20 January 2020 that it did not have  power  to  direct  the
    respondent to  return  the  applicant.   By  this  stage,  the  present
    judicial review proceedings were in prospect.



F. THE JUDICIAL REVIEW

49. In the present proceedings, the applicant seeks an order requiring  the
    respondent to arrange and facilitate the return of the applicant to the
    United Kingdom within fourteen  days.   Permission  to  bring  judicial
    review proceedings was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam  on  1
    May 2020.  She made directions with regard  to  the  hearing  being  by
    Skype for Business, to which neither party objected.

50. In a statement dated 11 March 2020, the applicant describes how he  was
    able in December 2018 to attend the High Court in Ibadan  in  order  to
    produce an affidavit, which records that the applicant was arrested  by
    the Nigerian police "over an allegation of  same  sex  activities"  and
    that "I have to go through series of molestation [sic] in the  form  of
    series of beating and intimidation by  residents  of  different  places
    where I have sought accommodation".  The applicant also  said  that  he
    was at risk of being arrested and  prosecuted,  which  may  lead  to  a
    fourteen year jail term.

51. In his witness statement, the applicant said that there are  "very  few
    people who are willing to interact with me here in Nigeria".  Some feel
    sorry for him and secretly give him handouts.  He is in touch with four
    friends who are part of the LGBT underground  community  in  Lagos  and
    attends some social gatherings with them, although this  is  not  easy.
    The abandoned building where he had been  living  had  been  raided  by
    police, who beat him.

52. In her statement of 2 June 2020, Joanna Sherman of Camden Community Law
    Centre describes conversations with the applicant in May 2020, in which
    he told her that he would be able to travel to Lagos  Airport  by  bus.
    The fare, approximately �1, could be obtained by asking people for  it.
    The applicant said that "people are able to move around Nigeria again",
    following the onset of the Covid-19 pandemic.

53. The hearing took place on 15 June 2020.  It was conducted in open court
    at Field  House,  with  counsel  appearing  by  video-link  (Skype  for
    Business).  No material technical difficulties were encountered  during
    the hearing.  We are satisfied that both Mr  Briddock  and  Mr  Thomann
    were able to make their cases effectively, by these means.



(a) Unlawful removal

54. It is important  to  establish  whether  the  applicant's  removal  was
    unlawful at the time it took place.

55. It is now established that a decision  to  remove  a  person  from  the
    United Kingdom under immigration powers will not be unlawful if and  to
    the extent that it is predicated upon an  earlier  decision  which  has
    not, at the time of removal, been found to be unlawful, but which later
    is so found.  The Upper Tribunal summarised the position in Niaz  (NIAA
    2002 s.104: pending appeal) [2019] UKUT 399:-

         "31. In this regard, Mr Kotas rightly relied upon the  judgment  in
             AB v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2017]  EWCA
             Civ  59.   In  that  case,  the  appellant  had  been  removed
             following an unsuccessful appeal that had been heard  pursuant
             to the  so-called  detained  fast  track  process,  which  was
             subsequently held to be unlawful.  An application for judicial
             review compelling the respondent to use her best endeavours to
             facilitate and fund  the  appellant's  return  to  the  United
             Kingdom, in order to take a direct  and  active  part  in  the
             appeal  process  (which  was  again  ongoing,  following   the
             withdrawal  of  the   detained   fast   track   regime),   was
             unsuccessful.  The Court of Appeal regarded itself as bound by
             its earlier judgments in Draga v Secretary of  State  for  the
             Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 842 and Fardous v Secretary of
             State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 931.   In  those
             cases, the court had refused to hold that a  decision  of  the
             respondent taken in pursuance of her immigration  powers  must
             be  treated  as  unlawful,  merely  because  the  respondent's
             decision was taken by reference to  the  decision  of  another
             body which was later found to have been  unlawful.   McFarlane
             LJ, giving judgment in AB, held as follows:-

                  '69. This court is bound by the  decisions  in  Draga  and
                      Fardous.  The starting point  for  our  consideration
                      must be that, in absence of any additional basis  for
                      holding that decision  'B'  was  made  unlawfully,  a
                      later finding that, in the event, an earlier decision
                      'A' that was relied upon was unlawful  does  not,  of
                      itself, affect the validity of decision 'B'.   Absent
                      any separate basis for holding that  the  SSHD  acted
                      unlawfully in making and implementing the decision to
                      remove AB to the Cameroon in December 2014, the  fact
                      that, subsequently, the DFT regime and his FTT appeal
                      have been held to have been unlawful does not  render
                      the separate removal decision unlawful  or  establish
                      that the SSHD was not entitled, at the time, to  rely
                      upon the legal validity of the  DFT  scheme  and  the
                      tribunal decisions relating to  the  appeal  and  the
                      refusal of a stay.'"

56. In PN v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2019]  EWHC  1616
    (Admin), Lewis J rejected the submission that AB was not binding.   His
    reasoning was that (a) counsel for the claimant in AB had not, in fact,
    formally conceded that the removal  direction  would  not  be  unlawful
    simply because of the subsequent finding that an  appeal  determination
    was unlawful; and (b) notwithstanding counsel's stance,  the  Court  of
    Appeal in AB had gone on to consider the issue of law.   As  a  result,
    Lewis J held that AB was binding on the High Court: paragraph 138.

57. On the other hand, even where removal was not unlawful, this  will  not
    necessarily preclude a  court  or  tribunal  on  judicial  review  from
    ordering the person's return.  So much is plain from  paragraph  34  of
    the judgment of Blake J in Lewis v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2010] EWCH 1749 (Admin).  The fact that removal was  lawful
    will, however, be "a highly material factor  against  the  exercise  of
    such discretion": paragraph 38(iii).

58. Mr Briddock submitted that where removal was unlawful at the time, this
    should be the starting point for the court  or  tribunal,  in  deciding
    whether to exercise its discretion to order return.  In this regard, Mr
    Briddock relied upon paragraph 49 of  the  judgment  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal in YZ (China) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2012] EWCA Civ 1022.  It must, however, be observed  that  YZ  (China)
    was a case where the respondent had acted  lawfully  in  deporting  the
    claimant.  The certificate, pursuant to which deportation  took  place,
    had not been declared invalid at that time.

59. Despite this observation, we agree that where  the  respondent  has  no
    legal basis for removing an individual, by reference to the position as
    at the time of removal, this should not only  constitute  the  starting
    point  for  the  Tribunal's  consideration  of  the  exercise  of   its
    discretion to order return, but is also likely to be a  weighty  factor
    in favour of making such an order.

60. In any event, the judgments of Richards LJ in YZ (China) and Lewis J in
    PN both emphasise that where the effect of removal has been to  deprive
    an individual of an in-country right of appeal to which he  or  she  is
    entitled by statute, that in itself should be the starting  point.   It
    is, in our view, also likely to  be  a  weighty  factor  in  favour  of
    ordering return.

61. We have no hesitation in concluding that, on its own terms, the removal
    of the present applicant to Nigeria on  28  March  2018  was  unlawful.
    Section 78 of the 2002 Act prohibits a person from being  removed  from
    the United Kingdom whilst their appeal is "pending" within the  meaning
    given by section 104.  Section 104 provides that an appeal  is  pending
    during the period when it is instituted and ending when it  is  finally
    determined, withdrawn or abandoned (or when  it  lapses  under  section
    99).  Section 104(2) provides that an appeal is not finally  determined
    while an application for permission to appeal under section 11 or 13 of
    the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007  could  be  made  or  is
    awaiting determination.

62. The applicant was not  served  with  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    decision, dismissing his appeal until 20 March 2018.  The period within
    which he could apply to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal accordingly did not expire until  3  April
    2018.  The applicant in fact sent his application for permission to the
    First-tier Tribunal on 21 March 2018.   The  applicant's  removal  was,
    accordingly, a breach of section 78.

63. Whether or not the respondent knew or should have known that she had no
    power to remove the applicant  is  plainly  a  matter  of  considerable
    significance, in deciding whether to exercise discretion to  order  the
    respondent to take best endeavours to effect  the  applicant's  return.
    Indeed, there would be serious implications for  the  rule  of  law  if
    courts and tribunals did not treat deliberate or reckless  law-breaking
    as an extremely weighty consideration, when  exercising  discretion  in
    judicial reviews.

64. In the present case, the respondent was plainly in  possession  of  the
    facts, which should have led her to conclude  that  the  applicant  had
    applied to the First-tier Tribunal in time for  permission  to  appeal.
    The email from OSCU (paragraph 41 above) makes this apparent.  The fact
    that the official nevertheless considered the application to be out  of
    time is immaterial.  The respondent knew the relevant  dates  and  that
    there was  a  likelihood  the  First-tier  Tribunal  would  accept  the
    application for permission.  OSCU's view, that  the  removal  direction
    should be deferred pending the Tribunal's decision  on  the  permission
    application and  the  outcome  of  any  possible  further  hearing  was
    entirely right.

65. The email of 28 March to the  First-tier  Tribunal  from  the  Criminal
    Casework Team 2 (paragraph 42 above) likewise shows beyond  doubt  that
    at the time of sending that email the respondent did not  consider  she
    had power to remove the  applicant.   Had  the  duty  judge  seen  that
    communication (which it seems he or she did not), it is  impossible  to
    envisage that  the  Duty  Judge  would  have  responded  in  the  terms
    communicated to the respondent by the clerk.

66. The respondent's state of knowledge was such that the message  conveyed
    to her by the Tribunal's clerk plainly ought to have been recognised as
    giving no  support  at  all  for  a  decision  to  go  ahead  with  the
    applicant's removal.  The respondent, at best, ought to have recognised
    that the communication in no way undermined the stance taken  by  OSCU.
    At worst, it suggests that someone  decided  to  take  unwarranted  and
    opportunistic advantage of what the message contained.

67. We therefore find that the applicant's removal was unlawful, viewed  as
    at the date of removal, and that the respondent knew this or  ought  to
    have known it.  This is our starting point in deciding whether an order
    with  respect  to  return  should  be  made.   It  is  also,   in   the
    circumstances, a very weighty matter in favour of making such an order.



(b) Other relevant factors

68. We have said at paragraph 60 above  that  significant  weight  is  also
    likely to be placed on the fact that removal has deprived a  person  of
    their statutory right to an in-country appeal.  Like Lewis J, we regard
    this factor as particularly significant, where the  appeal  concerns  a
    claim of real risk of persecution or other very serious harm.

69. The applicant's claim, based on his sexuality and religious conversion,
    was treated by the respondent as a fresh claim.  As one  can  see  from
    paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules, that necessarily means that the
    respondent accepted that - although she had rejected the claim -  there
    was nevertheless "a realistic prospect of success"  on  appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal (paragraph 6 above).

70. The First-tier Tribunal Judge, who dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal,
    proceeded with the hearing because of the Tribunal's error  in  sending
    the notice of hearing to an address at which the application no  longer
    resided.  This was despite the fact that the  applicant  had  told  the
    Tribunal at the CMR of his change of address.

71. The First-tier Tribunal Judge also appears to have been  influenced  by
    the assertion of the Presenting Officer that information regarding  the
    hearing had, nevertheless, been communicated by the respondent  to  the
    appellant at address B.  The respondent is, however, entirely unable to
    confirm that what the Presenting Officer said was correct.  Although we
    have no reason at all to ascribe any improper motive to the  Presenting
    Officer, the respondent has nevertheless thereby influenced the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge's decision to go ahead with the hearing in December
    2017.

72. Cumulatively, these are, we find, extremely powerful  factors  weighing
    on the applicant's side, in deciding whether to exercise discretion  to
    order the respondent to take steps to effect the applicant's return  to
    the United Kingdom, for the purposes of having his appeal  heard  here,
    as required by law.

73. Mr Thomann realistically recognised the difficulties in  resisting  any
    finding that removal was not lawful.   As  a  result,  his  submissions
    focussed upon other factors.

74. Mr Thomann asked us to regard the applicant as someone who was adept at
    "playing the system", as can be seen from his immigration history.   He
    was  also  a  person  who  had  committed  very  serious  offences   of
    dishonesty.  He  is  a  foreign  criminal,  whom  the  public  interest
    requires to be removed from the United Kingdom.

75. More recently, the applicant had behaved badly by failing to report  in
    February 2018, being encountered trying to board a ferry to Belfast.

76. We entirely accept that the appellant's history  is  very  problematic,
    both as regards his criminality and his immigration history.  The  fact
    of the matter is, however, that  the  applicant  was  afforded  an  in-
    country right of appeal in respect of his asylum and general protection
    claims.

77. We place little weight  on  Mr  Thomann's  attempt  to  make  something
    material of the failures to report in February 2018 and  the  encounter
    at the docks in Merseyside with immigration officials.   The  applicant
    had been reporting  regularly  for  a  significant  period  beforehand.
    Although in no way exculpating the applicant, the unsatisfactory way in
    which he came to know of the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  has,  to
    some extent, to be borne in mind.  Whilst attempting to board  a  ferry
    to Belfast might indicate that the applicant had it in  mind  to  reach
    the Republic of Ireland, this is essentially speculative.

78. So far as the applicant's conviction is  concerned,  we  note  that  at
    paragraph 56 of YZ (China), Richards LJ found he would not  place  much
    weight on the seriousness of the appellant's conviction  in  that  case
    "in circumstances where but for the  unlawful  certificate  (as  it  is
    assumed to be) the appellant would have had the right to remain in  the
    United Kingdom to  pursue  an  in-country  appeal  notwithstanding  the
    seriousness of his conviction".  In the circumstances  of  the  present
    case, we likewise do not consider it appropriate to give  the  fact  of
    the applicant's criminal offending much weight.

79. Mr Thomann submitted that it  was  relevant  to  consider  whether  the
    appellant might suffer irreparable harm, whilst remaining in Nigeria to
    await an out-of-country appeal by video-link from Lagos to  the  United
    Kingdom.  He pointed to the findings of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge;
    in particular, the fact that the LGBT element of the applicant's  claim
    was grounded in an alleged party in Nigeria in 2013.   The  applicant's
    passport had nothing to show that the applicant might even have been in
    Nigeria in that year.  The evidence of  alleged  threats  was,  in  any
    event, weak.

80. So far as concerned the applicant's present  position  in  Nigeria,  Mr
    Thomann said there was little if any evidence to support the  assertion
    he was destitute.  That assertion  was,  in  any  event,  difficult  to
    reconcile with  the  volume  of  the  applicant's  communications  with
    persons in the United  Kingdom.   The  applicant  was  a  sophisticated
    individual.  He had two sets of relatives in Nigeria.  It could not  be
    said that he was at risk of irreparable harm, if required to remain  in
    that country pending the hearing of his appeal.

81. Although we  do  not  discount  these  matters,  for  the  purposes  of
    determining how to exercise our discretion we do not consider that they
    can be given anything other than limited weight.  The fact is that  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  decision  has  been  set  aside  in  its
    entirety.  Furthermore, the  respondent's  attempt  to  rely  on  these
    matters once again faces the difficulty that the respondent decided  to
    treat the applicant's  submissions  on  risk  going  to  sexuality  and
    religious conversion as a fresh claim.

82. Mr Thomann suggested that there was no risk of irreparable harm if  the
    applicant, were, for the time being, to decline openly to  express  his
    sexuality.  Mr Thomann accepted that there was  some  evidence  of  the
    authorities in Nigeria persecuting people who did not remain  discrete.



83. Mr Thomann's  use  of  "irreparable  harm"  recalls  the  reference  to
    "serious irreversible harm" in section 94B(3) of the  2002  Act.   That
    section, however, concerns a power of certification, which has not been
    employed by the respondent in the present case.   Indeed,  Mr  Briddock
    submitted that in practice section  94B  certificates  were  issued  in
    respect of cases concerning Article 8 ECHR claims  rather  than  claims
    involving Article 3.

84. In any event, it is an  unattractive  argument  of  the  respondent  to
    submit that, having been unlawfully removed from the United Kingdom and
    so deprived of his statutory in-country right of appeal, the  applicant
    should be expected to moderate his sexual behaviour, whilst  he  awaits
    the outcome of an appeal that the respondent says the applicant  should
    conduct from Nigeria.

85.  Having  weighed  all  various  matters,  in  the  light  of  counsels'
    submissions, we conclude that (subject to what follows regarding Covid-
    19) the factors weighing in favour of the making of an order to  secure
    the applicant's return significantly outweigh the factors lying on  the
    respondent's side of the balance.



(c) Covid-19

86. The Covid-19 pandemic has complicated matters.  As at the date  of  the
    hearing, the position was that the effects of the pandemic  in  Nigeria
    were such that relevant personnel were not available at the Deputy High
    Commission in Lagos, in order to facilitate a video-link  hearing  with
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  the  United   Kingdom.    Mr   Thomann's
    instructions were that, as at 15 June, the  respondent  was  not  in  a
    position to say when this state of affairs might be  likely  to  change
    for the better.

87. The position regarding air travel was that flights both within  Nigeria
    and internationally were  suspended.   Domestic  flights  were  due  to
    resume on 21 June 2020.   International  flights  would,  it  appeared,
    resume at some unspecified time thereafter.

88. The effects of the pandemic had been, Mr  Thomann  said,  to  create  a
    backlog of hearings in the First-tier Tribunal.  Appeals were, however,
    beginning to be heard once more, although these were in the main remote
    hearings conducted by video-link.

89. Drawing these threads together, Mr Thomann submitted that the point had
    not yet been reached  when  it  would  be  appropriate  for  the  Upper
    Tribunal to make an order regarding  the  applicant's  return,  in  the
    light of the Covid-19 pandemic.  The matter could  and  should  be  re-
    visited in two months.

90. Mr Briddock submitted that, notwithstanding the pandemic, the  Tribunal
    should order the respondent  to  use  best  endeavours  to  effect  the
    applicant's return.

91. Following the hearing, on 25 June 2020  the  respondent  wrote  to  the
    Tribunal to  say  that  the  Embassy  (sic)  in  Lagos  had  agreed  to
    facilitate the applicant's appeal  from  outside  the  United  Kingdom.
    Should statutory appeals resume in the United Kingdom, a team could  be
    put in place to  oversee  the  use  of  video  conferencing  facilities
    required for the applicant's effective appeal.

92. The applicant's solicitors objected to the production of  this  letter,
    on the basis that it post-dated the  hearing.  In  any  event,  it  was
    submitted that the letter did not address  the  issues  raised  by  the
    applicant, including the evidence of  Ms  Sherman,  who  spoke  of  her
    difficulties taking instructions from the applicant, whilst he  remains
    in Nigeria.

93. On 3 July 2020, the respondent wrote a further letter to the  Tribunal.
    As well as pointing out that the information in the letter of  25  June
    necessarily post-dated the hearing, the 3 July  letter  said  that  the
    Deputy High Commission facility was taking steps  to  recommence  video
    hearings, although a specific date for hearings to  recommence  remains
    unknown. The respondent had, nevertheless, received  confirmation  that
    special arrangements can be made for a video hearing for the  applicant
    should there be a need prior  to  the  main  operations  restarting.  A
    number of measures were said to be in  place  to  make  this  possible.
    Further information on these could be supplied if necessary.

94. We note that neither party has sought to adduce evidence regarding  the
    present position of air travel within and to and from Nigeria.

95. We have found the Covid-19 issue the most difficult aspect of the case.
     As is well-known, at the present time there is much uncertainty  about
    the future course of the pandemic,  both  in  the  United  Kingdom  and
    worldwide.

96. Despite the applicant's challenge, we have had regard to the letters of
    25 June and 3 July. In the unusual circumstances of this case, it would
    be wrong to decide relief on anything less  than  the  most  up-to-date
    position following the outbreak of Covid-19 in Nigeria.

97. We have come to the conclusion that, despite the difficulties presented
    by Covid-19, it is appropriate now to  make  an  order,  requiring  the
    respondent to use her best endeavours to secure the applicant's  return
    to the United Kingdom for the purposes of his appeal. Our  reasons  are
    as follows.

98. The applicant's case for return is a very strong one.  Particularly  in
    the light of our findings regarding  the  state  of  knowledge  of  the
    respondent on the date the applicant was removed, the respondent  needs
    to show quite clearly  that  an  out  of  country  appeal  is,  in  the
    circumstances, the best option for  the  appellant,  having  regard  to
    timescale, the applicant's position  in  Nigeria  and  his  ability  to
    communicate with his solicitor.

99. This is not a case where the respondent is entitled to succeed on  this
    issue if the questions articulated in AJ (see paragraph 47 above)  fall
    to be answered in the respondent's favour. As the  First-tier  Tribunal
    rightly held, we  are  not  here  concerned  with  certification  under
    section 94B. The issue is not  one  of  Article  8  in  its  procedural
    aspect, as it was before the Supreme Court in Kiarie and  Byndloss.  We
    are here concerned with the  grant  of  relief  in  a  case  where  the
    respondent acted unlawfully in removing an individual, in circumstances
    where the respondent knew of, or was wilfully blind  to  or,  at  best,
    ought to have recognised, that unlawfulness; and where  the  individual
    was thereby deprived of an  in-country  right  of  appeal  against  the
    refusal of a protection claim.

100. In view of this, we do not consider it is appropriate  to  examine  the
    evidence of Ms Sherman (paragraph 92 above) through the prism of the AJ
    questions, which  include  asking  whether  removal  has  deprived  the
    individual of the ability  to  give  instructions/receive  advice  from
    United Kingdom lawyers (our emphasis). Rather,  we  take  Ms  Sherman's
    unchallenged evidence as it stands and accept she has  difficulties  in
    communicating with the applicant, which  she  would  not  have  if  the
    applicant were enjoying his legal right to conduct his appeal whilst in
    the  United  Kingdom.   In  deciding  upon  remedy,   we   take   these
    difficulties into account.

101. It is, of course, relevant that, according to the applicant, he  is  at
    risk whilst he remains in Nigeria. The  evidence  from  him  does  not,
    however, suggest that he regards himself as in  immediate  peril.  This
    may, of course, be because the applicant is  moderating  his  behaviour
    and movements, which is not something one should expect him to have  to
    do. Nevertheless, it is apparent that, despite all  this,  and  despite
    knowing of at least the  possibility  of  conducting  his  appeal  from
    Nigeria, the applicant's position continues to be that he would  prefer
    to return to the United Kingdom, as soon as circumstances  allow.  This
    is a matter to which we must have regard in deciding upon remedy.

102. So far as the position of the First-tier Tribunal is concerned, we  are
    aware that both remote and (at least some)  face-to-face  hearings  are
    now in prospect and that the listing of such cases  is  beginning.   If
    the applicant were returned to the United Kingdom, we would expect  the
    First-tier Tribunal to be sympathetic  to  an  application  (by  either
    party) for expedition, given the history of this case.

103. The greatest problem is the suspension of commercial air travel to  and
    from Nigeria, which appears to extend to chartered aircraft. As matters
    stand, there is no indication of when such air travel might recommence.

104. We take judicial notice of the economic (and social) importance of  air
    travel, for both business and leisure purposes. A number of  countries,
    including the United Kingdom, are attempting  to  resume  such  travel,
    albeit on a limited basis at present. We are unaware of any  reason  to
    assume the Nigerian authorities are not anxious to resume international
    flights (including to Europe), as  soon  as  practicable;  or  why  the
    United Kingdom government would not  take  the  same  view  of  such  a
    resumption.

105. Having regard to all these matters, we find that, despite the  position
    regarding Covid-19, the applicant should not be required to conduct his
    appeal from Nigeria but should be returned  for  that  purpose  by  the
    respondent to the United Kingdom.




G.  DECISION

106. We declare the removal  of  the  applicant  on  28  March  2018  to  be
    unlawful. We conclude we should order the respondent to  use  her  best
    endeavours to arrange and facilitate the return of the applicant to the
    United Kingdom.

107. We shall hear counsel on the form of the order, if the same  cannot  be
    agreed.  As we indicated at the hearing, in the light of  the  Covid-19
    situation, it may be necessary for the order to be more specific as  to
    what best endeavours does or does not comprise, in terms of making  air
    travel arrangements.  There will, in any event, be a need for the order
    to include liberty to apply.




    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) rules 2008


    Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  applicant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of his  family.   This  direction
    applies both to the applicant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                      Signed Mr Justice Lane Date:  10 July 2020






                      The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                      President of the Upper Tribunal
                      Immigration and Asylum Chamber
