
                                    [pic]

IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
(IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER)

R (on  the  application  of  Akber)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department (paragraph 353; Tribunal's role) [2021] UKUT 00260 (IAC)


                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                            London, EC4A 1WR

                                                           27 September 2021
                                   Before:

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH
                            _____________________

                                  Between:

                                  THE QUEEN
                            on the application of
                                  ALI AKBER
                                                                   Applicant
                                   - and -

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
                           ______________________

                                 Mr M Biggs
           (instructed by NR Legal Solicitors), for the Applicant

                       Mr D Blundell QC and Mr A Mills
     (instructed by the Government Legal Department) for the Respondent

                          Hearing date: 6 July 2021

                        ____________________________

                               J U D G M E N T
                        ____________________________

    Paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules


      1.  The  importance  of  paragraph  353  of  the   Immigration   Rules
         ("Paragraph 353") is as a "gate-keeping" function to shut out  from
         the appeals system unmeritorious second or subsequent  appeals.  An
         appeal  is  generated  under  the  current  form  of   section   82
         Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  ("the  2002  Act")
         whenever a protection or human rights "claim" is made and  refused.
         However, the Respondent is not obliged to treat repeat  submissions
         as a "claim" leading to a "decision" generating a right  of  appeal
         in  every  case  (Robinson  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department [2020] AC 942).


      2. The words "if rejected" in Paragraph 353  specifically  contemplate
         that the Respondent must form a view on the merits of  the  further
         submissions, in the sense that she may decide the  submissions  are
         such as to warrant the grant of leave to enter or  remain  (and  to
         recognise  the  person  as  a  refugee  or  otherwise  entitled  to
         international protection). It is only if she does not  do  so  that
         Paragraph 353 requires her  to  determine  if  the  (ex  hypothesi)
         rejected submissions are  a  fresh  claim,  the  refusal  of  which
         constitutes a decision falling within section 82 of the  2002  Act.
         It is artificial to separate the underlying merits of what  is  put
         forward  from  the  question   whether   something   "significantly
         different" is being advanced for the  purposes  of  Paragraph  353.
         It is not the case, therefore, that the Respondent has "decided"  a
         "claim" under section 82 of the 2002 Act  in  any  case  where  she
         considers  further  submissions  or  a  further   application   and
         concludes that the submissions or  application  do  not  merit  the
         grant of leave.


      3. The end-to-end process where Paragraph 353 applies is as follows:


         Stage 1:  The Applicant makes human rights or protection claim.
         Stage 2: That claim is refused by the Respondent, giving rise to  a
         right of appeal under section 82 of the 2002 Act.
         Stage 3: The Applicant's appeal is unsuccessful; or  the  Applicant
         does not  appeal  or  withdraws  his  appeal;  or  the  refusal  is
         certified under section 94 of the 2002 Act.
         Stage 4: The Applicant makes second or  subsequent  submissions  by
         way  of  written   submissions   or   application   ("the   Further
         Submissions").
         Stage 5: The Respondent considers whether to accept or  reject  the
         Further Submissions on their merits.
         Stage 6: If the Further Submissions are accepted on  their  merits,
         the Respondent grants leave/recognises Applicant's status.
         Stage 7: If the Further Submissions are  rejected,  the  Respondent
         goes on to consider whether they  nonetheless  amount  to  a  fresh
         protection or human rights claim; i.e. a categorisation decision is
         made.
         Stage 8: If the Respondent determines that the Further  Submissions
         do not amount to a fresh claim,  she  rejects  them  as  such.   No
         refusal of a human rights or protection claim  arises,  within  the
         meaning of section 82(1)(a) or (b) of the 2002 Act.   If,  however,
         she determines that they  do  amount  to  a  fresh  claim,  then  a
         "decision" has been made to refuse a "claim" for  the  purposes  of
         Section 82 (1)(a) or (b) of the 2002 Act  and  a  right  of  appeal
         arises against that decision


      4. The guidance  given  in  Sheidu  (further  submissions;  appealable
         decisions; Sudan) [2016] UKUT 412 (IAC) is that if the effect of  a
         decision is a refusal of a claim under section 82 of the 2002  Act,
         then there is a right of appeal even if the Respondent had intended
         to  refuse  further  submissions  applying  Paragraph  353.    That
         guidance turns on the interpretation  of  the  particular  decision
         letter under consideration in that case.  In some (albeit  extreme)
         cases such as Sheidu,  the  Upper  Tribunal  may  conclude  in  the
         context of a judicial review challenge  that  what  the  Respondent
         actually did was not what she  intended  to  do.   Such  cases  are
         nevertheless likely to be rare.


      5. Whether a decision of the Respondent is a  decision  to  refuse  to
         treat submissions as a fresh  claim  or  the  refusal  of  what  is
         accepted to be a fresh claim is a matter of substance and not form.
          The nature of the decision does not depend where in  the  decision
         letter Paragraph 353 is raised.  It  is  necessary  to  look  at  a
         Paragraph 353 decision under challenge as  a  whole.   It  must  be
         interpreted objectively, considered fairly  in  the  round  and  in
         substance.


    The Role of the Tribunal in Judicial Review Challenges to Paragraph 353
    Decisions


      6. Balajigari and others v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
         [2019] 1 WLR 4647 and R (oao BAA and Another) v Secretary of  State
         for the Home Department (Dublin III: judicial review; SoS's duties)
         [2020] UKUT 00227 (IAC) did not involve fresh claim  decisions.  As
         such they are distinguishable from fresh claims cases.    The  case
         law in relation to fresh claims has consistently  stated  that  the
         role of the Tribunal is only to consider whether  the  decision  is
         Wednesbury unreasonable or involves other  public  law  error:  (WM
         (DRC) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2007]  Imm  AR
         337).


      7. In a Judicial Review of a decision made under  Paragraph  353,  the
         Upper Tribunal is tasked with considering the Respondent's decision
         for rejecting the submissions as a fresh claim. The Tribunal is not
         required to reach a decision for itself  whether  the  Respondent's
         decision breaches an applicant's human  rights.   The  position  in
         this regard is akin to that where an appellate court or tribunal is
         examining the legality of the mixed legal  and  factual  conclusion
         reached by a fact-finding tribunal on whether a  decision  violates
         Article 8 rights.


      8. In the event that further material comes to light, the  remedy  for
         an applicant is to make further submissions to the  Respondent  and
         not seek to place the Tribunal in the  role  of  primary  decision-
         maker.


 1. This is a judgment to which we have both  contributed.   The  Applicant
    seeks judicial review of the Respondent's decision dated 27  July  2020
    ("the  Decision").   By  the  Decision,  the  Respondent  refused   the
    Applicant's application for indefinite leave to remain ("ILR")  in  the
    UK based on his long residence.  The Respondent also decided  that  the
    application made did not amount to a fresh  claim,  applying  paragraph
    353 of the Immigration Rules ("Paragraph 353").   The  effect  of  that
    conclusion is that the Applicant is unable to appeal the Decision.   It
    is in this respect that the judicial review raises important points  of
    principle which have implications for other  cases.   It  is  for  that
    reason that a Presidential panel was convened with a view to  providing
    guidance in other cases.

BACKGROUND

FACTUAL BACKGROUND

 2. The Applicant is a national of Pakistan.  He arrived in the  UK  on  14
    October 2006 with leave as a  student.   He  subsequently  switched  to
    remain as a Tier 1 migrant.  He was given leave as  a  Tier  1  General
    migrant which expired, following extension, on 15 August  2016.   On  2
    August 2016, the  Applicant  applied  for  ILR  based  on  five  years'
    residence as a Tier 1 migrant.  He subsequently varied that application
    to one for ILR based on ten years' lawful residence.


 3. The  application  for  ILR  was  refused  on  23  February  2018.   The
    Respondent refused the application on the basis that the Applicant  had
    acted dishonestly by declaring a  different  income  to  HMRC  for  tax
    purposes from the earnings declared to the Respondent  in  the  Tier  1
    applications.   The Respondent therefore  refused  the  application  on
    general grounds,  under  paragraph  322(5)  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    ("Paragraph 322(5)").

 4. The Applicant was given a right of appeal against the 23 February  2018
    decision which he exercised.  Although his appeal was allowed by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Bircher, following a successful appeal against that
    decision by the Respondent, the appeal was re-heard  and  dismissed  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Fisher.  Although Judge Fisher did not accept
    the  Respondent's  case  that  the  Applicant  had  declared  different
    earnings to HMRC and the Home Office, he found that the  Applicant  had
    acted dishonestly by not filing a tax return at all  in  the  tax  year
    2010-11.  He found that the Applicant must have been aware of  this  as
    he had not been asked to pay any tax but had  done  nothing  about  it.
    The Applicant's explanation at the time for the failure  was  that  his
    accountants had  been  negligent.   Judge  Fisher  concluded  that  the
    Respondent had been right to apply Paragraph 322(5).

 5. On 20 February 2020, a matter of days  after  the  Upper  Tribunal  had
    refused permission to appeal Judge  Fisher's  decision,  the  Applicant
    made a further application for ILR based on his  long  residence.   For
    the first time, the Applicant said that the reason why  no  tax  return
    was filed for 2010/11 was that he  did  not  owe  any  tax  as  he  was
    entitled  to  loss  relief  in  relation  to  another  business.   That
    assertion was unsupported  at  that  time  by  any  evidence  from  the
    Applicant's accountants.


 6. The Respondent again refused the application by the Decision.  We  will
    come to the detail of the Decision in due course.  For the present,  it
    is sufficient to note  that  the  Respondent  again  applied  Paragraph
    322(5) when refusing  to  grant  the  Applicant  ILR.   The  Respondent
    refused the Applicant leave to remain on human rights grounds,  relying
    in large part on Judge Fisher's decision.  She applied  Paragraph  353,
    concluding that the further submissions did not amount to a fresh claim
    because they had all been considered by the previous Judge  and/or  did
    not give rise to a realistic prospect of success on further appeal.

PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND


 7. The Applicant issued this application for judicial review on 27 October
    2020.  We do not need to say anything about  the  initial  grounds  as,
    following refusal of permission on the papers by Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Plimmer,  and  shortly  before  the  renewed  permission  hearing,  the
    Applicant applied to amend his grounds.  At the renewal hearing,  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Blum permitted the amendment and adjourned  the  hearing
    (also ordering that the Applicant pay the  Respondent's  costs  of  the
    adjournment in any event).


 8. At a resumed hearing on 18 February 2021, Upper Tribunal Judge  Norton-
    Taylor granted permission on grounds one and two which can  broadly  be
    summarised as follows:
    Ground one: the Decision, properly construed, gives rise to a right  of
    appeal.
    Ground two: the Decision breaches the Applicant's Article 8 rights.
    Judge Norton-Taylor refused permission on ground three which was to the
    effect that the Decision was Wednesbury unreasonable.  We are therefore
    no longer concerned with that ground.


 9. On 24 March 2021, Upper Tribunal Judge Smith issued directions  with  a
    view to a hearing before a Presidential  panel.   So  it  is  that  the
    judicial review comes before us for hearing.


10. In relation to ground two, the Applicant applied on 17  June  2021  for
    permission to rely upon further evidence.  The evidence  is,  in  short
    summary, a statement from the Applicant setting out his case as  it  is
    now to explain why he did  not  file  a  tax  return  for  2010/11  and
    exhibiting various documents in support of  his  case.   It  is  common
    ground that the statement and annexed documents  were  not  before  the
    Respondent when she made the Decision.  This application was  initially
    refused by an Upper Tribunal Lawyer and came before Judge Norton-Taylor
    on renewal.  He declined to make any order on the basis that  it  would
    be for the Tribunal to decide on the relevance  of  this  evidence  and
    whether it should be admitted at the substantive hearing.


11. The parties were agreed that the appropriate way forward in relation to
    this evidence was for us not to deal with  the  application  to  adduce
    further evidence at this hearing.  If we were  with  the  Applicant  in
    relation to ground one, it was agreed that it would  not  be  necessary
    for us to deal with ground two in any event as the further evidence and
    issues raised in that ground would be dealt with in an appeal.   If  we
    were not with the Applicant on ground one, depending  on  the  view  we
    reach on ground two, it might  be  necessary  to  issue  a  preliminary
    decision with a view  to  giving  the  Respondent  the  opportunity  to
    respond to the further evidence.   Whether  that  was  necessary  would
    depend on our view of the Applicant's case on ground two.

THE ISSUES

GROUND ONE


12. Ground  one  turns  on  the  proper  construction  and  application  of
    Paragraph 353.


13. The Respondent says that the construction of Paragraph 353 and the  way
    in which that applies in the appeals process is now put beyond doubt by
    the Supreme Court's judgment in Robinson v Secretary of State  for  the
    Home Department [2020] AC 942; [2019] Imm AR 877 ("Robinson").


14. The Applicant relies on two Tribunal decisions.  The first decision  is
    Sheidu (Further  Submissions;  Appealable  Decision)  [2016]  UKUT  412
    (IAC); [2017] Imm AR 179 ("Sheidu") which pre-dates Robinson.  In  that
    case, the Vice-President made some observations about  the  application
    of Paragraph 353 in relation to what was then a relatively new  appeals
    process.

15. The second decision is R (Kamrul Islam) v Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department (JR/8109/2018) ("Islam").  The Tribunal  in  Islam  did
    not purport to lay down any wider guidance.  However, since Islam post-
    dates Robinson, and  decided  that  the  guidance  in  Sheidu  survived
    Robinson, we need also to deal  with  that  decision.   The  case  also
    raised arguments similar to those made by the Applicant in  this  case.
    The Tribunal in that case accepted the arguments which were put forward
    to us by the Applicant in this case.

16. Ground one can be broken down into  two  questions  which  we  have  to
    answer:
    Question one:  Was Sheidu correctly decided and, even if it  was,  does
    the guidance there given survive the judgment in Robinson?
    Question two: To some extent depending on our answer to  question  one,
    what is the impact of the current case-law on this case?

GROUND TWO


17. Given what we  say  above  about  the  application  to  adduce  further
    evidence and the course we were invited to follow in that  regard,  the
    parties were agreed that the only issue which arises is the proper role
    of the Tribunal when considering  whether  the  Decision  breaches  the
    Applicant's Article 8 rights.


18. If we were with the Applicant that the role is one of  fact-finder,  we
    may find it necessary to consider the nature and extent  of  that  role
    but we would not embark  on  any  fact-finding  in  this  case  without
    convening a further hearing to deal with  the  additional  evidence  on
    which the Applicant seeks to rely.

19. In connection with this ground,  the  Respondent  also  says  that  the
    Applicant's  application  amounts  to  an  abuse  of  process.   As  we
    understood the Respondent's submissions, we do not need  to  deal  with
    the argument at this stage and not at all if we accept the Respondent's
    position that the Tribunal's role is one of review.

GROUND ONE

LEGAL FRAMEWORK

Paragraph 353 and the Statutory Appeal Scheme


20. Paragraph 353 reads as follows:


         "When a human rights  or  protection  claim  has  been  refused  or
         withdrawn or treated as withdrawn under  paragraph  333C  of  these
         Rules and any appeal relating to that claim is no  longer  pending,
         the decision maker will consider any further  submissions  and,  if
         rejected, will then determine whether they amount to a fresh claim.
          The  submissions  will  amount  to  a  fresh  claim  if  they  are
         significantly different from the material that has previously  been
         considered.  The submissions will only be  significantly  different
         if the content:
           i) had not already been considered; and
          ii) taken  together  with  the  previously  considered  material,
              created a realistic prospect of success, notwithstanding  its
              rejection.
         This paragraph does not apply to claims made overseas."


    As we will come to, the Respondent places particular  reliance  on  the
    words "if rejected".


21. We are here concerned only with a human  rights  claim.   There  is  no
    protection context.  A human rights claim is defined by section 113  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  ("the  2002  Act").
    That provides that a human rights claim is "a claim made by a person to
    the Secretary of State at a place designated by the Secretary of  State
    that to remove the person from or  require  him  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom or to refuse him  entry  into  the  United  Kingdom would  be
    unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998".


22. Rights  of  appeal  are  governed  by  section  82  of  the  2002  Act.
    Immediately prior to changes made by the  Immigration  Act  2014  ("the
    2014 Act"), rights of appeal were generated by the  making  of  certain
    "immigration decisions" which depended on the immigration status of the
    applicant.  Now, the right of  appeal  is  generated  only  by  certain
    decisions in response to human rights or protection claims (or revoking
    protection status).  For our  purposes,  we  are  concerned  only  with
    section 82(1)(b) of the 2002 Act which provides a right of appeal where
    the Respondent has decided to refuse a human rights claim.

The Case-law concerning Paragraph 353 and the Statutory Appeal Scheme


23. In order to understand how Paragraph 353 operates within the  statutory
    appeal system, it is necessary to say something about the background to
    that provision.


24. The starting point is the Court of Appeal's judgment in R  v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department ex parte Onibiyo [1996] QB 768; [1996]
    Imm AR 370.  In that case,  the  Court  was  considering  the  previous
    provision of the Immigration Rules - paragraph 346. It was  considering
    the issues in the context of  a  protection  claim  under  the  Refugee
    Convention.  Of course, the Human Rights Act 1998 was not in  force  at
    the time.


25. The Court of Appeal accepted that a person whose first asylum claim had
    been rejected could always make a second or further claim.  To  prevent
    further claims would be contrary to the Respondent's duty not to return
    a refugee to his or her country of origin.  Equally, however, the Court
    accepted that not every subsequent claim could  give  rise  to  another
    right of appeal.  The Court framed three questions  for  determination.
    What constitutes a fresh claim?  How and by whom is that question to be
    determined? What are the procedural consequences of such a decision?


26. In response to the first question, the applicant accepted that a "fresh
    claim" could not be made "by advancing an obviously untenable claim  or
    by repeating, even with some elaboration or addition, a  claim  already
    made". The Court concluded that the new  claim  must  be  "sufficiently
    different from the earlier claim to admit of a  realistic  prospect  of
    success that a favourable view could be taken of the new claim  despite
    the unfavourable conclusion reached on the earlier claim."


27. As to the second question, the Court accepted that the claim had to  be
    determined by the Respondent in  the  first  instance.   The  applicant
    argued that whether there was a fresh claim was a matter  of  precedent
    fact.  The Respondent argued that her decision as to the existence of a
    fresh claim could be impugned only on public law  grounds.   The  Court
    expressed a tentative view that the Respondent's argument  was  correct
    but did not need to determine it.  As we will come to when we  look  at
    ground two, since that time that  latter  view  has  been  held  to  be
    correct in cases such as WM (DRC) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2007] Imm AR 337 ("WM") (see [9] of the judgment).


28. The fresh claims issue came before the House of Lords in BA (Nigeria) v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2010] 1 AC 444; [2010]  Imm
    AR 363 ("BA").   We do not need to dwell on the judgment in BA  because
    the  cases  concerned  the  appeals  regime  prior  to  the  2014   Act
    amendments.   The Respondent had been bound in those cases to  make  an
    "immigration decision" under section 82 of the 2002  Act  in  any  case
    where she refused to revoke a deportation order.  A majority  of  their
    Lordships  (Baroness  Hale  dissenting),  concluded  that,  since   the
    decisions which were made were "immigration decisions" for the purposes
    of section  82,  the  right  of  appeal  could  only  be  curtailed  by
    certification under sections 94 or 96 of the 2002 Act.


29. In the course of his judgment in BA, however, Lord Hope  observed  that
    "[r]ule 353 as presently drafted has no part to play in the legislative
    scheme".  That observation  led  to  subsequent  challenges  to  "fresh
    claims" decisions asserting that a right of appeal would  always  arise
    absent certification.  Those challenges  culminated  in  the  Court  of
    Appeal's judgment in ZA (Nigeria) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2011] QB 722; [2010] Imm  AR  776  ("ZA").   The  Court  of
    Appeal distinguished the situation in BA.  BA  applied  only  where  an
    "immigration decision" had to be  made.   Paragraph  353  continued  to
    apply in all other cases.  The  Supreme  Court  refused  permission  to
    appeal the Court of Appeal's judgment.


30. BA and ZA were, as  we  have  indicated,  concerned  with  the  appeals
    procedure prior to the changes made by the Immigration Act  2014.    As
    we have already stated, rights of  appeal  are  now  generated  by  the
    refusal of either a human rights or protection claim (or the revocation
    of protection status).


31. In R (Waqar) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2015]  UKUT
    169  (IAC)  ("Waqar"),  this  Tribunal  concluded  that  Paragraph  353
    continued to apply under the new appeals regime.  The Court  of  Appeal
    refused permission to appeal that decision (see [8] of  the  Tribunal's
    reported decision in R (oao MG) v First-tier Tribunal (Immigration  and
    Asylum Chamber ('fresh claim'; para 353: no  appeal)  IJR  [2016]  UKUT
    00283 (IAC) confirming this and agreeing with the decision in Waqar).

32. Turning then to the cases on which the parties rely in  this  case,  we
    begin with Sheidu.   We  make  the  preliminary  observation  that  the
    Tribunal in Sheidu did not purport to determine whether  Paragraph  353
    was of continued relevance in the appeals process following the changes
    brought about by the 2014 Act.  It merely drew attention to the lack of
    Court of Appeal authority on the issue, which it considered left  "room
    for a modest measure of doubt".  The Tribunal determined  that  it  did
    not need to resolve that issue because on the  specific  facts  of  the
    case before it, it reached the conclusion that there was a refusal of a
    claim.   Although  the  Respondent  had  made  a  decision  purportedly
    applying Paragraph 353, the Tribunal concluded that  she  had,  on  the
    face of the decision, refused the protection and human  rights  claims.
    Accordingly, there was a right of appeal.


33. The guidance given in Sheidu is  only  that  "[i]f  the  SSHD  makes  a
    decision that is one of those specified in s 82(1), it carries a  right
    of appeal even if the intention was not to treat the submissions  as  a
    fresh claim."  The reasoning which lay behind the  Tribunal's  guidance
    is articulated at [16] and [17] of the decision as follows:


         "16.         The terms of the decision letter in the present  case
         show, we think, why we expressed the sentiments we did in paragraph
         7 above. It is true that the part  of  the  decision  beginning  at
         paragraph 66 purports to deal with  the  submissions  made  on  the
         basis that they are not a 'fresh claim'. But it appears to us  that
         the previous 65  paragraphs  do  something  rather  different.  The
         heading of the letter, which we have set  out,  indicates  that  it
         contains a decision to refuse a protection claim and a human rights
         claim; so far as the latter is concerned, paragraph 58  appears  to
         be, in terms, the refusal of a human rights claim. As it  seems  to
         us, this is ZT (Kosovo) and ZA (Nigeria) territory: there has been
         an appealable decision, and  once  there  has  been  an  appealable
         decision, paragraph 353 has no part to play.
         17.         Mr Deller's submissions are,  effectively,  under  two
         heads. The first is that it is not for the First-tier  Tribunal  to
         determine whether submissions amount to a 'fresh claim' within  the
         meaning of paragraph 353.  We  entirely  agree.  Nevertheless,  the
         First-tier Tribunal does have to  determine  whether  the  decision
         before it is one which falls within the definition in s. 82 of  the
         2002 Act as amended. Mr Deller's second submission is that, because
         of the way paragraph 353 is considered in the decision letter,  and
         following Waqar, the decision was that  the  submissions  did  not
         amount to a "fresh claim", and so their rejection carried no  right
         of appeal. If those terms were applicable to the  decision  letter,
         that submission would certainly be consistent with Waqar;  but  it
         does not appear to us  that  those  submissions  are  open  to  the
         Secretary of State in view of the terms  of  the  decision  letter.
         Whatever may have been the terms of the  decision  letters  in  the
         other cases, it appears to us that this decision letter starts with
         a human rights claim, substantively refuses it, and does  so  using
         wording in the heading and  in  the  refusal  itself  which  is  so
         clearly that envisaged by s. 82 that the  subsequent  consideration
         under paragraph 353 cannot have the effect of removing the right of
         appeal engendered by the decision."

    The Tribunal's reasoning  turns  on  the  structure  of  the  decision.
    Significantly, the decision there under challenge began with a  heading
    "Consideration of Further Submissions. Decision to Refuse a  Protection
    Claim and Human Rights Claim".


34. Next in time is the  Supreme  Court's  judgment  in  Robinson.   Having
    summarised the history of Paragraph 353 in  previous  cases  (which  is
    broadly as we have already set out), and agreeing  with  the  Court  of
    Appeal's judgment in ZA, the Court reached  the  following  conclusions
    concerning the continued relevance of Paragraph 353  to  the  post-2014
    Act appeals regime:


         "60.             .... Mr Fordham relies on the fact that the  2014
         amendments  remove  the  former  requirement  of  an   'immigration
         decision' to which the  'human  rights  claim'  and  its  rejection
         needed to  have  a  nexus.  He  submits  that  the  effect  of  the
         simplified scheme is that any submission that removal would  breach
         a relevant obligation will amount to a human rights  or  protection
         claim, the rejection of which will give rise to a right of  appeal.
         Once again, I am unable to accept this submission. The appellant is
         not assisted by the fact that under the amended section 82 there is
         no longer a requirement  to  establish  an  'immigration  decision'
         within the list previously set out in section 82(2). In  fact,  the
         contrary is the case. A decision to refuse to revoke a  deportation
         order was formerly an 'immigration decision' under section 82(2)(k)
         and therefore gave rise to an in-country right of  appeal,  subject
         to the possibility of certification, but  this  is  no  longer  the
         case.  The   2014   amendments   limit   immigration   appeals   to
         circumstances in which there has been a  refusal  of  a  protection
         claim or a human rights claim, or where protection status has  been
         revoked. (For present purposes I will concentrate on  human  rights
         claims.) However, the structure and operation of section 82  remain
         unchanged. Under the amended section 82(1) a person may  appeal  to
         the tribunal where the Secretary of State has decided to  refuse  a
         human rights claim made by him, but  this  does  not  relieve  that
         person of the burden  of  establishing  that  the  refusal  was  in
         response to a valid claim. The definitions in Part 5 do not address
         this question and the answer will  depend  on  the  application  of
         the Onibiyo line of authority.  Onibiyo [1996]  QB  768, Cakabay
         [199]  Imm  AR  176, ZA  (Nigeria)  [2011]   QB   722    and VM
         (Jamaica) [2017] Imm AR 1237 establish that there will only  be  a
         human rights claim to be  determined  if  further  submissions  are
         considered to amount to a  fresh  claim.  Rule  353,  in  turn,  is
         directed at the manner in which a court should approach that  prior
         question. Under the post-2014 provisions it remains the  case  that
         if there is no claim, there is no appealable decision.
         ...
         Conclusion
         64.             For these reasons I consider  that  the  Court  of
         Appeal was correct to conclude  that  'a  human  rights  claim'  in
         section 82(1)(b) of the 2002 Act as amended means an original human
         rights claim or a fresh human rights claim within  rule  353.  More
         generally, where a person has already had a protection claim  or  a
         human rights claim refused and there is no pending appeal,  further
         submissions which rely on protection or human rights  grounds  must
         first be accepted by the Secretary of State as  a  fresh  claim  in
         accordance with rule 353 of the Immigration Rules if a decision  in
         response to those representations is to attract a right  of  appeal
         under section 82 of the 2002 Act."

35. The Tribunal's decision in Islam post-dates Robinson. The Tribunal  was
    obviously bound by Robinson.  Nonetheless, following  consideration  of
    the guidance in Sheidu, and apparently based  on  the  wording  of  the
    decision under challenge in that case, the Tribunal concluded that  the
    Respondent had made a decision refusing a  claim.   Paragraph  353  was
    therefore of no  consequence.   A  right  of  appeal  had  arisen.  The
    Tribunal considered that the observations made in Sheidu concerning the
    importance of the structure of the decision letter survived Robinson.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

36. The first question for us to determine is whether  Sheidu  was  rightly
    decided.  As we have already observed, the Tribunal in Sheidu  did  not
    purport to offer guidance  more  generally  on  the  statutory  appeals
    scheme and Paragraph 353 in that context.  We consider  it  appropriate
    to begin our consideration with  observations  about  that  scheme  and
    Paragraph 353 in context  as  we  consider  it  important  properly  to
    understand the role of Paragraph 353.


37. We begin by emphasising  the  need  for  caution  in  relation  to  the
    terminology used when dealing with Paragraph 353.   The  importance  of
    Paragraph 353 is as a "gate-keeping" function  to  shut  out  from  the
    appeals system unmeritorious second or subsequent appeals.   An  appeal
    is generated under the current form of  section  82  of  the  2002  Act
    whenever a protection or human rights  "claim"  is  made  and  refused.
    Whether the matters put forward amount to a  claim  or  merely  further
    submissions is the central issue which the  Respondent  has  to  decide
    applying Paragraph 353.  If  she  concludes  that  the  matters  raised
    amount to a fresh "claim", she makes a "decision" to refuse that claim,
    so generating a right of appeal.  Obviously in the ordinary meaning  of
    the word "decision", the Respondent can be  said  to  make  a  decision
    every time that she refuses any application, claim or  set  of  further
    submissions.  In the context of section 82 of the  2002  Act,  however,
    "decision" has a specific meaning: see  MY  (refusal  of  human  rights
    claim) Pakistan [2020] UKUT 89 (IAC); [2020] Imm AR 906.  A "decision",
    if it refuses a (human rights or protection) "claim" gives  rise  to  a
    right of appeal.   If,  however,  the  Respondent  considers  that  the
    further matters raised are not a fresh "claim" for those purposes,  she
    rejects those and  refuses  to  treat  the  further  submissions  as  a
    protection or a human rights claim.


38. Mr Biggs does not go so far as to say that Paragraph 353 no longer  has
    a part to play in the post-2014 Act appeals regime.  Nor could he do so
    in light of the judgment in Robinson.  His argument is, in short,  that
    whether a decision gives rise to a  right  of  appeal  depends  on  the
    substance and structure of the decision under challenge.  He relies  on
    what is said in Sheidu and Islam in that regard.

39. Mr Biggs argues that, in any case where the Respondent engages with the
    merits of further submissions (or application) and makes a decision  in
    that regard, she has made a "decision" to refuse a "claim" which  gives
    rise to a right of appeal.  His submission is  perhaps  a  little  more
    nuanced than that as he has to accept that the wording of Paragraph 353
    requires the further submissions to be rejected prior to  consideration
    whether they amount to a fresh claim.

40. The Respondent relies squarely on the words "if rejected" in  Paragraph
    353 as an indication that she is required to engage with the merits  of
    further submissions and to reach conclusions on the substance prior  to
    determining whether the further submissions amount to a fresh claim.

41. Mr Biggs submits that what the Respondent  has  to  determine  are  the
    merits of the further submissions and not the human rights  claim.   As
    he put it, the requirement first to  consider  whether  to  reject  the
    submissions "does not require a full evaluation of the  merits  because
    otherwise the substantial advantage of Paragraph 353 to the  Respondent
    falls away".  In our view, that discloses  a  misunderstanding  of  the
    purpose of Paragraph 353.

42. Paragraph 353 is, as we have indicated, aimed at preventing  cases  re-
    entering the appeals system and not at reducing the burden of decision-
    making for the Respondent.  Whilst we accept that the Respondent is not
    required to consider in detail submissions which merely repeat what was
    said in the initial claim, it is difficult to see  how  the  Respondent
    could form a view whether further submissions are or are  not  a  fresh
    claim without first addressing the merits  of  what  is  said.   It  is
    artificial to separate the underlying merits of  what  is  put  forward
    from the question whether something "significantly different" is  being
    advanced.  Indeed, we doubt whether the latter can properly be assessed
    until the former is considered.

43. Mr Biggs sought to support his position in this regard by reference  to
    case-law.  He referred us to [47(4)] of Robinson as follows:

         "The fact that section 94 applies to both  original  and  purported
         renewed claims does not deprive rule 353 of its utility in relation
         to the latter category.  In appropriate cases,  rule  353  relieves
         the Secretary of State from taking a decision on the merits of  the
         application and refusing it.  It operates by enabling him to reject
         the submissions as not constituting  a  claim  requiring  decision.
         Section 94, however, comes into play only  when  the  Secretary  of
         State has considered a claim on its merits and refused it.  At that
         stage, certification operates to block a  right  to  an  in-country
         appeal which would otherwise arise.
             'Thus rule 353 can be operated as a sort of gatekeeper by  the
             Secretary of State to prevent  further  submissions  amounting
             to, or being treated as, a claim, therefore not  getting  into
             Part 5 territory at all.' (ZA (Nigeria) per Lord Neuberger  MR
             at para 26.)
          With respect  to  Mr  Fordham,  it  is  not  the  case  that  this
         interposing  function  arose  only  because   of   the   additional
         requirement of an 'immigration decision' in the pre-2014  statutory
         list in section 82(1) of the 2002 Act.   On  the  contrary,  it  is
         founded on the need to identify what constitutes a claim  for  this
         purpose."
         [our emphasis]

44. Mr Biggs understandably draws our attention to the sentences  which  we
    have emphasised in that passage.  His reliance however only  serves  to
    underline the need for care when considering how appeal rights function
    in the immigration context.  As is made plain when that passage is read
    as a whole and as we have already alluded to, a "claim" has a  specific
    meaning, particularly in the appeals regime following  the  Immigration
    Act 2014.  Even prior to those changes, whether a (protection or  human
    rights) "claim" had been made was of relevance to the determination  of
    the forum of the appeal (in or out of country).


45. Similarly, a "decision"  in  the  immigration  appeals  context  has  a
    specific meaning.  As  was  made  clear  in  BA,  in  cases  where  the
    Respondent was obliged to make a "decision" for the purposes of section
    82 of the 2002 Act (prior to the amendments made by 2014 Act), a  right
    of appeal would always arise absent certification.

46. With that terminology firmly in mind, we consider that the  passage  on
    which Mr Biggs places reliance says no more than that the Respondent is
    not obliged to treat repeat submissions  as  a  "claim"  leading  to  a
    "decision" generating  a  right  of  appeal  in  every  case.  That  is
    consistent with the previous case-law in relation to Paragraph 353.  It
    is only if she decides that the further submissions are a  fresh  claim
    that an appealable decision on  the  merits  is  taken  which,  if  not
    certified, would lead to a second or further appeal. That is put beyond
    doubt by the Supreme Court's reference to the "gatekeeping function" of
    Paragraph 353 preventing the case re-entering the appeals process.

47. We observe in passing that it is difficult to see  how  the  Respondent
    could accept that further submissions amount to a fresh claim  (on  the
    basis that they have a realistic prospect of success) and then  certify
    them as clearly unfounded under section  94  of  the  2002  Act  as  is
    suggested by the Supreme Court in this passage.   However, that is  not
    of any relevance to the issues we have to determine.

48. Similarly, Mr Biggs' reliance on [47(5)] of the  judgment  in  Robinson
    concerning section 96 of the 2002 Act does not advance his  case.   The
    Supreme Court is merely pointing out the differences between section 96
    where the Respondent accepts that a "claim" has been made but  prevents
    the right of appeal arising by certification and "the converse  of  the
    situation" under Paragraph 353 where the  Respondent  does  not  accept
    that a "claim" has been made at all.

49. If the position needs to be made any  clearer,  we  consider  there  is
    force in the Respondent's reference to [47(3)] of Robinson as follows:


         "As indicated above, where it applies rule 353 operates at a  prior
         stage to section 94.  In the case  of  a  purported  renewed  claim
         there  is  a  legitimate  preliminary  issue  as  to   whether   it
         constitutes a claim requiring a decision  on  the  merits  at  all.
         Rule 353 addresses that issue.  Section  94,  on  the  other  hand,
         proceeds on the basis that there is a valid  claim  which  requires
         consideration on the merits and a decision.  It creates a machinery
         of certification of the claim as clearly unfounded so as to prevent
         an in-country appeal."

50. We have set out paragraph 60 of  Robinson  at  [34]  above.   Mr  Biggs
    places reliance on the reference to "the burden  of  establishing  that
    the refusal was in response to a valid claim".   That  comment  however
    undermines the Applicant's case rather than  assisting  it.   It  makes
    plain that the focus is on whether there is a "claim"  leading  to  "an
    appealable  decision".   The  Supreme  Court,  in  that  passage,  also
    rejected the submission made by the appellant that "any submission that
    removal would breach a relevant  obligation  will  amount  to  a  human
    rights or protection claim, the rejection of which will give rise to  a
    right of appeal."


51. Mr Biggs also places reliance on [21]  of  the  decision  in  ZA.   The
    reference there is to the Secretary of State being able to decide  that
    submissions are not a fresh claim  and  then  "[declining]  to  make  a
    decision on whether or not to refuse leave to enter etc".  That is  not
    an indication that the merits of the submissions  do  not  have  to  be
    considered.  It is a recognition that, at the time, what generated  the
    right of appeal  was  a  decision  as  to  immigration  status  (as  is
    confirmed by the following part of that  sentence).  The  reference  to
    considering the merits  of  the  "claim"  there  and  at  [26]  of  the
    judgment, properly understood, are a rejection of the argument that the
    Respondent is obliged to consider the merits of the further submissions
    as a "claim" and to certify in order to remove the right of appeal.


52. As those cases make clear, therefore, the Respondent does not  have  to
    engage with the merits of a "claim" by treating it as  such  until  she
    has determined whether the further submissions are so different  as  to
    amount to a "claim" for the purposes of the  statutory  appeal  scheme.
    That does not mean however that she is not  required  to  consider  the
    merits of the submissions put forward  to  decide  whether  to  respond
    positively  to  them.  On  the  contrary,  the  words   "if   rejected"
    specifically contemplate that the Respondent must form a  view  on  the
    merits, in the sense that she may decide the submissions are such as to
    warrant the grant leave to enter or remain (and to recognise the person
    as a refugee or otherwise entitled to international protection). It  is
    only if she does not do so that Paragraph 353 requires her to determine
    if the rejected submissions are a fresh claim,  the  refusal  of  which
    constitutes a decision falling within section 82 of the 2002 Act.

53. The process which is undertaken by the Respondent where  Paragraph  353
    applies is therefore as follows:

    Stage 1:  The Applicant makes human rights or protection claim.
    Stage 2: That claim is refused by the  Respondent,  giving  rise  to  a
    right of appeal under section 82.
    Stage 3: The Applicant's appeal is unsuccessful; or the Applicant  does
    not appeal or withdraws his appeal; or the refusal is  certified  under
    section 94 of the 2002 Act.
    Stage 4: The Applicant makes second or subsequent submissions by way of
    written submissions or application ("the Further Submissions").
    Stage 5: The Respondent considers  whether  to  accept  or  reject  the
    Further Submissions on their merits.
    Stage 6: If the Further Submissions are accepted on their  merits,  the
    Respondent grants leave/recognises Applicant's status.
    Stage 7: If the Further Submissions are rejected, the  Respondent  goes
    on to consider whether they nonetheless amount to a fresh protection or
    human rights claim; ie a categorisation decision is made.
    Stage 8: If the Respondent determines that the Further  Submissions  do
    not amount to a fresh claim, she rejects them as such.  No refusal of a
    human rights or protection claim arises, within the meaning of  section
    82(1)(a) or (b) of the 2002 Act.  If, however, she determines that they
    do amount to a fresh claim, then a "decision" has been made to refuse a
    "claim" for the purposes of Section 82 (1)(a) or (b) of  the  2002  Act
    and a right of appeal arises against that decision

54. The foregoing is consistent with what is said by  this  Tribunal  in  R
    (oao Sharif Hussein) v First-tier Tribunal (Para 353: Present Scope and
    Effect) (IJR) [2017] Imm AR 1 ("Hussein") (see [50] of  the  decision).
    The  reference  at  [51]  of  the  decision  in  Hussein  regarding   a
    "discretion to grant leave...if  on  a  re-assessment,  it  is  thought
    appropriate to do so" is merely a recognition that the Respondent, when
    deciding whether to grant leave to remain, is acting in accordance with
    her duties under the Immigration Act 1971.  It does not  indicate  that
    there is no consideration of the merits in a Paragraph 353 case.


55. The foregoing analysis is also consistent with what is said at [54] and
    [55] of the decision in Hussein.  The reference to  the  categorisation
    decision is what we have referred to above as stage 7.   The  reference
    to the distinction between the process of categorisation and a decision
    to refuse a claim for the purposes of section 82 of the 2002 Act  again
    shows the need carefully to consider the language in context.   As  the
    Tribunal  there  makes  clear,  the  Paragraph  353  process   involves
    determining whether the further submissions amount  to  a  fresh  claim
    "although [they are] not such as to give rise to the grant  of  leave".
    That reference makes plain that the prior stage is to consider  whether
    leave should be granted.


56. We therefore reject the Applicant's argument that  the  Respondent  has
    "decided" a "claim" under section 82 of the 2002 Act in any case  where
    she  considers  further  submissions  or  a  further  application   and
    concludes that the submissions or application do not merit the grant of
    leave etc.

57. We now return then to the first question posed in ground one concerning
    the correctness of the  guidance  given  in  Sheidu  and  whether  that
    survives Robinson.

58. As we have already observed, Sheidu did not purport to give guidance on
    the application of Paragraph 353 in the post-2014  Act  context.   That
    guidance is now authoritatively given by the Supreme Court in Robinson.



59. In relation to his argument that Sheidu  still  applies  following  the
    judgment in Robinson, Mr Biggs relies on the decision in Islam.   Islam
    was not a reported case and did not offer guidance for other cases.  We
    do not therefore need formally to decide whether to follow it.  Nor  is
    this an appeal against the decision in that case.  We are of course not
    bound by it.

60. Islam is in any event a problematic decision.  As emerged in the course
    of the hearing before us, the decision under challenge in that case was
    one applying Paragraph 353  in  the  context  of  an  earlier  decision
    certifying a claim under section 94 of the 2002  Act.     Moreover,  it
    was  the  applicant's  case  that  he  had  not  received  the  earlier
    certification decision.   If  that  were  so  and  were  accepted,  the
    Tribunal  would  have  been  dealing  with   an   argument   that   the
    application/claim as made was  an  initial  one  requiring  a  decision
    which, if negative, would generate a  right  of  appeal  (unless  again
    certified).  In those circumstances,  Paragraph  353  would  be  of  no
    application.  Those arguments were not considered by the  Tribunal  but
    indicate the difficulties with placing reliance on that decision in any
    event.


61. As we have indicated,  the  guidance  given  in  Sheidu  turns  on  the
    structure of the decision letter there under challenge.   We  have  set
    out [16] and [17] of the decision at [33] above.


62. Both parties accept therefore that, ultimately, the guidance  given  in
    Sheidu turns on questions of interpretation  of  the  decision  letter.
    Both parties accept that it is necessary to look  at  a  Paragraph  353
    decision  under  challenge  as  a  whole.   It  must   be   interpreted
    objectively, considered fairly in the round and in substance.


63. Although we do not have the decision letter in Sheidu set out in  full,
    the conclusions of the Tribunal which form part of the  guidance  given
    turn on the heading in which the decision was described as a  "Decision
    to Refuse a Protection Claim and Human Rights Claim"   (albeit  in  the
    context of "consideration of further submissions") and  the  fact  that
    the  Respondent  had  refused  leave  to  remain  before  referring  to
    Paragraph 353.

64. In relation to the Decision here (and in Islam), Mr  Biggs  says  that,
    because an application for  ILR  under  paragraph  276B  of  the  Rules
    ("Paragraph 276B") is recognised by the Respondent  to  be  an  implied
    human rights claim, if the application is rejected on its merits before
    the Respondent engages with the categorisation decision under Paragraph
    353, she has  already  reached  a  "decision"  on  a  "claim"  and  has
    generated a right of appeal.  However, as we have already concluded  at
    paragraph 52 above, the Respondent has to consider the  merits  of  any
    further submissions put to her in order to decide whether they merit  a
    positive response.  That she does so and concludes a positive  response
    is not warranted does not indicate that she has recognised the  further
    submissions as a "claim" still less that she has made a "decision"  for
    the purposes of Section 82.

65. A decision letter may contain a number of different  elements.  It  is,
    however, the refusal of the human rights or protection element  of  the
    further submissions which, if recognised as a  "claim",  generates  the
    right of appeal.  Whilst, here, the application for ILR formed part  of
    the human rights case as long residence  is  part  of  the  Applicant's
    private life, that does not alter the fact that  any  appeal  would  be
    against the refusal of the human rights claim itself.

66. As both parties  accept,  when  searching  for  the  intention  of  the
    decision letter, one has  to  look  at  it  holistically.   Whilst  the
    heading used in the decision letter in Sheidu was perhaps  unfortunate,
    we do not consider that this alone could influence the  nature  of  the
    decision, which followed at least unless the  impact  of  the  decision
    read as a whole was that the Respondent  was  recognising  the  further
    submissions as a "claim" and making a "decision" to reject that  claim.
     In this case, Mr Biggs accepted that he would not be able to argue the
    Applicant's case as he has  if  Paragraph  353  had  been  put  at  the
    forefront of the Decision or, rather, if the application  for  ILR  had
    been considered "through the prism" of Paragraph 353.  However, whether
    it was considered in that context has to be looked at in substance  not
    based on where in a decision letter Paragraph 353 is mentioned.   There
    can be no benefit to anyone - be it the parties or Tribunal  -  of  the
    uncertainty generated by such an approach.


67. As we indicate at [33] above, the guidance given in Sheidu is  confined
    to a general statement that if the effect of a decision is a refusal of
    a claim under section 82 of the 2002 Act  then  there  is  a  right  of
    appeal  even  if  the  Respondent  had  intended  to   refuse   further
    submissions applying Paragraph 353.  As we  have  also  noted  at  [61]
    above, that guidance turns on interpretation  of  the  decision  letter
    under consideration in that case. It is therefore limited to the  facts
    of that case.

68. We make it clear that we are not saying that a court or tribunal  could
    never decide that the impact of a decision properly interpreted  was  a
    decision refusing a human rights claim rather  than  rejecting  further
    submissions. The Respondent is not the sole or ultimate arbiter of  how
    her decisions are to be interpreted.  In some  (albeit  extreme)  cases
    such as Sheidu, this Tribunal may conclude in the context of a judicial
    review challenge that what the Respondent actually did was not what she
    intended to do.  Such cases are nevertheless likely to be rare.


69. In light of the foregoing, we can answer the second question in  ground
    one more shortly. We are here concerned with the impact of our  earlier
    conclusions for the Decision in this case.

70. We accept that an application for ILR  under  Paragraph  276B  includes
    consideration of an  applicant's  human  rights  and  is  therefore  an
    implied human rights claim (see in that regard  [23]  to  [25]  of  the
    Tribunal's  decision  in  R  (oao  Mujahid)   v   First-tier   Tribunal
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) and the Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Home Department (refusal of  human  rights  claim)  [2020]  UKUT  00085
    (IAC); [2020] Imm AR 856).  However, the application for ILR  was  only
    part of the Respondent's consideration of the Applicant's human rights.




71. The application for ILR was submitted under cover of a letter dated  20
    February 2020 ([AB/C/57-64].  That letter dealt  with  the  Applicant's
    length of residence which was an integral part of the application under
    the Immigration Rules ("the Rules").   The  covering  letter  also  put
    forward  further  arguments  in  relation  to  the  deception   alleged
    previously (as found to be made out  by  the  previous  Tribunal).  The
    letter went on to refer to Article 8 more generally and to make  points
    about the Applicant's human rights in that context by reference to  his
    private and family life.  There was obviously  some  overlap  with  the
    application itself, but the covering letter included other points about
    the proportionality of a refusal to grant leave which went  beyond  the
    application.


72. The first part of the Respondent's consideration for that reason  dealt
    with the application made under the Rules. The Applicant had of  course
    made payment for this application and would no doubt have rightly  been
    aggrieved had the Respondent not engaged  with  the  application  being
    made.

73. The Respondent rejected that application on the basis she  had  before,
    namely that the Applicant had exercised deception and Paragraph  322(5)
    applied.  In  order  to  reach  that  conclusion,  the  Respondent  was
    required to consider the further evidence and  submissions  made  about
    the deception which had previously been alleged.  Again,  had  she  not
    done so, the Decision would no doubt  have  been  challenged  for  that
    reason.

74. Having also set out the findings of the  previous  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge in that regard, the Respondent  concluded  that  section  of  the
    decision with the following paragraph:


         "For the reason outlined above,  your  application  for  indefinite
         leave to remain on the grounds of long residence is refused, as you
         have failed to meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules under
         Paragraph 276D with reference to Paragraph 276B(i)(a) and (v) of HC
         395."


75. That paragraph does no more than to conclude that the Applicant was not
    entitled to a grant of ILR within the Rules because he  was  considered
    to have exercised deception and nothing he had  said  in  or  with  the
    further application led to any different conclusion.  We  do  not  here
    need to consider the substance of that conclusion as the Applicant  was
    refused permission to  challenge  the  substance  of  the  Decision  on
    rationality grounds (see [8] above).  It  was  precisely  the  kind  of
    decision, which Parliament has decided should no longer be subject to a
    right of appeal.


76. The second part of the Respondent's consideration related to the  human
    rights  case  under  Article  8  ECHR.   The   Respondent   began   her
    consideration by reference  to  Paragraph  353  in  order  to  consider
    whether any of what was said in the covering letter  or  otherwise  was
    significantly different  to  the  case  as  previously  advanced.   The
    Respondent referred again to the previous appeal decision and concluded
    that it was not.  Again, we do not need to consider at this  stage  the
    substance of what is there said.


77. As we have already noted, Mr  Biggs  argues  that,  by  the  time  that
    Paragraph 353 was raised, the Respondent had already made a  "decision"
    (refusing leave to remain) which, because the application for  ILR  was
    an implied human rights claim, amounted  to  a  "decision"  refusing  a
    "human rights claim" and therefore generating a right of appeal.  As we
    have already observed, we understood him to accept  that  if  Paragraph
    353 had  been  mentioned  prior  to  the  paragraph  refusing  the  ILR
    application which we cite at [74] above, then the Applicant would  have
    no case on ground one.


78. Whether a decision of the Respondent is a decision to refuse  to  treat
    submissions as a fresh claim or the refusal of what is accepted to be a
    fresh claim is, as Mr Blundell submitted, a matter of substance and not
    form.  The nature of the decision does not depend where in the decision
    letter Paragraph 353 is raised.  It makes sense for the  Respondent  to
    refer to Paragraph 353 at the point where she has to  consider  whether
    to apply it rather than earlier.

79. In this case, if the Respondent had been persuaded by  the  Applicant's
    arguments in relation to the  deception  alleged,  she  may  well  have
    reached the conclusion that ILR should be granted (since  that  is  the
    only point taken about the Applicant's entitlement to ILR).   It  would
    be nonsensical for the Respondent to consider  whether  a  decision  to
    refuse submissions amounted to an appealable decision  before  deciding
    whether the submissions should lead to the grant of leave to remain. We
    refer again to what we say at paragraph 52 above. As  we  have  already
    noted, it is also difficult to see how the  Respondent  could  consider
    whether the submissions were significantly different  without  engaging
    with what is said and expressing a view in that regard.


80. For completeness, we do not accept that our conclusions are impacted by
    the Vice President's decision in Yerokun (Refusal  of  claim;  Mujahid)
    [2020] UKUT 00377 (IAC) ("Yerokun").   We  do  not  disagree  with  the
    guidance given in Yerokun.   We accept that an  application  and  claim
    are different.  We accept that "refusal of one does not imply or entail
    the refusal of the other, even where the application includes a claim".
     That is consistent with our view that a decision has to be read  as  a
    whole and not broken up into component parts.  The point made  at  [12]
    of the decision (on which the Applicant relies) is merely  that  it  is
    not inconsistent for the Respondent to grant leave in  response  to  an
    application even if that forms part of the claim  but  then  go  on  to
    refuse the claim itself (or vice versa). That is a different  issue  to
    the one we are considering.  The point made is in any event  consistent
    with what we say above about the need to interpret the  decision  based
    on all its component parts and as a whole.

81. For those reasons, we refuse the application  for  judicial  review  on
    ground one.  It follows that the Respondent did  not  by  the  Decision
    generate a right of appeal.  The Applicant can therefore challenge  the
    Decision only by way of this judicial review.

GROUND TWO

82. The Applicant's case is that the Tribunal is required to  consider  the
    Applicant's Article 8 claim for itself. Mr Biggs  submits  that  it  is
    trite law that, where there is a challenge to a decision letter dealing
    with Article 8 ECHR in a judicial review, it is  for  the  Tribunal  to
    decide for itself whether Article 8  is  breached  by  the  refusal  of
    leave.  In this case, that involves, the Applicant says,  a  resolution
    of the factual dispute underlying the Applicant's case relating to  the
    deception.


83. The Respondent on the other hand says that the Tribunal's role  is  one
    of review on public law grounds because of the nature of the  Decision.
    The Respondent relies on what she says is  binding  authority  in  that
    regard.

LEGAL FRAMEWORK


84. Mr Biggs relies on the Court  of  Appeal's  judgment  in  Balajigari  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2019] 1  WLR  4647;  [2019]
    Imm AR 1152 ("Balajigari") as considered by the Tribunal in R (oao  BAA
    and Another) v Secretary of State for the Home Department (Dublin  III:
    judicial review; SoS's duties)  [2020]  UKUT  00227  (IAC)  ("BAA")  in
    particular at [59] to [63] as follows:


         "59.  The principle that issues of disputed fact may require to  be
         decided in judicial review proceedings  involving  a  human  rights
         ground of challenge has been emphatically confirmed by the judgment
         of Underhill LJ in R (Balajigari) v Home Secretary [2019]  1  WLR
         4647; [2019] EWCA Civ 673.  The case  involved  the  nature  of  a
         judicial review against  a  decision  of  the  respondent  that  an
         individual  had  acted  dishonestly   in   respect   of   financial
         information provided, respectively, to the respondent  and  to  Her
         Majesty's Revenue and Customs.  Where Article 8 was  in  play,  and
         the  issue  involves  the  proportionality  of   the   respondent's
         decision, Underhill LJ was in no  doubt  that  the  allegation  (of
         dishonesty) had to be determined by the Tribunal, by means  of  its
         own factual investigation:-
             '104. If such an article 8 challenge does proceed  by  way  of
             judicial review in the UT, and the claimant's article 8  rights
             are found to have been engaged, the tribunal will,  as  already
             noted,  have  to  consider  for  itself  whether  the   alleged
             dishonesty on the part of the  claimant  has  been  proved  and
             whether removal is proportionate, which in most cases is likely
             to be determined by the question of dishonesty.  It will not be
             confined, as  would  usually  be  the  case  and  as  in  these
             proceedings thus far, to reviewing the facts only on the ground
             of irrationality. This is because, where a claim  for  judicial
             review includes a pleaded ground that the Secretary of  State's
             decision either does or would violate article 8,  that  amounts
             to an allegation that  there  has  been  or  will  be  unlawful
             conduct contrary to section 6 of the 1998 Act.  That allegation
             has to be adjudicated by the tribunal on its merits: it  is  an
             argument based on illegality and not simply irrationality.  For
             a recent summary of the law in this regard see R (Caroopen)  v
             Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] 1 WLR  2339,
             paras 68-83, per Underhill LJ.'
         60.         At paragraphs 68  to  83  of Caroopen,  Underhill  LJ
         undertook an analysis of  the  case  law,  including Denbigh  High
         School, Naseri [sic], Bank Mellat No 2, Miss Behavin' and Lord
         Carlile's case, similar to that undertaken by  the  Upper  Tribunal
         in MS. Indeed, as we have seen, at paragraph 204 of its  judgment,
         the Upper Tribunal cited the passage at paragraph 73  of Caroopen,
         where Underhill LJ held that, in  challenges  of  this  kind,  'the
         Court cannot confine itself to asking whether  the  decision-making
         process was defective but must  decide  whether  the  decision  was
         right'.
         61.         It is, therefore, established that in a judicial review
         which challenges a decision on  the  ground  that  it  actually  or
         potentially violates a person's protected human right, the court or
         tribunal must determine that issue  for  itself  (albeit  ascribing
         weight to the decision-maker's expertise  and  statutory  or  other
         relevant functions). Where there is a dispute  as  to  the  primary
         facts that must be ascertained before that issue can be determined,
         the court or tribunal must resolve that dispute.
         62.         The legal principle I have just stated is part of  our
         domestic law of  judicial  review.  It  has  been  reached  by  the
         domestic courts applying section 6 of the Human  Rights  Act  1998,
         which prohibits a public authority from acting incompatibly with an
         ECHR right. Where an ECHR right is in play, this legal principle is
         not dependent on Article 27 of Dublin III  or,  indeed,  any  other
         piece of EU legislation regarding the availability of an  effective
         remedy, even where the challenged decision is made  under  EU  law.
         Nor is the principle dependent upon there being some  other  public
         law error in the impugned decision.
         63.         The fact that a decision of the respondent,  which  is
         otherwise free from public law error, may fall to be quashed, as  a
         result of a fact-finding exercise of the kind undertaken in MS and
         the present case, needs to be seen in context. In  most  instances,
         there is unlikely to be any dispute as to the  primary  facts.  The
         issue in contention will, rather, be about what  weight  should  be
         ascribed to particular factual elements  in  order  to  strike  the
         proportionality balance.  A decision which is free from public  law
         error, where the evidence available  to  the  respondent  does  not
         disclose a reason why the decision might be in breach of section  6
         of the Human Rights Act 1998, will not get  past  the  'permission'
         stage on judicial review. Although there is  no  legal  requirement
         for there to be an independent public law error, a genuine  dispute
         as to primary facts is likely to arise only  where  there  has,  in
         practice, been some such error, such  as  a  breach  of  procedural
         fairness (as in Balajigari)."


85. The Respondent relies on cases in the fresh claims context as authority
    for the proposition that the function of the court or  tribunal  is  to
    review the  decision  applying  ordinary  public  law  concepts.   That
    position is most clearly stated in WM as follows:


         "[10]...a court when reviewing a decision of the Secretary of State
         as to whether a fresh  claim  exists  must  address  the  following
         matters.
         [11] First, has the Secretary of State asked  himself  the  correct
         question?  The question is  not  whether  the  Secretary  of  State
         himself thinks that the new claim is a good one or should  succeed,
         but whether there  is  a  realistic  prospect  of  an  adjudicator,
         applying the rule of anxious scrutiny, thinking that the  applicant
         will be exposed to a real risk of persecution  on  return:  see  7
         above.  The  Secretary  of  State  or  course  can,  and  no  doubt
         logically should, treat his own view of the merits as  a  starting-
         point for that enquiry but it is  only  a  starting  point  in  the
         consideration of a question that is distinctly different  from  the
         exercise of the Secretary of State making up his own mind.  Second,
         in addressing that question, both in respect of the  evaluation  of
         the facts and in respect of the legal conclusions to be drawn  from
         those facts has the Secretary of State satisfied the requirement of
         anxious scrutiny?  If the court cannot be satisfied that the answer
         to both of those questions is in the affirmative it  will  have  to
         grant an  application  for  review  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
         decision."


86. The position is re-stated by the Supreme Court in Robinson as follows:


         "37.             In WM (DRC) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
         Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1495; [2007] Imm AR 337 the Court  of
         Appeal (Buxton, Parker and Moore-Bick LJJ) confirmed (per Buxton LJ
         at paras 8-10) that  there  is  no  provision  for  appeal  from  a
         decision of the Secretary of State as to the existence of  a  fresh
         claim and, accordingly, the court  was  engaged  only  through  the
         medium of judicial review. The Secretary of State's decision as  to
         whether there was a fresh claim was not a fact,  nor  precedent  to
         any other decision, but was the decision itself.  The  court  could
         not take that decision out of the hands of the decision maker.  The
         decision remained that of the Secretary of State, subject  only  to
         review on a Wednesbury basis, albeit applying anxious scrutiny."


    The Court of Appeal has also recently re-stated  that  as  the  correct
    approach in Akinola v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2021]
    EWCA Civ 1308 ("Akinola") (see [89] and [90] of the judgment).


DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

87. We accept that the judgments in Balajigari, WM  and  Robinson  are  all
    binding on us.  The challenge for us is to seek to  reconcile  what  is
    said in Balajigari (and BAA) on the one hand with what is  said  in  WM
    and Robinson on the other.


88. What is said by the Court of Appeal in Balajigari  is  consistent  with
    other cases involving certification or  where  there  is  no  right  of
    appeal.  BAA was of course itself a case  involving  certification  and
    where the applicant had no right  of  appeal.   The  same  is  true  of
    Balajigari.  Those cases were ones where there was a refusal of Tier  1
    applications but no consideration of human rights so there was (and had
    been) no right of appeal.


89. The position is however different in fresh claims cases such  as  this.
    The case law in relation to fresh claims has consistently  stated  that
    the role of the Tribunal is only to consider whether  the  decision  is
    Wednesbury unreasonable or involves public  law  error.   The  Tribunal
    does  not  consider  for  itself  whether  the  decision  breaches  the
    applicant's human rights.  Whilst we accept that WM is  a  judgment  of
    some  antiquity  and  concerned  asylum  rather   than   human   rights
    submissions, Robinson is a very recent decision of the highest court in
    this jurisdiction and was concerned squarely with Article 8 ECHR.   The
    Court of Appeal has also recently confirmed the position in Akinola.


90. There is good reason for the distinction between fresh claims cases and
    judicial  review  challenges  in  certification  cases  based  on   the
    existence of the earlier appeal.  That is the forum for  resolution  of
    disputes of fact.  It is only if an  applicant  puts  forward  material
    which shows that the earlier finding may be wrong (or in other words is
    significantly different or admits of a realistic prospect  of  success)
    that the Respondent's  decision  can  be  impugned.   The  Tribunal  is
    therefore  tasked  with  considering  the  Respondent's  decision   for
    rejecting the new material in light of the Tribunal's earlier  findings
    but is not  required  to  reach  a  decision  for  itself  whether  the
    Respondent's  decision  breaches  an  applicant's  human  rights.   The
    position in this regard is akin to that where  an  appellate  court  or
    tribunal is examining the legality  of  the  mixed  legal  and  factual
    conclusion reached by a fact-finding tribunal  on  whether  a  decision
    violates Article 8 rights.

91. In the event that further material comes to light, the  remedy  for  an
    applicant is to make further submissions to the Respondent and not seek
    to place the Tribunal in the role of primary decision-maker.

92. The Balajigari cases did not involve fresh  claim  decisions.  As  such
    they are distinguishable from this and other fresh claims  cases.   BAA
    is similarly distinguishable.  The case-law setting out the role of the
    Tribunal in Paragraph 353 cases has recently been re-stated in Robinson
    and is binding on us.  We consider that it is in any event correct.

93. For those reasons, we also refuse the application for  judicial  review
    on the Applicant's ground two.  We do not therefore need to  convene  a
    further hearing in relation to  the  fact-finding  exercise  which  the
    Applicant argues we should conduct.  Nor do we  need  to  consider  the
    Applicant's application to adduce further evidence.  If  the  Applicant
    wants that further evidence to be considered, his remedy is to  put  it
    before the Respondent.

CONCLUSION

94. For the above reasons, we refuse this application for judicial review.




Signed: L K Smith
Dated: 27 September 2021
