

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

KAM (Nuba - return) Sudan CG [2020] UKUT 00269 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil and Family Justice     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Centre                                        |                              |
|and Field House                               |                              |
|On 31 May and 1 June 2018; 30 August 2018;    |                              |
|24 and 25 October 2019; final written         |                              |
|submissions completed on 5 December 2019      |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                    k A m
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Jacobs, instructed by Albany Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Thomann, instructed by the
Government Legal Department


      a) An individual of Nuba ethnicity is not at real risk of  persecution
         or serious ill-treatment on return to Sudan (whether  in  the  Nuba
         Mountains, Greater  Khartoum  or  Khartoum  International  Airport)
         simply because of their ethnicity.

      b) A returning failed asylum-seeker (including of Nuba  ethnicity)  is
         not at real risk of persecution or  serious  ill-treatment  at  the
         airport simply on account of being a failed asylum-seeker.

      c) Prior to the political developments in 2019, individuals  who  were
         at risk on return (whether at the airport or in  Greater  Khartoum)
         were those who were perceived by the Sudanese authorities to  be  a
         sufficiently serious threat to the Sudanese Government  to  warrant
         targeting.

      d) The assessment of that risk required  an  evaluation  of  what  was
         likely to be known to the authorities and a holistic assessment  of
         the individual's circumstances  including  any  previous  political
         activity in Sudan or abroad and any past history  of  detention  in
         Sudan.  Factors include whether the individual  was  a  student,  a
         political activist or a journalist; their ethnicity; their religion
         (in particular Christianity); and whether they came from  a  former
         conflict area (such as the Nuba Mountains).

      e)  Whilst  the  question  of  perception  of   political   opposition
         underlying (c) above remains the  same  since  the  2019  political
         developments, when assessing any risk to  an  individual  now,  the
         effects of the 2019 political developments  are  relevant  and  are
         likely to affect the Sudanese authorities' view  of,  and  attitude
         towards, those who  might  be  perceived  as  political  opponents.
         Further, the 2019 political developments are likely to have greatly
         reduced the interest  of  the  Sudanese  government  in  supressing
         political opposition by violent or military action.

      f) Internal relocation to  Greater  Khartoum  for  a  person  of  Nuba
         ethnicity must depend upon an assessment of  all  the  individual's
         circumstances including their living conditions, their  ability  to
         access  education,  healthcare   and   employment.    Despite   the
         impoverished conditions  and  discrimination  faced  by  Nuba  when
         living in the so-called 'Black  Belt'  area  of  Greater  Khartoum,
         relocating  there  will  not   generally   be   unduly   harsh   or
         unreasonable.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This decision  provides  country  guidance  on  two  principal  issues.
    First, what, if any, is the risk of  persecution  and/or  serious  ill-
    treatment for a person of Nuba ethnicity in  Sudan?  Second,  what,  if
    any, internal relocation option  is  available  to  a  person  of  Nuba
    ethnicity if at risk of persecution in their home area?

I.  BACKGROUND

 2. The Nuba peoples  comprise  various  non-Arab  ethnic  groups  who  are
    indigenous to, and inhabit,  the  Nuba  Mountains  (in  particular  the
    foothills) in South Kordofan State in Sudan.   That  area  borders  the
    (now) independent country of South Sudan.  The Nuba also  live  in  the
    Blue Nile State of Sudan.  Together these areas are known as  the  "Two
    Areas".  They are a disparate  group  of  tribes  (perhaps  around  50)
    lacking any political unity and speak a number of languages  (estimated
    as over 100).  They live in villages, organised in  clans  or  extended
    family groups, with clan elders being in authority.  The Nuba  practise
    a number of  different  religions  including  Islam,  Christianity  and
    traditional African beliefs.

 3. Estimates of how many Nuba live in Sudan vary.  In 2003,  the  Sudanese
    Government estimated there were  1.07  million  Nuba  in  Sudan.   Some
    estimates put the number higher.  Many Nuba, as a result of conflict in
    their home area, now live in or around the capital, Khartoum which,  as
    "Greater Khartoum", is comprised of the  three  urban  conurbations  of
    Khartoum, Khartoum  North  and  Omdurman  (also  known  as  the  "Three
    Towns"). Although there is no verified figure, we heard  evidence  that
    put the number of Nuba in Greater Khartoum in the  100,000s.   Together
    with Non-Arab Darfuris, some sources have estimated  that  the  numbers
    may be  higher  reaching  as  many  as  1  million,  and  some  sources
    estimating as high as 5 million, living in  Greater  Khartoum.   It  is
    said that the joint Nuba/Non-Arab Darfuri population represents 60%  or
    70% of the total population  of  Greater  Khartoum  (see  Joint  Danish
    Immigration Service and Home Office Fact-finding Missions to  Khartoum,
    Kampala and  Nairobi,  "Situation  of  Persons  from  Darfur,  Southern
    Kordofan and Blue Nile in Khartoum"  (4  August  2016)  at  para  1.1).
    Whatever the correct  figure,  there  is  undoubtedly  a  very  sizable
    population of Nuba living in Greater Khartoum.   Most  live  in  shanty
    towns in an area called the  'Black  Belt'  on  the  outskirts  of  the
    conurbation.

 4. It is helpful to set out as background a brief summary of the  relevant
    political history of Sudan. We include  a  number  of  factual  matters
    widely reported in the news which took place in Sudan after the October
    2019 hearing.

 5. Sudan became an independent country in 1956. Its  immediately  relevant
    political history dates from June 1989 when  a  military  coup  led  by
    Colonel al-Bashir ("al-Bashir") deposed  the  existing  government  and
    installed a military government  (with  him  as  the  Chairman  of  the
    Revolutionary Command Council for National Salvation)  and  created  an
    Islamic state.  In October 1993 al-Bashir appointed  himself  President
    with executive and legislative powers.  Sudan became a one-party  state
    under the National Congress Party (the "NCP").

 6. Sudan has seen a number of internal military  conflicts  between  rebel
    groups and the Government both in the western Darfur region and in  the
    east and south of the country.

 7. A conflict in the Darfur region began  in  2003  led  by  rebel  groups
    including the Sudanese Liberation Movement/Army ("SLM/A")  and  Justice
    and Equality Movement ("JEM") arising  from  dissatisfaction  with  the
    treatment of Non-Arabs in Darfur.  The conflict lasted until 2007.  The
    Sudanese Government has been widely accused of genocide in  Darfur,  in
    particular as a result of the  actions  of  its  proxy,  the  Janjaweed
    militia.  As a consequence, in March 2009 al-Bashir  was  indicted  for
    war crimes and crimes of  genocide  and  against  humanity  before  the
    International Criminal Court in The Hague.

 8. In the south of Sudan a further conflict arose between  2003  and  2005
    waged against the Sudanese Government by a coalition of  rebel  groups,
    primarily led by the Sudanese People's  Liberation  Movement  ("SPLM").
    Following the signing of a peace agreement between  the  SPLM  and  the
    Sudanese Government in 2006, a referendum in 2011 led to the secession,
    and creation of the independent country, of South Sudan in 2011.

 9. In 2010, in the lead-up to the referendum, a  military  conflict  broke
    out in the South Kordofan region between the rebel group, the  Sudanese
    People's Liberation Movement-North ("SPLM-N") (affiliated to the  SPLM)
    and the Sudanese Government. The conflict in South  Kordofan  has  been
    described as creating a humanitarian crisis in that area and a blockade
    was in force to prevent humanitarian aid reaching the area  until  that
    was lifted in late 2019.  The conflict  continued  until  the  Sudanese
    Government declared a ceasefire in June 2016, initially for  4  months.
    The ceasefire has been  periodically  renewed  and  remains  in  place,
    though this is not to say that sporadic violent  incidents  or  attacks
    have not continued to occur.

10. The most recent political changes in Sudan began as a result of  events
    beginning in late 2018 when there were widespread public  protests,  in
    particularly in Khartoum.  The protest movement was  initially  led  by
    professionals - the Sudanese Professional  Association  ("SPA")  -  and
    subsequently a broader coalition of protestors known as the  Forces  of
    Freedom  and  Change  ("FFC").  The  protests  were  motivated  by  the
    significant economic down-turn in Sudan and its  day-to-day  impact  on
    the price of food and other goods.  The  protests  were  sustained  and
    grew in early 2019.

11. On 11 April 2019, al-Bashir was overthrown by a military coup.  He  was
    replaced by a Transitional Military  Council  ("TMC").   The  protests,
    however, continued, resulting in a violent crack-down on protestors  by
    the new  Sudanese  authorities  on  3  June  2019.   Nevertheless,  the
    protests continued.

12. On 5 July 2019, the TMC and FFC signed an agreement for a transition to
    a democratic state.  This was followed  by  the  adoption  of  a  draft
    constitution on 21 August 2019 and, in September 2019, the creation  of
    a Sovereign Council ("SC") comprised of military and civilian  members,
    presently chaired by Lieut-General al-Burhan ("al-Burhan").  The  chair
    of the SC will change to a civilian in June 2021  and  the  country  to
    civilian rule after 39 months, i.e. in the summer of 2022.  The present
    Government is led by a  respected  economist,  Prime  Minister  Abdalla
    Hamdok appointed on 21 August 2019.  An independent Chief  Justice  and
    Attorney-General were subsequently selected and appointed.

13. Peace talks between the new Sudanese Government and the two factions of
    the SPLM-N in the Nuba Mountains and the Blue Nile (led respectively by
    Abdelaziz al Hilu ("al Hilu") and Malik Agar) began in  the  autumn  of
    2019 in Juba, the capital of South Sudan.   Despite withdrawing at  one
    point, al Hilu subsequently returned to participate in the talks.

14. In November 2019, the restrictive Public Order law, whose use by the al-
    Bashir regime was widely recognised as a means  to  control  how  women
    acted and dressed, was repealed by the  new  Legislative  Council  (BBC
    News, "Sudan crisis: Women praise end of strict public order  law",  29
    November 2019). The Sudanese authorities also dissolved  the  NCP,  the
    political party of the former President.

15. In December 2019, al-Bashir was convicted of corruption  in  Sudan  and
    sentenced to 2 years' detention in a prison for the elderly (BBC  News,
    "Omar al-Bashir: Sudan ex-leader sentenced for corruption", 14 December
    2019).  In addition, Sudan has begun an investigation into  the  crimes
    committed in Darfur under the al-Bashir regime and in February 2020 the
    new Sudanese Government agreed to hand over al-Bashir  to  the  ICC  to
    face the March 2009 indictment arising out of the Darfur conflict  (BBC
    News, "Omar al-Bashir: Sudan agrees ex-president  must  face  ICC",  11
    February 2020).

16. In January 2020, the Sudanese army quelled a brief rebellion in Greater
    Khartoum by elite troops loyal to  al-Bashir  (BBC  News,  "Sudan  army
    quells Khartoum mutiny by pro-Bashir troops", 15  January  2020).   The
    rebellion appears to have been caused by a disagreement over  severance
    pay to members of the General Intelligence Service ("GIS") - which  had
    resulted from renaming in July 2019 of the  National  Intelligence  and
    Security Service ("NISS") headed by Salah Ghosh until he was sacked  by
    al-Burhan in April 2019 - which is being overhauled.  The action of the
    rebels was condemned by both al-Burhan, as head of the SC, and  General
    Mohammed Dagalo (widely known as  "Hemeti"  or  "Himiti"),  a  powerful
    figure in Sudan who previously led the  Janjaweed  and  now  leads  its
    successor, the Rapid Support Force ("RSF") and who is a member  of  the
    SC.  In March 2020, the Prime Minister Hamdok survived an assassination
    attempt in  Greater  Khartoum  (BBC  News,  "Sudan  PM  Abdalla  Hamdok
    survives assassination attempt", 9 March 2020).  Finally, in July 2020,
    the Sudanese Government announced new  laws  reforming  laws  from  the
    period of Islamic rule: allowing non-Muslims to drink, sell and  import
    alcohol, removing the requirement that women  have  permission  from  a
    male relative to travel with their children, abolishing  the  crime  of
    apostacy and banning the practice of  female  genital  mutilation  (BBC
    News, "Sudan scraps apostasy law and alcohol ban for  non-Muslims",  13
    July 2020).

II. THE PARTIES' CASES IN SUMMARY

17. The appellant's case  is  that  all  Nuba  (including  the  appellant),
    regardless of any political or other  profile,  face  a  real  risk  of
    persecution and/or serious ill-treatment contrary to Art 3 of the  ECHR
    on return to Sudan on  the  basis  of  their  ethnicity  and  political
    opinion because of their perceived association with  rebel  groups,  in
    particular the SPLM-N.  That position is said to be  sustained  on  two
    bases.

18. First, the Nuba are treated in the same way as non-Arab Darfuris which,
    the CG cases of AA (Non-Arab Darfuris -  relocation)  Sudan  CG  [2009]
    UKAIT 00056 and  MM  (Darfuris)  Sudan  CG  [2015]  UKUT  000010  (IAC)
    recognise, are at risk on return.   Secondly,  the  evidence  from  the
    witnesses and background evidence establishes that there is a real risk
    of persecution and/or serious ill-treatment to all Nuba (a) in the Nuba
    Mountains in South Kordofan; (b) in Greater Khartoum; and (c) on return
    at the airport.  The present situation,  despite  the  developments  in
    2019 remains fragile and it  remains  unsafe  to  return  Nuba  asylum-
    seekers to Sudan.

19. Finally, the appellant contends that  internal  relocation  to  Greater
    Khartoum is not reasonably open to an individual at risk in their  home
    area.

20. The respondent rejects any analogy with,  and  reliance  upon,  the  CG
    decisions relating to non-Arabs from Darfur.  Further,  the  respondent
    contends that there is  no  risk  per  se  to  an  individual  of  Nuba
    ethnicity on  return.   The  respondent  contends  that  there  are  no
    specific categories of individuals who cannot safely be returned - each
    case must be assessed on a holistic  basis  and  is  fact-sensitive  by
    analogy to the approach of the Upper  Tribunal  ("UT")  in  IM  and  AI
    (Risks - membership of Beja Tribe, Beja  Congress  and  JEM)  Sudan  CG
    [2016]  UKUT  000188  (IAC).   Any  risk  flows  from  an  individual's
    perceived political profile or activism and not from the mere  fact  of
    being from a Nuba tribe. The issue is whether the individual's  profile
    or  political  activity  presents  (or  is  perceived  to  present)   a
    sufficiently  serious  threat  to  the  Sudanese  regime   to   warrant
    targeting.  It  is  the  respondent's  contention  that  the  political
    developments in 2019 have shifted the threat to  the  Sudanese  regime,
    and by the regime, from a military to a political dimension.

21. Finally,  the  Respondent  accepts  that  internal  relocation  is  not
    available when an individual is at risk from the  Sudanese  State.  She
    also accepts that, if there is a serious risk of harm, for example,  in
    Greater  Khartoum  an  individual  cannot  reasonably  be  expected  to
    relocate to the Nuba  Mountains.   The  respondent  contends  that  the
    reasonableness of internal relocation from some other area  to  Greater
    Khartoum, however, will be fact-sensitive.

III. THE APPEAL

22. The appellant is a citizen of Sudan who was born  in  1983.   He  comes
    from  Omdurman,  Sudan's  second  largest  city  and  part  of  Greater
    Khartoum.  He is of Nuba ethnicity. He left Sudan on 21  November  2014
    and, having travelled through a number of  countries,  arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom on 31 August 2015 and claimed  asylum.   His  claim  had
    four elements.

23. First, the appellant claimed that he had  left  Omdurman  in  2009  and
    moved to the Nuba Mountains.  After conflict broke out  there  in  2011
    between the SPLM-N and the Sudanese authorities, he decided  to  return
    to Omdurman and, he claimed, whilst travelling to Omdurman in  2013  or
    2014 (his evidence referred to both dates), he had  been  arrested  and
    detained by the government and accused of being a member of the SPLM-N.
     Secondly, he claimed to fear the SPLM-N whom he had refused  to  join.
    Thirdly, the appellant relied  upon  sur  place  activities,  namely  a
    television interview criticising the Government. Finally, he claimed to
    be at risk  from  the  Sudanese  Government  because  he  was  of  Nuba
    ethnicity.

24. On 18 December 2015, the Secretary of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    claims for asylum, humanitarian protection and under Article 8  of  the
    ECHR.

25. Following the refusal of his claims,  the  appellant  appealed  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal ("FtT").  His appeal was heard by Judge Sweeney  on
    3 August 2016.  Judge Sweeney dismissed the appellant's appeal  on  all
    grounds.  Judge Sweeney accepted that  the  appellant  was  a  Sudanese
    citizen and  of  Nuba  ethnicity.   However,  the  judge  rejected  the
    appellant's account including that he had left Omdurman to  go  to  the
    Nuba Mountains and that he  had  been  arrested  and  detained  by  the
    Sudanese Government whilst returning to Omdurman.  The judge  concluded
    that the appellant would not be at risk  from  the  SPLM-N,  not  least
    because they had shown  no  adverse  interest  in  him  since  2011/12.
    Finally, the judge rejected the appellant's claim to be at risk because
    of his sur place activities because there was no evidence that  he  had
    come to the attention of the Sudanese authorities  nor  was  it  likely
    that his limited activities would do so.

26. The appellant appealed, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal  ("UT").
    The  appellant  did  not  challenge  the  judge's  adverse  credibility
    finding. The grounds argued that the judge failed to consider the  risk
    to the appellant because of his Nuba ethnicity in the light of his  sur
    place activities  which  would  result  in  him  being  regarded  as  a
    political opponent.

27. In a decision sent on 24 February 2017 (Appendix 2), the UT (UTJ  Grubb
    and DUTJ Chalkley) concluded that the appellant's grounds were made out
    and set aside the FtT's decision.  The judge's  factual  findings  were
    preserved.  The appeal was  adjourned  in  order  that,  at  a  resumed
    hearing, the decision could be re-made on the sole issue of whether the
    appellant had established that he would be at risk on return  to  Sudan
    because of his Nuba ethnicity.  Subsequently, the appeal was identified
    as one appropriate to give country guidance on that general issue.

IV. THE HEARINGS

28. The substantive appeal to re-make the  decision,  ignoring  intervening
    case  management  hearings,  was  listed  on  three  occasions  between
    May/June 2018 and October 2019.

29. On 31 May and 1 June 2018, we heard oral evidence from  three  witness:
    (1) Dame Rosalind Marsden DCMG (a  former  British  Ambassador  and  EU
    Special Representative to Sudan), (2) Madeline  Crowther  (Director  of
    Waging Peace, an organisation  which  campaigns  against  human  rights
    abuses in Sudan) and (3) Dr Eric Reeves (a  Senior  Fellow  at  Harvard
    University's  Centre  for  Health  and  Human  Rights).   The  latter's
    evidence was given, not without technical difficulties, by  Skype  from
    the USA.

30. On 30 August 2018, the hearing resumed for  submissions.   However,  it
    transpired at that hearing that a Home  Office  fact-finding  visit  to
    Sudan had taken place earlier in August and a report  was  expected  in
    October.  In the light of that, we adjourned the hearing to  await  the
    report and any further evidence or submissions in respect  of  it.   In
    the result the report was delayed and only became available in November
    2018 (Home Office, "Report  of  a  Fact-Finding  Mission  to  Khartoum,
    Sudan" (the "F-FR 2018")).  In January 2019, supplementary reports were
    prepared by  both  Dame  Rosalind  Marsden  and  Madeline  Crowther  in
    relation to the F-FR 2018.

31. However, the supervening events in Sudan beginning in late 2018 further
    delayed, with the parties' agreement, the re-listing of the appeal.  At
    a CMH on 29 August 2019, despite the evolving situation in Sudan it was
    agreed by the parties that the appeal should be  re-listed  in  October
    2019 in order to hear  further  evidence  (if  appropriate)  and  final
    submissions.

32. On 24 and 25 October 2019 the appeal was re-listed when further reports
    were prepared by, and  there  was  further  oral  evidence  from,  Dame
    Rosalind  Marsden  and  Madeline  Crowther.   We  received  no  further
    evidence from the parties after the  hearing  on  24/25  October.  Both
    representatives agreed that only if there was  evidence  which  changed
    the 'direction of travel' of a party's case would further  evidence  be
    submitted by the parties.  In  the  result,  neither  party  sought  to
    introduce any post-hearing evidence, despite the  events  to  which  we
    have referred above. We have referred to news reports above,  in  order
    to give context and to show that  there  has  been  no  change  in  the
    direction of travel.  Our decision, however, is made on the evidence we
    heard, not taking into account any post-hearing news reports.

33. Following the 24/25 October  hearing,  the  parties  provided  us  with
    sequential written submissions ending with the appellant's response  on
    5 December 2019.  We are grateful to both counsel  for  their  detailed
    and helpful written submissions.  We are  also  grateful  to  them  for
    their helpful written, and for the most part  agreed,  summary  of  the
    oral evidence given at the initial hearing in May/June 2018.

V. THE EXISTING COUNTRY GUIDANCE

34. There is no existing country guidance directly concerned with the  Nuba
    in Sudan.

35. However, existing country guidance recognises  that  non-Arab  Darfuris
    are at risk on return to Sudan.  That was accepted by  the  AIT  in  AA
    (Non-Arab Darfuris - relocation)  Sudan  CG  [2009]  UKAIT  00056.   As
    summarised in the headnote, the AIT decided:


         "All non-Arab Darfuris are at real risk of  persecution  in  Darfur
         and cannot reasonably be expected to relocate elsewhere in Sudan."

36. AA was re-affirmed by the Upper Tribunal  in  MM  (Darfuris)  Sudan  CG
    [2015] UKUT  000010  (IAC)  where  it  was  emphasised  that  the  term
    "Darfuri" was to be understood as an "ethnic term" relating to  origins
    and not a geographical term such that it covered Darfuris who were  not
    born in Darfur.  As a consequence, the UT recognised that  there  is  a
    real risk of persecution for a non-Arab  Darfuri  whatever  their  home
    area (e.g. including Greater Khartoum) in Sudan.

37. Despite the developments in Sudan since December 2018, MM has  recently
    been affirmed by the UT (albeit without a CG designation) in AAR  &  AA
    (Non-Arab Darfuris - return) Sudan [2019] UKUT 282 (IAC).  The headnote
    reads as follows:

         "The situation in  Sudan  remains  volatile  after  civil  protests
         started in late 2018 and the  future  is  unpredictable.  There  is
         insufficient evidence currently available to show that the guidance
         given in AA (non-Arab Darfuris - relocation) Sudan CG [2009] UKAIT
         00056 and MM (Darfuris) Sudan CG  [2015]  UKUT  10  (IAC)  requires
         revision. Those cases should still be followed."

38. The CG decisions, therefore, in respect of non-Arab Darfuris remain  at
    present unchanged, if only because the Tribunal has  not  yet  had  the
    opportunity to consider fully  the  position  in  Sudan  following  the
    recent changes.

39. There is one further CG decision we should mention.  IM and AI (Risks -
    membership of Beja Tribe, Beja Congress and JEM) Sudan CG  [2016]  UKUT
    000188 (IAC) concerned the risk to members of the Beja tribe and  those
    politically active with the Justice and Equality Movement  ("the  JEM")
    in Sudan.  The guidance is detailed and is summarised in  the  headnote
    (emphasis added).  It reflects a distinction between those who are  (or
    are perceived as) politically active and a  sufficient  threat  to  the
    regime, and those who are not (references to "NISS" are to  the  former
    National Intelligence and Security  Service,  for  which  see  para  16
    above):


       "1.  In order for a person to be at risk on return  to  Sudan  there
          must  be  evidence  known  to  the  Sudanese  authorities   which
          implicates the claimant in activity  which  they  are  likely  to
          perceive as a potential threat to the regime to the extent  that,
          on return to Khartoum there is a risk to  the  claimant  that  he
          will be targeted by the authorities. The  task  of  the  decision
          maker  is  to  identify  such  a  person  and  this  requires  as
          comprehensive an assessment  as  possible  about  the  individual
          concerned.


       2.    The evidence draws a clear distinction between those  who  are
          arrested, detained  for  a  short  period,  questioned,  probably
          intimidated, possibly rough handled without having  suffered  (or
          being at risk of suffering) serious harm and those who  face  the
          much graver risk of serious harm. The distinction does not depend
          upon the individual being classified, for example, as  a  teacher
          or a journalist (relevant as these matters are) but is the result
          of a finely balanced fact-finding exercise encompassing  all  the
          information that can be gleaned about him. The decision maker  is
          required to place the individual in the airport on return or back
          home in his community and assess how the authorities  are  likely
          to re-act on the strength of the information known to them  about
          him.


       3.   Distinctions must be drawn with those whose political  activity
          is not particularly great or who do  not  have  great  influence.
          Whilst it does not take much for the NISS to  open  a  file,  the
          very fact that  so  many  are  identified  as  potential  targets
          inevitably requires NISS to distinguish between those  whom  they
          view as a real threat and those whom they do not.


       4.   It will not be enough to make out a risk that the  authorities'
          interest will be limited to the extremely  common  phenomenon  of
          arrest and detention which though intimidating (and  designed  to
          be intimidating) does not cross the threshold into persecution.


       5.   The  purpose  of  the  targeting  is  likely  to  be  obtaining
          information about the claimant's own activities or the activities
          of his friends and associates.


       6.   The evidence establishes the targeting is not  random  but  the
          result of suspicion based upon information  in  the  authorities'
          possession, although it may be limited.


       7.   Caution should be exercised when the claim is based on a single
          incident.  Statistically,  a  single  incident  must  reduce  the
          likelihood of the Sudanese authorities becoming aware  of  it  or
          treating the claimant as of significant interest.


       8.   Where the claim is based  on  events  in  Sudan  in  which  the
          claimant has come to the attention of the authorities, the nature
          of the claimant's  involvement,  the  likelihood  of  this  being
          perceived as in opposition to the government,  his  treatment  in
          detention, the length of detention and any  relevant  surrounding
          circumstances and the likelihood of the event  or  the  detention
          being made the subject of a record are all likely to be  material
          factors.


       9.  Where the claim is based on events outside Sudan,  the  evidence
          of  the  claimant  having  come  to  the  attention  of  Sudanese
          intelligence is bound to be more difficult to establish. However,
          it is clear that the Sudanese  authorities  place  reliance  upon
          information-gathering about the  activities  of  members  of  the
          diaspora which  includes  covert  surveillance.  The  nature  and
          extent of the claimant's activities, when and where, will  inform
          the decision maker when he comes to decide whether it  is  likely
          those activities will attract the attention of  the  authorities,
          bearing in mind the likelihood that the authorities will have  to
          distinguish amongst a  potentially  large  group  of  individuals
          between those who merit being targeted and those that do not.


       10. The decision maker must seek to  build  up  as  comprehensive  a
          picture as possible of  the  claimant  taking  into  account  all
          relevant  material  including  that  which  may  not  have   been
          established even to the lower standard of proof.


       11. Once a composite assessment of the evidence has  been  made,  it
          will be for the decision maker to determine whether  there  is  a
          real risk that the claimant will come to  the  attention  of  the
          authorities on return in such a way as amounts to more  than  the
          routine commonplace detention but meets the threshold of  a  real
          risk of serious harm.


       12. Where a claimant has not been believed in all  or  part  of  his
          evidence, the decision maker will have to assess how this impacts
          on the requirement to establish that a Convention claim has  been
          made out. He will not have the comprehensive,  composite  picture
          he would otherwise have had. There are likely to be shortfalls in
          the evidence that the decision maker is unable to speculate upon.
          The final  analysis  will  remain  the  same:  has  the  claimant
          established there is a real risk that he, the claimant, will come
          to the attention of the authorities on return in such  a  way  as
          amounts to  more  than  the  routine  commonplace  detention  and
          release but meets the threshold of serious harm."

40. At [203], the UT made brief mention of individuals from South  Kordofan
    and the Blue Nile:

         "The  problem  that  the  evidence  presents  is  that  whilst  the
         categories of those potentially at risk are legion, it is  apparent
         that not all those falling into a particular category are at  risk.
         It is not enough, therefore,  to  be  a  journalist  or  a  student
         because not all members of these groups are at risk. So, too,  with
         ethnic or tribal classification. Not all non-Arabs are at risk; nor
         all black Africans are at  risk  notwithstanding  the  unchallenged
         evidence that they are members of  the  various  tribes  associated
         with this group. Not all those from the troubled regions of Darfur,
         Southern Kordofan or the Blue Nile are at risk. Nor are  all  those
         who have been arrested and detained. However, all of these  matters
         are factors that are relevant and some, of course,  are  much  more
         likely to be significant, such as prior detention and ill-treatment
         as a result of involvement in  activities  perceived  as  being  in
         opposition to the government. Yet, all of  this  material  must  be
         taken into account." (our emphasis)


41. So far as we are aware, this is the only reference in the CG  cases  to
    those from South Kordofan which must refer to the Nuba.  It places them
    in the same position as those with whom  the  UT  in  IM  and  AI  were
    concerned, the  risk  to  whom  has  to  be  assessed  holistically  to
    determine whether as a result of their activities they are likely to be
    perceived as a potential threat to the Sudanese regime.


42. Although not referred to in the headnote, the UT specifically concluded
    that individuals were not at risk on return to Sudan merely  by  reason
    of being failed asylum-seekers ([222]-[225]).



VI. THE LEGAL FRAMEWORK

43. The applicable law was not a matter of contention between the  parties.
    The appellant relies upon the Refugee Convention and Art 3 of the ECHR.
     (Reference is also made to Art 2 ('right to  life')  but  we  did  not
    understand this to add anything to the  reliance  upon  Art  3  or  the
    Refugee Convention in this case.)   Consequently, we are not  concerned
    with, and heard no argument upon,  any  issue  concerning  humanitarian
    protection under  Art  15(c)  of  Council  Directive  2004/83/EC  ("the
    Qualification Directive").  We can, therefore, state the applicable law
    briefly.

    A. Refugee Convention

44. Article 1A(2) of the Refugee Convention, defines  a refugee as being  a
    person who:


         "owing to well-founded fear of  being  persecuted  for  reasons  of
         race, religion, nationality,  membership  of  a  particular  social
         group  or  political  opinion,  is  outside  the  country  of   his
         nationality and is unable or, owing to such fear, is  unwilling  to
         avail himself of the protection of that country; or who, not having
         a nationality and being outside the country of his former  habitual
         residence as a result of such events, is unable or, owing  to  such
         fear, is unwilling to return to it."


    (See also Art 2(c) of the Qualification Directive.)

45. A fear of persecution will be well-founded, if  the  decision-maker  is
    satisfied that there is a reasonable  degree  of  likelihood  (or  real
    risk) that the individual would be persecuted for a  Convention  reason
    if returned to his own country (R v SSHD, ex p Sivakumaran   [1988]  AC
    958 at 197-198, 202, per Lord Keith of Kinkel and  at  994,  1000,  per
    Lord Goff of Chieveley).

46. Whilst caution must be exercised in adding any gloss to the "reasonable
    degree of likelihood" and "real risk" standards, where it is said  that
    a particular group, or return in particular circumstances,  gives  rise
    to a claim by an individual who fits that group or circumstance, as the
    AIT pointed out in AA (Risk  for  involuntary  returnees)  Zimbabwe  CG
    [2006] UKAIT 00061 at [29}:

         " The point is that where risk is said  to  arise  based  upon  the
         perception that the appellant falls within a class  of  persons  he
         will not be able to demonstrate that he faces a  real  risk  unless
         the evidence shows that the abuse is consistently applied  to  that
         class of persons."

47. The AIT added (at [31]) in the context  of  a  claim  that  all  failed
    asylum-seekers were at risk on return:

         "The issue is whether the evidence establishes  a  real  risk.  The
         appellant does not need to show a certainty or a  probability  that
         all failed asylum seekers returned involuntarily will face  serious
         ill-treatment upon return.  He needs to show only that there  is  a
         consistent pattern of such mistreatment such that anyone  returning
         in those circumstances faces a real risk of  coming  to  harm  even
         though not everyone does."

48. Persecution may arise from sufficiently serious physical or mental ill-
    treatment,  or  discrimination  by  the  state:   actions   which   are
    "sufficiently serious by their nature or repetition as to constitute  a
    severe violation of basis human rights" (see Art 9 of the Qualification
    Directive).

49. The persecution must be "for" one of  the  stated  Convention  reasons:
    relevant in this appeal particularly are  political  opinion,  religion
    and race. The last  includes  "colour,  descent,  or  membership  of  a
    particular ethnic group" (see Art 10.1 of the Qualification Directive).
    It  is  immaterial  whether  the  individual  possesses  the   relevant
    characteristic (such as political opinion) which  attracts  persecution
    provided that such a characteristic is attributed to (or  perceived  to
    be held  by)  the  individual  by  the  persecutor  (Art  10.2  of  the
    Qualification Directive).


    B. Article 3


50. In respect of Article 3 of the ECHR, the appellant must establish  that
    there are substantial grounds for believing that there is a  real  risk
    of treatment contrary  to  Article  3,  i.e.  "torture  or  inhuman  or
    degrading treatment or punishment".  This is  frequently  equated  with
    "serious ill-treatment" or "serious harm" which  is  reflected  in  the
    terms of Art 15(b) of the Qualification Directive.  Further,


         "the  requirement  that  there  must  be  substantial  grounds  for
         believing that there is  a  real  risk  of  treatment  contrary  to
         Article 3 on return means not more than that there must be a proper
         evidential basis for concluding that there [is] such a real  risk."
         (AS and DD (Libya) v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 289 at [24]).


51. In the context of a claim based upon living conditions in  the  country
    of return, Art 3 requires a 'high threshold' to be met before  it  will
    be breached.  This is particularly so where the living  conditions  are
    "predominantly attributable to poverty or the state's lack of resources
    to deal with naturally occurring phenomenon, such as drought" (see Sufi
    and Elmi v UK 54 EHRR 209 at [282]).   In SSHD v Said [2016]  EWCA  Civ
    442, the Court of Appeal applied this approach and at [31], Burnett  LJ
    (as he then was) said this:


         "An appeal to article 3 which suggests that  the  person  concerned
         would face impoverished conditions of living on removal to  Somalia
         should, as the Strasbourg Court indicated in Sufi and Elmi at  para
         292, be viewed by reference to the test in the N case. Impoverished
         conditions which were the direct result of violent  activities  may
         be viewed differently as would cases where the risk suggested is of
         direct violence itself."


         (See also Burnett LJ at [18].)


52. Whilst the case of  N  v  UK  (2008)  47  EHRR  39  has  recently  been
    reconsidered by the Strasbourg Court in Paposhvili v Belgium [2017] Imm
    AR 867 and adopted by the Supreme Court in AM(Zimbabwe) v  SSHD  [2020]
    UKSC 17 so as to broaden the category  of  'exceptional  case'  falling
    within Art 3 in medical/health cases (and here by analogy we assume  in
    'living condition' cases), it remains a rigorous test requiring serious
    and immediate  suffering  reaching  the  high  Art  3  threshold  or  a
    significant diminution in  life  expectancy  (see  [27]-[31]  per  Lord
    Wilson in AM).


53. Where the humanitarian conditions are the result of a conflict, war  or
    a state's discriminatory  policy,  the  'high  threshold'  required  to
    establish a breach of Art 3 does not apply.  In Sufi & Elmi v UK (2012)
    54 EHRR 9, the Strasbourg Court said this at [282]-[283]:


         "282. If the dire humanitarian conditions in Somalia were solely or
             even predominantly attributable to poverty or to  the  State's
             lack  of  resources  to  deal  with  a   naturally   occurring
             phenomenon, such as a drought, the test in N.  v.  the  United
             Kingdom may well have been considered to  be  the  appropriate
             one.  However, it is clear that while drought has  contributed
             to the humanitarian crisis, that crisis is  predominantly  due
             to the direct and indirect  actions  of  the  parties  to  the
             conflict.  The  reports  indicate  that  all  parties  to  the
             conflict have employed indiscriminate methods  of  warfare  in
             densely populated urban areas with no regard to the safety  of
             the civilian population ...  This fact alone has  resulted  in
             widespread displacement and the breakdown of social, political
             and economic infrastructures.   Moreover,  the  situation  has
             been greatly exacerbated  by  al-Shabab's  refusal  to  permit
             international aid agencies to operate in the areas  under  its
             control, despite the fact that between a third and a  half  of
             all Somalis are living in a situation of  serious  deprivation
             ...


         283.  Consequently,  the  Court  does  not  consider  the  approach
             adopted in N. v. the United Kingdom to be appropriate  in  the
             circumstances of the present case.   Rather,  it  prefers  the
             approach adopted  in  M.S.S.  v.  Belgium  and  Greece,  which
             requires it to have regard to an applicant's ability to  cater
             for his most basic needs, such as food, hygiene  and  shelter,
             his vulnerability to ill-treatment and  the  prospect  of  his
             situation improving within a reasonable time-frame (see M.S.S.
             v. Belgium and Greece, cited above, � 254)."


54. In AMM and  others  (conflict;  humanitarian  crisis;  returnees;  FGM)
    Somalia CG [2011] UKUT 00445 (IAC) the UT  identified  that  the  'high
    threshold' in N did not apply where  the  "predominant  cause"  of  the
    circumstances, said to give rise to a breach of Art 3, is human actions
    rather than naturally occurring (at [129]):


         "If the predominant cause of the poor living conditions faced by  a
         person is due to human actions in the  State  in  question,  rather
         than to naturally occurring  phenomena,  coupled  with  a  lack  of
         resources to deal with those phenomena, then the high threshold set
         by N need not be reached."



    C. Internal Relocation

55. Art 8 of the Qualification Directive sets out  the  legal  approach  to
    internal relocation in the case of a person who is able to show a  risk
    of persecution in their home area. For our purposes, it suffices to set
    out its adoption, in substance, in para 399O of the  Immigration  Rules
    which is as follows:



         "399O(i)       The Secretary of State will not make:

             (a)        a grant of refugee status if in part of the country
             of origin a person would not have a well founded fear of being
             persecuted, and the person can reasonably be expected to  stay
             in that part of the country; or

             (b)        a grant of humanitarian protection if  in  part  of
             the country of return a person would not face a real  risk  of
             suffering serious harm,  and  the  person  can  reasonably  be
             expected to stay in that part of the country.

         (ii)   In examining whether a part of  the  country  of  origin  or
         country of return meets the requirements in (i)  the  Secretary  of
         State, when making  a  decision  on  whether  to  grant  asylum  or
         humanitarian  protection,  will  have   regard   to   the   general
         circumstances prevailing in that part of the  country  and  to  the
         personal circumstances of the person.

         (iii)  (i) applies notwithstanding technical obstacles to return to
         the country of origin or country of return."


56. There are two limbs to  be  considered:  (1)  will  the  individual  be
    exposed to a real risk  of  serious  harm  in  the  place  of  proposed
    internal relocation?;  and (2) if not, will it be reasonable (or unduly
    harsh) for that individual to live in the place of proposed relocation?
    The issue of reasonableness only arises if there is not a real risk  of
    serious harm in the place  of  proposed  relocation  (see,  SSHD  v  SC
    (Jamaica) [2017] EWCA Civ 2112 at [39]).

57. The approach to 'reasonableness' and 'undue harshness'  as  the  second
    limb of the internal relocation test was analysed by the House of Lords
    in Januzi v SSHD [2006] UKHL 5 and AH (Sudan) v SSHD  [2006]  UKHL  49.
    For our purposes, as there was no dispute before us on  the  applicable
    law, it suffices to set out the helpful summary  of  the  law,  drawing
    together the earlier cases, by the Court of Appeal in AS  (Afghanistan)
    v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 873.  At [61] Underhill LJ (with whom  King  and
    Singh LJJ agreed) said:


         "61.  I start by  summarising  the  essential  points,  so  far  as
         relevant to this appeal, established by the authorities  about  the
         nature of the exercise required by article 8 of  the  Directive.  I
         emphasise that this is not intended as a comprehensive analysis  of
         all the issues raised by the authorities to which I have referred.


             (1) By way of preliminary, internal  relocation  is  obviously
             not an alternative  where  there  is  a  real  risk  that  the
             applicant for asylum will suffer persecution, or serious  harm
             within the meaning of  article  15  of  the  Directive  (which
             includes treatment which would be contrary to article 3 of the
             ECHR), in the putative safe haven. We are concerned with cases
             where there is no such risk.
             (2) The ultimate question is whether in such  a  case  "taking
             account  of  all  relevant  circumstances  pertaining  to  the
             claimant and his country of origin, ... it  is  reasonable  to
             expect the claimant to relocate or whether it would be  unduly
             harsh to expect him to do so". That is the formulation of Lord
             Bingham in Januzi, repeated in AH (Sudan).  It  pre-dates  the
             Directive and is not identically worded:  in  particular,  the
             reference to whether relocation would be "unduly harsh" is not
             present  in  article  8  but  derives  from  the  UNHCR   2003
             Guidelines (see Januzi, para. 20). But it  was  common  ground
             before us that it states the test required by  article  8  [of
             the Qualification Directive]. When in  doubt  it  is  to  that
             question that tribunals should return.
             (3) The test so stated is one of great generality  (save  only
             that it excludes any comparison of the  conditions,  including
             the  degree  of  respect  for  human  rights,  between   those
             obtaining in the safe haven and those of the country of refuge
             - this being the ratio of Januzi). It  requires  consideration
             of all matters relevant to the reasonableness  of  relocation,
             none having inherent priority over  the  others  (AH  (Sudan),
             para. 13). This is the same as Lady Hale's description of  the
             necessary assessment as "holistic" (AH (Sudan) paras. 27-28).
             (4) One way of approaching that assessment is to  ask  whether
             in the safe haven the applicant can lead "a relatively  normal
             life without facing undue hardship ... in the context  of  the
             country concerned".  That  language  derives  from  the  UNHCR
             Guidelines and is quoted by  Lord  Bingham  with  approval  in
             Januzi (para. 20) and also used by Lord Hope (para.  47);  but
             it does not appear in  the  Directive  or  in  Lord  Bingham's
             formulation of the test, and it should not  be  treated  as  a
             substitute for the latter. Rather, it is  a  valuable  way  of
             approaching the reasonableness analysis - "one touchstone", as
             Lord Brown puts it (AH (Sudan) para. 42). Its value is because
             if a person is able to lead in the safe haven a life which  is
             relatively normal for people in the context of his or her  own
             country, it will be reasonable to expect them  to  stay  there
             (AH (Sudan), para. 47).
             (5) It may be reasonable, and not unduly harsh,  to  expect  a
             refugee to relocate even if conditions in the safe haven  are,
             by the standards of the country of refuge, very bad.  That  is
             part of what is decided by Januzi  itself,  and  the  passages
             quoted at paras. 34 and 35 above  reinforce  it.  It  is  also
             vividly illustrated by the outcome of AH  (Sudan),  where  the
             House of Lords upheld the decision of  the  AIT  that  it  was
             reasonable for Darfuri refugees to be expected to relocate  to
             the camps  or  squatter  slums  of  Khartoum.  That  may  seem
             inconsistent with the suggested approach of asking whether the
             applicant would be able lead a "relatively normal life" in the
             safe haven; but the reconciliation lies in  the  qualification
             "in the context of the country concerned".
             (6) Point (5) does not mean that it will be reasonable  for  a
             person to relocate to a safe haven, however bad the conditions
             they will face there, as long as such conditions are normal in
             their country.  Conditions  may  be  normal  but  nevertheless
             unduly harsh: this is the point emphasised by Lady Hale in  AH
             (Sudan) and is exemplified by AA (Uganda).
             (7) The UNHCR Guidelines contain a full discussion of  factors
             relevant to the reasonableness analysis. These  are  described
             by Lord Bingham as "valuable" and partly quoted by him (Januzi
             para. 20); and at para. 20 of her opinion in AH  (Sudan)  Lady
             Hale endorses a submission made in that case  by  UNHCR  which
             summarises the factors  in  question.  A  decision-maker  must
             consider those factors, so  far  as  material,  in  each  case
             (though it  does  not  follow  that  everything  said  in  the
             detailed discussion in the Guidelines is authoritative).
             (8) The assessment must in each case be conducted by reference
             to  the  reasonableness  of  relocation  for  the   particular
             individual."

58. The burden of proof is upon the appellant to establish the real risk of
    serious harm in the proposed place of relocation (see  SMO  and  others
    (Article 15(c); identity documents) CG Iraq [2019] UKUT  400  (IAC)  at
    [206]).

59. As  regards  reasonableness  or  undue  harshness,  an  evaluative  and
    holistic assessment of all the relevant circumstances is required.   In
    MB (Internal relocation - burden of  proof)  Albania  [2019]  UKUT  392
    (IAC), the UT stated:


           "The burden  of  proof  remains  on  the  appellant,  where  the
           respondent has identified the location to which it  is  asserted
           they could relocate, to prove why that location would be  unduly
           harsh, in line  with  AMM  and  others  (conflict;  humanitarian
           crisis; returnees; FGM) Somalia CG [2011] UKUT  445  (IAC),  but
           within that burden, the evaluation exercise should be  holistic.
           An holistic approach to such an assessment  is  consistent  with
           the balance-sheet approach endorsed later in SSHD v SC (Jamaica)
           [2017] EWCA Civ 2112, at paragraphs [40] and [41]. MM v Minister
           for Justice, Equality and Law Reform, Ireland  (Common  European
           Asylum System - Directive 2004/83/EC)  Case  C-277/11  does  not
           impose a burden on the respondent or result in a formal  sharing
           of  the  burden  of  proof,  but  merely  confirms  a  duty   of
           cooperation  at  the  stage  of  assessment,  for  example   the
           production of the country information reports."

60. The UT in MB pointed out (at [25])  that  "[a]n  over-emphasis  on  the
    overall burden of  proof  can  be  a  distraction  from  that  holistic
    assessment".

VII. THE EVIDENCE

61. The evidence in this appeal developed over the period of time that  the
    appeal  took  to  be  completed,  not  least  due  to   the   political
    developments  in  Sudan.   Both  the  oral  and  written  evidence  are
    voluminous.  The initial written and oral evidence in May/June 2018 pre-
    dated the political developments in Sudan beginning  in  December  2018
    and through 2019.  We were provided with further written evidence,  and
    we heard further  oral  evidence,  from  two  of  the  witnesses  (Dame
    Rosalind Marsden and Ms Madeline Crowther) at the  hearing  in  October
    2019 but the evidence of Dr Eric Reeves, given  at  the  May/June  2018
    hearing, was not  updated  and  so  necessarily  did  not  address  the
    effects, if any, of the political developments in 2019.

62. Dame Rosalind has had considerable experience in Sudan itself, some  of
    it recent.  She has maintained her interest in  the  country  by  high-
    level diplomatic contact.  Much of what she told us  she  was  able  to
    support by personal experience.  Ms Crowther's knowledge  of  Sudan  is
    derived from her work for a human rights organisation in  London.   She
    has not visited Sudan and does not speak Arabic or any of the languages
    in which those on whose behalf she works express themselves.  Dr Reeves
    is an academic with considerable knowledge of Sudan  but  who  has  not
    been in Sudan since 2003.All three referred to contacts with others who
    have experience in Sudan, from whom they derived some of  the  opinions
    they incorporated in their evidence. In relation to facts, we attribute
    more weight to  those  derived  from  direct  personal  observation  by
    witnesses.  That inevitably means that we give considerable  weight  to
    the factual evidence of Dame Rosalind, if rather less to those  of  the
    other witnesses.  In the same way, we attribute considerable weight  to
    factual statements in the written reports received in  evidence,  where
    they are based on direct observation.   We  treat  opinions  with  some
    caution, bearing in mind particularly whether they are expressed  by  a
    person or body that has any campaigning  role.   In  general,  we  have
    attempted to test expressed opinions against the touchstone of observed
    facts in order to form our own views on the realities of  the  position
    of Nuba in Sudan.

63. At our request, both Mr Jacobs and Mr Thomann helpfully  made  specific
    reference to the evidence upon which  they  relied  in  their  detained
    final written submissions.  We set out that evidence in Appendix  1  as
    follows: (a) Dame Rosalind Marsden; (b) Ms Madeline  Crowther;  (c)  Dr
    Eric Reeves; (d) country background  documents;  and  (e)  Home  Office
    documents.  In what follows, we assume that Appendix 1 has been read.

VIII. THE SUBMISSIONS

    A. The Appellant

64. Mr Jacobs summarises the appellant's case in 11  points  in  his  final
    written submissions at para [1] and  which  are  further  amplified  at
    paras [185]-[203].

65. Mr Jacobs' submission  is  that  all  Nuba  (including  the  appellant)
    regardless of any political or  other  profile  face  a  real  risk  of
    persecution and/or serious ill-treatment on  return  to  Sudan  on  the
    basis of  their  ethnicity  and  political  opinion  because  of  their
    perceived association with rebel groups, in particular the SPLM-N:

         (1) the Nuba  are  treated  the  same  as  non-Arab  Darfuris  who,
         following the CG decisions concerning  Darfuris,  are  at  risk  on
         return;

         (2) the expert and background evidence establishes a real  risk  to
         all Nuba in  the  Nuba  Mountains,  in  Greater  Khartoum  and,  on
         arrival, at the  airport  due  to  their  ethnicity  and  perceived
         political association with rebel groups;

         (3) the current situation in  Sudan  remains  fragile  despite  the
         recent political developments and it is too soon to say  that  Nuba
         can be safely returned; and

         (4) the situation in Greater Khartoum is  such  that  it  would  be
         unduly harsh for any Nuba not from there to relocate there.

66. Mr Jacobs, in particular, places reliance  on  the  evidence  of  three
    witnesses (Dame Rosalind Marsden, Ms  Madeline  Crowther  and  Dr  Eric
    Reeves) that the Nuba have been targeted for ill-treatment under the al-
    Bashir regime as suspected supporters of rebel groups in particular the
    SPLM-N (see paras [185]-[186]).

67. Moreover, the present situation, despite the developments in 2018-2019,
    remains fragile and, again relying in particular upon  Dame  Rosalind's
    most recent evidence, it remains unsafe to return  Nuba  asylum-seekers
    to Sudan.  Mr Jacobs summarises what he  says  is  the  impact  of  the
    current  developments  in  11  points  at  para  [1]  of  his   written
    submissions as follows:


      1) Notwithstanding the positive developments in Sudan since  the  fall
         of President Bashir in April 2019,  the  'deep  state'  remains  in
         place.
      2) Consequently, a majority of officials in  Sudan  retain  entrenched
         views as to non-Arab Sudanese from marginalised areas
      3) Those views necessarily impute  Nuba  with  a  pollical  opinion  -
         namely that or support for SPLM-N, or other rebel groups.
      4) Arabist policies were racially discriminatory against Nuba -  using
         terms such as Abid (slave). Nuba were targeted on grounds  of  race
         and imputed political opinion. Those Nuba returning  from  overseas
         are more likely to be seen as politically active.
      5) Nuba failed asylum-seekers could still be at risk of  ill-treatment
         in Khartoum today as long as members of the former regime  continue
         to control NISS and other security organs;  the  National  Security
         Act has not been amended to remove  NISS's  powers  of  arrest  and
         detention; and the RSF still has a presence in urban areas. ....
      6) General Mohamed Hamdan Dagalo (widely known as Hemeti)  has  become
         the most powerful man in Sudan. He  is  the  leader  of  the  Rapid
         Support Force (RSF), which comprises the former Janjawid and  which
         has committed atrocities and perpetrated  human  rights  abuses  in
         Darfur and the Nuba mountains,  most  recently  in  relation  to  a
         mining dispute. Those forces retain an 'Arabist' mindset.
      7) The present administration is subject to the same threat  that  led
         to the downfall of the Bashir regime - namely the economic  crisis.
         In the event  that  the  current  government  is  unable  to  raise
         international  finance  to  alleviate  the  crisis,  there   is   a
         significant possibility that the military under Hemeti and/or a pro
         Bashir Islamist faction may take power, which  would  result  in  a
         restoration  of  active  oppression  of  marginalized   and   rebel
         associated groups, such as the Nuba.
      8) There is a close parallel between the former regime's perception of
         non-Arab Darfuris and Nuba because  members  of  both  groups  were
         suspected of being sympathetic to  the  rebel  armed  movements  in
         Darfur, the Nuba Mountains or Blue Nile. In particular,  the  armed
         movements from Darfur, the Nuba Mountains and Blue Nile are closely
         inter-related and have formed joint alliances.....
      9) In the same way that the  Secretary  of  State  concedes  that  the
         position has not stabilised sufficiently for the position  relating
         to returns of Darfuris to change, neither can it logically be  said
         that Nuba (who share a number of characteristics with Darfuris) can
         safely be returned.
     10) There is evidence of recent targeting of  Nuba  in  Khartoum.  Dame
         Rosalind Marsden has recently interviewed a group  of  professional
         Nuba men in Khartoum.
     11) The Nuba Mountains are described as a 'war zone' by  Dr  Catena  (a
         credible source). As matters stand there is no peace agreement  and
         Nuba continue to face persecution at the hands of RSF in their home
         areas. It is unreasonable to expect returning Nuba  asylum  seekers
         to settle or resettle in Khartoum/Omdurman in  circumstances  where
         Hemeti's forces continue to persecute Nuba in their tribal areas.

68. In relation to the risk to  Nuba  in  South  Kordofan,  Mr  Jacobs,  in
    addition to Dr Catena's characterisation of the situation there, relies
    (at para [73]) upon the evidence of incidents in the Nuba Mountains  in
    October 2019 referred to in Dame Rosalind's evidence (October 2019):

      i) [On] 4 October, RSF forces recruited from the Hawazma  and  Salamat
         (Arab nomadic tribes), attacked  the  Nuba  village  of  Tongal  in
         Habila locality, using 25 pick-up trucks with mounted machine  guns
         (paragraph 28)

     ii) On 5  October,  Shamseddin  Kabbashi,  a  military  member  of  the
         Sovereign Council (who is himself a Nuba from the Gulfan tribe)  is
         reported to have met with Chiefs  from  both  the  Gulfan  and  Dar
         Naeele and given each of them SDG  500,000  to  unite  against  the
         SPLM/N. (paragraph 28)

    iii) On 16 October Abdel Aziz al Hilu's  spokesman  announced  that  RSF
         soldiers in 25 Landcruisers had ambushed civilians  inside  SPLM/N-
         controlled territory near Khor Waral in Habila locality,  abducting
         13 people, and killing  two,  including  a  local  Sheikh  who  had
         objected to the local nomads passing  through  farmland  (paragraph
         29)


     iv) [O]n 7 October, the RSF mounted an attack on people living near the
         gold mines at Talodi, using 27 armed pick-up trucks. They beat  and
         arrested civilians, injuring ten people, and looted their property.
         Demonstrations by local residents had been going on for months over
         the use of mercury and cyanide by gold-mining companies which  they
         said had caused serious health and environmental problems. Most  of
         these companies are owned by the RSF  and  the  security  apparatus
         (paragraph 30)


69. Mr Jacobs concludes his  submissions  (at  paras  [185]-[203])  with  a
    number of points relating to the country guidance and disposal  of  the
    appellant's appeal as follows:

    185. ...The objective evidence ...  and  the  evidence  from  the  three
         experts confirms that Nuba were targeted for  ill  treatment  under
         the Bashir regime as  suspected  members  or  supporters  of  rebel
         groups.  They  have  been  singled  out  for  ill  treatment  as  a
         consequence of the former regime's Arabisation policies.


    186. The expert witnesses have  all  given  reliable  evidence  and  the
         Tribunal is requested to accept their conclusions, which have  been
         derived from a wide range of sources. Dame Rosalind  Marsden  is  a
         credible source in her own right. Madeleine Crowther  has  assisted
         the Tribunal through Waging Peace in previous country guidance; has
         provided source material to the Belgian COI and ARC. Dr Reeves is a
         well-regarded and long-standing country expert.


    187. The evidence of Dame Rosalind Marsden is consistent  with  that  of
         the International Crisis Group, upon which the Secretary of State's
         position is based (save for the cursory assessment by  the  Embassy
         official, to which it is submitted, little weight  should  attach).
         Both Dame Rosalind and the ICG assert that the current situation in
         Khartoum is fragile for a number of reasons.


    188. Firstly, the  Government  is  unable  to  respond  to  the  ongoing
         economic crisis, a situation which brought down the Bashir Regime.


    189. Secondly, the military are unlikely to relinquish power and have an
         effective veto in the current administration.


    190. Thirdly, the Deep State remains intact outside Khartoum and  within
         Khartoum only the  upper  layer  of  bureaucracy  (under  secretary
         level) has been replaced. The  pro  Islamist  and  Arabist  culture
         within all government institutions remains as the  mindset  of  the
         Bashir regime.


    191. Fourthly, NISS retains its wide-ranging powers and immunity pending
         changes which have not been brought into  effect.  NISS  retains  a
         desk at Khartoum  airport.  It  is  uncontentious  that  NISS  have
         systematically ill treated those to whom it has imputed a political
         opinion. Failed asylum seekers from marginalised rebel areas  would
         engage that perceived opinion.


    192. Fifthly, Hemeti is the most powerful  man  in  Sudan.   He  is  the
         leader of the Rapid Support Forces, formerly  the  Janjawid,  which
         has persecuted Darfuris and Nuba in their home areas. RSF  continue
         to be active in South Kordofan and  the  Nuba  Mountains  and  have
         recently carried out attacks in Nuba areas.


    193. Sixthly, there is evidence that RSF targeted Nuba during  the  June
         2019 massacre and in the  aftermath  of  that  incident.  Madeleine
         Crowther has spoken to the Director of HUDO concerning  attacks  in
         the  Black  Belt  after  3  June  and  Dame  Rosalind  Marden   has
         interviewed Nuba in Khartoum recently, who have given  accounts  of
         recent  harassment  on  grounds  of  ethnicity.  The  Public  Order
         legislation continues to apply in the Nuba areas of the capital and
         surrounding areas, thus facilitating continuing harassment of Nuba.


    194. Seventhly, the position of Al Hilu and the disengagement of Al Noor
         are  likely  to  prevent  the  conclusion  of  a   peace   process,
         particularly in the Nuba Mountains and South Kordofan. It is likely
         that Hemeti and the RSF will seek to bring the rebels  to  heel  or
         would otherwise which use the impasse to take power back  from  the
         current administration.


    195. The above factors all impact on the risk of ill treatment amounting
         to persecution and Article 3 ill treatment that Nuba would face  in
         the event of return now  as  failed  asylum  seekers.  The  Refugee
         Convention is engaged by  way  of  imputed  political  opinion  and
         ethnicity.


    196. The Appellant has established that he would have been persecuted in
         the event of return under the Bashir regime by way of ethnicity and
         imputed political opinion. Nuba are dark skinned, non-Arab and from
         rebel areas. Furthermore, rebel groups associated with Nuba have in
         recent years posed an  existential  threat  to  the  Government  of
         Sudan. These are  all  factors  which  Nuba  have  in  common  with
         Darfuris.


    197. It is respectfully submitted that the situation in Sudan  is  still
         unstable, for  the  reasons  set  out  by  Dame  Rosalind  Marsden,
         Madeleine Crowther and the recent ICG report. In the same way  that
         Darfuris currently face persecution in their  home  areas  are  not
         able to return to Khartoum, neither can Nuba reasonably be expected
         to return.  The  characteristics  of  both  groups  are  strikingly
         similar. It is submitted that the Upper Tribunal  should  follow  a
         consistent approach.


    198. Notwithstanding the positive changes made in Khartoum, Nuba  failed
         asylum seekers would be at risk of ill treatment at  the  hands  of
         NISS/GIS  in  the  event  of  return.  That  risk  would   increase
         substantially should the current government fall from power and the
         Islamist faction of Hemeti takes power.  These  scenarios  are  not
         unlikely for reasons set out by Dame Rosalind Marsden and Madeleine
         Crowther.


    199. The Tribunal is therefore invited to  issue  country  guidance  for
         Nuba in the same terms as in AAR & AA (Non-Arab Darfuris -  return)
         Sudan [2019] UKUT 00282 (IAC).


    200. It is submitted that the  Appellant's  appeal  against  refusal  of
         asylum should be allowed and the decision of FTJ Sweeney remade  on
         the basis that the Appellant, as a member of the Nuba Tribes,  will
         be at risk of persecution and Article 3 ill treatment on the  basis
         of his ethnicity  and  the  imputed  political  opinion  (suspected
         support of SPLM/N) that would attach to a Nuba who is  returned  to
         Khartoum as a failed asylum seeker from the United Kingdom.


    201. It is relevant for the purposes of Country Guidance  to  note  that
         the Secretary of State appears to accept that certain categories of
         Nuba cannot be safely returned. These categories are: those who are
         politically active; students; and Christians. If, which is  denied,
         the Appellant is not  entitled  to  succeed  in  this  appeal,  the
         Tribunal is nevertheless requested to confirm that  the  categories
         of Nuba as identified above cannot be safely returned  to  Khartoum
         and should succeed in asylum claims.


    202. Alternatively,  it  is  established  that  Nuba  are  subjected  to
         ethnically and politically motivated attacks in  their  home  areas
         and would be refugees in the event of return  to  those  areas.  In
         these  circumstances,  life  in  Khartoum   for   such   Nuba,   in
         displacement areas such as the black belt would be unduly harsh for
         a returned failed asylum seeker from the Nuba Mountains  and  South
         Kordofan.


    203.  The level of discrimination in  Khartoum  and  Omdurman,  if  not
         persecutory in nature, would be unduly harsh within the meaning  of
         Januzi. The  evidence  establishes  that  there  is  no  access  to
         effective   medical   services,    education,    employment    ....
         Additionally, Nuba are routinely denied citizenship  through  being
         required to provide birth certificates from their areas of  origin.
         This denial impacts on access to essential services.

    B. The Respondent

70. In his submissions, Mr Thomann, on behalf of  the  respondent,  rejects
    any analogy with, and reliance upon, the CG decisions relating to  non-
    Arabs from Darfur.  The respondent contends that there is no  risk  per
    se to an individual of Nuba ethnicity on return.  Instead, it  is  said
    that the risk flows from perceived political profile  or  activism  and
    not from the mere fact of being from a Nuba tribe.

71. The respondent contends  that  there  are  no  specific  categories  of
    individuals who cannot safely be returned - each case must be  assessed
    on a holistic basis and is fact-sensitive by analogy to the approach of
    the UT in IM and AI.  The issue is whether the individual's profile  or
    political activity  presents  a  sufficiently  serious  threat  to  the
    Sudanese regime to warrant targeting.

72. Mr Thomann, nevertheless, accepts that a  person  who  has  a  credible
    claim to a political profile or activism such that they will have  come
    to the attention of the Sudanese authorities (or is likely to have done
    so) is likely to have a well-founded fear of  persecution  and/or  ill-
    treatment on return.

73. The respondent contends that a returned asylum-seeker will not,  simply
    on that basis, be at risk on return at the airport or elsewhere.

74. Further, the respondent accepts that  internal  relocation  to  Greater
    Khartoum will not be reasonable if the individual  has  a  well-founded
    fear  from  the  Sudanese  state.   However,  the   reasonableness   of
    relocation to Greater Khartoum for other individuals who cannot  return
    to their home area by reason of a risk of serious harm will depend upon
    an assessment  of  all  the  circumstances.   Finally,  the  respondent
    accepts that relocation to the  Nuba  Mountains  is  not  a  reasonable
    option.

75. Mr Thomann sets out the respondent's position in paras [4]-[14] of  his
    final written submissions as follows (footnotes omitted):



      4. The population of Nuba in the wider Khartoum  Area,  the  focus  of
         this appeal, is not known precisely, but is likely to  number  many
         hundreds of thousands.   It is not, moreover, possible to speak  of
         a "single Nuba experience" within  that  population.   Rather,  the
         position, both before and after the changes of 2019, remains that a
         person from a tribe which originates from  the  Nuba  Mountains  is
         not, on that account alone, at risk on return to Khartoum  and  its
         environs.



      5. As this Tribunal found in IM and AI (Risks  -  membership  of  Beja
         Tribe, Beja Congress and JEM)  Sudan CG [2016] UKUT 188  (IAC)...it
         has  at  all  material  times  been  necessary  to   build   up   a
         comprehensive picture of the  returnee,  taking  into  account  all
         relevant material, in order  to  establish  risk  on  return.   The
         Secretary  of  State  accepts  that,  as  part  of  that  composite
         assessment, a person's Nuba ethnicity is a factor, amongst  others,
         to be considered when determining whether the individual  would  be
         perceived as a sufficiently serious threat to the regime to warrant
         targeting, and  treatment  that  amounts  to  serious  harm.  Other
         factors, including the returnee's

           a. profession,

           b. any political activity,

           c. evidence as to whether that activity has come to the  adverse
              attention of the Sudanese authorities,

           d. any past history of detention and the circumstances  of  such
              detention

         will also be relevant to that in the round assessment.


      6. The Appellant's suggestion that it is appropriate  to  depart  from
         the country guidance by drawing an analogy with the extant  country
         guidance on Non-Arab Darfuris is mistaken for a number of  reasons.
          Whilst  there  are  analogies,  set  out  below,  there  are  also
         significant distinctions pertaining to the communities of Nuba  and
         Non-Arab Darfuris in the Khartoum  Area.   In  summary  the  latter
         community is perceived not merely as larger, but more organised and
         politically active.  It posed a greater threat to forces seeking to
         counter reform in 2019. Forensically, there  is  another  important
         distinction.  The position in this appeal is not that the Secretary
         of State is inviting this Tribunal to depart  from  extant  country
         guidance  concerning  the  position  of  the  Nuba,  or   Non-Arabs
         generally in the Khartoum area.  It is rather, one of endorsing the
         nuanced and, with respect, careful Country guidance promulgated  by
         this Tribunal in IM and AI.



      7. In so far as concerns the  developments  in  the  passage  of  time
         between  the  promulgation  of  IM  and  AI  and  this   Tribunal's
         determination, the changes effected have improved the  position  in
         Khartoum, and indeed  between  July  (when  the  Darfuri  case  was
         considered) and now,  the  process  of  democratic  transition  has
         further progressed and the position of the interim  government  has
         further stabilised.



      8. The evidence did not support in 2018, and still less  does  it  now
         support, the Appellant's core submission that a Nuba  would  be  at
         real risk of ill-treatment on return to Khartoum.   The Appellant's
         general statements to this effect in his written submissions of  12
         November 2019 are not supported by the country evidence.



      9. The principal significance of the 2019 developments,  and  the  two
         transitions of power associated with them, is as  follows.   First,
         these developments shed light on the nature of the  popular  threat
         presented to the Sudanese regime in 2019:   a  threat  which  takes
         political  rather  than  military  shape.   Secondly,  the   Bashir
         regime's response to the protests in early 2019, and  that  of  the
         Transitional Military Council later in 2019, further shed light  on
         the extent, if any, that existential  threats  to  the  regime  may
         translate into a heightened risk to the Nuba living in the Khartoum
         Area.  Thirdly,  the  change  of  government,  and  change  of  the
         political climate consequent upon it, bears upon the assessment  of
         immediate  risk,  if  any,  on  return  to  Khartoum  International
         Airport.



     10. Beyond this, the Secretary of  State  does  not  suggest  that  the
         formation  of  the  Interim  Government,  and  the  opening  up  of
         democratic  and  civic  space  associated  with  it,  represents  a
         permanent  democratic  settlement.    Nor   that   the   democratic
         transition is bound to succeed.  The Tribunal  is  not  invited  to
         approach this Country Guidance  determination  through  Panglossian
         eyes.  The institutional changes, and changes of political  culture
         effected by the Interim Government do, however, properly fall to be
         taken into account in deciding, according  to  the  relevant  legal
         principles set out below, on the claims of the present Appellant to
         international protection, and on  the  giving  of  current  country
         guidance.



     11. The Secretary of State has previously accepted that the fact that a
         person originates from the Nuba Mountains is a material  matter  to
         be brought to bear in assessing how the authorities are  likely  to
         react on the strength of the information known to them  about  him.
         She does not resile from that position.  However, this factor alone
         does not suffice to place a returnee at risk per se.



     12. On a careful examination of the evidence, written and oral, it  was
         necessary in 2018 to draw a distinction between those perceived  to
         have an influence or history of activism considered to be a  threat
         to the regime, and those that do not.   The  evidence  before  this
         Tribunal in IM and AI was that  targeting  by  the,  then  Sudanese
         National Intelligence and Security Service (NISS)  is  not  random,
         but  the  result  of  suspicion  based  upon  information  in   the
         authorities' possession.  None of  the  testimonies  heard  by  the
         Tribunal at the hearing undermine the validity of that  assessment.





     13. On the first issue identified for country guidance  therefore,  the
         Secretary of  State's  position  is  that  neither  an  Appellant's
         ethnicity, tribal background nor his activities sur place will, per
         se, give rise to a real risk of persecution on return to  Omdurman,
         nor at Khartoum International Airport.



     14. The size and diversity of the Nuba population in  Greater  Khartoum
         (Omdurman is one of Three Towns that comprise Greater Khartoum) and
         their  environs  renders  it  difficult   to   generalise   whether
         relocation  to  Khartoum  would   give   rise   to   unduly   harsh
         circumstances on return.  It would be wrong  to  underestimate  the
         challenge of accessing housing,  services  and  employment  for  an
         internally displaced person or a returnee with no contacts or roots
         in Khartoum State.  There is, however, no single  Nuba  experience,
         and each individual's  circumstances  would  need  to  be  assessed
         carefully.


76. The respondent's position on the "general risk" to Nuba is further  set
    out  at  paras  [174]-181]  of  Mr  Thomann's  submissions  as  follows
    (footnotes omitted):

     174. General Risk: The human rights abuses committed by  the  Sudanese
          authorities and in particular the National Intelligence  Security
          Services (NISS)  in  recent  years  are  well  documented.   That
          country evidence further suggested that a wide range  of  persons
          may be at risk of detention and ill-treatment  or  serious  harm.
          The last category may include in particular  those  returning  to
          conflict areas  such  as  Darfur  and  South  Kordofan  (see  the
          Tribunal's guidance in IM and AI, ....


     175. The Secretary of State accepted as part of her  2018  submissions
          that a person who had a credible claim to a political profile  or
          activism such that they will have come to the  adverse  attention
          of the Sudanese authorities, or is likely to have  done  so,  was
          likely to qualify for asylum.  The  Appellant's  Nuba  background
          is, in that context, a factor material to the assessment  in  the
          round.  It is not suggested that the country position has changed
          so significantly that this concession, which formed part of  this
          Tribunal's Country Guidance in 2016, should be revisited.


     176. By contrast,  the  extant  Country  Guidance,  and  the  evidence
          considered as part of  this  appeal,  does  not  show  that  mere
          membership of a tribe from the Nuba Mountains  gives  rise  to  a
          real risk of persecution or serious harm on return.   Nor will  a
          failed asylum seeker from  a  tribe  originating  from  the  Nuba
          Mountains be at risk, by reason only of  this  status,  of  undue
          hardship on relocation to Khartoum.


     177. The threat posed to the regime in 2019  is  more  broadly  based,
          political, and organised.    At its spearhead are  professionals,
          and civic activists. This contrasts with the existential military
          threats posed to the regime in the past, in conjunction with  the
          Darfuri and South Kordofan insurgencies.   Indeed,  as  [Rosalind
          Marsden]  accepted,  the  military   strength   of   the   ethnic
          communities on the periphery of Sudan was, by 2018, much reduced.


     178.  Consistently  with  those  developments,  the  focus  of  recent
          evidence of mistreatment and  targeting  has  been,  principally,
          upon professionals, activists and persons partaking in  the  2019
          demonstrations.


     179. The Appellant's case as to a bright-line risk on ethnic lines  is
          not reconcilable either with by the size  of  the  population  of
          Nuba in and around Khartoum and the paucity of evidence that Nuba
          being targeted or mistreated there.   Rather, a  person's  ethnic
          background remains one of the factors to take into  account  when
          conducting the nuanced  assessment  of  risk  described  by  this
          Tribunal in  its  2016  Country  Guidance  on  returns  to  Sudan
          generally.


     180. There is not,  as  the  Appellant's  submission  pre-supposes,  a
          single Nuba experience in Khartoum (see, inter alia,  the  number
          of  appointments  of  Nuba  to  the  government  and  Supervisory
          Council).   That absence of evidence is particularly  telling  in
          the context  of  the  existential  threats  posed  to  successive
          Sudanese governments in the last 12 months.


     181. A Nuba Failed Asylum Seeker likewise will not by reason  of  that
          status alone, face a real risk of persecution,  serious  harm  or
          treatment contrary to Article 3 of  the  European  Convention  on
          Human Rights on return to Sudan.   Such a claim is not,  contrary
          to Dr Reeves' understanding, a political act which stands  to  be
          assessed by  the  Sudanese  security  services  as  a  threat  to
          internal stability.


77. Then at paras [192]-[194], Mr  Thomann  concludes  his  submissions  as
    follows:

    192. There is no extant country guidance dealing specifically with Nuba.
           Instead, the careful guidance of  this  Tribunal  promulgated  in
         2016 considered the submission that risk  of  mistreatment  may  be
         derived solely from non-Arab ethnicity, and specifically rejected a
         suggestion  that  bright  line  risk  distinctions  could  be  made
         premised upon ethnic lines.


   193. For the avoidance of doubt, and in accordance with  that  guidance,
        the Secretary of  State  does  not  accept,  as  suggested  by  the
        Appellant, that  "certain  categories  of  Nuba  cannot  be  safely
        returned", such as those who are politically  active,  students  or
        Christians.


   194. Rather, those factors form a relevant, rather than  decisive,  part
        of the overall assessment  of  risk  on  return  advocated  by  the
        Tribunal in IM and AI.  The evidence is not [that] either Christian
        Nuba, Nuba students, or politically engaged Nuba  are  a  group  at
        risk per se.  Rather,  such  aspects  are  factors  which  need  to
        weighed up as part  of  the  decision-maker's  overall  assessment.
        Further, and in addition, the process of strengthening of civic and
        democratic forces, the adoption of  the  constitutional  documents,
        the  civic  engagement  of  the  professions,  and  the  concurrent
        weakening of the Islamist forces since the  2016  country  guidance
        was promulgated has, if anything, improved the position  on  return
        for Nuba who are Christian, educated, or active religiously.


78. Further the respondent contends that a real risk of ill-treatment  does
    not arise simply from being a returned failed asylum-seeker.  The  same
    "nuanced" approach in IM and AI is contended to be applicable. There is
    no risk simply being a failed  asylum  -seeker.   In  relation  to  the
    latter, Mr Thomann contends (at paras [185]-[189])  that  there  is  no
    real risk of mistreatment on return at the airport.  The evidence, post
    the 2019 developments, does not support any real risk  of  mistreatment
    at the airport:

    185. Risk at  the  Airport:   The  Respondent  accepts  that  there  was
         evidence in 2018 that Sudanese authorities, may be able to identify
         a person as a failed asylum seeker  on  return,  depending  on  the
         circumstances of their departure  from  and  return  to  Sudan  and
         question such a returnee closely.  That risk materialises  when  an
         individual travels on an emergency travel document, or  a  passport
         lacking a valid exit stamp, or is accompanied by  escort  staff  on
         return.    It is  further  likely  that  such  a  person  would  be
         questioned about activities since leaving Sudan.


    186. Beyond this, there remains a lack of evidence that a failed  asylum
         seeker, if  detained  on  arrival  in  Khartoum,  would  become  of
         interest to NISS or experience treatment which  would  put  him  at
         real risk merely by reason of the fact of  claiming  asylum.    The
         fact that there is no formal  monitoring  of  returns  to  Khartoum
         International Airport by human rights  groups,  and  that  removals
         from the UK and other countries take place in low numbers does  not
         explain such an absence.


    187. The testimonies  collected  by  Waging  Peace  likewise  cannot  be
         described as presenting a consistent pattern of  mistreatment  such
         as to support the Appellant's case as to risk  on  return  by  mere
         reason of being a Nuba.


    188. The Tribunal has been provided with a 22 October 2019 CPIT Response
         to  Information  Request  showing  figures  for  Returns  to  Sudan
         compiled with the assistance of Eurostat's  published  numbers  and
         European Asylum Support Office responses....  Those figures do  not
         purport to be complete.   As  will  be  apparent,  the  numbers  of
         voluntary and enforced  returns  is  not  large  (para  4.2.3,  and
         response to Query 6).  It will further be noted that  there  is  no
         formal post-return monitoring.  It is nonetheless striking that the
         evidence of a risk of serious mistreatment on return, as opposed to
         questioning, by reference to ethnic profile only, is  absent.   The
         Appellant's suggestion that such a risk may exist, in  the  absence
         of such evidence, is mistaken.


    189. In so far as that position has changed since 2018, the evidence  is
         that the security position at the airport has, if anything,  become
         less strict.  There are no reports of  recent  mistreatment.   RM's
         supposition that historical opposition to the Bashir  regime  would
         not be viewed negatively in the current climate is astute, and  her
         anecdotal evidence as to  the  nature  of  the  remaining  security
         presence reflects this.


79. The respondent accepts internal  relocation  is  not  available  to  an
    individual who is at risk from the Sudanese  Government  (para  [183]).
    However, whilst in principle available to a returnee who cannot  return
    to his home area by reason of  risk  of  serious  harm,  relocation  to
    Greater Khartoum will not generally be unreasonable (para [184]):



     184. For returnees more generally, not fearing state  persecution  but
          unable to return to their home  area  by  reason  of  a  risk  of
          serious harm, the feasibility of internal relocation has depended
          upon all the circumstances of the case.  In  principle,  Khartoum
          and Omdurman remain areas of viable relocation for those  seeking
          to leave the conflict areas in South  Kordofan.  That  submission
          does not overlook the difficulties described by interlocutors for
          those arriving in the  poorer  areas  of  Khartoum  in  accessing
          healthcare, education and employment. The description of societal
          factors and discrimination is further noted.  However, the  sheer
          size and diversity of the population in Khartoum from Darfur  and
          the Two Areas renders the  submission  that  relocation  will  be
          unreasonable in the generality of cases unsustainable.   Instead,
          the question as to whether access  to  economic  activity,  basic
          services and shelter will be available to a returnee or displaced
          person requires a fact-specific assessment of  the  circumstances
          of the individual returnee. See, for example, the position of the
          present Appellant, considered further below.

IX. THE COUNTRY GUIDANCE ARGUMENT

80. We set out the existing guidance above because,  although  (apart  from
    that one reference in IM and AI) it is not concerned with those of Nuba
    ethnicity, Mr Jacobs places considerable reliance upon  it,  contending
    that Nuba are treated in a  like  manner  to  non-Arab  Darfuris  as  a
    marginalised group who are likely to be linked through their  ethnicity
    to political and military conflicts in their areas of origin.   In  his
    submission, the CG decisions on non-Arab Darfuris  should  be  followed
    and the appellant succeeds.  He relies on the fact that before  the  UT
    in AAR and AA the respondent  conceded  that  the  situation  in  Sudan
    remained volatile and that there was insufficient evidence currently to
    show that the guidance in AA and MM should be changed.

81. By contrast, Mr Thomann invites us not to follow or  apply  AA  and  MM
    where the respondent's concession was merely that there was not "cogent
    evidence", given the volatile situation, to  justify  revising  the  CG
    decisions and, in the cases of the particular appellants before the UT,
    further delay was not appropriate and their  appeals  should  be  dealt
    with on the basis of the existing CG cases.

82. Instead, he relies upon IM and AI and invites us to apply its  approach
    (by analogy) in assessing, what if any, is the risk of  persecution  to
    those of Nuba ethnicity returning to Sudan.

83. The argument is as follows: (i) Country Guidance establishes that group
    A is subject to risks X.  (ii) In the present case evidence shows  that
    the position of group B  is  the  same  as  that  of  group  A.   (iii)
    Therefore the Country Guidance applies to group B.  Proposition (ii) is
    a matter for the evidence in the present case; but  the  derivation  of
    proposition (iii) from propositions (i) and (ii) is an  issue  of  law.
    We reject Mr  Jacobs'  submission  that  Country  Guidance  applies  by
    analogy in the circumstances he seeks to set up.

84. The relevance of the CG decision (in the  context  with  which  we  are
    concerned) is that it has a precedential effect in any case before  the
    FtT or UT where the individual claims to  be  at  risk  as  a  non-Arab
    Darfuri.  That is made clear  by  the  paragraph  12.2  of  the  Senior
    President's Practice Direction (Immigration and Asylum Chambers of  the
    First-Tier Tribunal and  the  Upper  Tribunal)  (10  February  2010  as
    amended):

         "12.2. A reported determination of the Tribunal, the AIT or the IAT
         bearing the letters "CG"  shall  be  treated  as  an  authoritative
         finding  on  the  country  guidance   issue   identified   in   the
         determination, based upon the evidence before the  members  of  the
         Tribunal, the AIT or the  IAT  that  determine  the  appeal.  As  a
         result, unless it has been expressly superseded or replaced by  any
         later "CG" determination, or is inconsistent with  other  authority
         that is binding on the Tribunal, such a country  guidance  case  is
         authoritative in any subsequent appeal, so far as  that  appeal:(a)
         relates to the country guidance issue in question; and (b)  depends
         upon the same or similar evidence."

85. The "authoritative" nature of a CG decision "in respect of a particular
    matter" as set out in para 12.2 of the Practice Direction  derives  its
    force from s.107(3) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
    (as amended).

86. Paragraph 12.4 of the Practice Direction emphasises the  importance  CG
    decisions play in treating like cases alike and that a failure to apply
    the decision (or properly explain why it  is  not  applicable,  in  all
    likelihood because of new cogent evidence) is likely to be an error  of
    law:

         "12.4. Because of the principle that like cases should  be  treated
         in  like  manner,  any  failure  to  follow  a  clear,   apparently
         applicable country guidance case or to show why it does  not  apply
         to the case in question is likely to be  regarded  as  grounds  for
         appeal on a point of law."

87. A Country Guidance decision's precedential effect  extends,  therefore,
    to any other appeal so far as it "relates to the country guidance issue
    in question".  A tribunal hearing an appeal in respect  of  a  non-Arab
    Dafuri must, therefore, apply the CG decision in the absence  of  "very
    strong grounds supported by cogent evidence"  (see  SG  (Iraq)  v  SSHD
    [2012] EWCA Civ 940 at [47]). The parties in a case covered by  Country
    Guidance are not required, indeed are relieved of  the  obligation,  to
    lead the relevant country background evidence:  the  CG  decision  will
    suffice.

88. However, a CG decision dealing  with  the  risk  to  non-Arab  Darfuris
    returning to Sudan has no precedential effect in a case  not  concerned
    with a non-Arab  Darfuri.    That  is  because  it  has  no  collateral
    precedential effect in other cases.  A CG decision cannot  be  used  as
    the evidential tool  to  overcome  (or  indeed  replace)  the  need  to
    establish by evidence the position of non-Arab  Darfuris  in  this  or,
    indeed, in any other case not involving a non-Arab Darfuri.

89. If we were concerned in this case with a non-Arab Darfuri appellant, we
    would know, applying the CG cases, the correct outcome of  the  appeal,
    subject to there not being cogent  evidence  to  justify  not  applying
    them.  That is not the same as us knowing what is the  actual  position
    of non-Arab Darfuris in the absence of evidence on  that  issue.   This
    appeal was not argued on the basis of evidence about non-Arab  Darfuris
    but rather, on this point at least, that they are at risk (applying the
    CG decisions) and the Nuba are in the same position (see the expert and
    background evidence).  We are not in any position to  second-guess  the
    UT's position (and the respondent's concession) in August 2019  in  the
    case of AAR and AA and we do not do so.  Despite Mr  Jacobs'  assertion
    that the position of Nuba is the same as  that  of  non-Arab  Darfuris,
    this is not a decision about non-Arab Darfuris  and,  subject  only  to
    what is said at paragraph 252, nothing in this decision should be taken
    to comment in any way on the existing Country Guidance in  relation  to
    non-Arab Darfuris.

90. So we reject Mr Jacobs' submission that we should base our decision  on
    the guidance contained in AA and MM.  The risk,  if  any,  to  Nuba  on
    return to Sudan must be determined on the relevant evidence  before  us
    relating to the position of Nuba in Sudan.

91. Likewise, of course, IM and AI cannot be 'applied' as country  guidance
    to Nuba as the case did not concern them.  The country  guidance  issue
    was different even though, in passing the UT  made  some  reference  to
    their position at [203].  The UT's view on there  being  no  real  risk
    simply as a failed  asylum-seeker  might  be  considered  part  of  the
    country guidance but for the fact that it is not identified in the UT's
    decision as a point on which  the  decision  gives  guidance.   We  are
    content to treat it, therefore, as not a country guidance  finding  and
    to reach our own conclusion on the evidence before us.

92. In any event, it seems to us that Mr Thomann was not seeking to ask  us
    to apply IM and AI as  a  CG  decision  but  rather  contending  for  a
    "composite assessment" and  "fact-sensitive"  approach  in  determining
    whether an individual of Nuba ethnicity would be at risk on  return  as
    someone who would be (or would  be  perceived  to  be)  a  sufficiently
    serious threat  to  the  Sudanese  regime  to  warrant  targeting  and,
    therefore, at real risk of serious harm.  In other words,  the  general
    position is that an individual who claims to be at risk  will  need  to
    establish the risk on the facts of the  individual  case,  without  the
    benefit of any sweeping assertion derived from a Country Guidance case.
     The need to consider any Nuba  claim  individually  was  the  position
    which Mr Thomann sought to substantiate on the basis of the evidence.

X. DISCUSSION

93. Having rejected the appellant's argument based on the non-Arab  Darfuri
    CG cases, we turn to consider the  appellant's  claim  based  upon  the
    evidence relating to Nuba in  Sudan.   In  reaching  our  findings,  we
    consider the risk to an individual of Nuba ethnicity:

         (i)  in the Nuba Mountains in South Kordofan;

         (ii)  in Greater Khartoum; and

         (iii)  at Khartoum International Airport on return; and

         (iv) we conclude by  considering  whether  internal  relocation  to
         Greater Khartoum is an option for a person  of  Nuba  ethnicity  at
         risk in their home area elsewhere.

    A. The Nuba Mountains and South Kordofan

94. We consider the position in the Nuba Mountains over two  time  periods:
    (a) between 2011 and 2016, covering the period from  the  beginning  of
    hostilities and ending with the ceasefire in 2016; and  (b)  since  the
    2016 ceasefire to the present.

95. The conflict in the  south  of  Sudan  (2003-2005)  which  led  to  the
    cessation of South Sudan (2011) was followed by an  armed  struggle  by
    rebels (2011-2016) based in the Two Areas, i.e. South Kordofan and  the
    Blue Nile, under the umbrella  of  the  SPLM-N.   That  armed  struggle
    commenced in June 2011 in the Nuba Mountains and  spread  to  the  Blue
    Nile in September 2011.  The SPLM-N split into two  factions  in  2017:
    that in the Blue Nile led by Malik Agar and in the  Nuba  Mountains  by
    led by al Hilu.  As Dame Rosalind told us  in  her  oral  evidence  and
    March 2018 report, the al-Bashir regime was opposed to the Nuba  tribes
    because many Nuba fought with the SPLM-N  on  the  side  of  the  south
    Sudanese in the North/South civil war.  Her evidence was  that  in  the
    1990s the regime declared a Jihad against the Nuba.  The armed conflict
    in the Nuba Mountains in 2010/2011 led  to  aerial  bombing  campaigns,
    ground attack, forcible displacement and a  humanitarian  crisis.   The
    situation is documented in  the  Asylum  Research  Consultancy  Report:
    "South Kordofan and the Blue Nile Country Report" (dated 1  June  2016)
    covering the period up to 1 April 2016.  We have  no  reason  to  doubt
    that evidence or that of the witnesses we heard about the period up  to
    the ceasefire in 2016.

96. Dr Reeves described events  in  the  South  Kordofan  region  including
    ethnic cleansing, the Sudanese government's  blockade  of  humanitarian
    assistance to those in the Nuba Mountains and, on the basis of a leaked
    Minute of a meeting of senior military officials on 31 August 2014, the
    use of starvation as a method of  war  when  it  was  agreed  that  the
    sorghum  crop  in  the  Nuba  Mountains  should   be   destroyed.    He
    characterised the government's approach as amounting to  genocide.   As
    his evidence was given in June 2018, Dr Reeves' evidence did  not  take
    into account the recent developments  in  the  political  situation  in
    Sudan since April 2019.

97. In the Waging Peace Report of  March  2018,  Ms  Crowther  referred  to
    attacks on civilians and the indiscriminate bombing of civilian targets
    including schools and hospitals.  She also referred to the blockade  of
    humanitarian aid to the region. She also said that the situation on the
    ground "has largely played itself out away from public attention" as  a
    result of the expulsion on NGOs in 2009 and the  almost  "non-existent"
    press coverage due to the Government's deliberate obstruction of  media
    freedom.

98. Both Dr Reeves and Ms Crowther spoke of contacts with  Dr  Tom  Catena,
    who worked -  and  continues  to  work  -  in  the  Nuba  Mountains  as
    describing the situation as a "war zone".  That said, there has in fact
    been a continuing cease-fire by the Sudanese authorities and the rebels
    since 2016 and, in our view, the developments  in  2019  including  the
    peace-talks in Juba between the Government and the  rebels,  have  only
    made the cessation of hostilities more stable.   Ms  Crowther,  in  her
    evidence, said that there had been no aerial bombing activity  in  2017
    because "the government of Sudan has been on its best behaviour" whilst
    negotiating with, and obtaining a  lifting  of  sanctions  by,  the  US
    government in 2017. The same report does, however, record harassment of
    women students at University in South Kordofan in January 2018.

    2011-2016

99. What, then, was the position in the Nuba Mountains up to the cease-fire
    in 2016?  We accept that  the  situation  at  that  time  created  dire
    humanitarian conditions  engineered  and  maintained  by  the  Sudanese
    state.  We can well understand why individuals of Nuba  ethnicity  left
    the Nuba Mountains area prior to the 2016 cease-fire  when  faced  with
    the violence and humanitarian conditions  that  then  pertained  there.
    Based upon the evidence we have been referred to,  it  is  likely  that
    Government action,  including  the  use  of  violence  and  attacks  by
    Government forces, would have engaged Art 15(c)  of  the  Qualification
    Directive.   Equally,  the  conditions  of  deprivation  for  the  Nuba
    inhabitations of the region - the "humanitarian crisis"  including  the
    blockade of  humanitarian  assistance  and  the  deliberate  Government
    tactic of starvation - up to the cease-fire in 2016 may well  have,  in
    an individual case, reached the 'threshold' of "inhumane  or  degrading
    treatment" contrary to Art 3 of the ECHR.

    Since 2016

100. What of the current  situation?   The  appellant's  case  is  that  the
    ongoing violence in South Kordofan creates a real risk of serious  harm
    and targeting of all Nuba.    By  contrast,  the  Secretary  of  State,
    whilst not accepting that there was previously a real risk to all  Nuba
    prior to the cessation  of  hostilities  in  2016,  contends  that  the
    current circumstances since the cease-fire do not give rise to  a  real
    risk of serious harm or persecution to  an  individual  simply  due  to
    their Nuba ethnicity.

101. We acknowledge that despite the 2016  cease-fire,  violent  attacks  by
    government forces, including the RSF  (headed  by  Hemeti)  have  taken
    place in South Kordofan.  The "Human Rights Update: April - June  2019"
    notes that:

         "Although the number of attacks still have not  reached  the  level
         prior to sharp dehumanisation that began in June 2016,  there  were
         more human rights violation incidents perpetrated by  the  Sudanese
         government in the Two Areas during the first six  months  of  2019,
         compared to the prior two years.  Similarly,  as  a  result,  there
         were more people injured and killed during  the  first  six  months
         2019 than during the last six months of 2018."

102. In that regard, what is said there may reflect the  heightened  tension
    during early 2019 as a result of the protests taking  place  in  Sudan,
    principally in Greater Khartoum, against the al-Bashir regime.

103. In his written submissions (at para [73]), Mr Jacobs places  particular
    reliance  upon  four  examples  of  recent  incidents  or  attacks   by
    government or RSF forces which were referred to by Dame Rosalind in her
    Addendum Report of 17  October  2019.   The  incidents  took  place  in
    October 2019.

104. First, on 4 October, it is reported  that  RSF's  forces  attacked  the
    Nuba village of Tongal using 25 pick-up  trucks  mounted  with  machine
    guns.  Secondly, on 5 October Shamseddin Kabbashi, a military member of
    the Sovereign Council (who is himself a Nuba) and General  Hemeti  have
    been recruiting from both Arab and Nuba tribes in government-controlled
    areas to join the RSF.  Thirdly, on 16  October,  al  Hilu's  spokesman
    announced that RSF soldiers in 25 land cruisers had ambushed  civilians
    inside SPLM-N controlled territory near Khor Warl abducting  13  people
    and killing two others including a local Sheikh who had objected to the
    local nomads passing through farm lands.  Fourthly, on  7  October  the
    RSF mounted an attack on people living near  the  goldmines  at  Talodi
    using 27 armed  pick-up  trucks.  They  beat  and  arrested  civilians,
    injuring 10 people, and looted their property.  Dame Rosalind  told  us
    that most of these companies are owned by the RSF, including Hemeti and
    others in the regime.

105. Whilst we have no  reason  to  doubt  the  evidence  of  these  violent
    incidents in  the  Nuba  Mountains,  they  do  not,  in  our  judgment,
    demonstrate a real risk to all Nuba living there.   In  our  view,  the
    attacks were targeted in very particular circumstances against  certain
    individuals  and/or  organisations  and  are  not   representative   of
    widespread abuses or violence directed  against  Nuba  generally.   The
    incident around the goldmine in Talodi appears to arise as a result  of
    demonstrations by local residents which had been going on for a  number
    of months over the use of mercury and cyanide by  goldmining  companies
    which they claim have caused serious health and environmental problems.
     Ms Crowther also gave the example of recent violence in South Kordofan
    as the attack on the goldmine at Talodi.  That incident has the feature
    of a targeted attack as a result of a grievance felt by the  forces  of
    the government or supported by the government.  The same can be said of
    the attack following the 'dispute'  with  the  nomads  passing  through
    farmland.

106. In her oral evidence, Ms Crowther referred to an e-mail dated  19  July
    2019 from the South Kordofan/Blue Nile Coordination Unit  (Annex  V  of
    her statement dated 27 August 2019) and its reference to cattle raiding
    incidents by militia in South  Kordofan.  In  her  oral  evidence,  she
    agreed these were individual incidents and that there was  no  evidence
    of general round-ups in South Kordofan. Ms Crowther  also  referred  to
    evidence from an activist (Annex VII of the same  statement)  who  said
    that the security and humanitarian situation in South Kordofan had  not
    changed and the militias were committing many atrocities.  In her  oral
    evidence, she agreed that he had not given any  specific  examples  but
    that was because he had not been asked but he had  given  her  some  in
    discussions.  We do not know what those examples were and, in  reality,
    his evidence is general without giving any supporting incidents.

107. Dr Reeves' evidence was, necessarily, restricted to the position  prior
    to the recent developments when he gave his evidence in May/June  2018.
    In our judgment, Dr Reeves' opinion that there was in  2018,  prior  to
    the 2019 political developments, a real  risk  to  all  Nuba  in  South
    Kordofan on return is also not borne out by the evidence.

108. Both Ms Crowther and Dr  Reeves  referred  to  communications  from  Dr
    Catena. Dr Catena, working as a doctor, is based in the Nuba Mountains.
     He characterises the Nuba Mountain area as having been, and continuing
    to be, a "war zone".  Whilst that may be an entirely fitting historical
    characterisation of the situation given the  history  of  conflict  and
    violence in South Kordofan between 2011 and 2016, in our  judgment,  it
    is not a fitting description of the present situation in South Kordofan
    supported by the evidence of the current circumstances.

109. Whilst attacks against Nuba individuals have taken place, the  examples
    we were  referred  to  are  limited.   We  were  told  that  there  was
    effectively a  media  blackout  on  what  was  happening  in  the  Nuba
    Mountains.  We can, however, only reach  a  decision  on  the  evidence
    before us; not on evidence that could not be produced if  that  is  the
    case.  The clear position, in any event, is  that  we  saw  nothing  to
    suggest that the sources of information from the  Nuba  Mountains  have
    simply ceased.  On  the  contrary,  we  were  presented  with  evidence
    through the witnesses (including from Dr Catena) and from  Ms  Crowther
    following a visit in December 2018 to camps on the South Sudan side  of
    the border with Sudan and the South Kordofan region.

110. Mr Thomann conceded that an individual of Nuba ethnicity,  if  at  risk
    elsewhere in Sudan, could not be expected reasonably to relocate to the
    Nuba Mountains.  We will consider internal relocation,  inter  alia  to
    the Nuba Mountains, later but, for the present, we should not be  taken
    to be endorsing that concession.  However,  of  course,  it  is  not  a
    concession that there is a real risk of  persecution  or  serious  ill-
    treatment to all  Nuba  in  the  Nuba  Mountains.   Rather,  it  is  an
    acceptance by the respondent that a person of Nuba ethnicity, not  from
    the Nuba Mountains, cannot reasonably be expected to relocate there  to
    live.

111. We accept that there has been some violence and there  have  been  some
    attacks against Nuba individuals in South Kordofan in the recent  past.
    The situation in the Nuba Mountains, unlike that in  Greater  Khartoum,
    has been one of real conflict and humanitarian  crisis.   Nevertheless,
    the evidence concerning the current position does not support a finding
    that the level of conflict rises above that of  a  few,  albeit  highly
    deplorable, violent incidents.  The humanitarian blockade has now  been
    lifted and the Sudanese government is permitting aid to pass into South
    Kordofan both from within Sudan and from foreign sources.  We will deal
    below more generally with the events in  Sudan  in  2018/2019  and  the
    positive political developments since mid-2019.  A  ceasefire  by  both
    sides has held since 2016 and has, in our view, only become more secure
    since the political developments in 2019.  A  negotiated  peace-process
    continues  between  the  Sudanese  government  and  the  rebel  groups,
    including the SPLM-N. Even though, briefly in the Autumn  of  2019  al-
    Hilu withdrew, he has now returned to take  part  in  the  talks.   The
    events in 2019 have, in our judgment, 'dampened down' the motivation to
    use military action in the Nuba Mountains and turned  the  Government's
    focus towards a political settlement.

112. The evidence does not establish a widespread or consistent  pattern  of
    targeted or  random  violence  or  attacks  directed  against  Nuba  by
    Government forces (or those acting on behalf of the Government) in  the
    Nuba Mountains.  The incidents are limited in number and,  as  we  have
    said above, arise in specific contexts.  The evidence falls well  short
    of showing that in October 2019 or now there is a risk to Nuba  in  the
    Nuba mountains that is universal or consistent or  that  arises  solely
    from their ethnicity.  Whatever was the position  during  the  conflict
    between 2011 and 2016, the evidence of the current  circumstances  does
    not establish that there is a real risk of persecution or serious  ill-
    treatment contrary to Art 3 of the ECHR faced  by  all  Nuba  in  South
    Kordofan.

113. We were not invited to consider the application of  Art  15(c)  of  the
    Qualification Directive to the present situation in the Nuba Mountains.
     In the light of that we would only say this: nothing in  the  evidence
    suggests that a claim for humanitarian or subsidiary protection,  based
    upon Art 15(c) and establishing a real risk of indiscriminate violence,
    would have any prospect of succeeding now.

    B. Greater Khartoum

114. The position of Nuba in Greater Khartoum was the  subject  of  a  great
    deal of evidence before us.  The witnesses' evidence  had  to  traverse
    the emerging situation in Sudan, in  particular  in  Greater  Khartoum,
    following the  protests  in  late  2018,  the  fall  of  the  al-Bashir
    government in April 2019 and the establishment of a new government  and
    constitution in the summer of 2019.  The emerging  political  situation
    inevitably created evidential uncertainties and  ambiguity,  not  least
    arguments concerning the sustainability of what  are  accepted  by  the
    appellant to be, positive, democratic developments in Sudan.

115. It was, we have no doubt, a challenge for the witnesses to maintain  an
    up to date assessment of the situation in Sudan.  In  that  regard,  of
    course, Dr Reeves' evidence did not deal with these developments as  it
    pre-dated them.  Ms Crowther's most recent evidence was informed by her
    contacts within the relevant communities in  the  UK  and  following  a
    visit to refugee camps in South Sudan in December 2018.  Dame  Rosalind
    Marden's evidence was, at least in part, more  directly  informed.   In
    October 2019, she made a visit to Greater  Khartoum  where  she  met  a
    number of individuals, including a group  of  six  young  Nuba  men  in
    Greater Khartoum.

    Prior to the 2018/2019 political developments

116. The Nuba have historically been discriminated against in Sudan.   There
    was a consistency of evidence before us that this was  the  case  (see,
    e.g. the evidence of Dame Rosalind, Madeline Crowther and  Dr  Reeves).
    Their physical appearance, often not being Muslim and  being  non-Arab,
    has marked them out as different;  particularly  since  the  policy  of
    'Arabisation 'and Islamisation of the state which was part of  the  al-
    Bashir government's policy.   We accept that the Nuba have  often  been
    the subject of discrimination, for example. in their  social,  economic
    and religious lives both in the Nuba Mountains and Greater Khartoum and
    have been verbally abused being  referred  to  as  "abid"  or  "zurgha"
    derogatory terms meaning "slave" and "dirty  black"  respectively.   In
    Greater Khartoum, Nuba live predominantly in the shanty  towns  of  the
    'Black Belt', where their circumstances are likely to  include  poverty
    and deprivation.

117. Dame Rosalind told us, and we accept, that the  al-Bashir  regime  (and
    its security apparatus in particular) has treated Nuba (and  those  who
    came from the Nuba Mountains) with suspicion because they were regarded
    as possible political opponents and associated with the  rebel  forces,
    in particular, the SPLM-N.  We accept that this  suspicion  might  well
    have led to a risk of  arbitrary  arrest  and  detention  by  the  NISS
    particularly so at times of heightened political tension,  for  example
    during the active conflict in the Nuba Mountains between 2011 and 2016.
     The advance by the  SPLM-N  out  of  South  Kordofan  towards  Greater
    Khartoum in  April  2013  was,  as  Dame  Rosalind  told  us,  a  major
    humiliation for the  (then)  Sudanese  government  and,  she  told  us,
    resulted in round ups and arrests of Nuba.  In her last 2018 report she
    stated:

         "As long as there is no comprehensive peace settlement addressed as
         the root causes  of  Sudan's  internal  conflicts,  the  Nuba  will
         continue to be regarded with suspicion by the authorities as likely
         political opponents and will remain at risk of arbitrary arrest and
         detention by Sudan's powerful National  Intelligence  and  Security
         Service (NISS)."

118. In her oral evidence in May/June 2018, Dame Rosalind said that not  all
    Nuba would be suspected of supporting the  SPLM-N  but  those  who  had
    received a higher education were more likely to be targeted (that is to
    say, for the most part, not those living in deprived  circumstances  in
    the 'Black Belt').  She said that the authorities could not monitor all
    Nuba and that the NISS worked in Greater Khartoum, through a network of
    informers.  Her evidence was that  large  numbers  of  Nuba  -  in  the
    hundreds of thousands or in her later evidence as many as 1.5 million -
    lived in Greater Khartoum, largely in the 'Black Belt'.  Dame  Rosalind
    spoke of the arrest of 200  activist  individuals  in  January/February
    2018 but that all had been released.  In that, she disagreed  with  the
    evidence of Ms Crowther  that  a  number  of  detainees  had  not  been
    released.  Overall, on this point, we prefer Dame  Rosalind's  evidence
    given her exceptional experience of Sudan  based  upon  her  diplomatic
    experience and her recent meeting with representatives in  Nairobi  and
    her recent visit to Sudan.   In  our  judgment,  Dame  Rosalind's  2018
    evidence - given before the recent developments in Sudan - did  not  go
    as far  as  supporting  a  finding  that  there  was  a  real  risk  of
    persecution or serious ill-treatment to all Nuba in Greater Khartoum.

119. In her October 2019 oral evidence, Dame Rosalind said  that  there  was
    no evidence of Nuba being targeted prior to the April 2019 fall of  the
    al-Bashir regime.  She said that "could well have  been  taking  place"
    but emphasised that any targeting was "to  do  with  politics  and  not
    ethnicity".

120. Ms Crowther in her 2018 evidence, postulated a risk to Nuba in  Greater
    Khartoum as a result of their association with rebel groups.  She  also
    said that "at times of  political  upheaval"  this  risk  is  increased
    because of the perception of association with all, or at least sympathy
    for, rebel and opposition activity.  She noted the wide scale  protests
    in early 2018 which were marked by arrest and ill-treatment of hundreds
    of opposition figures.  When the  regime  is  threatened,  Ms  Crowther
    expressed the view that the targeting of the Nuba  intensified.   That,
    she said, involved  attacks  upon  demonstrators  and  arrests  at  the
    beginning of 2018 when widespread protests against the economic  crisis
    began.  Much of Ms Crowther's  evidence  related  to  the  position  of
    returnees to Sudan which we will deal with below.

121. Ms Crowther also said that there was systematic discrimination  against
    Nuba in Greater Khartoum as a result of  the  government's  Arabisation
    policies.   She  identified  difficulties  in  access  to   employment,
    housing, healthcare and  education.   She  also,  like  Dame  Rosalind,
    referred to the difficulties that an individual of Nuba ethnicity might
    have in obtaining an ID card, which was crucial to access to  a  number
    of services.

122.  In  our  judgment,  Ms  Crowther's  evidence  does  not  establish   a
    consistent picture of a risk of persecution or serious ill-treatment to
    Nuba in Greater Khartoum prior to the recent political developments  in
    Sudan.  The difficulties to which she referred are not persecution; and
    the incidents of ill-treatment are not tied solely to ethnicity.

123. Speaking to the situation in 2018, Dr Reeves'  evidence  was  that  all
    Nuba  would  face  "unacceptably  high  risks"  if  returned  to  Sudan
    including Greater Khartoum.  We  are  here  only  concerned  with  risk
    whilst in Greater Khartoum and not with  any  risk  on  return  at  the
    airport.  Much of his evidence was directed to that latter  issue.   We
    accept his evidence, consistent with the other witnesses  and  material
    to which we were referred, that the  Nuba  are,  as  an  ethnic  group,
    discriminated against, and that a vast  majority  undoubtedly  live  in
    impoverished circumstances in the shanty towns in the 'Black  Belt'  of
    Greater  Khartoum.   However,  Dr  Reeves'  evidence  of  any  risk  to
    returning Nuba was given at a time when, in  his  view,  there  was  an
    intensification of  government  repression  as  a  consequence  of  the
    economic situation and protest beginning in 2018.  In his evidence,  Dr
    Reeves was asked to identify recent examples of Nuba being  subject  to
    random targeting.  The example given was in the 2015 report  by  Asylum
    Research Consultancy, "Situation in Khartoum and Omdurman" (9 September
    2015).  That concerned an activist who had been arrested at a  meeting.
    It does not begin to support Dr Reeves' position that there was a  real
    risk to all Nuba in Greater Khartoum.

124.  Looking  at  the  position  in  2018  prior  to  the  2019   political
    developments, in our judgment, the evidence of  Dame  Rosalind  and  Ms
    Crowther does not support a conclusion  that  all  Nuba  were  at  risk
    simply because of their ethnicity.  The sheer number of  Nuba  said  to
    live in Greater Khartoum, whether in the hundreds of thousands  (or  in
    even greater numbers) but with only limited examples of  ill-treatment,
    strongly suggests the contrary: that Nuba were not  at  risk  as  such.
    Looking at the evidence as a whole, we consider that it goes no further
    than being consistent with a conclusion that the risk to any individual
    was based on being perceived to have been a  political  threat  to  the
    regime.  Being Nuba would be a relevant factor as  it  could  create  a
    suspicion of support for rebel groups such as the SPLM-N  (particularly
    at times of heightened political tension), but would  not,  in  itself,
    result in risk of being perceived as a threat and  consequent  risk  of
    arrest, detention or ill-treatment that could amount to persecution  or
    serious ill-treatment; a risk of that sort might, however,   flow  from
    political  activity  in  Sudan  or  abroad  which  was  known  to   the
    authorities.

125. In the F-FR 2016 the risk to Darfuri students was highlighted:

         "Asked about  the  profile  of  groups  of  persons  monitored  and
         targeted by the authorities in Khartoum, the two lawyers  explained
         that Darfuri activists were the most  targeted  group  compared  to
         activists  from  the  Two  Areas,  particularly   Darfuri   Student
         activists who  took  part  in  demonstrations.   According  to  the
         sources, Darfuris were more organised  than  people  from  the  Two
         Areas, and this made Darfuris the most targeted  group  and  caused
         them to be treated most harshly by the authorities when arrested."

126. The targeted group was activists, in particular  student  activists  in
    Darfur but the report also recognised that student activists  from  the
    "Two Areas" may also have been monitored  and  targeted  though,  to  a
    lesser extent.  The relevance of being involved in  what  was,  or  was
    perceived to be,  "political  activity"  was  also  emphasised  in  the
    Landinfo Report, "Sudan,  Scope  Political  activity  critical  of  the
    regime" (11 November 2013).

127. Likewise, the examples  relied  upon  by  Mr  Jacobs  from  the  Asylum
    Research Consultancy report in 2015 do not support there having been  a
    general targeting of Nuba.  One example  concerned  Nuba  attacked  and
    detained by police following a retaliatory beating by Nuba of a  police
    officer accused of raping a woman of Nuba ethnicity.  Another  entailed
    the arrest and ill-treatment of Nuba by the NISS at  the  time  of  the
    April 2015 elections.  The final passage specifically focused upon ill-
    treatment focussed on those perceived as political opponents.

128. In the F-FR 2016, at para 3.3 the absence of targeting exclusively  due
    to ethnic background was noted as follows:

         "Four sources observe that all communities from Darfur or  the  Two
         Areas in Khartoum could be at risk of mistreatment by the  NISS  or
         indicated that persons from these communities may  be  targeted  by
         the authorities due to the ethnicity alone.  However, none  of  the
         sources provided specific information indicating that persons  from
         Darfur or the Two Areas were being subject to mistreatment  by  the
         authorities exclusively due to their ethnic background."

129. The interest, however, that the Sudanese authorities had  in  students,
    journalists  and  activists  including  political  and   human   rights
    activists was noted by two human rights lawyers in  the  F-FR  2016  at
    page 67:

         "The source added that in addition to Darfuri student activists who
         were the  most  targeted  group,  journalists,  lawyers  and  other
         individuals or groups were in opposition  to  the  government  were
         monitored by NISS.  It was added although the political  department
         in the NISS, which was responsible for monitoring  the  opposition,
         was a small  department,  it  was  divided  into  small  specialist
         sections which each was responsible for a certain opposition group,
         for example one section for political parties, another section  for
         students, the third section for rebel groups etc."

130. Mr Jacobs,  in  his  written  submissions,  referred  to  two  passages
    quoting sources in the F-FR Report 2018 at para 3.4.5 and  3.4.7.   The
    report mainly concerned the  position  of  Darfuris  and  the  risk  to
    returned failed asylum seekers.  One  source  stated  that  he  thought
    "Darfuris would be targeted if they took part in demonstrations"  (para
    3.4.5).  Whilst one civil society activist stated that the Nuba  people
    and Darfuris are often associated with rebel  groups,  a  human  rights
    defender considered that "not all Darfuris are suspected of  supporting
    rebels; just those that are suspected of opposing the government" (para
    3.4.7).  The many sources link any round-ups and large scale arrests of
    Darfuris in Greater Khartoum (and not all sources were aware  of  wide-
    scale round-ups or arrests of Darfuris)  to  the  war  in  Darfur  (see
    section 3.3) and now that that  conflict  intensity  has  reduced,  one
    source at the British Embassy said that "there is no need  to  lock  up
    Darfuris" (para 3.3.2).   To  the  extent  relevant  to  Nuba,  in  our
    judgment, the focus  of  the  accounts  of  ill-treatment,  arrest  and
    detention is on those who are politically active,  for  example,  those
    involved in demonstrations  and  students  (see  citations  at  [A224]-
    [A230]).

131. We  note  the  Australian  Government  Report  (Department  of  Foreign
    Affairs and Trade), Country Information Report: Sudan (27  April  2016)
    at paras 3.10 - 3.12.  At 3.12 states:

         "Overall, DFAT assesses that Nuba currently face  a  high  risk  of
         discrimination  and  violence.   Given  the  actual  or   perceived
         association of Nuba with the armed opposition, Nuba are  likely  to
         face a high risk of discrimination and violence  outside  the  Nuba
         Mountains, including in Khartoum."

132. That was said, however, in a report covering a period  prior  to  April
    2016 when the cease-fire first took effect in the Nuba  Mountains.   It
    was,  therefore,  reflecting  on  a  time  of  considerably  heightened
    political tension given the on-going conflict with the SPLM-N in  South
    Kordofan.  As we have noted, the evidence suggests that  there  was  an
    increased risk to individuals such as the Nuba at such times.

133. Overall, therefore, we have concluded that the mantra that there was  a
    risk to all Nuba, because being Nuba was perceived prior  to  the  2019
    political developments as making an individual  a  potential  political
    opponent, is not borne out by the evidence.  In our judgment, prior  to
    those recent developments, the evidence does not establish that a  real
    risk of persecution or serious ill-treatment arose from being Nuba  and
    living in Greater Khartoum.  There was, however, evidence  of  specific
    targeting of individuals (with Nuba ethnicity) who had been politically
    active, for example a journalist and someone who had spoken on Sudanese
    political issues at the UK  Parliament.   There  are  examples  in  the
    evidence of individuals of Nuba ethnicity being subject  to  harassment
    and even detention (e.g., those involved in football) but the level  of
    such incidents prior to 2019,  was  not  widespread  or  sufficient  in
    number to lead us to conclude that all Nuba were at real risk of  being
    subjected to harm amounting to persecution or serious ill-treatment.

134. In her oral evidence in May/June 2018, Ms Crowther identified a  number
    of risk factors that would, in her view, have given  rise  to  specific
    concerns  for  Nuba  on  return:  students,  those   participating   in
    demonstrations, those engaged in political activities,  those  educated
    above primary  level,  those  who  have  travelled  abroad,  and  those
    returning with  documents  which  identified  them  as  failed  asylum-
    seekers.

135. Dame Rosalind in her response to the F-FT  2018  stated  that  being  a
    Nuba failed asylum seeker created a significant risk  of  ill-treatment
    because of presumed association with the SPLM-N.   That  view  was,  in
    many respects, backed away from in  her  oral  evidence,  in  that  she
    accepted that not all Nuba were at risk in Greater Khartoum and she did
    not know of any recent examples of targeting of  Nuba.    In  addition,
    she referred to a number of risk factors, albeit again in  the  context
    of  returnees:  actual  oppositional  activity  in  Sudan  or   abroad;
    membership of professional classes; profile of  being  a  human  rights
    defender or activist; a blogger/social media activist;  young  male  of
    military age; a student.  However, she goes on  to  state  that  it  is
    difficult to predict who the NISS will target as the way  they  operate
    is "arbitrary".

136. The evidence, in our view, read as a whole, focused any potential  risk
    upon political  activists,  journalists,  human  rights  activists  and
    students who may, as a result, have been perceived by the government to
    be a threat.  (We  will  return  to  whether  a  failed  asylum  seeker
    (whether or not of Nuba ethnicity) would have been at risk on return to
    Sudan at the airport.)  Given the history of  conflicts  in  Sudan,  we
    also accept that being Nuba and/or being from the Nuba Mountains was  a
    factor to take into account in assessing whether the  individual  would
    fall into the category which we have identified as potentially being at
    risk of persecution  or  serious  ill-treatment.   Ethnic  origins  and
    geographical origins had the potential to  raise  suspicions  of  rebel
    sympathies for  the  al-Bashir  regime.  They  were  not,  however,  in
    themselves sufficient to put an individual at risk.

137. As we have already commented, the appellant's contention that all  Nuba
    were (and still are) at risk of persecution or serious ill-treatment in
    Greater Khartoum as perceived supporters of the SPLM-N is difficult  to
    sustain given the size of  the  Nuba  population  in  Greater  Khartoum
    (whether in  the  hundreds  of  thousands  or  even  greater)  and  the
    incidence of the tensions,  arrests  and  ill-treatment  to  which  the
    witness and background evidence spoke.  Of course,  a  conclusion  that
    any particular individual would have been at "real risk" of persecution
    and/or serious ill-treatment does not mean that every Nuba  in  Greater
    Khartoum was, in fact, subject to persecution or serious ill-treatment.
     Nevertheless, the disparity or, as Mr Thomann put in his  submissions,
    the disconnect between the size  of  the  Nuba  population  in  Greater
    Khartoum and the incidence of targeted mistreatment documented  in  the
    evidence speaks powerfully against the appellant's submission that  all
    Nuba were at real risk.

138. We accept the evidence, for example of Dame Rosalind and  in  the  F-FR
    2018 (sections 5.1 and 5.2), that the  Sudanese  authorities  monitored
    political activism through informers both in Greater Khartoum and  also
    abroad such as in the UK.  Potentially, therefore,  political  activism
    in-country and abroad could have come to the  attention  of  the  NISS.
    But, as Dame Rosalind told us, the NISS could not, in practice, monitor
    all the Nuba population in Greater Khartoum given its size.  Knowledge,
    therefore, of any particular individual's activities, which might  have
    put an individual at risk, cannot necessarily be inferred simply by the
    evidence that NISS did monitor groups, such as  the  Nuba,  in  Greater
    Khartoum.

139.  In our view, a number  of  factors  would  be  relevant  in  order  to
    determine whether, prior to the developments  in  2019,  an  individual
    would be both known to the authorities, and  also  be  perceived  as  a
    threat  to  the  regime.   Those  factors  include   the   individual's
    ethnicity, their place of origin (where it is  a  conflict  zone),  any
    actual  political  activity  in  Sudan  or  abroad,   their  profession
    (including whether they are a journalist or human rights activist), any
    previous detention or past interest by the Sudanese authorities in  the
    individual and also whether  they  were  a  student.   As  regards  the
    latter, we heard evidence  concerning  the  student  activity  both  of
    Darfuris and Nuba.  Whilst the evidence was that the  Darfuri  students
    were better organised and, it can perhaps  be  said,  more  politically
    active, we accept that being a  student  was  a  relevant  factor  when
    assessing risk regardless of whether the individual was  a  Darfuri  or
    Nuba.

140. One other potential risk factor which arose  in  the  evidence  was  an
    individual's religion, in particular that some  Nuba  were  Christians.
    It was not suggested to us that as such a person  would  have  been  at
    real risk of persecution.  Mr Jacobs did not make much of  this  factor
    in his  initial  written  submissions.   However,  in  response  to  Mr
    Thomann's submissions, he relied  upon  the  evidence  that,  he  said,
    showed that "Christians from the Nuba Mountains are uniquely  targeted"
    (US Commission on International Religious Freedom, "Annual Report 2019,
    Sudan" set out in "CPIT 1" at para 11.2.2 and at [A283]).  He relied on
    evidence that Christian Churches  had  been  demolished  and  Christian
    schools were forced to operate on Sundays.   He  also  relied  on  Dame
    Rosalind's evidence,  following  her  October  2019  visit  to  Greater
    Khartoum, that she  had  been  told  by  one  Nuba  man  of  continuing
    harassment of Christians, including the  Supreme  Court's  decision  in
    October  2019  to  confirm  criminal  charges  against  the   executive
    committee of a Christian church  which  was  predominantly  Nuban.   He
    submitted that Christians suffered systematic discrimination  and  that
    "Nuba Christians form a risk category".

141. We do not accept that the evidence supports such  a  view.   We  accept
    that there are examples of Christians in Greater Khartoum  experiencing
    harassment and limitations on their ability to follow their faith.  The
    evidence does not demonstrate,  however,  this  is  widespread  or,  in
    itself, reached  a  sufficiently  high  and  sustained  level  to  have
    amounted  to  persecution  or  serious  ill-treatment  of   Christians.
    However, religion, in particular if an individual were Christian, was a
    risk factor.  It was a factor that might potentially  have  contributed
    to the overall assessment of risk to an individual  given  the  Islamic
    nature of the Sudanese State under al-Bashir. This may, of course, have
    been inter-linked with an individual's Nuba ethnicity given  that  some
    Nuba are Christian.

    After the 2018/2019 political developments

142. That being the position prior to the 2018/2019 developments,  what,  if
    any, impact have those developments had upon any assessment of risk  to
    Nuba in Greater Khartoum?

143. The political developments in  Sudan  between  December  2018  and  the
    final hearings in this appeal were charted  in  the  written  and  oral
    evidence of Dame Rosalind and Ms Crowther and a  number  of  up-to-date
    documents, in particular the developments are set out in detail in  the
    "CPIT 1" document.  We earlier summarised the main developments  (paras
    10-13).

144. The essential features of the developments  are  not  in  dispute.   Mr
    Jacobs, in his submissions, described what had occurred in Sudan  since
    the fall  of  al-Bashir  in  April  2019  as  "positive"  developments.
    Principally, these consisted of the establishment of the TMC  in  April
    2019 following the overthrow of al-Bashir.

145. Even more significant are the developments that followed in the  summer
    of 2019. Following agreement reached on 5 July 2019 between the TMC and
    the FFC, the SC was  established  consisting  of  eleven  civilian  and
    military members, which, for the first  21  months,  is  chaired  by  a
    military member (para 6) who is al Burhan.  The SC has a majority (six)
    of civilian members - five nominated by the FFC  and  one  selected  by
    agreement between the FCC and TMC (para 5).  It will be  chaired  by  a
    civilian member for the remaining 18 months (para 7).   The  transition
    to civilian control is  planned  for  2021.   During  the  transitional
    period, a stated aim is to dismantle the al-Bashir regime and establish
    "the state of law and institutions".   The  agreement  provides  for  a
    Legislative Council (paras  14-18)  and  an  independent  Investigation
    Committee to  investigate  the  3  June  2019  incidents  and  "related
    incidents of human rights violations committed  against  civilians  and
    militaries" (para 19).

146. A new Constitution, which was appended to Dame Rosalind's report of  27
    August 2019, was agreed on 21 August 2019 and provides  for  democratic
    institutions and a civil society.  The present structure is  to  remain
    in effect for 39 months (the transitional period) when  elections  will
    be held.

147. The Constitution enshrines a number of institutions  including  the  SC
    (Ch 4),  the  Cabinet  and  its  constitution  (Ch  5),  the  judiciary
    including  an  independent  Constitutional  Court  (Ch   8),   and   an
    independent public prosecutor (Ch 9).  The Constitution also  enshrines
    a number of "uniformed agencies" (Ch 11): the armed forces, the police,
    the GIS and military courts.   The  role  of  the  GIS  is  limited  to
    "gathering and analysing information" and providing it to the competent
    authorities (para 36).

148. The  Constitution  also  provides,  in  some  detail,  for  the  "state
    agencies" seeking to achieve "a just and  comprehensive  peace"  ending
    regional conflicts in Sudan (Ch 15).

149. The Constitution contains a  "Rights  and  freedoms  Charter"  (Ch  14)
    setting out a number of  rights,  including  the  right  to  "life  and
    dignity",  to  "citizenship  and  nationality",  to  "protection   from
    torture",  to  "personal  freedom  and  security",  for  "women",   for
    "children",  to a "fair trial", to "freedom of belief and  worship"  to
    "freedom   of   assembly   and   organisation"   and   to    "political
    participation".

150. A further "positive" development has been the appointment on 21  August
    2019  of  a  civilian  Prime  Minister,  Abdalla  Hamdok  a   respected
    international economist and his cabinet  which  includes  a  number  of
    civilian members and individuals  from  the  Blue  Nile  and  the  Nuba
    Mountains regions.

151. Further, there has been the appointment of a respected female judge  to
    be the Chief Justice together with the appointment  of  an  independent
    Attorney General.

152. Since the autumn of 2019 on-going peace talks have been held  in  Juba,
    the capital of South Sudan between the Sudanese  Government  and  rebel
    movements including both factions of the SPLM-N, albeit at one point al
    Hilu temporarily withdrew.

153. We set out earlier a number of events which post-date  the  hearing  in
    October 2019 (see paras 14-16).  Those events  do  nothing  to  deflect
    from the direction of travel in the political developments and  changes
    in Sudan that were in place at the date of the October hearing.

154.  Mr  Jacobs'  detailed  submissions  advance  two  principal  lines  of
    argument; first, the evidence shows that Nuba  are  still  at  risk  in
    Greater Khartoum and continue to be subject  to  violence  etc  at  the
    hands of the Sudanese Government, in particular the GIS; secondly,  any
    changes that have occurred are "fragile"  and  could  collapse  with  a
    return to a military  regime  more  akin  to  that  of  al-Bashir.   In
    relation to the period covered by the political developments, Mr Jacobs
    relied  upon  the  violent  suppression  of  protestors  following  the
    overthrow of al-Bashir in particular, on 3 June 2019.  He  also  relied
    upon the  continuing  enforcement  of  the  Public  Order  law  on  the
    outskirts of Greater Khartoum directed towards women; the harassment of
    Christians as evidenced by the Supreme Court's confirmation of an order
    of 7 October 2019 of criminal charges against an executive committee of
    the Sudanese Church of Christ, accused of refusing to hand over  church
    property; and the targeting of women "tea sellers" in Greater  Khartoum
    during the protests.  Both Dame Rosalind and Ms Crowther gave  evidence
    about these matters.

155. Dame Rosalind, in her reports of 27 August 2019  and  17  October  2019
    together with her oral evidence dealt  with  the  current  position  in
    Greater Khartoum.

156. Dame Rosalind was critical  of  the  "CPIT  1"  report  which  appended
    correspondence from the British Embassy in which it  is  said  Sudanese
    contacts expressed

         "surprise at  the  suggestion  that  Nuba  people  are  subject  to
         systematic discrimination or mistreatment  in  Khartoum,  with  the
         exception  that  they  might  find  it  more  difficult  to  obtain
         employment."

157. She told us that it was not clear  whether  any  Nuba  individuals  had
    been consulted (see para 98 above).  The document stated that the  view
    is made "[a]necdotally" and we do not place  much  weight  or  reliance
    upon it.

158. Dame Rosalind told us that Nuba women were continuing  to  be  targeted
    by the enforcement of the Public Order  law  in  Greater  Khartoum  and
    Christians were harassed as evidenced by  the  Supreme  Court's  recent
    confirmation of criminal charges against a committee  of  the  Sudanese
    Church of Christ.  She told us of the example  of  female  tea  sellers
    (who are largely from ethnic groups such as Nuba)  being  targeted  and
    harassed under the Public Order law.  She also described a meeting with
    a group of six young Nuba and said they had told  her  that  two  weeks
    before the meeting two of them had  been  sitting  drinking  tea  on  a
    pavement at a tea seller's store when  they  were  taken  to  a  police
    station but were later released without charge.

159. In our judgment, the evidence relayed by Dame Rosalind from  the  group
    of six young Nuba that she met, does not support a claim that there  is
    a continuing risk to all Nuba in  Greater  Khartoum.   Dame  Rosalind's
    visit was during the time when hearings  in  this  appeal  were  taking
    place and her motive in seeking to meet a group of Nuba was in order to
    see for herself the difficulties she had already described to us.   The
    group she met appear  to  have  been  sought  out  as  individuals  who
    perceived themselves as having  been  targeted.   There  was  only  one
    example  given  of  personal  mistreatment  and,  at  its  highest,  it
    concerned  arrest  and  detention  for  a  short  period  and  release,
    unharmed, without charge by one or two of the  individuals.   It  comes
    nowhere near to being supportive of a conclusion that all Nuba  are  at
    risk of serious ill-treatment in Greater Khartoum.

160.  Further,  the  incidents  reported  to  Dame  Rosalind  of  harassment
    (including arrest and summary conviction and punishment) of  women  tea
    sellers  on  the  outskirts  of  Greater  Khartoum  do  not  support  a
    conclusion that there is a widespread and real  risk  of  serious  ill-
    treatment to all individuals of Nuba ethnicity even though  female  tea
    sellers largely come from ethnic groups such as the Nuba.

161. Other instances of mistreatment, and even the killing, of  tea  sellers
    was given in the evidence.  The evidence  was  that  a  number  of  tea
    sellers were killed during the 3 June suppression of protestors by  the
    military.  The evidence concerning the suppression of  protestors  does
    not support, in our judgment, the targeting of an ethnic group such  as
    the Nuba by the (then) military Government.  Rather, it represents  the
    (then) Government's interest in those protesting  at  the  time  either
    seeking the removal of al-Bashir  or,  in  the  wake  of  his  removal,
    further reform away from the TMC.  In our view, the female tea  sellers
    (many of whom  were  providing  refreshment  to  the  protesters)  were
    perceived as associated with those demonstrations and protests.   Their
    mistreatment (or worse) clearly arises from that perception at the time
    leading up to, and at the time of, the June protests rather than  their
    ethnic background, Nuba or otherwise.

162. The recent decision of the Sudanese Supreme  Court  does  not,  in  our
    view, support a conclusion that Christians per se (Nuba  or  otherwise)
    are at risk.  It must be seen  in  the  context  of  all  the  evidence
    including the continuing political  development  in  Sudan  from  2019,
    including the adoption of a  Constitution  which  protects  freedom  of
    religion.  Most recently, the crime of apostacy has been abolished.

163. In her evidence, Ms Crowther acknowledged  that  the  circumstances  in
    Sudan had dramatically changed since the May/June  2018  hearing.   She
    referred to the rise of Hemeti, as  the  leader  of  the  RSF  and  the
    involvement of Hemeti and others in the suppression of  the  protesters
    on 3 June 2019.  She spoke of attacks in the Black Belt  after  3  June
    2019 and the incident of a Nuba footballer being  targeted.   She  also
    referred to the government's failure to release 25 individuals of  Nuba
    and Darfuri ethnicity who had previously been  detained.   As  we  have
    already noted, Dame Rosalind's evidence was that all detainees had been
    released.  Even if these latter incidents are  accepted,  they  do  not
    demonstrate the widespread targeting of the vast number of Nuba.

164. Though  Ms  Crowther  and  Dame  Rosalind  referred  to  the  continued
    enforcement of the Public Order law against women, particularly in  the
    'Black Belt' area of Greater Khartoum, the new government had suspended
    that law in central Khartoum but it continued to remain in force in the
    'Black Belt' area.  (Subsequently, the Public Order law was  repealed.)



165. In our judgment, the evidence of the circumstances in Greater  Khartoum
    since the political developments of 2019 do not establish a  real  risk
    to Nuba because of their ethnicity.  Whilst  we  accept  that  the  TMC
    responded severely to the protests following the removal  of  al-Bashir
    and which culminated in the violent suppression  of  the  demonstrators
    and others perceived to be involved in the protests  on  3  June,  this
    action was targeted against the protestors  and  not  Nuba  because  of
    their ethnicity.   The  political  developments  have  clearly  made  a
    difference since the 3 June protests.  As  we  heard,  the  October  21
    protests were not met by a violent response from the new Government and
    its forces.  Indeed, the attitude  of  the  Government  seems  to  have
    discouraged the involvement  of  Islamist  protestors  who  might  have
    clashed with other protestors.  In any event, the demonstrations passed
    without the violent intervention that was seen on  3  June.  The  other
    evidence of incidents involving action (harassment  or  worse)  against
    Nuba do not, as we have already said, establish  a  level  of  incident
    that lead us to conclude Nuba because of their ethnicity are at risk in
    Greater Khartoum.

166. Mr Jacobs relied upon the evidence of Dame Rosalind and Ms Crowther  as
    to the "fragile" nature of the democratic changes that have occurred in
    2009 and the continued threat that the military (in particular  Hemeti)
    may represent if, for example, the economic fortunes of  Sudan  do  not
    improve.  Reliance was also placed upon the  continued  threat  of  the
    "deep state", namely the remaining  political  and  governmental  posts
    held by those who occupied those posts  during  the  al-Bashir  regime.
    The threat, it is said,  is  that  the  Islamists,  together  with  the
    military, will regain power and any democratic gains in  2019  will  be
    lost.

167. Dame Rosalind was of the view  that  it  was  too  early  to  determine
    whether the progress made  towards  democracy  and  civilian  rule  was
    reversible.  However, she said that the military threat  posed  by  the
    rebel groups in Darfur and South Kordofan had "declined  significantly"
    and the security threat posed to the regime by the SPLM-N had weakened.
     She said that the better organisation and  widespread  nature  of  the
    protests in 2019, together with the availability  of  social  media  to
    document its atrocities, and  the  interests  of  external  parties  in
    stability, rendered strong-armed tactics  less  likely  to  succeed  in
    2019.  She stated that there had been a falling out between Hemeti  and
    the Islamist faction.  She said that there  was  no  immediate  Islamic
    threat of force and considered that its efforts might  be  targeted  to
    preparing politically for  an  election  in  three  years'  time.   She
    accepted that the profile of those mistreated  and  arrested  in  early
    2009 appeared to be little focused upon ethnic  background.   She  said
    that there had been a degree of  opening  up  of  democratic  space,  a
    strengthening of the civic forces by the appointment  of  independently
    minded persons, and a commitment by the Prime Minster and  his  cabinet
    to "a radical set of reform measures in dismantling the deep state"  as
    set out in the constitutional declaration.  However, she said that  the
    economic challenges and  uncertainty  and  the  risk  of  the  loss  of
    credibility on the part of the civilian government in  the  absence  of
    tangible progress rendered the outcome of the transition to  democratic
    and civilian government, uncertain.  Dame Rosalind said that the threat
    of an Islamic counter-revolutionary coup was real.   Nevertheless,  she
    recognised that there had been a failed coup attempt in July.  She said
    that the Islamic shadow militias still existed.  She  said  that  in  a
    recent demonstration on 21 October, the Islamists had not taken part.

168. As regards the peace process, Dame Rosalind pointed out that there  was
    no peace agreement on the table, although a  preliminary  document  had
    been signed.  She pointed out that al Hilu's demand for  the  right  to
    self-determination and a secular Sudan was a  potential  impediment  to
    the peace process.  Any change would be very difficult and  would  have
    to be debated in a broader constitutional forum. Dame  Rosalind  placed
    great store in the importance of a comprehensive peace agreement  being
    reached.

169. Ms Crowther's evidence of the impact  of  the  2019  developments,  and
    changes in the Sudanese Government and State, was largely to  the  same
    effect.

170. The political landscape in Sudan has changed since  April  2019  -  and
    particularly since August/September 2019 with the new Constitution, the
    joint military/civilian SC  and  new  civilian-led  Government.   There
    have, undoubtedly, been positive democratic changes in Sudan  in  2019.
    We were told that the changes are "fragile".  Mr Thomann accepted  that
    the changes may not be permanent.  Whilst we acknowledge that there are
    risks to the  regime  as  identified  by  both  Dame  Rosalind  and  Ms
    Crowther, nevertheless, the progress  is  all  one  way  and  with  the
    passage of time and the continuing democratisation, the risk that there
    may be a reversionary regime change in Sudan, becomes more speculative.



171. A shift to a constitutional democracy is now part of Sudanese law  and,
    without any impediment to which our attention was drawn,  it  continues
    to be  the  situation  in  Sudan.   Further,  recent  changes  such  as
    abolishing the Public Order law and  the  apostacy  law  point  to  the
    reduction of Islamicist influence.  The  weight  of  the  evidence  was
    indicative of a real intention by the new Government to see through the
    reforms and resolve the economic problems facing Sudan.

172. The threat of a military or Islamic ("deep  state")  overthrow  of  the
    new order has  not  eventuated  and,  indeed,  the  military  have,  if
    anything, aligned themselves with pro-democracy protestors, for example
    in their approach to the demonstrations on 21  October.   There  is  no
    evidence that the 'deep state' has worked effectively to undermine  the
    on-going democratic changes.  If that has been tried, it appears not to
    have succeeded.  The military have acted to support the  new  political
    order by defeating the GIS revolt  in  July  2019,  and  the  Islamists
    failed to take part in the 21  October  demonstration,  it  would  seem
    because the Sudanese government and military made it clear  they  would
    not be allowed to approach government buildings.  Hemeti, we were told,
    has fallen out with the Islamists  and  there  has  been  no  effective
    resurgence of the apparatus of the former  regime  to  defeat  the  new
    developments. On the contrary, the principal actors, both military  and
    civilian, are acting in consort to effect the democratic changes in the
    new Constitution.

173. At the date of the final written submissions in  early  December  2019,
    no evidence was drawn to our attention by either party that was said to
    deflect  from  the  'direction  of  travel'  in   Sudan,   namely   the
    establishment of a  democratic  state  post  al-Bashir.   In  addition,
    despite  the  inherent  complexities  and  potential   impediments   to
    achieving peace in Sudan, the evidence was that the Sudanese government
    and the rebel groups (apart  from  Al  Nour  group  from  Darfur)  were
    actively engaged in peace talks in Juba,  even  if  there  had  been  a
    temporary withdrawal by al Hilu.  Whilst Ms Crowther spoke of the  need
    for caution given the number of failed earlier attempts  to  achieve  a
    peace settlement, those earlier attempts were, of course, during the al-
    Bashir regime.  The political climate in Sudan has changed.

174. At the time of those submissions, the Sudanese government  had  already
    indicated its intention to repeal the Public Order law.   An  attempted
    rebellion by members of the former NISS who objected to the  reform  of
    the security services, was quelled by the  military  and  condemned  by
    Hemeti.  We have no doubt that the traditional Sudanese mindset against
    non-Arabs,   and   the   resulting   casual   and   sometimes   serious
    discrimination will not have completely disappeared and  may  never  do
    so.   However,  the  evidence  indicates  to  us  strongly   that   the
    manifestation of ongoing disputes between the new  Sudanese  government
    and rebel groups has moved from a military response to a political one.
     Dame Rosalind accepted  that  in  her  evidence.   The  search  for  a
    comprehensive peace agreement is enshrined in the new Constitution  and
    the peace process continues in talks in Juba including al Hilu.

175. The  direction  of  travel  remains  firmly  pointing  in  the  way  of
    democratic change and the powers  of  law  and  order  and  a  move  to
    stability and resolving difficulties politically  rather  than  through
    force or violence.

176. Likewise, the government's response to al-Bashir following his fall  is
    entirely consistent with the rule of law.  He has been sentenced to two
    years detention (not imprisonment, because of his age) and the Sudanese
    Government has indicated its willingness to hand al-Bashir over to  the
    ICC in The Hague to face the charges of genocide and war  crimes  which
    are outstanding against him.

177. The longer the situation remains stable the weaker the arguments  based
    on 'fragility' become: the speculation inherent in the submissions made
    to us becomes more distant from the  reality.   In  our  judgment,  the
    continuing stability of the democratic changes  does  not  justify  any
    inference that in the immediate  and  foreseeable  future  the  current
    regime  will  fall  and  there  will  be  a  return   to   an   Islamic
    based/military government.

178. What does that mean for an assessment of the risk to  Nuba  in  Greater
    Khartoum?

179. Mr Thomann accepted  that  there  remains  a  risk  of  persecution  or
    serious ill-treatment for those who are  perceived  as  a  sufficiently
    serious threat to the Sudanese regime to prompt  targeting,  which  may
    lead to mistreatment that amounts to serious harm.  We agree  that  the
    situation has not evolved such that we can be confident that  the  risk
    to those who are, or are perceived to be,  a  threat  to  the  Sudanese
    Government,  which  we  have  accepted  existed  before  the  political
    developments in 2019, has now completely evaporated with  the  fall  of
    the al-Bashir regime and  the  installation  since  August  2019  of  a
    democratic State with a new  Constitution  and  Government.   In  time,
    however, that may well be the proper inference to  be  drawn  from  the
    changes. What is clear, however, is that the assessment  of  whether  a
    person is, or is perceived to be, a threat to the  Sudanese  Government
    has to be determined by reference to the change of Government  and  all
    that that entails.

180. As Dame Rosalind pointed out in her 27 August 2019 report:

             "Civilians in the new transitional government would not regard
             membership of the UK  diaspora  or  an  anti-Bashir  political
             profile as a negative factor. Indeed, those who supported  the
             revolution and opposed the previous regime would be  welcomed.
             However, it is not yet clear to what extent the civilians will
             be able to exercise authority over GIS and other parts of  the
             military-security apparatus given that security sector  reform
             is to be left in the hands of the  military  institutions  and
             the Ministers of Defence and Interior in the Cabinet  will  be
             chosen by the TMC."

181. We acknowledge that the  GIS  remains  active,  although  its  previous
    head, Salah Ghosh has disappeared and is no longer its head.   The  new
    Constitution limits its role to "gathering and  analyzing  information"
    (para 36).  But, as Dame Rosalind stated in her evidence, the  existing
    law (the National Security Act) remains in  force  until  repealed  and
    that it confers powers of arrest and detention, and grants immunity  to
    GIS officers.  The military remain a central and powerful part  of  the
    new Government.  Hemeti remains a central part of  the  new  Government
    with control of the RFS; but his siding with the democratic  protestors
    against the Islamists in 21 October 2019, offers  no  support  for  the
    view that he will seek  to  undermine  the  political  developments  in
    Sudan. As Dame Rosalind told us, the new Government has  moved  from  a
    military  to  a  political  solution  to  resolving  Sudan's   internal
    problems.  Taken as a whole, the evidence does not lead us to  conclude
    that the Sudanese Government is  not  at  present  in  control  of  its
    forces, including the RSF and GIS.

182. The central question remains  (as  it  was  before  2019)  whether  the
    individual's circumstances as known to (or suspected by)  the  Sudanese
    authorities create a perception that the individual is  a  sufficiently
    serious threat to the Sudanese government to warrant targeting and ill-
    treatment.  A fact-sensitive assessment is required taking into account
    all the circumstances.

183. We draw on  the  instances  of  "risk"  categories  identified  in  the
    evidence of Dame Rosalind and Ms Crowther as relevant risk  factors  in
    assessing the Sudanese authorities' perception of an individual.  These
    include the individual's ethnicity, their place of origin (where it  is
    a conflict zone), any actual political activity  in  Sudan  or  abroad,
    their profession (including whether they  are  a  journalist  or  human
    rights activist), any  previous  detention  or  past  interest  by  the
    Sudanese authorities in the individual, their religion and also whether
    they are a student.  In making the distinction between 'categories' and
    'factors' we apply our general conclusion that the risk of persecution,
    if it exists, will be found in a holistic examination of  a  claimant's
    history, profile and identity, not in the simplistic  assignment  of  a
    claimant to a category.

184. The 2019 "positive  political  developments"  in  Sudan  have,  in  our
    judgment, substantially lowered the interest of the Sudanese government
    in supressing political opposition by violent or military action.   The
    present Government, after all,  owes  its  existence  in  part  to  the
    political  opposition  that  manifested  itself  in  the   streets   in
    2018/2019.  In particular, it will be relevant in assessing whether  an
    individual will be at risk on this basis to take into account that  any
    "oppositional" political activity against the al-Bashir regime may have
    a dwindling relevance to the current Sudanese government, including the
    army and the GIS.

185. Further, the evidence relating to the Government's response to Nuba  in
    Greater Khartoum since the democratic changes in  the  summer  of  2019
    does not support a conclusion that Sudanese authorities (including  the
    GIS)  consider  a  person  of  Nuba  ethnicity  (without  more)  as   a
    sufficiently serious threat to the political regime or as  a  perceived
    political opponent as a supporter of the SPLM-N.

    C. At Khartoum International Airport

186. Mr Jacobs submitted that the appellant as a  failed  asylum  seeker  of
    Nuba ethnicity would be at risk of persecution or serious ill-treatment
    at Khartoum International Airport at the hands of the NISS (or as it is
    now rebranded, the GIS).  He relied upon the  witnesses'  evidence  and
    the background evidence to support his submissions.  He submitted  that
    all Nuba, as failed asylum seekers, would be at risk of persecution  or
    serious ill-treatment at the hands of the GIS on return.

187. Mr Jacobs relied upon the evidence of Dr  Reeves  and  the  individuals
    whom he had consulted and referred to his report and oral evidence.  Dr
    Reeves' view was that because of the history of racism towards the Nuba
    and (speaking in 2018) the intensification of government repression and
    the consequence of the budget issues, there was a risk of ill-treatment
    amounting to persecution for any returning failed asylum seeker of Nuba
    ethnicity.  Dr Reeves' view was that returnees were asked  for  details
    of their ethnicity at Khartoum airport.  He referred to the killing  of
    a returnee in November 2015 and  that,  for  the  NISS,  there  was  no
    distinction to be made between non-Arabs from Darfur and those from the
    Nuba Mountains.  Because there were, he said,  fewer  Nuba,  they  were
    exposed to a greater risk as a member of a politically active  diaspora
    returning to Sudan.  His view was that failed asylum  seekers  of  Nuba
    ethnicity, who were returned on ETDs, were likely to be singled out for
    detention and the probability of torture was  high.   He  rejected  the
    proposition, put to him in cross-examination, that a 'low  level'  Nuba
    would not be subject to  interrogation  and  ill-treatment  on  return.
    They were perceived as opponents of the government.

188. Mr Thomann submitted that  there  were  difficulties  with  Dr  Reeves'
    evidence.

189. First, Dr Reeves' report did not mention a number of  recent  documents
    referring to the position of returnees to  Sudan,  including  the  F-FR
    2016, the investigation of the Office of the Belgian  Commissioner  for
    Refugees in relation to  the  "Belgian  COI  Report"  and  the  claimed
    mistreatment of returnees; and this was despite the fact that Dr Reeves
    asserted that he had excluded nothing  in  preparing  his  report.   He
    stated in cross-examination that, although he was aware of some of this
    material, he had chosen not to refer to  them  because  of  their  poor
    quality or partiality.

190.  Secondly,  Mr  Thomann  submitted  that  Dr  Reeves  had   failed   to
    incorporate into his report what had been said by  one  of  his  expert
    consultees (Ted  Dagne)  who  had  stated  that  it  was  necessary  in
    assessing   risk   to   distinguish   between   returnees   who    were
    activists/leaders and others.  In other words,  Mr  Thomann  submitted,
    that consultee had not taken the view that  Nuba  ethnicity  in  itself
    gave rise to a risk of harm on return without more.

191. Thirdly, Mr Thomann submitted that, on  enquiry,  Dr  Reeves  had  been
    unable to estimate how many Nuba had been returned to Sudan.

192. Finally,  Mr  Thomann  submitted  that  Dr  Reeves'  evidence  involved
    sweeping generalisations including the size of the  Nuba  diaspora  and
    there was a "disconnect" between the nature of the risk posited  by  Dr
    Reeves and the portion of the specific examples of mistreatment in  the
    evidence.  The specific example he was able to  give,  based  upon  the
    Asylum Research Consultancy  Report  for  2015  involved  the  targeted
    mistreatment directed at a single individual who was perceived to  have
    a profile of interest to the NISS.   It  did  not  support  Dr  Reeves'
    generalisation that all Nuba returned as failed asylum seekers were  at
    risk.

193. We agree with Mr Thomann's criticisms of Dr Reeves' evidence.    As  we
    have said, Dr Reeves' evidence was limited to  the  period  before  the
    changes in 2019.  Nevertheless, even as regards that  period,  we  have
    considerable doubt whether Dr Reeves' assertion of risk to all Nuba  on
    return can be accommodated by the  evidence  (as  a  whole)  concerning
    specific examples of ill-treatment to Nuba on return at the airport (or
    indeed in Greater Khartoum).  He did not refer to recent evidence  such
    as the F-FR 2016 and failed to incorporate the more nuanced view of one
    source that the risk was focused on the politically active.  In stating
    his view of risk to all Nuba returnees, he was unaware of the number of
    Nuba returnees to Sudan.   The empirical  evidence  does  not,  in  our
    judgment, provide a sufficient underpinning for the scale and nature of
    the risk to all Nuba posited by Dr Reeves prior to 2019, whether within
    Greater Khartoum or  on  arrival  at  Khartoum  International  Airport.
    There are instances of harassment, detention and ill-treatment but they
    are not, in our view, sufficiently widespread to justify  an  inference
    that all Nuba are at risk.  We discuss the documentary  evidence  about
    returnees to the airport below.  For the present, we say this: like  Ms
    Crowther, Dr Reeves based his view  upon  examples  of  returnees  from
    Belgium and Italy referred to in the "Belgium COI Report".  In  forming
    his view, however, Dr Reeves fails to have regard to the report of  the
    Belgian Commissioner for Refugees where it is said that there are  very
    real problems with the examples,  including  that  many  accounts  were
    flawed by the acceptance of the individuals' credibility.

194. Mr Jacobs also relied upon the evidence of Madeleine Crowther  and  her
    2018 report prepared for Waging Peace.  That report, in turn,  referred
    to the "Belgian COI Report" collating evidence derived from the  Tahrir
    Institute, in the summer of 2017.

195. Ms Crowther concluded, in her 2018 report,  that  it  was  likely  that
    individuals (including Nuba) will be  detained  and  interrogated  upon
    return.  There was a two-stage process of  detention  at  the  airport.
    The first stage involved detention at an  immigration  office  and  the
    second stage at an NISS office, although Ms Crowther  stated  that  the
    separation between these stages was not to be looked  at  as  "strict".
    She stated that detainees are released only on the condition that  they
    do not leave the country and that they gather information on opposition
    groups in preparation for a period of further questioning.

196. Ms Crowther told us that she was in regular contact  with  Nuba  groups
    and she estimated that there were around 2,000 Nuba  in  the  UK.   She
    told us that Waging Peace had "1,000 active cases"  on  its  books  and
    estimated that in 90% of the cases  the  individuals  had  "experienced
    torture".  She referred to an interview carried out by Waging Peace  of
    a detainee who had witnessed a Nuba  individual  being  questioned  for
    hours on arrival in Khartoum about his political activities and support
    for the rebels.  Her evidence was that claiming asylum abroad was  seen
    by the NISS as a political act  -  reflecting  a  similar  view  of  Dr
    Reeves.  The NISS were not subject to judicial  oversight  and  enjoyed
    complete  impunity  under  Sudanese  law.   Her   evidence   was   that
    individuals are routinely questioned about their  political  activities
    and connection in the country from which they had travelled.  The  risk
    continues after release from the airport as release is conditional with
    family guarantees and the prospects of re-detention at any  time.   She
    noted that the government do not  monitor  the  position  of  returnees
    after they have returned.  Waging Peace did not meet individuals at the
    airport as this would add to the risk by showing engagement with  local
    human rights defenders or groups.

197. In her evidence, Ms Crowther told us that she had seen the  testimonies
    of those returnees referred to in the "Belgian COI  Report"  which  had
    been compiled by the Tahrir Institute.  She said that  the  testimonies
    confirmed the accounts of detention and interrogation  on  arrival  and
    incidences of beatings.  She  did  not  accept  the  criticism  of  the
    Belgian Commissioner that the testimonies of the individuals  were  not
    credible.

198. Ms Crowther identified the categories of Nuba who would be at  specific
    risk including, students, those participating in demonstrations,  those
    engaged in political activities, those educated  above  primary  level,
    those who had travelled abroad,  and  those  returning  with  documents
    which identify them as failed asylum seekers.

199. Mr Thomann submitted that Ms Crowther's evidence did  not  support  the
    contention that all Nuba were  at  risk  on  return  as  failed  asylum
    seekers.   First,  he  submitted  that  she  had   not   provided   any
    verification of "1,000 cases" and whether they supported her contention
    that all Nuba failed asylum seekers were at risk on return.  He pointed
    out that the majority of the testimonies were anonymous.

200. Secondly, as regards her reliance upon the "Belgian  COI  Report",  the
    Belgian Commissioner had called into question the  conclusions  on  the
    basis that the accounts given by  some  of  the  individuals  were  not
    credible.  Her explanation that inconsistencies in their evidence arose
    from the use of the Arabic language or "fraught period" experienced  by
    the individuals, was not an adequate explanation not least  because  Ms
    Crowther accepted that she did not speak Sudanese Arabic.

201. Thirdly, Mr Thomann submitted that the two specific examples  given  by
    Ms Crowther in her 2018 report were, on analysis, not supportive of the
    contention that the mere fact of being a Nuba on return created a  real
    risk of serious ill-treatment.  The first, concerning Ms B, Mr  Thomann
    submitted, was an account of a returnee in March 2014 who had worked as
    a journalist in Khartoum and who had conducted  research  in  the  Nuba
    Mountains.  The second, Mr C, was an account of a person from the  Nuba
    Mountains but whose studies in the UK had been funded by a company part-
    owned by the Sudanese government.  However, Mr Thomann pointed out that
    he had spoken at a meeting in the UK  parliament  headed  "The  Ticking
    Time-bomb: Preventing a Return to War in Sudan" about the future of the
    Two Areas along with the head of the Nuba Mountains  Solidarity  Abroad
    organisation.  These examples,  Mr  Thomann  submitted,  were  targeted
    against those who were perceived as politically active or journalists.

202. We accept Mr Thomann's submissions  and  criticisms  of  Ms  Crowther's
    evidence.  Ms Crowther's view that all Nuba failed asylum  seekers  are
    at risk on return to Khartoum airport is not supported by the  evidence
    upon which she relies.  The "1,000" known cases which she  relied  upon
    are  unparticularised  and  provide  no  verifiable  evidence  of  ill-
    treatment to failed asylum-seekers on  return.   Nor  is  her  position
    supported by the "COI Belgian Report" and the specific examples of Ms B
    and Mr C which she gave.  In relying on the former, Ms Crowther  failed
    to take into account the Belgium Commissioner's view that the  accounts
    of many of the individuals returned from  Belgium  lacked  credibility.
    Ms  Crowther's  contention  that  the  returnees  were,  in  some   way
    misunderstood, because they spoke Arabic and where hampered by it being
    a "fraught period" was unsubstantiated  in  the  face  of  the  Belgium
    Commissioner's thorough  investigation  of  their  cases.   The  latter
    instances of Ms B and Mr C, in our judgment, does provide some  support
    for specific  targeting  of  those  who  had  been  politically  active
    including journalists.  They do not support a generalised risk  to  all
    returning Nuba failed asylum seekers.

203. In her most recent evidence, Ms Crowther maintained that  the  position
    was the same in 2019 despite  the  political  changes.   Ms  Crowther's
    evidence, both in writing and orally, subsequent  to  the  hearings  in
    May/June 2018 focussed more on the political developments in Sudan.  We
    have already indicated, despite his reference  to  it  in  his  written
    submissions, Mr  Jacobs  disavowed  any  reliance  upon  Ms  Crowther's
    response to the Home Office's F-FR 2018.  The thrust  of  her  evidence
    was that the Nuba would continue to be associated with the  SPLM-N  and
    therefore  suspected  of  opposition   activism   and   the   political
    developments did not remove the risk of ill-treatment to returned  Nuba
    failed asylum seekers.  Again, Ms Crowther's assertion of  a  continued
    risk to all Nuba  failed  asylum  seekers  is  not  supported,  in  our
    judgment, by the political developments and move to democracy which  we
    have already  identified  or  the  empirical  evidence  concerning  the
    treatment of Nuba on return.

204. Mr Jacobs also relied upon the evidence from Dame Rosalind.   She  also
    gave evidence concerning the position of returned  Nuba  failed  asylum
    seekers.  In her  oral  evidence  in  May  2018,  she  said  that  such
    individuals would be under "suspicion" on return.  She had  heard  from
    several sources that they were interviewed and then  monitored  over  a
    longer period.  She posited that the risk  did  not  necessarily  arise
    immediately as the authorities could  monitor  the  Nuba,  through  the
    network of NISS informers, once living in Sudan.

205. In her 4 January 2019 report, Dame Rosalind again said  that  a  failed
    asylum seeker of Nuba ethnicity was likely to be viewed with "increased
    suspicion" by the Sudanese government on the basis of presumed  support
    for the SPLM-N in the Nuba Mountains.  Dame Rosalind  was  critical  of
    the F-FR 2018's methodology  in  assessing  the  contrasting  views  of
    different sources - some  stating  that  returnees  did  not  face  any
    problems, whilst others referred to difficulties and ill-treatment  for
    those who were activists or, in some  instances,  simply  because  they
    claimed asylum abroad.  The F-FR 2018 drew only on 20 sources and there
    was no attempt to resolve contradictory opinions  (paras  26-27).   She
    maintained failed asylum-seekers of Nuba ethnicity were at risk.

206. We accept  that  the  F-FR  2018  sources  do  not  provide  consistent
    accounts of who, prior to the 2019 developments, would be  of  interest
    and at risk on return.   The  weight  of  that  evidence  (set  out  in
    summary  at  [A240]-[A251])  is,  however,  not   supportive   of   the
    appellant's case that  all  returning  failed  asylum-seekers  of  Nuba
    ethnicity would have been at risk.

207. In her oral evidence Dame  Rosalind  was  more  circumspect  about  the
    current situation.  She was unable to give any recent examples of  ill-
    treatment of returning Nuba at Khartoum airport.  She  said  it  was  a
    difficult question to answer whether a person who  had  claimed  asylum
    overseas and was of Nuba ethnicity would be at risk.  This was  because
    there was no actual evidence relating to treatment of returning  failed
    asylum seekers under the new regime.  However, she repeated that  there
    was still an NISS/GIS desk at the airport  but  she  said  that  checks
    appeared to be more cursory than before.  She suspected that there were
    different procedures on entry for known  failed  asylum  seekers.   She
    stated that there was a  concern  that  the  NISS/GIS  mindset  was  to
    suspect failed asylum seekers of Nuba ethnicity of involvement with the
    SPLM-N and that that had not changed and so there remained a risk  that
    Nuba failed asylum seekers would be subject to ill-treatment.

208. We consider Dame Rosalind's evidence concerning the  present  situation
    to be important.  She said that any investigation in  Khartoum  airport
    is likely to be more "cursory" since the fall of the al-Bashir  regime.
    We also note that she was unable to give any examples  of  mistreatment
    of returning failed asylum seekers under the  new  regime.   We  remind
    ourselves of Dame Rosalind's observation during her evidence  that  the
    social media had a part to play in exposing  actions  by  the  Sudanese
    authorities.  We were referred to  none  that  could  support  specific
    recent instances of ill-treatment to arrivals at Khartoum airport.

209. At various points in the case, including the evidence of  Ms  Crowther,
    it appeared that the argument being posited was  that  the  absence  of
    evidence did not show that Nuba were not at risk.   We  do  not  accept
    that argument.  The absence of evidence, in the  circumstances  we  are
    considering, is not probative evidence that a  risk  does  exist.   The
    appellant bears the burden of proof  and  without  evidence  we  cannot
    infer that what is said happens (or happened) does,  in  fact,  happen.
    The absence of external monitoring of the position of  returned  asylum
    seekers  cannot  probatively  assist  the  appellant  where  there   is
    otherwise no evidence of those individuals' position in Sudan.

210. Mr Jacobs also placed reliance upon a number of the country  background
    documents.

211. First, he relied upon the F-FR 2016 and, in particular, in relation  to
    the  position  of  failed  asylum  seekers  on   return   to   Khartoum
    International airport.  At page 15  of  the  report  the  following  is
    reported:

         "NHRMO considered that those from Darfur or the Two Areas, who  had
         been outside Sudan for a considerable period, would  be  questioned
         extensively about their political activities and  risked  detention
         if they were suspected of activities against the government."

212. At page 16, the same source referred to a detention of  a  Nuba  person
    at the airport as follows:

         "NHRMO  referring  to  their  own  human  rights  monitoring  work,
         considered that it would not be  safe  for  NHRMO  staff  to  visit
         Khartoum and referred to  a  specific  case  of  detention  at  the
         airport involving a  Nuba  person  who  was  detained  for  alleged
         political activity."

213. Then, finally at page 17 those sources  are  quoted  as  reporting  the
    following:

         "Western embassy (C) noted that upon arrival at KIA,  Darfuris  and
         persons from the Two Areas may be treated impolitely  and  probably
         asked to pay a bribe, but they would not face any  difficulties  if
         they already were not 'flagged' by the NISS.  NHRMO  observed  that
         those from the Two Areas travelling through Khartoum  International
         Airport (KIA) would be subject to more intensive questioning  about
         their background and political involvement, with ethnic  Nuba  most
         likely to experience harassment."

214. In our judgment, this evidence, dating from August 2016  and  therefore
    prior to the overthrow of the al-Bashir  government,  goes  no  further
    than recognising that ethnic Nuba were likely to experience  harassment
    but the difficulties, in particular detention by the NISS,  related  to
    suspicion of actual political activities against the government and not
    simply because they are of Nuba  ethnicity.   It  does  not  support  a
    conclusion that all Nuba are perceived as potential supporters of rebel
    groups, such as the SPLM-N or that being a returned  asylum-seeker  and
    having claimed asylum abroad is, in  itself,  seen  as  apolitical  act
    which will result in ill-treatment at the airport.   It also  does  not
    support  a  generalised  risk  of  ill-treatment  to  all  ethnic  Nuba
    returning as failed asylum seekers or being detained and ill-treated as
    a consequence.

215. Secondly, Mr Jacobs placed reliance upon the "COI  Belgian  Report"  of
    February 2018.  We discussed that report earlier and also considered Ms
    Crowther's assessment of it.   We find persuasive the conclusion of the
    Belgian Commissioner that these instances of  claimed  mistreatment  by
    returned asylum seekers are unreliable.  He concluded:

         "The CGRS has not been able to obtain absolute certainty or clarity
         about whether  the  facts  stated  in  the  report  of  the  Tahrir
         Institute actually  took  place.   But  regarding  the  three  main
         testimonies from this report, it was found some important  elements
         were not true, to such an extent that this  raises  serious  doubts
         about the rest of the testimony."

216. We are perhaps not concerned with 'absolute certainty or clarity',  but
    we have no reason to disagree with  the  general  conclusion  that  the
    accounts in question are not entitled to be treated  as  reliable.  The
    "Belgian COI Report" does not add to the appellant's case.

217. Thirdly, Mr Jacobs placed reliance upon paragraph  4.2  of  the  Asylum
    Research Consultancy document dated 13 September 2018 which adopts  the
    F-FR 2016 on the  treatment  of  persons  travelling  through  Khartoum
    airport that:

         "Persons from the Two Areas will be treated differently because  of
         being perceived to be affiliated with the SPLM-N and they would  be
         subject to more intensive questioning about  their  background  and
         political involvement.  Ethnic Nuba persons will be most likely  to
         experience harassment and will be easily  identifiable  from  their
         name."

218. This, however, goes no further  than  recognising  that  failed  asylum
    seekers, in particular those who are  ethnic  Nubas,  would  have  been
    subject to "more intensive questioning" and would  be  most  likely  to
    experience harassment.  It provides  no  support  for  the  appellant's
    contention that all Nuban failed asylum seekers are  at  real  risk  of
    detention and serious ill-treatment or persecution by the  NISS/GIS  at
    Khartoum airport.

219. In relation to any risk, at the airport,  Mr  Thomann  referred  us  to
    "CPIT 2" dated 22 October 2019.  It includes figures, inter  alia,  for
    enforced returns  between  2014  and  2018  prepared  from  information
    provided by EASO.  A table in para 2.1.1 shows  UK  returns  to  Sudan.
    The number of forced returns to Sudan were 48  (2014),  34  (2015),  11
    (2016), 39 (2017) and 14 (2018). Mr Jacobs accepted that these  figures
    do not assist in  showing  whether  any  Nuba  have  been  returned  to
    Khartoum during this period.  The figures at para 4.3.1  show  a  total
    for the period of 2014  to  June  2019  of  15  enforced  returns.  The
    disparity was not satisfactorily explained to  us  but  may  relate  to
    different classification systems being used  with  the  former  figures
    reflecting the year an individual applied for asylum  rather  than  the
    year they were returned.

220. At para 4.2.3 there is a table showing figures for  forced  returns  to
    Sudan between 2014  and  2018  by  four  EU  states  who  consented  to
    disclosure of information: Belgium (13), Switzerland (27),  Sweden  (7)
    and Slovenia (1).  But, as Mr Jacobs pointed out,  Switzerland  is  the
    only country which was able to confirm that it returns  Nuba  to  Sudan
    (para 4.2.5).  Although  the  information  provided  did  not  indicate
    whether any enforced returns were in fact Nuba.  Mr Jacobs also pointed
    out that one country, Cyprus, confirmed that it did not  return  anyone
    to Sudan who originated from Darfur or South Kordofan (para 4.2.4).  In
    the result, we  have  not  found  "CPIT  2"  provided  any  significant
    information to assist us in assessing the risk, if  any,  to  a  failed
    asylum seeker of Nuba ethnicity returned to Sudan.

221. Mr Thomann contended that the evidence did not establish that a  failed
    asylum seeker of Nuba ethnicity was for that reason alone at real  risk
    of  persecution  or  serious  ill-treatment  on  return.   However,  he
    accepted that the evidence, as of 2018, was that  Sudanese  authorities
    may be able to identify a person as a failed asylum seeker  on  return,
    depending on the circumstances of their departure from  and  return  to
    Sudan and by questioning such a returnee closely.  He accepted that the
    risk of identification and close questioning arose when  an  individual
    travels on an emergency travel document, or a passport lacking a  valid
    exit stamp, or if accompanied by escort staff on return.   He  accepted
    that it was likely, as of 2018, that such a person would be  questioned
    about activities since  leaving  Sudan.   However,  he  contended  that
    beyond that there was a lack of evidence that a failed  asylum  seeker,
    if detained on return in Khartoum, would become of interest to the NISS
    or be subject to serious mistreatment which would put them at real risk
    merely by reason of the fact of claiming asylum.

222. As to the present position, Mr Thomann submitted that the evidence  was
    that the security position at the airport had, if anything, become less
    strict.  There were no reports of recent  mistreatment  and  he  relied
    upon Dame Rosalind's view that opposition to the al-Bashir regime would
    not now be viewed negatively in the current climate  and  her  evidence
    that any investigation in Khartoum airport was now likely  to  be  more
    "cursory".

223. We accept the evidence that there has been a two-stage process  at  the
    airport - first involving an immigration  desk  and  then,  secondly  a
    NISS/GIS desk.   That arrangement continues today.

224. As regards the situation prior to 2019, we accept the evidence  that  a
    failed asylum-seeker of Nuba ethnicity, if and  when  identified  as  a
    person of Nuba ethnicity or as coming  from  the  Nuba  Mountains,  was
    likely to experience a heightened risk of inquiry about their political
    activities in Sudan or abroad.  That process would  have  involved  the
    NISS.   The  individual's  background  might  well  have  been  readily
    apparent from his or her appearance  and  return  on  emergency  travel
    documents or a passport lacking an exit stamp was likely to prompt  the
    NISS to question an individual about their activities. We accept that a
    person of Nuba ethnicity might face a  higher  risk  of  investigation.
    However, the evidence does not establish that there would have been any
    continuing interest in a person, including a person of Nuba  ethnicity,
    unless they were perceived to be a sufficiently serious threat  to  the
    al-Bashir Government.   The risk was no more, and  no  less,  than  the
    risk we have identified in relation to individuals in Greater Khartoum.
    There was no risk per se to a failed  asylum  seeker.   That  what  was
    found by this Tribunal in IM and AI at [225]:

         "It is our firm conclusion that a failed asylum  seeker,  including
         an individual  that  has  been  subject  to  investigation  by  the
         immigration authorities on return, would not be at risk of  further
         investigation by NISS on that basis alone."

225. What of the  current  risk,  since  the  2019  political  developments?
    Given the establishment of the new Government  and  political  changes,
    opposition to the al-Bashir regime would, most  likely,  no  longer  be
    considered  to  be  oppositional  to  the  current   government.    The
    government has changed, and, as we have  set  out  above,  there  is  a
    developing move to a democratically based regime.  Significant  changes
    have been made along that route following  the  overthrow  of  the  al-
    Bashir regime and its replacement, since August 2019 by the  SC  and  a
    civilian government, headed by a well-respected international economist
    as Prime Minster.  There is no evidence that  the  GIS  (as  the  NISS'
    successor) has ill-treated any returned failed asylum seeker since  the
    political developments in  2019.   It  would  be  pure  speculation  to
    conclude that the 'old ways' (relied upon by the appellant and  in  any
    event in our  view  lacking  evidential  support)  remain  the  current
    practices in the absence of any evidence.

226. In our judgment, the evidence does not establish that there was a  real
    risk to a failed asylum seeker on the  ground  that  he  was  of  Nuban
    ethnicity on return at Khartoum airport prior  to  the  2019  political
    developments.  Further, the evidence does not establish any  such  risk
    since the 2019 political developments.

227. Despite recent changes, we accept  that  a  person  of  Nuba  ethnicity
    might face a higher risk of investigation but we are also of  the  firm
    conclusion that a failed asylum seeker (whether of  Nuba  ethnicity  or
    not) is not at risk as such at Khartoum airport.  The  examination  is,
    as Dame Rosalind told us, more "cursory" today than it was  previously.
    The risk, if any, arises in the very same  circumstances  as  it  would
    arise in Greater Khartoum,  namely,  applying  an  holistic  and  fact-
    sensitive approach a  person  would  be  perceived  as  a  sufficiently
    serious threat to the current regime to warrant targeting and treatment
    that amounts to serious harm. What we have said earlier concerning  the
    risk to individuals in Greater Khartoum following  the  2019  political
    developments applies with equal force when assessing any  risk  at  the
    airport as a failed asylum-seeker.

228. The evidence we have  discussed  deals  with  returned  failed  asylum-
    seekers.  There was no evidence that other Nuba travelling in  and  out
    of Khartoum airport were subject to any particular display of  interest
    by the Sudanese authorities, in particular the NISS/GIS at the airport.
       In our view, the absence of any  evidence  of  that  reinforces  the
    conclusions we have reached on the evidence that Nuba as such  are  not
    at risk on return.

229. Whether or not that is right, the position on the evidence we did  hear
    is that there is no higher risk of persecution or serious ill-treatment
    to those of Nuba ethnicity at Khartoum airport  beyond  that  which  we
    have already identified in Greater Khartoum.

    D. Internal Relocation

230. The parties' written submissions on the issue  of  internal  relocation
    to Greater Khartoum were brief.  It could have no  application  to  the
    appellant as he is from Omdurman in Greater Khartoum and the  Secretary
    of State did not suggest  that  the  appellant  could  be  expected  to
    relocate  to  the  Nuba  Mountains  (see  para  [89]  of  Mr  Thomann's
    submissions).

231. Not surprisingly,  Mr  Thomann  accepted  that  if  an  individual  can
    establish a real risk of persecution by the  Sudanese  state  in  their
    home area, then internal relocation is not available (see para [182] of
    Mr Thomann's submissions).  That is accepted by the Home Office in  its
    CPIN: "Sudan, Rejected Asylum Seekers" (August 2017)  at  para  2.5.1).
    Consequently, if an ethnic Nuba from one of the Two Areas was  able  to
    establish a real risk of state persecution in  his  or  her  area,  the
    issue of internal relocation to Greater Khartoum does  not  arise.   It
    is, in general, the case that a person who has a well-founded  fear  of
    persecution by the national state authorities will not be able to avoid
    harm by internal relocation.

232. The scope for an internal relocation argument is,  therefore,  limited,
    given that we are concerned with  the  risk  of  ill-treatment  to  the
    individual by the State in their home area.  It  could,  perhaps,  more
    easily be seen to arise in a humanitarian protection  claim  where  the
    risk in the home area falls  within  Art  15(c)  of  the  Qualification
    Directive.  That latter risk in, for example, the  Nuba  Mountains  was
    not, however, an issue pursued or raised before us.  We,  nevertheless,
    address the issue of internal relocation to Greater Khartoum for  those
    cases where it might arise, albeit not in relation to this appellant.

233. If a real risk of serious harm does otherwise arise in  the  home  area
    of a person of Nuba ethnicity, the appellant contends that a  level  of
    discrimination (for example in the availability of services,  education
    and employment) living in the 'Black Belt' in Greater Khartoum would be
    unduly harsh and unreasonable.  The respondent contends that - assuming
    the risk is not from the State - that issue would depend upon  all  the
    circumstances of the case, involving a fact-specific assessment for the
    individual returnee.  We agree with the respondent's submission.

234. We heard, and were referred to, evidence concerning  the  circumstances
    of Nuba living in Greater Khartoum (see, e.g., Dame Rosalind at  [A21]-
    [A22]  (oral  evidence),  [A30]-[A31]  (written   evidence);   Madeline
    Crowther at [A100]-[A105] (Waging Peace Report,  March  2018),  [A124]-
    [A125] (oral evidence); F-FR 2016 at [A204]-[A214]; F-FR 2018 at [A231]-
    [A234]; Landinfo Response at [A270]).  That evidence  was  directed  to
    the issue of whether the circumstances  were  such  that  it  would  be
    unreasonable or unduly harsh for a person of Nuba ethnicity to relocate
    to Greater Khartoum, and,  in  addition,  but  much  less  prominently,
    whether the living and social circumstances in  Greater  Khartoum  gave
    rise to a breach of article 3 of the ECHR

235. Mr Jacobs' submissions were briefly made in paras  [202]-[203]  of  his
    initial written submission, contending that the level of discrimination
    in Greater Khartoum, if not persecutory in nature, would make it unduly
    harsh for a person of Nuba ethnicity to live there.  In his submissions
    in response to those of Mr Thomann, Mr Jacobs relied, in effect, on the
    respondent's position in the  CPIN  that  internal  relocation  is  not
    available when the risk is from the  State  in  the  individual's  home
    area.

236. He submitted that a person of Nuba ethnicity might  well  live  in  the
    'Black Belt' and the evidence established that there is there no access
    to effective medical services, education  and  employment.   He  relied
    upon the evidence of Dame Rosalind of the  impoverished  conditions  in
    the 'Black Belt' where there were no services and merely mud huts  with
    no fences.   The Public  Order  law  continues  in  force.   There  was
    discrimination in relation to employment and difficulties for Nuba such
    as obtaining a national identity card which is required  to  give  them
    access to basic services.

237. Mr Thomann accepted that  there  are  difficulties  for  those  in  the
    poorer areas of Greater Khartoum accessing  healthcare,  education  and
    employment.    He   also   accepted   that    discrimination    occurs.
    Nevertheless, he contended that the sheer size  and  diversity  of  the
    population in Greater Khartoum coming from Darfur and  the  Two  Areas,
    made  the  submission  that  relocation  would  be  reasonable  in  the
    generality  of  cases  sustainable.   In  his  submission,  whether   a
    particular individual would be able to access economic activity,  basic
    services and shelter will require a  fact-specific  assessment  of  the
    circumstances of that individual.

238. We have no doubt that Mr Thomann's approach is the correct one.

239. In assessing internal relocation, the correct approach is  set  out  in
    para 339O of the Immigration Rules (HC 395 as amended) and in Januzi  v
    SSHD and AH (Sudan) v SSHD (see above paras 55-60).  We  bear  in  mind
    the approach to the issue of internal relocation  and,  in  particular,
    reasonableness or undue harshness set out in Underhill LJ's judgment in
    AS (Afghanistan) v SSHD at [61]  which  we  set  out  above.   A  fact-
    sensitive, holistic assessment of all the circumstances is required.

240. Mr Jacobs relied upon discrimination experienced by Nuba in the  'Black
    Belt'.  Those were  the  terms  used  by  both  Dame  Rosalind  and  Ms
    Crowther.  We are unsure precisely what they understood  discrimination
    to mean in this context.  It may well have implied  that  the  Sudanese
    Government  deliberately  treated  those  in  the  'Black   Belt',   in
    particular the Nuba (and perhaps non-Arab  Darfuri),  differently  from
    Nuba living elsewhere or other inhabitants of Greater Khartoum  not  of
    Nuba (or non-Arab Darfuri) ethnicity.  Consequently, Dame Rosalind  was
    critical of the British Embassy's report, that "[a]necdotally"  sources
    were  surprised  at  the   suggestion   that   there   was   systematic
    discrimination, because it was unclear who  had  been  consulted.   The
    evidence overall, however, does not lead us to conclude that  there  is
    "systematic" discrimination (in the sense  of  deliberate  differential
    treatment by the State) against Nuba living  in  the  'Black  Belt'  in
    Greater Khartoum.

241. In our judgment, the crucial issue  is  an  assessment  of  the  actual
    social and living conditions  that  Nuba  live  in  if  their  internal
    relocation option  is,  in  reality,  to  the  'Black  Belt'.   Do  the
    conditions in the 'Black Belt'  make  living  there  "unreasonable"  or
    "unduly harsh"?

242. Many Nuba have been driven to move to Greater Khartoum because  of  the
    conflict in their respected home areas, and some have, no doubt,  moved
    for economic and social reasons with better access to services and more
    job opportunities in Greater Khartoum than in their home area (see F-FR
    2018 section 1.1).  That may suggest that, at least for some, they find
    it a more reasonable prospect than living elsewhere.   It  is  not,  we
    accept, determinative.

243. There is a very large Nuba population (at least hundreds of  thousands)
    living in Greater Khartoum.  In reality, most Nuba live in  the  'Black
    Belt'.  There are also very large numbers of non-Arab Darfuris who live
    there.   While we accept that those of Nuba  ethnicity  are  likely  to
    live in the 'Black Belt', some, however, may not, where,  for  example,
    they hold professional  or  other  jobs  that  allow  greater  economic
    freedom.

244. Some Nuba do hold high-ranking positions,  not  least  in  the  SC  and
    traditionally have held posts in the police force and armed forces.  We
    accept Mr Thomann's submission that the  evidence  does  not  establish
    that education, whether at a secondary or tertiary  level,  is  not  in
    principle accessible for individuals living in  Greater  Khartoum  from
    the Nuba Mountains.  There was evidence before  us  of  Nuba  attending
    tertiary education in Greater Khartoum.  On the other hand, the British
    Embassy has reported that  Nuba  who  obtained  employment  in  Greater
    Khartoum have "petty jobs in the informal sector".  There is  no  doubt
    that the circumstances in the 'Black Belt', where the majority of  such
    individuals live in shanty towns, are impoverished.  Housing  is  of  a
    generally poor standard, access to services  is  limited,  and  largely
    such work that can be obtained by inhabitants  is  low  paid,  but  not
    exclusively so.  Mr Jacobs pointed us to general material in the Asylum
    Research Centre Report, "Sudan Query: The  Situation  in  Khartoum  and
    Omdurman -  an  Update"  (13,  September  2018)  concerning  access  to
    services and living conditions in Greater Khartoum (especially at pages
    64-67) which cited, and reflected, as he accepted, what was said in the
    F-FR 2016 and the Waging Peace  Report  of  March  2018.   Whilst  Dame
    Rosalind and Ms Crowther said that  access  to  services  is  generally
    poorer for those living in the 'Black  Belt',  the  evidence  does  not
    establish that services are generally unavailable.  In our judgment,  a
    fact-specific approach must be adopted to the consideration  of  access
    to services, including education, for any particular individual and its
    implications  for  the  assessment  of  'reasonableness'   and   'undue
    harshness'.

245. We heard evidence concerning the  importance  of,  and  access  to,  ID
    cards.  The evidence before us was that displaced persons  from  Darfur
    and the Two Areas  may  experience  difficulties  in  reacquiring  lost
    documents because of the  need  to  obtain  witnesses  to  prove  their
    identity (see F-FR 2016 at para 4.1).  That was also  the  evidence  of
    Dame Rosalind in her first statement where she said:

         "If Nuba have been displaced, they often have difficulty in getting
         national identity cards because they don't have a birth certificate
         and cannot get a certificate from a tribal elder to attest to their
         identity.  If they do not have national identity cards, they cannot
         access basic services or  sit  exams  to  graduate  from  secondary
         school."

246. Whilst Mr Thomann in para [115] of his submissions drew  our  attention
    to evidence demonstrating that an ID card could be obtained  regardless
    of place of origin or tribal background, there may still be  difficulty
    for some individuals, particularly from the Two Areas  and  Darfur,  if
    they cannot establish their identity in  the  required  way.   We  also
    note, the evidence before us, in the F-FR 2016  (at  page  77)  from  a
    Greater Khartoum based journalist that people from Darfur and  the  Two
    Areas may not be concerned about obtaining an ID card:

         "Concerning the possibility of obtaining  a  national  number,  the
         source mentioned that people from Darfur and the Two Areas also can
         apply in obtaining national numbers; however,  a  large  number  of
         Darfuris in Khartoum as well as in Darfur have not applied for  the
         national number yet.  According to the source, the main reason  for
         this was that people did not care about the number and did not  see
         any advantage in having it. They consider the card merely as a tool
         for the government to collect information about them  in  order  to
         monitor and control them."

247. Consequently, we accept that whether an individual has an ID card  and,
    if not, whether they would be able to obtain one,  may  be  a  relevant
    factor, specific to their particular circumstances on return to Greater
    Khartoum when assessing whether it would be reasonable or unduly  harsh
    for them to live there.  On the evidence before us  we  do  not  accept
    either that an ID card is necessary  for  reasonable  life  in  Greater
    Khartoum or that an ID card cannot be obtained by a migrant Nuba.

248. Overall, we do not accept that, as a general rule, it would  be  unduly
    harsh or unreasonable for a person of Nuba ethnicity returning to Sudan
    to relocate to Greater Khartoum.  Applying the  well-established  tests
    of 'reasonableness' and 'unduly harsh', whether internal relocation  is
    open to a particular individual must necessarily  be  a  fact-sensitive
    assessment of all the relevant factors.

249. We did not receive detailed submissions on  whether  the  situation  in
    Greater Khartoum breached article 3 of the ECHR.  We  do  not  propose,
    therefore, to deal with this issue in detail.   The  claim,  for  these
    purposes, is based upon the circumstances in which  a  returned  failed
    asylum seeker of Nuba ethnicity would  live  in  Greater  Khartoum,  in
    particular, if that would be  to  the  'Black  Belt'.   Establishing  a
    breach of article 3 in these circumstances is likely  to  be  extremely
    difficult.  The threshold of such a claim is very high (see SSHD v Said
    at [31] and SSHD v MS (Somalia)).  Only in an exceptional case will the
    standard of living and social conditions of the returned person violate
    article 3 (see Said at [26]).  Whilst that must necessarily be a  fact-
    sensitive assessment, we doubt whether, on the evidence we  have  seen,
    that high threshold is likely to be reached in the generality of cases.



250. Finally, the parties' submissions did not explore the issue of  whether
    internal relocation  to  the  Nuba  mountains  for  a  person  of  Nuba
    ethnicity at risk in Greater Khartoum was  reasonable  and  not  unduly
    harsh.  We noted earlier,  Mr  Thomann's  position  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State that it was not suggested that the appellant (if  at
    risk in greater Khartoum) could relocate to the Nuba Mountains.   Given
    that the risk in Khartoum is likely  to  be  a  risk  from  the  State,
    relocation elsewhere in Sudan  is,  rightly,  accepted  not  to  be  an
    option.  If the issue of relocation was to arise without  the  risk  in
    Greater Khartoum emanating from the State, we should not be taken to be
    necessarily endorsing Mr Thomann's position.   All  would  turn  on  an
    assessment of the risk to that individual in  the  Nuba  Mountains  and
    whether the circumstances they would live  in,  and  experience,  there
    would make it unreasonable or unduly harsh to  do  so.   It  would,  as
    ever,  require  a  fact-sensitive  assessment.   In  the   absence   of
    submissions directed to this  issue  and  given  that  we  consider  it
    unlikely to arise as it would require the risk not to emanate from  the
    State  in  Greater  Khartoum,  we  say  nothing  more  specific   about
    relocation to the Nuba Mountains.







    E. A Footnote

251. Our decision is solely concerned with the position  of  individuals  of
    Nuba ethnicity in Sudan.  We rejected earlier an argument based upon  a
    reliance on the CG decisions dealing with non-Arab Darfuris.   We  have
    reached our conclusions based upon the evidence relating  to  Nuba  and
    not non-Arab Darfuris.  But a broader contention  was  made  before  us
    that the position of the Nuba is the same as non-Arab Darfuris, i.e all
    Nuba and non-Arab Darfuris are at risk in Greater  Khartoum.   We  have
    rejected that contention in relation to those of  Nuba  ethnicity.   We
    make no findings in relation to non-Arab Darfuris and, as we  indicated
    above, nothing we said should be understood to undermine  the  existing
    CG decisions in respect of non-Arab Darfuris.  We would simply  observe
    that if the comparison  is  maintained,  on  the  evidence  we  saw  in
    relation to Nuba, it might well have implications for the assessment of
    the risk to non-Arab Darfuris on return.

XI. COUNTRY GUIDANCE

252. We set out the following country guidance in  relation  to  individuals
    of Nuba ethnicity returning to Sudan:

      a) An individual of Nuba ethnicity is not at real risk of  persecution
         or serious ill-treatment on return to Sudan (whether  in  the  Nuba
         Mountains, Greater  Khartoum  or  Khartoum  International  Airport)
         simply because of their ethnicity.

      b) A returning failed asylum-seeker (including of Nuba  ethnicity)  is
         not at real risk of persecution or  serious  ill-treatment  at  the
         airport simply on account of being a failed asylum-seeker.

      c) Prior to the political developments in 2019, individuals  who  were
         at risk on return (whether at the airport or in  Greater  Khartoum)
         were those who were perceived by the Sudanese authorities to  be  a
         sufficiently serious threat to the Sudanese Government  to  warrant
         targeting.

      d) The assessment of that risk required  an  evaluation  of  what  was
         likely to be known to the authorities and a holistic assessment  of
         the individual's circumstances  including  any  previous  political
         activity in Sudan or abroad and any past history  of  detention  in
         Sudan.  Factors include whether the individual  was  a  student,  a
         political activist or a journalist; their ethnicity; their religion
         (in particular Christianity); and whether they came from  a  former
         conflict area (such as the Nuba Mountains).

      e)  Whilst  the  question  of  perception  of   political   opposition
         underlying (c) above remains the  same  since  the  2019  political
         developments, when assessing any risk to  an  individual  now,  the
         effects of the 2019 political developments  are  relevant  and  are
         likely to affect the Sudanese authorities' view  of,  and  attitude
         towards, those who  might  be  perceived  as  political  opponents.
         Further, the 2019 political developments are likely to have greatly
         reduced the interest  of  the  Sudanese  government  in  supressing
         political opposition by violent or military action.

      f) Internal relocation to  Greater  Khartoum  for  a  person  of  Nuba
         ethnicity must depend upon an assessment of  all  the  individual's
         circumstances including their living conditions, their  ability  to
         access  education,  healthcare   and   employment.    Despite   the
         impoverished conditions  and  discrimination  faced  by  Nuba  when
         living in the so-called 'Black  Belt'  area  of  Greater  Khartoum,
         relocating  there  will  not   generally   be   unduly   harsh   or
         unreasonable.

XII. KAM'S APPEAL

253. Mr Jacobs' submission that the appellant's  appeal  should  be  allowed
    was based upon the contention that all Nuba, returned as failed  asylum
    seekers, were at risk of persecution or serious  ill-treatment  because
    of their perceived association with rebel opponents to the  government,
    in particular the SPLM-N.   We  have  rejected  that  contention.   The
    appellant cannot succeed simply  on  the  basis  that  he  is  of  Nuba
    ethnicity and a returning failed asylum seeker.

254. The  preserved  findings  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  are  that  the
    appellant comes from Omdurman (part of Greater Khartoum) and is of Nuba
    ethnicity.  He has family who live  in  Omdurman.   He  has  failed  to
    establish any political activity in Sudan or that he has ever  been  of
    interest to the Sudanese authorities, including the NISS.  The claim to
    have been arrested  and  ill-treated  in  Sudan  was  rejected  as  not
    credible by the First-tier Tribunal and that finding was upheld by this
    Tribunal.

255.  The  appellant  relied  upon  sur  place  activities  in  the  UK,  as
    participating  in  a  television  interview  criticising  the  Sudanese
    government and as having joined the Nuba  Mountains  Solidarity  Abroad
    group.  The First-tier Tribunal,  having  viewed  the  broadcast  clip,
    concluded that it  did  not  contain  any  criticism  of  the  Sudanese
    government.   As  regards  his  activities  with  the  Nuba   Mountains
    Solidarity Abroad group his activities were limited to having  attended
    one memorial meeting and one social  gathering,  as  well  as  being  a
    member of the Facebook and WhatsApp groups.  There was no evidence that
    he had come to the attention of the Sudanese authorities  nor  that  it
    was likely that his  limited  activities  would  come  to  the  adverse
    attention of the authorities in Sudan.  None of these findings were set
    aside by this Tribunal.  They stand as part of the  assessment  of  his
    appeal.

256. Consequently, the appellant has not established any political  activity
    in Sudan and has never been of interest to  the  Sudanese  authorities,
    including the NISS.  His activity in the UK involved activity  critical
    of the (then) al-Bashir government.  His association with  a  political
    group in the UK was limited and was found not to be something of  which
    the Sudanese government would be aware.  All the elements of his  claim
    predated the changes of 2019.   The  appellant  is  a  person  of  Nuba
    ethnicity  from  Omdurman  with  no  political  activity  which   could
    conceivably be seen as giving rise to a potential threat to the current
    Government in Sudan.  He is not at risk of persecution at  the  airport
    or at home.  He will return to his home area where he can  safely  live
    with his family.  No question of internal location arises.





257. For these reasons, we re-make the decision and dismiss the  appellant's
    appeal.


                                 Signed

                           Andrew Grubb

                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                 Date: 25 August 2020


                                 APPENDIX 1

 1. CONTENTS



    A. Dame Rosalind Marsden DCMG

          1. Report, "The Nuba Community in Sudan: why  they  are  at  risk"
             (March 2018)  [A3]-[A10]

          2. Oral evidence (31 May 2018) [A11]-[A25]

          3. "Comments on the Home Office Fact-finding Mission  Report"  (28
             January 2019)  [A26]-[A37]

          4. "Report on the current political situation  in  Sudan  and  the
             risks involved in  returning  failed  Nuba  asylum  seekers  to
             Sudan" (27 August 2019) [A38]-[A49]

          5. "Addendum Report on the current political  situation  in  Sudan
             and the risks involved in returning failed Nuba asylum  seekers
             to Sudan" (17 October 2019) [A50]-[A62]

          6. Oral evidence (24/25 October 2019) [A63]-[A85]




    B. Ms Madeline Crowther

          1. "Risks to individuals from  Nuba  Mountains  in  Sudan"  (March
             2018) [A87]-[A105]

          2. Oral evidence (31 May/1 June 2018) [A106]-[A129]

          3. "Comment on Home Office's Nov 2018 Fact-Finding Mission report"
             (January 2019) [A130]

          4. "Report on the risk to Nuba Individuals in  Sudan"  (27  August
             2019)  [A131]-[A137]

          5. "Addendum report - risk  to  Nuba  Individuals  in  Sudan"  (17
             October 2019)  [A138]-[A148]

          6. Oral evidence (25 October 2019)  [A149]-[A166]




    C. Dr Eric Reeves

          1. "Risk to people from the Nuba Mountains  Region  on  return  to
             Sudan" (January 2018) [A168]-[A174]

          2. Oral evidence (21 June 2018) [A175]-[A181]




    D. Country Background Evidence

          1. Joint Danish Immigration Service and Home  Office  Fact-finding
             Missions  to  Khartoum,  Kampala  and  Nairobi,  "Situation  of
             Persons  from  Darfur,  Southern  Kordofan  and  Blue  Nile  in
             Khartoum" (4 August 2016) ("F-FR 2016") [A189]-[A215]

          2. Home Office, "Report of a  Fact-Finding  Mission  to  Khartoum,
             Sudan" (November 2018) ("the F-FR 2018") [A216]-[A251]

          3.  Asylum  Research  Consultancy,  "Situation  in  Khartoum   and
             Omdurman" (9 September 2015) [A252] -[A254]

          4. Research Centre, "Sudan: Query Response"  (13  September  2018)
             [A254]-[A260]

          5. COI Focus, "Sudan: Risk upon Return" (2018) [A261]-[A264]

          6. Belgium Commissioner  General  for  Refugees,  "Respecting  the
             principle of Non-Refoulement  when  organising  the  return  of
             persons to Sudan" (February 2018) [A265]-[A268]

          7. Landinfo Response to UK Home Office Query on Sudan (April 2018)
             [A269]-[A270]




    E. The Respondent's Documents

          1. Home Office Country Policy Information Team,  "Response  to  an
             Information Request: Sudan" (23 October 2019) ("CPIT 1") [A273]-
             [A283]

          2. Home Office Country Policy Information Team,  "Response  to  an
             Information Request: Sudan, Returns" (22 October  2019)  ("CPIT
             2") [A284]-[A286]

A. Dame Rosalind Marsden DCMG

 2. Dame Rosalind Marsden was the first witness to give oral evidence.  She
    served as British Ambassador to Sudan from 2007 until 2010 and she  was
    the EU Special Representative for Sudan from October 2010 until October
    2013.  From 2014 to 2018, she was the Senior Advisor to the Centre  for
    Humanitarian Dialogue, a US-funded Sudanese programme and  she  advised
    the US government on the Sudanese peace process.  She is  currently  an
    Associate Fellow at Chatham House where  she  is  a  political  analyst
    advising  on  Sudan  and  South  Sudan  issues.   She  has   first-hand
    experience of Sudan.  In July 2019, she attended a 3-day  meeting  with
    30 Sudanese civil  society  representatives  in  Nairobi.   Between  28
    September and 9 October 2019, she visited Khartoum to help organise and
    chair a Chatham House conference during  which  time  she  met  with  a
    number of local individuals.

    1. Report, "The Nuba Community in Sudan: why they are at  risk"  (March
    2018)

 3. In her oral evidence in May/June 2018, Dame Rosalind adopted her  March
    2018 report.  In that report, she described the cultural and  religious
    diversity of the tribes from the Nuba Mountains and the  background  to
    the displacement of "hundreds of thousands" of Nuba to Khartoum in  the
    course of the long-standing conflict in South Kordofan.

 4. In her report, Dame Rosalind stated that ethnicity in Sudan was "highly
    politicised" and that members of the Nuba Community were  suspected  by
    the authorities of supporting the SPLM-N.  That was  part  of  a  wider
    rebel alliance called the Sudan Revolutionary Front ("SRF") which  also
    included the armed movements from Darfur.

 5. Dame Rosalind stated that the al-Bashir regime was opposed to the  Nuba
    tribes.  This was because many Nuba fought with the SPLM on the side of
    the South Sudanese in the civil war.  This led to the  Khartoum  regime
    in the 1990s declaring a jihad against  the  Nuba  and  the  subsequent
    policy of using starvation as a weapon of persecution against  Nuba  in
    government control areas.  She said that young men of military age were
    forcibly  recruited  and  made  to  fight  against  their  own  people.
    Additionally, large numbers of Nuba  girls  and  women  were  raped  by
    government soldiers.  She stated that  the  April  2013  rebel  advance
    towards Khartoum was seen as  a  major  humiliation  for  the  Sudanese
    government and resulted in round-ups and arrests of the Nuba.

 6. In her  report,  Dame  Rosalind  stated  that  the  declared  universal
    cessation of hostilities in  South  Kordofan  has  yet  to  lead  to  a
    negotiated  monitored  cessation   of   hostilities   or   consent   to
    humanitarian  access  to  the  SPLM-N  controlled  areas  of  the  Nuba
    Mountains.  She said that:

         "As long  as  there  is  no  comprehensive  peace  settlement  that
         addresses the root causes of Sudan's internal conflicts,  the  Nuba
         will continue to be regarded with suspicion by the  authorities  as
         likely political opponents and will remain  at  risk  of  arbitrary
         arrest and detention by Sudan's powerful National Intelligence  and
         Security  Service  (NISS),  particularly  at  times  of  heightened
         political tension."

 7. She stated that Sudan's National  Security  Act  allowed  the  NISS  to
    detain people for up to four and  a  half  months  without  charge,  in
    violation of international law.  There were numerous reports of torture
    and ill-treatment in NISS detention centres.

 8. Foreseeing,  in  effect,  the  political  developments  in  2019,  Dame
    Rosalind added:

         "In addition to the risks already facing the Nuba community because
         of the association with the conflicting Southern  Kordofan  in  the
         Blue Nile, Sudan is currently going through a period of  heightened
         political  tension  because  of  widespread   protests   over   the
         government's austerity measures and a sharp increase in  the  price
         of food and necessities since early January 2018.   The  government
         has responded to the protest by arresting  hundreds  of  opposition
         politicians, activists and ordinary civilians,  including  some  of
         the Nuba community.  These protests are  expected  to  continue  as
         there are no signs of any solutions of Sudan's economic crisis."

 9. In her  report,  Dame  Rosalind  stated  that  a  number  of  forms  of
    discrimination are suffered by the  Nuba  in  Sudan  including  racial,
    linguistic,   cultural,   social   and    economic,    and    religious
    discrimination.  As regards  the  so-called  'Black  Belt'  in  Greater
    Khartoum where most of the Nuba live in  impoverished  conditions,  she
    stated that was

         "kept under close surveillance by Sudanese  National  Security  and
         Intelligence Services (NISS) because the communities who live there
         are considered to pose a potential  security  threat  on  political
         grounds".

10. In the final paragraph of her report,  Dame  Rosalind  dealt  with  the
    forced return of Nuba asylum seekers.  She referred to what was said by
    a Nuba organisation in the UK.  She said this:

           "[m]embers of the Nuba Solidarity Committee in the UK say  that,
           if failed Nuba asylum seekers were to be returned to Sudan, they
           may not  face  problems  immediately  on  their  return  as  the
           Government knows that their treatment is likely to be monitored.
            But over time there is a significant risk that they  and  their
           families will be harassed by  the  security  service,  including
           being interrogated  by  NISS  about  the  diaspora  in  the  UK,
           detailed or even targeted in a 'traffic accident'."

    2. Oral Evidence (31 May 2018)

11. In her oral evidence at the first hearing on 31 May/1 June  2018,  Dame
    Rosalind stated that dark-skin colour could lead to an assumption  that
    a person is Nuba, Darfuri or from the Blue Nile and  failing  that,  an
    identity card would record information as to the  tribal  origin.   She
    said that the Nuba tribes had faced a  history  of  discrimination  and
    marginalisation.  In particular, the Nuba  had  been  involved  in  the
    civil war and also in the conflict in South Kordofan since  June  2011.
    She said that not all Nuba would be suspected of supporting the  SPLM-N
    but there might be  an  assumption  that  an  educated  Nuba  would  be
    sympathetic to its cause.  There would be a greater problem at times of
    conflict and tension.

12. Dame Rosalind said that there was a  similarity  between  Darfuris  and
    Nuba in that both groups are perceived  to  be  sympathisers  of  armed
    movements.

13. Dame Rosalind said that  the  2011  attacks  in  the  Nuba  areas  were
    triggered by the election and could be compared to the earlier violence
    against Darfuris  in  that  they  amounted  to  deliberate  attacks  on
    civilians.  The current cessation of hostilities was  holding  but  had
    not held entirely.  Whilst there were no longer aerial bombardments  in
    Nuba  areas,  pro-government  militia  remained  active  and   it   was
    considered hostilities could be  renewed  at  any  time.   Indeed,  the
    government had withheld humanitarian aid from the Nuba Mountains  as  a
    means of waging  war  in  the  area.   She  said  that  the  government
    considered the advances made on Khartoum in 2013 by  the  JEM  and  the
    SPLM-N as humiliations to the regime and they had  led  to  a  wave  of
    arrests.

14. Dame Rosalind stated that there was currently (May/June 2018)  a  state
    of political tension in Sudan and the lack of any  comprehensive  peace
    agreement had created a background of suspicion.  Whilst there remained
    no peace agreement, Nuba  ethnicity  constituted  a  high-risk  factor.
    Furthermore, the economy had declined and there had  been  protests  in
    January 2018.

15. Dame Rosalind stated that the Nuba in Khartoum live in shanty towns  in
    an area called 'Black Belt' which she had visited during the  elections
    in 2010.  She stated that there were no services  in  this  area  which
    comprised mud huts and had no  fences.   She  said  there  was  a  very
    serious humanitarian situation for the Nuba  in  their  home  area  and
    there was a continuing flow of Nuba to refugee camps.

16. Dame Rosalind stated that Nuba as a group might join protests  and  are
    kept under surveillance.  Nuba returning from  overseas  may  not  face
    difficulty at the airport but the government are aware of the potential
    for monitoring on return.  She stated that the security services  might
    let the "dust settle" and detain individuals once they had passed  from
    the airport into the city.

17. Dame Rosalind expressed the view that the appellant's  risk  on  return
    would not be reduced by the fact that he lived  in  Omdurman  prior  to
    leaving Sudan.  He would be seen primarily as Nuba and as a member of a
    group which is perceived as hostile to the regime.  She stated that the
    NISS paid close attention to this group.  The NISS are powerful  within
    Sudan and there were numerous reports of abuse.  She said that the NISS
    was active throughout the country and acted with impunity.

18. In cross-examination, Dame Rosalind stated that the cease-fire in South
    Kordofan in 2016 was agreed with (then) President  Obama  and  that  US
    sanctions were lifted thereafter.  She said that the  area  bombardment
    in South Kordofan had  stopped  but  that  there  remained  attacks  on
    civilians.  It was a unilateral  cessation  of  hostilities  which  was
    renewed every few months.

19. Dame Rosalind stated that the lifting  of  economic  sanctions  was  an
    incentive to maintain cessation of hostilities, as was it important  to
    be removed from the US list of state sponsors of terror.  However,  the
    political situation was more precarious than it had been  because  when
    sanctions were lifted; the off-and-on situation in Sudan, in  fact,  in
    October 2017 deteriorated with high inflation.  The economic  situation
    was extremely serious.  She pointed out that it was unclear whether the
    Sudanese government would be prepared to accept any conditions from the
    international community and that  President  al-Bashir  had  asked  the
    Russian government for protection from the effects of the US sanctions.

20. Dame Rosalind said that the Nuba population in Greater Khartoum must be
    in the 100,000s.  She accepted that it would not be  feasible  for  the
    NISS to monitor the  whole  of  the  population.    She  accepted  that
    monitoring would be  targeting  particular  Nuba  leaders  and  that  a
    returned asylum seeker would not, without more, be on a list  of  those
    of interest.  She accepted that the focus would  be  on  those  with  a
    profile and that those returned asylum seekers  might  fall  into  that
    category.  She noted that the NISS focused upon  those  who  were  more
    highly educated and activists.

21. Whilst Dame Rosalind said that Sudanese law  prohibited  discrimination
    on grounds of ethnicity, she also said that the application of the  law
    in practice was different.  Educational  opportunities  were  poor  and
    educational provision was low and privatisation of health provision had
    made access to health services more difficult  particularly  for  those
    living in the 'Black Belt'.  She said that  in  principle  an  ID  card
    would be available  whatever  an  individual's  ethnic  background  but
    stated that the problem was that those from the  peripheral  areas  did
    not have a birth certificate and could  not  obtain  the  documentation
    from a tribal area if they were from conflict areas  to  obtain  an  ID
    card.  It was more  likely  that  an  individual  would  not  have  the
    necessary documents if they were displaced.

22. In relation to South Kordofan, Dame Rosalind said that education in the
    Nuba Mountains was extremely poor.  The level  of  education  was  low.
    She was unaware of a university in South Kordofan.  She  accepted  that
    education was more broadly available  in  Khartoum.   She  was  unaware
    whether there were Nuba students in the university in Khartoum but  she
    was aware of a Nuba students' association but she could not comment  on
    the number of students.  She said that there was no formal bar to  Nuba
    students going to university.

23. As regard Christian worship in Khartoum, she said that there had been a
    decrease since the creation of South  Sudan  and  many  Christians  had
    left.  She was unaware of the numbers of Christian schools in Khartoum.

24. As regards the perception of Darfuri and Nuba students,  Dame  Rosalind
    stated that students as a group were vulnerable to  detention  but  the
    Darfuri students seemed to be more subject to arrest and ill-treatment.
     They were more  politicised  and  there  was  stronger  support  among
    Darfuri students in Khartoum.

25. As regard recent (i.e. up to May/June 2018) unrest  in  Khartoum,  Dame
    Rosalind had no specific knowledge that Nuba were  targeted.   She  was
    unable to comment on individual incidences of alleged arrest on return.
     She was unaware of precisely how many individuals had  been  detained.
    Those detained in January and February - some 200 or so  activists  and
    others - had all been released.  It had been reported, she  said,  that
    several hundreds of Darfuris were arrested  during  that  period.   She
    observed that some may  not  have  been  detained  but  may  have  been
    required to report to the NISS.  The numbers  who  were  detained  were
    "not huge".  She said that a returning Nuba asylum  seeker  would  come
    under "suspicion on return".




    3. "Comments on  the  Home  Office  Fact-finding  Mission  Report"  (28
    January 2019)

26. Following the publication of the  F-FR  2018  in  November  2018,  Dame
    Rosalind produced a response in writing to that report.  The report was
    mainly concerned with the position of non-Arab Darfuris.  However, Dame
    Rosalind commented in her  evidence  that  the  report,  in  her  view,
    acknowledged the similarity in perception of  the  two  groups  by  the
    authorities, in  their  respective  perceived  allegiances  with  rebel
    groups.  At para 5 of her response, Dame Rosalind said this:

         "Although the FFM report is focused on the  circumstances  of  non-
         Arab Darfuris and does not specifically address those of the  Nuba,
         several sources quoted in the report draw attention to  the  strong
         read across between the situation of Sudanese of Nuba  and  Darfuri
         ethnicity because both are presumed by the Government of  Sudan  to
         be supporters or sympathisers  of  the  armed  movements  in  their
         respective conflict zones - Nuba  Mountains/Southern  Kordofan  and
         Blue Nile States (also known as the Two Areas) and  Darfur  (3.2.6;
         3.2.10),  In the  case  of  the  Nuba,  they  are  presumed  to  be
         supportive  of  the  Sudan   People's   Liberation   Movement/North
         (SPLM/N).  As long as the conflict in the Two Areas is not resolved
         and the SPLM/N is seen to pose a political and security  threat  to
         the regime, this perception is likely to continue in the  minds  of
         the Sudanese authorities."

27. In her response, Dame Rosalind commented on the eight-year conflict  in
    South Kordofan and the progress in peace talks, in  particular  in  the
    light of the demands of the SPLM-N faction led by al Hilu.  At  para  8
    she said this:

         "There has been no  significant  progress  in  the  African  Union-
         mediated peace talks between the Government of Sudan and the SPLM/N
         to end the conflict.  The SPLM/N suffered  a  leadership  split  in
         2017 and divided into two factions, the larger  one  led  by  Abdul
         Aziz Al Hilu which controls the Nuba  Mountains  and  the  southern
         part of Blue Nile state and the smaller faction led by  Malik  Agar
         which controls the Ingessena Hills in Blue Nile.   Abdel  Aziz  has
         adopted a harder negotiating  position  than  Malik  Agar  and  his
         demands for self-determination, retention of his army for 20  years
         and the creation of a secular Sudan with the  abolition  of  sharia
         law  have  proved  unacceptable  to  the  Government.   Talks  over
         humanitarian access to the SPLM/N-controlled areas, remain  stalled
         over Abdel Aziz's insistence on cross-border, not just  cross-line,
         access."

28. Dame Rosalind acknowledged that the F-FR 2018 had been written prior to
    the political development beginning in December 2018.  At paras  10-11,
    Dame Rosalind said that the protests had begun in mid-December and  the
    government had responded to them with "predictable brutality":

         "10. Though initially sparked by spiralling food  prices  and  fuel
             shortages,  the  protests  were  not  "bread  riots"  but  the
             culmination  of  three   decades   of   repression,   poverty,
             unemployment, institutionalised corruption and atrocity crimes
             in Darfur, the Nuba Mountains/Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile.
              They  quickly  assumed  a  strong  political  dimension  with
             protestors calling for the end of Bashir and his regime.   The
             protests have  been  led  by  a  coalition  of  young  people,
             professionals, civil society and opposition political parties.
              All segments of society are involved but young people are the
             most visible out  on  the  streets.   They  feel  a  sense  of
             hopelessness because of lack of employment  opportunities  and
             the erosion of living  standards  caused  by  hyper-inflation.
             Women, who have also been at the forefront  of  the  protests,
             are angry about decades of harassment and humiliation  by  the
             public order police.  Even sons and daughters  of  the  ruling
             party  have  joined  the  demonstrations.   While  no   single
             political organisation dominates the  protests,  the  Sudanese
             Professionals Association, and  particularly  the  independent
             doctors syndicate, have been  prominent  in  coordinating  the
             protests.  Opposition parties and  coalitions,  which  have  a
             long history of internal divisions, have  finally  managed  to
             pull together and coordinate with other  social  forces.   The
             protests have now entered their second month and are  steadily
             gaining momentum  with  increasing  numbers  and  geographical
             spread.  Given the scale and breadth of  the  protests,  which
             started in mid-December, these constitute the  most  sustained
             popular challenge faced by the Bashir regime since it came  to
             power in 1989.

         11.  The Government has responded to the protests with  predictable
             brutality, using  beatings,  tear-gas,  large-scale  arbitrary
             arrests, torture, extra-judicial killings and the use of  live
             ammunition against unarmed protestors.  Over 50 protestors are
             reported to have been killed and hundreds injured.   A  number
             of victims have been shot in the head or chest  by  government
             snipers or have died from torture in  NISS  detention.   There
             has also been  a  campaign  of  mass  arrests  with  thousands
             detained.  Journalists, activists and especially doctors  have
             been targeted.  Hundreds of videos and photographs showing the
             injuries of  the  victims  and  the  brutality  of  government
             security forces are circulating on social media."


29. At paras 13-14, Dame Rosalind commented on the impact of the  political
    turmoil for those of Nuba ethnicity, including the "increased suspicion
    by the government" that those of Nuba ethnicity are presumed supporters
    of the SPLM-N insurgency in the Nuba Mountains.   At  paras  13-14  she
    said this:

         "13. All Sudan's opposition groups have come out in support of  the
             protests, including the two SPLM/N factions  led  respectively
             by Abdul Aziz Al Hilu and Malik Agar, who have  both  publicly
             encouraged their supporters to join the protests across Sudan.
               There  have  been  a  number  of  protests  in  the   poorer
             neighbourhoods of Khartoum where Sudanese  of  both  Nuba  and
             Darfuri ethnicity tend to be concentrated.   There  have  also
             been solidarity protests in Kauda, the  SPLM-N  stronghold  in
             the Nuba Mountains.  SPLM/N supporters and activists have also
             been  arrested  in  the  government-controlled  area  of  Nuba
             Mountains/Southern  Kordofan,  including  pre-emptive  arrests
             prior to a visit by President Bashir to the area on 28 January
             2019.

         14.  This means that failed asylum seekers of  Nuba  ethnicity  are
             likely to be viewed with increased suspicion by the Government
             of Sudan  not  only  as  presumed  supporters  of  the  SPLM/N
             insurgency  in  the  Nuba  Mountains  but  also  as  potential
             participants in country-wide protests to topple the regime."

30. At paras 15-21, Dame Rosalind  dealt  with  the  position  of  Nuba  in
    Greater Khartoum:

         "The Nuba living in the shanty towns of Khartoum  suffer  the  same
         hardships as Darfuris, plus additional discrimination on  religious
         grounds".

31. She continued:

         "15. The  FFM  report  mentions  the  presence  of  Nuba  alongside
             Darfuris in the shanty towns around the Khartoum  metropolitan
             area (which includes the three  towns  of  Khartoum,  Khartoum
             North and Omdurman).  The authors of the FFM report  conducted
             all their interviews inside the British  Embassy  in  Khartoum
             and did not visit the "Black Belt" areas to see for themselves
             the conditions in which most Darfuris and Nuba live.  But some
             of their interviewees noted that the various kinds  of  social
             and economic discrimination suffered by Darfuris living in the
             so-called "Black Belt", particularly  lack  of  basic  rights,
             including access to water, education  and  health  facilities,
             apply equally to the Nuba.  Saleh Mahmoud,  the  human  rights
             defender, noted that Darfuris and Nuba living  in  the  shanty
             towns were often  forcibly  evicted  (3.5.8).   The  political
             scientist observed that government security agencies  regarded
             these areas as sleeping cells for rebels and that there was  a
             large NISS presence in  these  areas  (3.2.7).   Some  of  the
             interviewees   thought   that   the   Nuba   suffered    worse
             discrimination  than  the  Darfuris.   The  Second   Secretary
             Political at the British Embassy said that  that  "Arabs  look
             down upon the Nuba and people from South Sudan" (3.2.11).  The
             civil society activist thought that Darfuris did  better  than
             the Nuba in terms of socio-economics.  "Nuba IDP families rely
             on income generated by their  children  collecting  recyclable
             items to sell from rubbish dumps" (3.5.5).

         16.  Unlike Darfuris, who are nearly all Muslims, many Nuba  suffer
             further discrimination as a result of  being  Christian.   The
             Government continues to restrict religious freedom and  belief
             by  demolishing  churches,  interfering  in  internal   Church
             affairs and making Christian schools open on  Sundays.   Sudan
             has been identified as a "Country of  Particular  Concern"  in
             the US State Department's latest report to Religious Freedom.

         17.  As is the case with Darfuris, there are  some  Nuba  who  hold
             government or military positions in Khartoum.   But  the  Nuba
             who occupy these positions  are  either  associated  with  the
             National Congress Party or have been deliberately co-opted  by
             the  Government  with  jobs,  privileges  and  money  and  are
             despised by their own community."

32. Dame Rosalind said that, in her view, the  F-FR  2018  understated  the
    gravity  of  the  situation  in  Sudan.   She  stated  that  there  was
    insufficient appreciation of the heavy presence  of  the  NISS  at  the
    airport and the fact

         "that failed asylum-seekers, who are  returned  with  escorts,  are
         effectively handed over to NISS, a  body  with  an  extremely  poor
         human rights record".

33. She did, however, accept the proposition put  forward  by  one  of  the
    respondent's  interlocutors  in  the  report  that  the  human   rights
    environment in Khartoum was more benign  than  in  the  past  and  that
    people could talk openly about politics.

34. At paras 22-25, Dame  Rosalind  set  out  what  she  called  the  "risk
    categories" in relation to failed asylum seekers and Nuba on return and
    expressed the view that, as of January 2019, a failed asylum seeker  of
    Nuba ethnicity would be at risk of  ill-treatment  because  of  imputed
    political opinion.  She relied, in part, on what she had been  told  by
    others:

         "Risk categories

         22.  I have been told by an eminent Sudanese human rights lawyer to
             whom I spoke in the context of  the  Darfur  Country  Guidance
             Case that the fact of being a failed Sudanese asylum seeker in
             itself  creates  a  negative  profile  in  the  eyes  of   the
             Government because seeking asylum is  regarded  as  a  hostile
             political act.   This  view  was  also  expressed  by  several
             Sudanese interviewees quoted in the FFM report including Saleh
             Osman from the Darfur Bar Association and  the  civil  society
             activist (6.3.4 and 6.3.6).  Western Embassy officials and the
             IOM representative, on the other hand, generally  agreed  with
             the assessment of risk in the  Home  Office's  Sudan:  Country
             Policy Information Note,  Unsuccessful  Asylum  Seekers,  July
             2018.  The possible reasons for this divergence of opinion  is
             addressed in para 28 below.

         23.  In my view, it is likely that a failed asylum seeker from  the
             UK would be regarded with greater suspicion  than  a  returnee
             from a neighbouring country because the Sudanese  diaspora  in
             the  UK  are  heavily  engaged  in  opposition  activity,   as
             evidenced   by   the   large   number    of    anti-government
             demonstrations held in cities across the UK in the  last  five
             weeks in support of the popular uprising in Sudan.

         24.  If a failed asylum seeker is also of Nuba ethnicity,  this  is
             sufficient to  create  a  significant  risk  of  ill-treatment
             because of presumed association with the SPLM/N, regardless of
             whether this is true or  not.   Other  factors  that  may  add
             further to the risk include:

                  .    evidence of actual  opposition  activity  either  in-
                    country or sur place.  NISS  officers  in  the  Sudanese
                    Embassy in the UK go to great  lengths  to  monitor  the
                    political activities of the diaspora through  a  network
                    of informers;

                  .    membership of the professional classes.   Members  of
                    the professional classes played a major role in the 1964
                    and 1985 uprisings and are doing so again in the current
                    uprising

                  .    a profile as a human rights defender of activist

                  .    a profile as a blogger/social media  activist.   NISS
                    have a special unit which monitors social media  closely
                    for any sign of political  dissent.   Khartoum  has  now
                    extended its reach by asking the  security  services  in
                    neighbouring countries to deport Sudanese activists, who
                    have then been detained on their return to Sudan.

                  .    a young male of military age

                  .    a student.  The  "jihadi"  student  brigades  of  the
                    ruling National Congress Party target Nuba  as  well  as
                    Darfuri students in the universities because of presumed
                    affiliation with the opposition and suspicion that those
                    with an education could become activists  and  community
                    leaders.

             The criteria mentioned above are additional risk  factors  but
             the way  in  which  NISS  operates  is  arbitrary  and  it  is
             therefore difficult to predict precisely who they will target.

         25.  Once in detention, detainees with a media or political profile
             or who come from well-known families are likely to be  treated
             more favourably than lower profile individuals  who  are  more
             likely to be abused or tortured in prison.  For example, Saleh
             Mahmoud, the well-known human rights defender, recounted  that
             when he was  detained  in  February-April  2018,  he  was  not
             physically tortured but he was forced to witness  the  beating
             of other young detainees (3.3.1).  The civil society  activist
             also noted that, if he was arrested, he would be probably  not
             be mistreated because  he  was  a  high-profile  human  rights
             activist and his case would attract media attention  from  the
             international human rights community which was unwanted by the
             Sudanese authorities.  "But for other Darfuris, when arrested,
             there is no  press  release,  no  one  to  make  a  noise  and
             intervene" (6.3.6).  This distinction would also apply to Nuba
             detainees."

35. In relation to the monitoring of failed asylum seekers,  she  disagreed
    (at paras 26-27) with the F-FR 2018's view that failed  asylum  seekers
    were not likely to face ill-treatment on return in the following terms:

         "Monitoring of failed asylum-seekers after their return

         26.  There is a marked contrast between the views  express  by  the
             majority of Sudanese civil society representatives interviewed
             by the FFM team and those of Western  Embassies  and  the  IOM
             representative on  the  other  as  to  whether  failed  asylum
             seekers were likely to face ill-treatment on return.  Most  of
             the Sudanese civil society representatives said they had heard
             about problems for individuals returned  to  Sudan,  including
             arrest, detention and ill-treatment or  considered  it  likely
             that returnees might  experience  difficulties  (6.3.4-6.3.9).
             Amjed Farid al Tayeb said that he had personally met returnees
             who had been ill-treated, namely two from Jordan in  2015  and
             one from Belgium in April 2018.  Dr Ahmed  Eltoum  Salim  drew
             attention to an article in the New York Times on 22 April 2018
             by Patrick Kingsley (6.3.22),  who  said  he  had  interviewed
             seven recently returned asylum seekers, four of  whom  claimed
             to have been tortured.  The article documented the case  of  a
             Darfuri political dissident returned from France in late 2017,
             who said he had been detained by NISS on arrival  at  Khartoum
             airport and tortured with beatings and  electric  shocks  over
             ten days and had had to  be  hospitalised.   However,  Western
             Embassy officials and the IOM  representative  all  said  that
             they were not aware of  verified  cases  of  ill-treatment  of
             returnees.

         27.  The methodology adopted by the FFM report is to quote excerpts
             from the interviews and correspondence conducted with  the  20
             sources listed in Annex C of the report.   The  report  relies
             solely on these 20 sources and does  not  draw  on  any  other
             material.  Where the opinions expressed  by  interviewees  are
             contradictory, the report  does  not  attempt  to  explain  or
             reconcile the differences.  Nor does it express  any  judgment
             as to which opinions are well-founded or attempt to  draw  any
             final conclusions.

         28.  Nevertheless, it is clear from  the  interviews  that  certain
             caveats should be applied in assessing the opinions  expressed
             by some interviewees.   There  appears  to  be  no  systematic
             mechanism in place for  monitoring  the  treatment  of  failed
             asylum seekers after their return.  This  applies  to  Western
             Embassies and the IOM as well as  to  Sudanese  civil  society
             organisations...."

36. Dame Rosalind went on in para 28 to  state  that  the  UNHCR,  IOC  and
    Western Embassies did not monitor or follow-up returned asylum  seekers
    to Sudan. Further, at para 29, Dame Rosalind said that the  authors  of
    the F-FR 208 had not consulted Amnesty International who had been  able
    to follow up on the treatment of some failed asylum seekers and:

           "have found evidence of ill-treatment in  some  cases,  although
           they told me that its is a mixed picture and that  it  is  often
           difficult to track down failed asylum seekers to  monitor  their
           post-deportation experience because they are so traumatised  and
           paranoid that they do not want to speak to anyone."

37. At paras 30-32 of her report, Dame Rosalind set out her conclusions  in
    the light of the F-FR 2018 including her view that the Nuba were likely
    to be  targeted  in  Khartoum  because  of  their  perceived  political
    affiliation with armed rebel movements and that failed  asylum  seekers
    of Nuba ethnicity, on return were likely to be at risk of ill-treatment
    because of their ethnicity and, again, their perceived affiliation with
    armed rebel movements.  The suspicion which fell upon them was, in  her
    view, likely to continue as long as the internal  conflicts  in  Darfur
    and in the  Two  Areas  were  not  resolved.   She  also  identified  a
    "significant additional risk" as  being  a  "potential  participant  in
    country-wide protests at the top of a regime".   At  paras  30-32  Dame
    Rosalind said this:

         "Conclusion

         30.  Although the FFM report is focused  on  gathering  information
             about  the  circumstances  of  non-Arab  Darfuris  in   Sudan,
             interviewees quoted in the report draw many parallels with the
             circumstances of the Nuba,  who  have  also  suffered  extreme
             violence at the hands of government  forces  and  militias  in
             their home areas and are targeted by the Sudanese  authorities
             in Khartoum because of their perceived  political  affiliation
             with armed rebel movements.  Indeed, several interviewees  say
             that discrimination  against  the  Nuba  is  worse  than  that
             against Darfuris.  However, those who  researched  the  report
             conducted all their  interviews  in  the  British  Embassy  in
             Khartoum and did not visit the "Black Belt" to collect  first-
             hand evidence of the living conditions of  many  Darfuris  and
             Nuba in Khartoum.  The report also downplays  the  gravity  of
             the human rights situation in Sudan and particularly the  role
             of NISS in this regard.

         31.  The other aim of the FFM  report  was  to  gather  information
             about the treatment of returnees generally.  It quotes various
             sources in Western Embassies and IOM who say that they are not
             aware of information indicating  that  failed  asylum  seekers
             have been ill-treated after their return but, in  the  absence
             of  any  systematic  monitoring  mechanism,  this   does   not
             necessarily prove that no such incidents take place.  Nor  did
             the authors of the report appear to have  interviewed  Amnesty
             whose  reports  do  contain  evidence  of   ill-treatment   of
             returnees.

         32.  Like non-Arab Darfuris, failed Sudanese asylum seekers of Nuba
             ethnicity are likely to be at risk  of  ill-treatment  on  the
             grounds of their ethnicity  if  they  are  returned  to  Sudan
             because of the associated presumption  in  the  Government  of
             Sudan's  mind  of  political  affiliation   to   armed   rebel
             movements.  This suspicion is likely to continue  as  long  as
             Sudan's internal conflicts in Darfur and the Two Areas are not
             resolved.  If a failed asylum-seeker falls into one  or  other
             risk categories, the risk is increased, irrespective of  their
             tribal origin.  However, the way in  which  NISS  operates  is
             arbitrary.  There is now  a  significant  additional  risk  of
             being  viewed  as  a  potential  participant  in  country-wide
             protests to topple the regime.  Given the  current  government
             crackdown and the prospect of continued political instability,
             it would not be appropriate to return failed  Sudanese  asylum
             seekers of Nuba  ethnicity  to  Khartoum  in  a  situation  of
             heightened political tension."

    4. "Report on the current political situation in Sudan  and  the  risks
    involved in returning failed Nuba asylum seekers to Sudan"  (27  August
    2019)

38. Dame Rosalind produced two written reports for the October 2019 hearing
    dated 27 August and 17 October 2019 in which  she  commented  upon  the
    situation in Sudan.  These are important  as  they  provide  up-to-date
    evidence about the situation in Sudan following the fall  of  al-Bashir
    and the political developments that have followed.  At para  5  of  her
    report dated 27 August 2019, Dame Rosalind set out the post-April  2019
    situation following  the  overthrow  of  the  regime  of  al-Bashir  as
    follows:

         "On 11 April 2019 - after four months of nation-wide  pro-democracy
         peaceful protests - Sudan's former President, Omar al  Bashir,  was
         overthrown by a group of senior military and security officers from
         his own Security Committee,  who  formed  a  Transitional  Military
         Council (TMC).  The TMC embarked on negotiations  with  Forces  for
         Freedom and Change (FFC), a pro-democracy coalition  of  opposition
         political forces, professionals and other civil society actors, but
         conducted a brutal crackdown on protesters in Khartoum on  3  June,
         followed by  other  incidents  of  violence.   Nevertheless,  under
         intense external pressure, the TMC signed a power-sharing agreement
         with the FFC on 17 August to form a transitional government with an
         independent civilian Prime Minister."

39. Annexed to her report is the political agreement of 17  July  2019  and
    the constitutional  declaration  of  4  August  2019  setting  out  the
    arrangements for the transitional government.


40. At para 6 of her report Dame Rosalind set out the potential dangers for
    the future noting the "fragility of the situation" and that it was  too
    early to predict where Sudan was heading and whether  it  was  safe  to
    return asylum seekers of Nuba ethnic origin.  At para 7-9 Dame Rosalind
    said this about the nature of  the  power  sharing  agreement  and  new
    transitional government:

         "The power-sharing agreement and the new transitional government
         7.   Mediated by the African Union and Ethiopia, the deal  provides
             for a transitional period of three years and three  months  to
             prepare for national elections in 2022.  During  this  period,
             the government will be composed of three transitional  bodies:
             a  joint  military/civilian  Sovereign  Council  acting  as  a
             collective Head of State, with six civilian and five  military
             members, to be chaired for the first 21 months by  a  military
             representative and for the last 18 months  by  a  civilian;  a
             civilian  Prime  Minister  and  Cabinet  largely  composed  of
             technocrats;;  and  a  Legislative  Council,  responsible  for
             legislation and oversight  of  the  executive,  to  be  formed
             within 90 days.  The Members of the Sovereign Council and  the
             Cabinet in the transitional government will not be eligible to
             stand in the 2022 elections but this bar  does  not  apply  to
             members of the Legislative Council.
         8.   The powers and responsibilities of the three  bodies  are  set
             out in a political agreement (initialled on  17  July)  and  a
             constitutional declaration (initialled on 4 August) which were
             formally signed in Khartoum on 17 August in  the  presence  of
             international and regional dignitaries.  The TMC was dissolved
             and the Sovereign Council appointed on 21 August, with General
             Abdel Fatah Burhan, an army officer and the former head of the
             TMC, as chair.  Abdallah Hamdok, an experienced and  respected
             economist, who served until  last  year  as  Deputy  Executive
             Secretary of the UN Economic Commission for Africa,  has  also
             been sworn in  as  Prime  Minister  and  his  new  Cabinet  is
             expected to be announced on 28 August.
         9.   The next steps in forming the transitional government will  be
             the appointment of 11 Independent Commissions (responsible for
             Peace,  Elections,  Borders,  Constitutional  Drafting,  Legal
             Reform.  Anti-Corruption  and  Public  Funds  Recovery,  Human
             Rights, Civil Service Reform, Land, Transitional  Justice  and
             Women  and  Gender  Equality);  and  the  formation   of   the
             Legislative Council by mid-November. "

41. At paras 10-11, Dame  Rosalind  set  out  the  background  to  how  the
    agreement was reached between the TMC and the FFC following the violent
    crackdown on 3 June 2019:

         "How was the agreement reached?
         10.  The TMC realised the limits of its power when its  attempt  to
             halt the revolution by forcibly dismantling the  protest  site
             in  Khartoum  on  3  June  backfired,  sparking  international
             outrage (see below).  Defiant protestors turned out  in  large
             numbers on  3  June  to  demonstrate  their  determination  to
             sustain the revolution and the FFC's ability to mobilise  mass
             support. Strong international pressure for the rapid formation
             of a civilian-led  transitional  authority,  US/UK  diplomatic
             intervention with the TMC's backers, Saudi Arabia, the UAE and
             Egypt, and a coup attempt  by  counter-revolutionary  Islamist
             forces may all have persuaded the TMC that they had to  strike
             a deal with the pro-democracy movement.
         11.  In the opposition camp, the  FFC  concluded  that,  given  the
             power imbalance between the military and unarmed civilians,  a
             compromise was needed in order  to  establish  a  transitional
             government, however imperfect, so that  civilians  could  push
             their  reform  agenda  from  inside  government  and  avoid  a
             political  vacuum,  which  could  leave  room   for   counter-
             revolutionary coups or escalating  violence  by  Sudan's  many
             security forces."

42. At para 12, Dame Rosalind sets out  the  "balance"  between  civil  and
    military on the SC:

         "12.      The  agreement  is  a  step  forward  but  still   leaves
              considerable  power  in  the  hands  of  the  military.  Some
              opposition forces have criticised the agreement for being too
              weak, particularly as the military will chair  the  Sovereign
              Council for the first 21 months and will be able to veto  its
              decisions, since, in the absence of consensus, decisions will
              require a two thirds majority. They  will  also  be  able  to
              nominate the Ministers of Interior and Defence.  On the other
              hand, FFC negotiators point to gains made during negotiations
              on the constitutional declaration such as  confirmation  that
              the FFC will have 67 per cent of the seats in the Legislative
              Council, the paramilitary Rapid  Support  Forces  (RSF)  will
              come under at  least  nominal  army  control  and  government
              officials will not enjoy blanket immunity from  prosecution."



43. At paras 13-15, Dame Rosalind commented on the  challenges  facing  the
    FFC and their future impact on political developments:

         "Divisions within the FFC

         13.  But political dynamics will matter more than pieces of  paper.
             The unity of FFC forces has been strained by  the  negotiation
             process, continuing street violence  and  internal  bickering.
             The Sudanese Communist Party, which is a member  of  the  FFC,
             has been particularly critical of the power-sharing agreement.
             If civilian authority is to prevail, it will be important  for
             the FFC to maintain a united political front  to  ensure  that
             the new government delivers on its reform programme.  Most  of
             the  civilians  in  the  new  government  are  likely  to   be
             politically inexperienced technocrats.  Reports  of  divisions
             within the FFC risk fracturing the protest movement, providing
             an opportunity for the military to exploit the  situation  and
             scuttle a transition to democracy.
         14.  While civilian rule and civic rights are the main  demands  of
             protestors in urban areas, Sudanese living in  conflict  zones
             attach more importance  to  achieving  peace  and  ending  the
             marginalisation of Sudan's peripheries. The armed movements in
             the Sudan Revolutionary Front (SRF), which  fought  for  years
             against  Bashir's  regime,  have  stressed  that   peace   and
             democratisation must go hand in hand if the revolution  is  to
             enable people in the peripheries to become equal citizens  and
             take full part in national elections - putting an end to long-
             established forms of governance which  favoured  a  privileged
             political elite in Khartoum.  The TMC and FFC have agreed that
             achieving a  comprehensive  peace  settlement  should  be  the
             priority for the first six months of the transitional  period.
             The  constitutional declaration includes a peace agenda  drawn
             from a roadmap for peace  agreed  by  the  SRF  and  some  FFC
             elements in Addis Ababa in late July,  although  the  SRF  are
             angry that other key sections  of  the  Addis  agreement  were
             omitted  and  have  complained  that  the  interests  of   the
             marginalised areas  have  been  side-lined  by  the  allegedly
             Khartoum-centric   approach   of    the    FFC    negotiators.
             Nevertheless, the SRF are preparing to start  negotiations  as
             soon as the Peace Commission is formed.  It is less clear when
             the other armed movements -  the  SPLM/North  faction  led  by
             Abdel Aziz al Hilu and the Sudan Liberation  Movement  led  by
             Abdel Wahid Nour - will be ready to negotiate.
         15.  Another challenge will be to ensure proper  representation  of
             youth and women in the new governance structures. These groups
             were the driving force of the revolution but have been largely
             excluded from FFC decision-making bodies.  Including these new
             social  forces  and  other  marginalised  groups  in  the  new
             governance structures will be crucial if Sudan is to transform
             established patterns  of  power  and  privilege  and  the  new
             government is to retain the support of the streets."

44. At paras 16-27, Dame Rosalind deals with a number of  features  of  the
    current position relevant to whether real change has taken  place,  and
    will continue, in Sudan  dealing  with  "potential  spoilers"  and  the
    challenge of dismantling the Islamic "deep state"  and  the  continuing
    role of the NISS, now re-named the GIS:

         "Potential spoilers
         16.  There is concern among some activists that the  TMC  might  be
             reluctant to hand  over  the  chairmanship  of  the  Sovereign
             Council after 21 months and could be  tempted  to  engineer  a
             crisis that would provide a  pretext  for  claiming  that  the
             military need to take over the government in order to  prevent
             chaos.  Alternatively, they might simply "let  the  government
             fail" i.e. wait until popular discontent grows  because  there
             is no immediate  improvement  in  basic  services  and  living
             standards and then use this as an excuse to take control.
         17.   Insecurity  could  also  arise  from  divisions  amongst  the
             security  forces.   While  the  opposition  may  struggle   to
             maintain its unity, the military also face  divisions.   Among
             the  Sudanese  Armed  Forces  (SAF),   there   is   reportedly
             widespread resentment of the RSF as an ill-disciplined militia
             who are paid far more generously than their SAF  counterparts.
             There is also resentment  among  SAF  officers  that  the  RSF
             commander, General Mohamed  Hamdan  Dagalo  (widely  known  as
             Hemeti) enjoys such a senior  position  despite  never  having
             graduated from the  military  academy  (or  indeed  even  from
             primary school).  Hemeti, a 45-year-old  camel  trader  turned
             militia commander, has emerged as the  most  powerful  man  in
             Sudan, even more than General Burhan, who actually chairs  the
             Sovereign Council.
         18.  Many in the protest movement are afraid that Hemeti might make
             a move to take over the country. He controls tens of thousands
             of paramilitary forces, who were originally recruited from the
             Janjaweed nomadic Arab tribes mobilised by the  Bashir  regime
             to  put  down  rebellion  in  Darfur  in   2003-4   and   were
             subsequently rebranded in 2013 as the  Rapid  Support  Forces.
             Rights  groups  say  that  his  forces  burned  villages   and
             systematically raped and killed civilians during a  series  of
             counter-insurgency campaigns in Darfur, the Nuba Mountains and
             Blue Nile over many  years.   While  his  forces  continue  to
             attack civilians in Darfur, Hemeti has now brought violence to
             the streets of the national capital.
         19.  One of the main reasons for Hemeti's rapid ascendancy is  that
             he has been contracted by Saudi Arabia  and  the  United  Arab
             Emirates to provide ground troops to fight on their behalf  in
             the Yemen war against the Houthis and now in Libya in  support
             of General Haftar.  With Gulf money,  he  is  reported  to  be
             recruiting heavily from Arab tribes in Chad and Niger as  well
             as other parts of Sudan. Consequently, the RSF  has  become  a
             transboundary  militia,  which  could  destabilise  the  wider
             region as well as bringing chaos to Sudan.  Hemeti can draw on
             his family's vast gold  mining  and  livestock  operations  in
             Darfur, as well as Gulf money, to buy the  support  of  tribal
             leaders and local elites. Much will depend on  whether  it  is
             possible to control the RSF by reducing its funding from  Gulf
             states and limiting Hemeti's political ambitions. But many are
             sceptical about how  quickly  that  could  happen,  given  the
             strength of  Hemeti's  military  and  economic  base  and  the
             continued interest of the Gulf states in renting his  fighters
             for Yemen and Libya.  For now,  Burhan  and  Hemeti  are  tied
             together by their mutual commercial  and  political  interests
             but in the longer run, the  SAF's  disdain  for  Hemeti  could
             unpick the alliance.
         20.  Another risk to the country's stability is that members of the
             former ruling party (the  National  Congress  Party)  and  the
             Islamic Movement, who still occupy many  key  posts  in  state
             institutions and numerous businesses, could  try  to  sabotage
             the economy to undermine the transitional government or  mount
             a  counter-revolutionary  coup  with  support  from   Islamist
             elements within the security forces and  the  Islamist  shadow
             militias (Popular Defence Forces,  Popular  Security,  Popular
             Police,  student  jihadist  units)  created  by  the  previous
             regime.  There already appears to have been at least once such
             coup attempt, which led to the arrest of several  senior  army
             officers, including the  Chief  of  Staff,  and  some  veteran
             Islamist politicians.

         The extent to  which  elements  of  the  Bashir  regime  remain  in
         positions of power
         21.  The overthrow of Bashir after 30 years in power  was  a  major
             turning point in Sudanese politics but many  elements  of  his
             repressive regime are still in place.  The  biggest  challenge
             facing the government will be dismantling the  Islamist  "deep
             state" or "parallel state" created over thirty  years  by  the
             former regime, which took  control  of  all  security  organs,
             state institutions and key sectors of the  economy,  including
             hundreds of businesses owned by  the  NCP  and  the  military-
             security apparatus.  Key to dismantling the deep state will be
             the implementation of a comprehensive  programme  of  security
             sector  reform  aimed  at  establishing  a  professional   and
             inclusive national army, reducing the disproportionately  high
             percentage of the national budget devoted to the military  and
             security  services   (estimated   to   be   about   70%)   and
             restructuring the intelligence service.  Because state capture
             by the Bashir regime was so far-reaching, dismantling the deep
             state is expected to take several years.
         22.  The TMC itself is regarded by many in the protest movement  as
             a mere extension of the Bashir regime because  it  was  formed
             from  members  of  Bashir's  Security  Committee.   There   is
             considerable scepticism that they will be willing to  give  up
             their power and financial privileges.
         23.  A number of Islamist officers from  SAF  and  NISS  have  been
             seconded to the RSF in the last couple of  years.  Hemeti  has
             claimed  that  members  of  Islamist  shadow   militias   also
             infiltrated the RSF during the operation to clear  the  sit-in
             area  on  3  June  and  were  responsible   for   deliberately
             escalating the violence, while trying to put all the blame  on
             him.   These shadow militias appear to have  access  to  army,
             police and other uniforms.
         24.  Bashir and some senior members of the former regime are  under
             arrest and are  allegedly  being  detained  in  Kober  prison,
             Khartoum's top security prison. Bashir was brought to trial in
             Khartoum on 19 August on charges of corruption based on  money
             found in his house when he was  arrested  (although  the  real
             extent of his corruption is infinitely greater than this). But
             most Sudanese are more concerned that he should  face  justice
             for the heinous crimes he is  alleged  to  have  committed  in
             Darfur, including war  crimes,  crimes  against  humanity  and
             genocide.  It is not yet clear whether Bashir will be sent  to
             the Hague but one of the mandated tasks  of  the  transitional
             government is to hold accountable all members of the  previous
             regime for all crimes committed against  the  Sudanese  people
             since 30 June 1989.
         To what extent does the National Intelligence and Security  Service
         (NISS) still retain power?

         25.  An early demand of the protesters was the  disbanding  of  the
             powerful NISS, which was used to protect  the  Bashir  regime,
             among other things by arresting, detaining and often torturing
             its  opponents  and  by  rigging   elections.    The   Special
             Operations Department of NISS also has a substantial  military
             capability, including armoured personnel carriers  and  attack
             helicopters as well as an extensive covert business network.
         26.  So far there have been two signs of possible  reform:  General
             Burhan's decision on 29 July to change the organisation's name
             to the General Intelligence Service (GIS); and the stipulation
             in the Constitutional Declaration (Article 36) that the duties
             of  GIS  should  be  limited  to   gathering   and   analysing
             information and providing advice to the relevant  authorities.
             However, the  Constitutional  Declaration  (Article  2a)  also
             stipulates that all existing laws shall remain in force unless
             they are repealed or amended. This  means  that  the  National
             Security Act, which provides for the intelligence  service  to
             exercise powers of arrest and detention and grants immunity to
             its officers for all acts committed in  the  course  of  their
             duties, will remain in force until such time as it is  amended
             or repealed by the Transitional Legislative Council.   As  the
             all-powerful intelligence and security service is at the heart
             of Sudan's deep state and the military  have  a  veto  in  the
             Sovereign Council, few expect the new government to make  many
             inroads into it anytime soon.  One possible  option  that  has
             been mooted is for the Special Operations Department of GIS to
             be transferred to the Rapid Support  Forces.  But  this  would
             still be problematic  if  they  did  not  change  their  modus
             operandi.
         27.  GIS is still staffed by the same officers who ran  NISS,  most
             of whom are Islamists.  They are therefore likely  to  operate
             in much the same way as they did  before,  particularly  while
             they still enjoy impunity.  Although the former head of  NISS,
             Salah Gosh, is in exile in Egypt, where he is said  to  be  an
             adviser to Egyptian intelligence, the most powerful figure  in
             GIS is now thought to be Abdul Ghaffar Sharif, the former Head
             of Political Security in  NISS,  who  was  notorious  for  his
             brutality."

45. Subsequently in her report (paras 30-36), Dame  Rosalind  commented  on
    violence against protestors in Khartoum in beginning in  December  2018
    as follows:

         "RECENT VIOLENCE AGAINST CIVILIANS

         30.  When protests  started  in  December  2018,  the  government's
             security forces and militias responded in a heavy-handed  way,
             using  whips,  tear  gas,  rubber  bullets  and   often   live
             ammunition against peaceful  protesters.  Many  injuries  were
             caused by tear  gas  canisters  thrown  directly  at  people's
             heads.  Doctors were particularly targeted and  tear  gas  was
             used inside hospitals where the wounded  were  being  treated.
             The main perpetrators of the violence were reported to be NISS
             officers, possibly  reinforced  by  members  of  the  Islamist
             shadow militias.  According to a  Human  Rights  Watch  Report
             issued  two  days  before  Bashir  was  overthrown,   credible
             monitors estimated that over 70  protesters  had  been  killed
             since the protests started in December.
         31.  On 6 April, tens of thousands of protesters started  a  sit-in
             outside the army HQ in central Khartoum.  When NISS  tried  to
             disperse the protesters by force, some  junior  army  officers
             sought  to  protect  the  sit-in  and  fraternised  with   the
             protesters, even returning fire  to  repel  the  NISS  attack.
             The fact that the protestors had for the first time managed to
             reach the army HQ and that some army elements had come out  in
             their support was a significant development. On  9  August,  I
             was quoted in the Times as saying that  Sudan  "can  never  go
             back to how things were before. The momentum  is  growing  and
             growing, things are moving quickly  on  the  ground".   On  11
             April, Bashir was overthrown.
         32.  After the TMC  took  over,  there  was  a  temporary  lull  in
             violence in Khartoum while negotiations started with the  FFC.
             However, on 13 and 16 May there were two  incidents  when  men
             wearing RSF uniforms were reported to have attacked protesters
             in the sit-in area in Khartoum, using live ammunition,  batons
             and whips.  Four protestors and an army major were reported to
             have been killed on 13 May. A further fourteen were injured in
             Khartoum on 16 May and  on  the  same  day,  men  wearing  RSF
             uniforms were also reported to have attacked youths with whips
             and rifle butts in El Gedaref in East Sudan.
         33.  The turning point was 3 June, the last day  of  Ramadan,  when
             the TMC launched  a  large-scale  operation  to  disperse  the
             protestors from the sit-in area in  Khartoum  by  force  using
             live ammunition.  Some  130  people  were  shot  and  hundreds
             injured by the RSF and other security forces.  There were also
             70 reported cases of rape, including of female medical  staff.
             An attempt was made to conceal some of the bodies by  throwing
             them into the Nile, weighted down  by  stones  tied  to  their
             legs. At least 40 of these  bodies  were  recovered  from  the
             river over the following days.  The tents in the  sit-in  area
             were all burnt and the sit-in area,  which  was  seen  by  the
             young revolutionaries as a microcosm of the New Sudan of which
             they dreamed, was reduced to ashes.   The  RSF  also  attacked
             the University of Khartoum, which was within the sit-in  area,
             destroying and looting much of  the  university  property  and
             killing several protesters within the university campus.
         34.  Those who survived the attack on the sit-in  area  on  3  June
             fled back to their homes and erected barricades in the streets
             to try to protect their local neighbourhoods.  Over  the  next
             few days, the RSF roamed the  streets,  attacking  anyone  who
             ventured outside.   Some activists and those involved in civil
             disobedience were deliberately targeted.
         35.  If the TMC had hoped to  crush  the  revolution  through  this
             brutal crackdown, their tactics badly backfired.   The June  3
             massacre created huge public anger and  there  is  now  strong
             public pressure for justice and accountability.
         36.  Since June there have been several further incidents in  areas
             of Central Sudan involving violent attacks  against  civilians
             by people wearing RSF uniforms, including  the  killing  of  6
             peaceful protesters, including 5 school children, at  a  rally
             in El Obeid on 29 July to protest bread  and  fuel  shortages.
             Four more protesters were killed by government security forces
             using live ammunition and several wounded in a  protest  march
             in Omdurman on 1 August to show solidarity with the victims in
             El Obeid."

46. In the remainder of her report (paras 38-46), Dame Rosalind dealt  with
    "Nuba - specific issues" including  the  threat  of  the  RSF  and  any
    evidence of recent targeting of Nuba in Khartoum and the Nuba Mountains
    as follows:

         "Is the RSF a threat to Nuba? The influence of Arabisation on those
         in power
         38.  The RSF were originally drawn from the former Janjaweed,  Arab
             nomadic tribes who were used by the Bashir regime to conduct a
             counter-insurgency campaign against  the  armed  movements  in
             Darfur through a policy of collective  punishment  and  sexual
             violence against civilians.  RSF forces  are  now  also  being
             recruited from the Rashaida, an Arab tribe in  Eastern  Sudan,
             and from Arab nomadic tribes in Chad and Niger.  The RSF  have
             been deployed in the counter-insurgency campaign  against  the
             SPLM/North in the Nuba Mountains and Blue Nile as well  as  in
             Darfur.   Hemeti, the RSF commander,  comes  from  the  camel-
             herding Abbala branch of the Rizeigat tribe in North Darfur, a
             large Arab tribe which spans Darfur and  Chad.    He  receives
             advice from a group of Rizeigat politicians, who share an Arab
             supremacist ideology, which was initially linked to  the  Arab
             Gathering, a pan-Arabist organisation created in Darfur in the
             1980s.  Some of them were involved in recruiting Janjaweed and
             more recently for the RSF. Others have helped in settling Arab
             tribesmen on land previously inhabited by  non-Arab  tribesmen
             who have been driven off their lands following  conflict  with
             Arab militias or the RSF.
         40.  Hemeti's original goal was to use  the  RSF  to  increase  his
             tribe's  political  and  military  power  in  Darfur  and,  if
             possible, at national level.  But  after  overthrowing  Bashir
             and receiving strong support from Saudi Arabia  and  the  UAE,
             his political ambitions grew.  Hemeti is not an Islamist  but,
             in May, he accepted support from a wealthy Darfuri businessman
             and a veteran Islamist politician, who offered to help him  to
             bring large numbers of tribal chiefs to Khartoum with the  aim
             of co-opting them and expanding his political base  to  weaken
             the FFC.  But this  gathering  dispersed  after  three  weeks,
             allegedly because  of  disputes  over  payment.   Hemeti  then
             appears to have fallen out with the Islamists whom he  accused
             of infiltrating his RSF forces, escalating violence at  the  3
             June break-up of the sit-in and trying to frame him  for  what
             happened.   After  the  massive  turn-out   by   pro-democracy
             protesters on 30 June, Hemeti seems to have concluded that  he
             would have to accept a deal with the FFC.
         41.  For the time being the military and civilian  members  of  the
             transitional  government  will  have  a  common   enemy   (the
             Islamists). But  if  the  Islamists  are  neutralised,  it  is
             possible that the military, and Hemeti  in  particular,  might
             try to regain control.  Given the ethnic composition and track
             record of the  RSF  and  the  ideology  of  Hemeti's  Rizeigat
             advisers, this could pose a threat to the  Nuba  and  non-Arab
             Darfuris.


         Is there recent evidence of targeting of Nuba?
               a) In Khartoum
         42.  I have been told by two civil society contacts that  Nuba  and
             Darfuris, who had their  own  tents  in  the  sit-in  area  in
             Khartoum, were targeted more aggressively during the  forcible
             dispersal of protesters on 3 June.
         43.  "Tea  sellers",  including  Nuba  women,  were  amongst  those
             attacked on 3 June both in the sit-in area  and  near  Comboni
             College, some distance away from the sit-in area.   There  are
             thousands of poor women who sell tea  from  street  stalls  in
             Khartoum. Most of them come from  the  marginalised  areas  of
             Darfur and the Nuba Mountains and have always been one of  the
             most vulnerable groups in the city. They  are  often  harassed
             and punished by the public order police, even though they only
             earn two or three dollars a day for brewing glasses  of  sweet
             tea.  When the sit-in started outside the  army  HQ,  the  tea
             sellers set up a volunteer kitchen to prepare tea, coffee  and
             food for thousands of the protesters. On 3 June, many of these
             women were beaten and sexually  assaulted.   At  least  6  are
             reported to have been killed.
         44.  Two days after the 3 June crackdown, the  RSF  arrested  Yasir
             Arman, the Deputy Chair of the SPLM/North (Agar  faction)  who
             had returned to Khartoum with a small SPLM/North delegation to
             support the revolution and to try to initiate peace talks.   A
             few days later, the RSF also arrested two  of  his  SPLM/North
             colleagues - Ismail Jalab and Mubarak Ardol, both of whom  are
             Nuba.   All three were subsequently deported to Juba.  Whereas
             the SPLM/North delegation was targeted, none of the other  FFC
             political leaders were arrested.
               b) In the Nuba Mountains
         45.  Although the level of violence against civilians in the  SPLM-
             North controlled areas of the Nuba Mountains is  substantially
             lower than it was prior  to  June  2016  when  aerial  bombing
             stopped, attacks on civilians by  government  security  forces
             have continued since the TMC took over in  April  2019.  Human
             rights monitors report that there have been a number of cattle-
             raiding attacks against  civilians,  particularly  in  Dalami,
             Heiban and  Thobo  counties,  which  are  said  to  have  been
             committed by men in SAF uniform.
         46.  According to the South Kordofan  and  Blue  Nile  Coordination
             Unit,  the  humanitarian  situation  in  the  Nuba   Mountains
             continues to be serious.   Food  stocks  are  reported  to  be
             depleted and the food security outlook  uncertain.   Essential
             medicines are in short supply and there is limited  access  to
             health clinics."

47. At paras 47-55, Dame Rosalind commented on historical parallels between
    the Nuba and Darfuris and the current perception of Nuba:

         "Historical parallels between Nuba  and  Darfuris  in  relation  to
         opposition to the Bashir regime
         47.   There  is  a  close  parallel  between  the  former  regime's
             perception of non-Arab Darfuris and Nuba  because  members  of
             both groups were suspected of being sympathetic to  the  rebel
             armed movements in Darfur, the Nuba Mountains or Blue Nile.
         48.  The armed movements from Darfur, the Nuba Mountains  and  Blue
             Nile  are  closely  inter-related  and   have   formed   joint
             alliances. For example, the Sudan Revolutionary  Front,  which
             is a member of the Sudan Call opposition alliance and the FFC,
             includes two armed movements  from  Darfur  (the  Justice  and
             Equality Movement  and  the  Sudan  Liberation  Movement/Minni
             Minawi and one from the Nuba  Mountains  and  Blue  Nile  (the
             Malik  Agar  faction  of   the   Sudan   People's   Liberation
             Movement/North.   The  largest  armed  movement  in  the  Nuba
             Mountains and Blue Nile (the Abdel Aziz faction of  the  Sudan
             People's  Liberation  Movement/North)  has  also   formed   an
             alliance with one of the Darfuri armed movements.


         Has the perception of Darfuris changed?
         49.  In the early phase of the revolution, there were  signs  of  a
             new solidarity with  Darfuris.  When  Bashir  and  Salah  Gosh
             initially tried to blame the protests on members of one of the
             Darfuri armed movements and  NISS  arrested  over  30  Darfuri
             students who were falsely accused of  being  "saboteurs",  the
             young protestors on the streets in Central  Sudan  started  to
             chant "We are all Darfur".  In April,  however,  some  of  the
             protestors in the sit-in area in Khartoum  started  to  praise
             Hemeti because they thought the RSF  had  initially  protected
             them from attacks by NISS.  This attitude, albeit short-lived,
             was regarded as insensitive by Darfuris and  Nuba  because  of
             the widespread and grave human rights violations that the  RSF
             were still committing against civilians in Darfur and the Nuba
             Mountains.


         Has the perception of Nuba changed?  Are  there  parallels  between
         current perceptions of Nuba and Darfuris?
         50.  Individuals of non-Arab Darfuri or Nuba ethnic origin are both
             identifiable because of their  darker  skin  colour  and  have
             historically been looked down upon by lighter-skinned Sudanese
             from tribes in central Sudan  and  referred  to  by  insulting
             terms such as "Abid" (the Arabic term for  slave).   Civilians
             in the new transitional government are likely to try to take a
             more progressive approach to dealing with  ethnic  stereotypes
             but this racist prejudice is deep-seated in  Sudanese  society
             and is unlikely to disappear overnight.
         51.  Indeed, many Sudanese living in the  marginalised  areas  feel
             aggrieved that they are under-represented in the  transitional
             government. If it had not been  for  the  Sudan  Revolutionary
             Front, which initiated a meeting with  other  FFC  members  in
             Addis Ababa in late July, there would have been no substantive
             chapter in the Constitutional  Declaration  dealing  with  the
             peace agenda and the issues  of  the  marginalised,  IDPs  and
             refugees.   The armed movements have complained that this as a
             sign that Sudanese living  in  central  Sudan  still  want  to
             monopolise power at their  expense  and  complain  that  their
             mindset has not yet changed. It remains to be seen whether the
             Sovereign Council,  and  particularly  the  military  who  are
             responsible for the security sector, will  be  ready  to  make
             concessions in the  peace  talks  that  will  give  the  armed
             movements  and  their  constituencies  appropriate   political
             representation in the transitional institutions.


         Are Nuba likely to be targeted today on account  of  ethnicity  and
         perceived involvement with rebel groups?
         52.   As  one  reason  for  targeting  Nuba  is   their   perceived
             involvement with rebel groups, the  situation  for  Nuba  (and
             Darfuris) is likely to improve if it is possible  to  reach  a
             comprehensive agreement with the  armed  movements.   This  is
             supposed to be a top priority for the transitional government.
             The  Constitutional  Declaration  stipulates  that   a   peace
             agreement should be  concluded  within  six  months  from  the
             signing of the agreement (ie by February 2020).  The new Prime
             Minister also vowed to prioritise peace at his inaugural press
             conference on 21 August.   However, it  is  uncertain  if  the
             February 2020  target will be met, given that  Abdel  Aziz  al
             Hilu, the leader of the largest SPLM/N  faction  in  the  Nuba
             Mountains, is calling for the right to self-determination  and
             two armies  and  Abdel  Wahid  Nour,  whose  Sudan  Liberation
             Movement still has a  significant  military  presence  in  the
             Jebel Marra area of Darfur, has  denounced  the  power-sharing
             deal as a "betrayal of the revolution".
         53.  It is too early to say how the security organs  such  as  NISS
             and the RSF will treat marginalised groups such  as  Nuba  and
             Darfuris until we know whether civilians in  the  transitional
             government will be able to  exercise  effective  control  over
             their behaviour and  progress  can  be  made  in  implementing
             security sector reform.


         Does the position of Nuba differ from likely targeting of Darfuris?
         What conclusions can be drawn from the outcome of the recent Darfur
         Country Guidance case in relation to Nuba?
         54.  The outcome of the Darfur Country Guidance Case promulgated on
             7 August 2019 is relevant to the position  of  the  Nuba.  The
             Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) concluded that
             "the situation in Sudan remains volatile after civil  protests
             started in late 2018 and the future is unpredictable. There is
             insufficient evidence currently available  to  show  that  the
             guidance given in AA (non-Arab Darfuris - relocation) Sudan CG
             (2009) UKAIT 00056 and MM  (Darfuris)  Sudan  CG  (2015)  UKUT
             00010 (IAC) requires revision. Those  cases  should  still  be
             followed".
         55.  As the position of the Nuba in regard to likely  targeting  on
             account of ethnicity  and  perceived  involvement  with  rebel
             groups is the same as that of Darfuris,  the  same  conclusion
             should be drawn in relation to Nuba-related asylum cases."
48. Dame Rosalind also addressed (paras 56-58) the  issue  whether  a  Nuba
    failed asylum seeker with no political profile  would  be  at  risk  on
    return to Khartoum:

         "Would membership of the UK diaspora place  a  Nuba  failed  asylum
         seeker (with no personal political  profile)  at  risk  on  return?
         Would a Nuba failed  asylum  seeker  (with  no  personal  political
         profile) be at risk of ill treatment in Khartoum in  the  event  of
         return today? Would a Nuba failed asylum seeker (with  no  personal
         political profile)  be  at  risk  of  ill  treatment  in  the  Nuba
         Mountains in the  event  of  return  today?    Would  Nuba  with  a
         political (anti-Bashir) profile be at risk if returned from the UK?
         56.  Civilians in the new transitional government would not  regard
             membership of the UK  diaspora  or  an  anti-Bashir  political
             profile as a negative factor. Indeed, those who supported  the
             revolution and opposed the previous regime would be  welcomed.
             However, it is not yet clear to what extent the civilians will
             be able to exercise authority over GIS and other parts of  the
             military-security apparatus given that security sector  reform
             is to be left in the hands of the  military  institutions  and
             the Ministers of Defence and Interior in the Cabinet  will  be
             chosen by the TMC.
         57.  Nuba failed asylum-seekers could still  be  at  risk  of  ill-
             treatment in Khartoum today as long as members of  the  former
             regime continue to control NISS and other security organs; the
             National Security Act has not been amended  to  remove  NISS's
             powers of arrest and  detention;  and  the  RSF  still  has  a
             presence in urban areas. They would also be  at  risk  in  the
             Nuba Mountains until such time as  a  peace  agreement  is  in
             place.
         58.  There is still the danger of another military take-over or  of
             a counter-revolutionary coup by the Islamists. Either scenario
             could create a hostile  environment  for  Nuba  failed  asylum
             seekers."

49. At paras 59 and 60, Dame Rosalind set out her  conclusions  identifying
    that the political situation remains "volatile" and  she  identified  a
    number of  indicators  that  would  assist  to  clarify  the  political
    situation for the future:

         "CONCLUSION: IS THE CURRENT SITUATION IN SUDAN ONE IN WHICH  IT  IS
         SAFE TO RETURN NUBA? HOW  LONG  WILL  IT  TAKE  FOR  THE  POLITICAL
         SITUATION TO CLARIFY?
         59.  The power-sharing  agreement  is  an  important  step  towards
             democratic transition. But the political  situation  in  Sudan
             remains volatile and it is too soon to predict where Sudan  is
             heading.  We are still in  unchartered  territory  and  it  is
             premature to say with confidence that it would be safe to send
             Nuba back.

         60.  It is difficult  to  tell  how  long  it  will  take  for  the
             political  situation  to  clarify  but   the   most   relevant
             indicators would include:
             -    signature of a comprehensive  peace  agreement  with  the
                  armed movements, particularly with Abdel  Aziz  Al  Hilu's
                  faction of the SPLM/North, which has the largest  presence
                  in the Nuba Mountains  (according  to  the  Constitutional
                  Declaration, a comprehensive peace agreement  is  supposed
                  to be completed within 6 months - by February 2020)
             -    evidence that civilians are no longer being  attacked  by
                  government security forces in the Nuba Mountains and  that
                  humanitarian assistance is being  provided  to  SPLM/North
                  controlled areas
             -    the start of security sector reform, including  amendment
                  of the National  Security  Act  (in  accordance  with  the
                  Constitutional Declaration) to remove GIS powers of arrest
                  and  detention,  plus  evidence   that   this   is   being
                  implemented in practice
             -    the withdrawal of the RSF from the  streets  of  Khartoum
                  and other cities and from any law enforcement activities
             -    evidence of progress in restoring the  rule  of  law  and
                  respect for human rights and establishing  an  independent
                  judiciary
             -     General  Burhan  hands  over  the  chairmanship  of  the
                  Sovereign Council to one of its  civilian  members  in  21
                  months' time (June 2021).  This  would  be  a  significant
                  milestone.
             -    holding of free and fair elections  in  three  years  and
                  three months (2022)"

    5. Addendum Report "On the current political situation in Sudan and the
    risks involved in returning failed Nuba asylum seekers  to  Sudan"  (17
    October 2019)

50. In her final written report,  Dame  Rosalind  dealt  with  the  current
    situation following a visit by her to Khartoum between 28 September and
    9 October 2019.  She  identified  a  number  of  positive  developments
    including the appointment of the new  prime  minister,  Abdalla  Hamdok
    (para 3).  She noted that those to whom she had spoken - both  Sudanese
    and international - agreed that the political situation was still  very
    fragile (para 2).  She noted that the government's  "biggest  immediate
    challenge is economic" (para 4).  At paras 4-5 Dame Rosalind said this:

         "4.  But one of the Government's biggest  immediate  challenges  is
             economic. After 30 years of the Bashir regime, the country  is
             bankrupt, with no foreign reserves, high inflation, a  sharply
             devalued currency, pervasive corruption and key sectors of the
             economy controlled  by  the  deep  state.   Although  the  new
             government has only been in office for six  weeks,  there  are
             signs that its honeymoon period at  home  could  prove  short-
             lived if  it  is  not  able  to  deliver  early  and  tangible
             improvements in people's lives, particularly  in  relation  to
             food, fuel, water, electricity and transport.  The  Government
             is already being criticised for moving too slowly.  Hamdok has
             had to do a lot  of  international  travel  to  New  York  and
             Sudan's neighbouring countries  in  his  first  six  weeks  in
             office but people are complaining that, when he is  away,  the
             Government is paralysed.
         5.   International goodwill is yet to be translated into  practical
             economic assistance, apart from some wheat and  fuel  that  is
             being supplied by Saudi Arabia  and  the  UAE.   Sudan's  debt
             arrears and the US designation of Sudan as a State Sponsor  of
             Terrorism will have to be addressed before the new  Government
             can access financial assistance from the IMF and  World  Bank.
             The US have indicated that they will not be  able  to  provide
             any economic assistance in the short-term are looking  to  the
             Europeans and the Gulf states to help in the meantime. But the
             Sudanese people are impatient to see immediate improvements in
             their lives. The Government is trying to  manage  expectations
             and plead for patience. But it will need to  demonstrate  that
             it is doing something  to  deliver  an  improvement  in  basic
             services and living standards. Otherwise it could face renewed
             street protests, which  could,  in  turn,  open  the  door  to
             renewed violence on the streets by the security forces and the
             ill-disciplined paramilitary Rapid Support Forces (RSF)."

51. At para 6, Dame Rosalind said:

         "6.   There  is  very  strong  public  pressure  for  justice   and
             accountability for the human rights  abuses  committed  during
             the December revolution, particularly in the 3  June  massacre
             when the demonstrators in the sit-in area outside the military
             headquarters were forcibly dispersed.  The Government has  set
             up an  investigation  committee  but  the  power-sharing  deal
             between  the  military  and  civilians  is  likely  to  be   a
             constraint if, as expected, the finger is pointed at  some  of
             the military members of the Sovereign Council."

52. At para 7, Dame Rosalind stated that the peace talks may  remain  tough
    particularly given that al Hilu is seeking


         "substantial devolution of power to the regions,  the  need  for  a
         secular state and comprehensive security sector reform."


53. At para 9, Dame Rosalind said that the military members of the SC still
    wield "considerable power".  She also said that Hemeti "is now regarded
    as the most powerful man in Sudan".  She went on to state that:

         "He is using his immense wealth from these mercenary activities and
         from his large and expanding business empire, including gold  mines
         in Darfur and elsewhere, to build his political constituency  among
         tribal chiefs and Arab tribes.  His RSF officers  are  reported  to
         have been doing a lot of community work in provincial areas  around
         Sudan, which is widely interpreted as a sign that Hemeti is already
         on an unofficial election campaign trail.  He  is  also  trying  to
         polish his image (further tarnished by the RSF's involvement in the
         3 June massacre in Khartoum) by leading the government  negotiating
         delegation in the peace talks in Juba with the armed movements. But
         many Sudanese worry it may only be a matter of time before Hemeti's
         mask slips."

54. At para 10, Dame Rosalind said that the  threat  to  the  "transitional
    government is that of a counter-revolutionary  coup  by  Islamic  hard-
    liners from the Bashir regime".  She said that  the  concern  was  that
    Islamists may try to "stoke violence" during  a  demonstration  planned
    for 21 October.

55. At para 11,  Dame  Rosalind  said  that  if  Hemeti  or  the  hard-line
    Islamists were to overthrow the current government this  would  pose  a
    threat to all Sudanese democratic forces and that Sudanese of  Nuba  or
    non-Arab Darfuri origin could be particularly at risk.

56. Nevertheless, at paras  12-13,  Dame  Rosalind  set  out  a  number  of
    positive changes that have taken place as follows:


         "12. For the Sudanese middle class living in central  Khartoum  and
             foreign visitors such  as  myself,  there  have  been  several
             tangible signs of positive change:


                - It is much easier for foreigners from Western countries to
                  get a Sudanese visa

                - The atmosphere in the city felt much freer than under  the
                  Bashir regime. I was not conscious of  being  followed  by
                  national security.

                - Central Khartoum looks peaceful and seems to have returned
                  to normal after  the  violence  used  by  security  forces
                  against peaceful protestors from December 2018-June  2019.



                - The national security presence at Khartoum  airport  seems
                  to be much lighter than before

         13.  The transitional government has started to  take  some  reform
             measures. For example, it has:

                - launched peace talks with the armed movements and released
                  some POWs

                -   dismissed   all   the   Vice-Chancellors   of   Sudanese
                  universities

                - dismissed most Under-secretaries who  were  affiliated  to
                  the former ruling party and appointed new ones

                - dismissed the former Chief  Justice  and  Attorney-General
                  and appointed new ones nominated by the FFC

                - dismissed the head of Sudanese state radio and  television
                  who defended the RSF's role in the 3 June massacre

                - signed an agreement to allow the UN  Office  of  the  High
                  Commissioner for Human Rights to set up a  fully  mandated
                  office in Sudan

                - promoted  women  to  top  posts  (Chief  Justice,  Foreign
                  Minister, Vice Chancellor of Khartoum University)

                - announced that journalists will no longer be arrested

                - acknowledged the existence of cholera in  Sudan,  allowing
                  the country to access vaccines from the WHO (something the
                  previous regime had refused to do)."


57. At para 14, Dame Rosalind stated that a number of elements of the  "old
    regime" are still in place:

         "14. However, the process of change has only just started and  many
             elements of the old regime are still in place. For example:

                - Apart from the removal of  Under-Secretaries,  the  entire
                  civil service is still controlled by the deep state.
                - The same applies to the judiciary, apart  from  the  Chief
                  Justice and Attorney General

                - The army, police  and  security  apparatus  from  the  old
                  regime are still in place.

                - The presence of the RSF in the centre of Khartoum is  much
                  smaller and less visible than before but  they  are  still
                  deployed around strategic and military  installations  and
                  resentment  about  their  role  in  the  3  June  massacre
                  continues to simmer. Many Sudanese are worried  that  they
                  could be reactivated at any time.

                - The Islamist shadow militias have not been disbanded.

                - The Defence and Interior Ministers are generals  who  were
                  appointed by the Transitional Military Council.

                - The impact of the revolution has not yet been felt at  all
                  outside Khartoum. The people running the state governments
                  are still  the  senior  army  officers  appointed  several
                  months ago by General Burhan."


58. In relation to the position  of  the  Nuba  living  in  Khartoum,  Dame
    Rosalind reported on a meeting that she had with six young  Nubian  men
    in Omdurman on 7 October at paras 15-25 as follows:

         "Has there been any change for Nuba living in Khartoum?

         15.  I spoke to a group of six young Nuba men,  all  of  whom  were
             lawyers or teachers, at the office of Justice  Africa  (Sudan)
             in Omdurman on 7 October. I asked them whether the position of
             Nuba had changed since the new  transitional  government  took
             over in early September.

         16.  They all said that, as far as they were concerned, nothing had
             changed. "We don't think change has taken place in Sudan yet".
              They described Hamdok as a man from the centre, not a  leader
             of the revolution, adding that all his advisers were from  the
             centre.

         17.  They said they had all supported the December  revolution  and
             had taken part in the sit-in. At that time, everyone had mixed
             in  together.   But  after   the   political   agreement   and
             constitutional declaration were signed,  they  felt  they  had
             been excluded again by the Forces for Freedom and Change,  and
             the Sudanese Professionals Association. They regarded these as
             elitist groups representing the interests of  the  centre  who
             did not consult the marginalised groups on  an  equal  footing
             and wanted to keep the status quo so that they could  continue
             to run things. Sudan needed radical structural changes  and  a
             change in mentality if there was to be a genuine  "New  Sudan"
             built on equal citizenship.

         18.  They complained that there were  very  few  Nuba  in  the  new
             Government. The only Nuba in the Cabinet was the  Minister  of
             Agriculture. One of the five military members of the Sovereign
             Council, Shamseddin Kabbashi, was also a Nuba but he had  been
             a collaborator with the Bashir regime. "We can't live together
             unless everyone accepts diversity". There was still insecurity
             in the marginalised areas. "We can't talk  about  peace  until
             there is a peace agreement and  people  can  return  to  their
             homes.  Wars could restart at any time".

         19.  The same policies existed and no one in the new government was
             speaking  up  for  the  interests  of  the  Nuba   and   other
             marginalised people. Most of the Nuba were still living in the
             slums in the outskirts of Khartoum and other big towns  or  in
             refugee camps in South Sudan, Kenya and Uganda. Some have been
             there for a long time. There were no  services  in  the  areas
             where the Nuba lived in Khartoum and Omdurman. No one  in  the
             new government seemed to care about this.

         20.  The Sudanese media was still biased to Arab  culture  and  was
             still  portraying  Sudan  as  a  Muslim  state.    Female   TV
             presenters still all had pale skins and wore the  hijab.   The
             school curriculum was still biased towards  Arab  culture.  No
             one in the new government was talking about changing  this  to
             reflect the diverse cultures of the country. People  from  the
             marginalised areas still had limited  promotion  opportunities
             in most  sectors  and  professions.  Nor  was  the  Government
             pursuing the issue of justice for ethnic cleansing in the Nuba
             Mountains. Issues of identity, social justice and  recognition
             of diverse cultures had not yet  been  addressed  by  the  new
             government.  If not addressed, the Nuba would press for  self-
             determination.

         Are Nuba still being targeted in Khartoum?

         21.  I asked the six young Nuba men whether they thought that  Nuba
             were  still  being  targeted  in  Khartoum   since   the   new
             transitional government had taken over or whether their  lives
             had improved.  They  said  that,  since  the  revolution,  the
             Public Order Law was  no  longer  being  enforced  in  central
             Khartoum but it was still being applied in Nuba-majority areas
             in the outskirts of Khartoum and Omdurman.  For  example,  the
             Public Order Police were still harassing tea sellers and  food
             sellers (many of them Nuba women) in Dar es  Salaam,  Umbadda,
             Haj Yousif  and  El  Fatih  1  and  2  (relocation  areas  for
             displaced people on the very edge  of  Omdurman).   They  were
             still being taken to summary courts and lashed or fined.   The
             police, the judge and the prosecutor would then share out  the
             proceeds of the fines between them.  Because these women  were
             poor, they could not afford lawyers and  did  not  know  their
             rights.

         22.  Two of the young Nuba men in the  group  recounted  that,  two
             weeks before our meeting, they had been sitting  drinking  tea
             on the pavement at a tea seller's stall in  one  of  the  Nuba
             majority areas of Omdurman when a  police  lorry  came  along,
             stopped and searched them. They had been  taken  to  a  police
             station for  no  apparent  reason  and  subsequently  released
             without charge. They said that this  kind  of  harassment  was
             still continuing  in  parts  of  the  capital  because  police
             officers from the previous regime were still in place.

         23.  One of the young Nuba men in the group raised the treatment of
             Christians.  He  said  that,  although  the  new  Minister  of
             Guidance and Religious Endowments had affirmed  the  country's
             religious diversity and talked about giving  more  freedom  to
             non-Muslims, this had not materialised yet.  The Ministry  was
             still entirely controlled by Muslim  officials  from  the  old
             regime and the judiciary was still unreformed. When Abdel Aziz
             al Hilu, the leader of the SPLM/N - Al Hilu  faction  had  met
             Hamdok in Juba, he had told him that one of his movement's key
             demands in the peace talks was  that  Sudan  should  become  a
             secular state and that President Nimeiri's decision in 1983 to
             impose Sharia Law throughout the country should  be  reversed.
             But Hamdok had insisted that this was a national decision that
             could only be taken in the national constitutional conference.



         24.  The point made by my Nuba interlocutor  about  the  continuing
             harassment of Christians is borne out by a decision  taken  by
             the Supreme Court on 7 October  to  confirm  criminal  charges
             against the executive committee  of  the  Sudanese  Church  of
             Christ, a predominantly Nuba denomination, who were accused of
             refusing to hand over Church property to an  unelected  church
             committee appointed by the Bashir regime.

         [24].    I have heard from a different source that Nuba  youths  in
             the poor areas in the outskirts of Khartoum and  Omdurman  are
             also being targeted for recruitment into the RSF.   The tribal
             leaders who have been paid generously by Himiti to recruit for
             the RSF are doing so both among people in their home areas  in
             Southern Kordofan and among their own tribe in Khartoum.

         25.  The report by  the  Home  Office  entitled  "Sudan:  Political
             Situation Update" (October 2019) states in paragraph  31  that
             the Country Policy and Information Team (CPIT) was not able to
             identify information of targeting of  Nuba  by  the  state  in
             Khartoum or surrounding cities in the sources consulted, which
             are listed in the bibliography.  However, none of the  sources
             in the bibliography directly address the situation of Nuba  in
             Khartoum and the CPIT does not appear to have  spoken  to  any
             Nuba either in Sudan or in the  diaspora  to  ask  them  about
             their views and their experience in recent months."

59. As regards the position of Nuba in the Nuba  Mountains,  Dame  Rosalind
    dealt with this at paras 26-32 referring to a number  of  incidents  in
    2019 involving the RSF:

         "Targeting of Nuba in the Nuba Mountains

         26.  A unilateral ceasefire by both parties  to  the  conflict  has
             been in place in the Nuba Mountains since 2016. Following  the
             formation of the transitional government, Abdel Aziz al  Hilu,
             the leader of the largest SLM/N faction, signed  an  agreement
             with the new government on 11  September  2019  declaring  his
             readiness to take part in peace talks in Juba starting in mid-
             October.

         27.  However, not  much  has  changed  on  the  ground  until  now.
             Southern Kordofan is still under a  state  of  emergency.  The
             military Governor is still in place, the Popular Defence Force
             (an Islamist militia created by the National  Congress  Party)
             is still operational and the police are still the same.

         28.  There are still reports of continuing insecurity. For example,
             on 4 October,  RSF  forces  recruited  from  the  Hawazma  and
             Salamat (Arab nomadic tribes), attacked the  Nuba  village  of
             Tongal in  Habila  locality,  using  25  pick-up  trucks  with
             mounted machine guns. General Himiti, the Deputy Chair of  the
             Sovereign Council and RSF Commander, and Shamseddin  Kabbashi,
             a military member of the Sovereign Council (who is  himself  a
             Nuba  from  the  Gulfan  tribe))  have  been  busy  since  May
             recruiting youth from both Arab  tribes  and  Nuba  tribes  in
             government-controlled areas to  join  the  RSF.  Kabbashi  and
             Yasir Al  Atta,  another  military  member  of  the  Sovereign
             Council, have also been trying to encourage the  nomadic  Arab
             Dar Naeele (a branch of the Hawazma  tribe)  to  change  their
             migration path southwards during the  dry  season  from  their
             traditional route through  government-controlled  areas  to  a
             route through Habila, which is the territory of the Gulfan,  a
             Nuba tribe, and which is very close to the SPLM/N front  line.
             Kabbashi is also reported  to  have  tried  to  bring  in  SAF
             soldiers to accompany the Arab pastoralists on their migration
             route. SPLM/N sources thought that this looked like a ploy  to
             provoke a conflict and give SAF a pretext to capture  some  of
             their territory ahead of the peace talks starting in Juba.  On
             5 October, Kabbashi is reported to have met with  Chiefs  from
             both the Gulfan and Dar Naeele and  given  each  of  them  SDG
             500,000 to unite against the SPLM/N.

         29.  On 16 October Abdel Aziz al Hilu's  spokesman  announced  that
             RSF soldiers in 25 Landcruisers had ambushed civilians  inside
             SPLM/N-controlled  territory  near  Khor   Waral   in   Habila
             locality, abducting 13 people, and killing  two,  including  a
             local Sheikh who had objected  to  the  local  nomads  passing
             through  farmland.   Abdel  Aziz  accused  the  government  of
             supporting the Hawazma against other tribes in the region  and
             violating the ceasefire and announced that  he  was  therefore
             suspending  negotiations  until   there   was   an   immediate
             ceasefire, a full investigation and detainees  were  released.
             General Burhan responded immediately by announcing a ceasefire
             throughout the country. Mohamed el Taishi, a  civilian  member
             of the Sovereign Council and spokesman  for  the  government's
             negotiating team in Juba, strongly  condemning  the  incident,
             pledging to investigate and hold the perpetrators accountable.
              This incident shows that the security situation on the ground
             is still extremely volatile.

         30.  In a separate incident on 7 October, the RSF mounted an attack
             on people living near the gold mines at Talodi, using 27 armed
             pick-up trucks. They beat and arrested civilians, injuring ten
             people, and looted their  property.  Demonstrations  by  local
             residents had been going on for months over the use of mercury
             and cyanide by  gold-mining  companies  which  they  said  had
             caused serious health  and  environmental  problems.  Most  of
             these  companies  are  owned  by  the  RSF  and  the  security
             apparatus. Under pressure from these protests, the Governor of
             Southern Kordofan had ordered the  companies  to  close  their
             factories but  when  they  refused  to  do,  angry  protestors
             stormed the gold mining plants and  burnt  down  four  of  the
             factories and the vehicles of the  companies  operating  them.
             On 4 October, the spokesman of the Sovereign Council condemned
             the environmental protestors as "armed groups  of  saboteurs".
             Residents of Talodi  staged  a  big  march  on  7  October  to
             denounce the statement by the Sovereign Council on the grounds
             that it had not acknowledged the justice of  their  cause  and
             had falsely accused them of being armed. The  six  young  Nuba
             men I interviewed in Omdurman were  particularly  angry  about
             this  statement  because  they  thought  it  showed  that  the
             Sovereign Council were ignoring the grievances of the Nuba and
             defending the vested interests of their own members.

         31.  Tom Catena, the well-known American doctor who has worked in a
             hospital in the Nuba Mountains for the last decade, said in an
             interview in September 2019 that "the  region  remains  a  war
             zone".  There are several reports from the HUDO Centre,  that,
             because of the state of emergency  in  Southern  Kordofan/Nuba
             Mountains, Sudanese security forces  and  militias  have  been
             carrying out arrests at will even since the formation  of  the
             new government.

         32.  If the RSF and  other  security  forces  are  still  attacking
             civilians in  the  Nuba  Mountains,  it  is  difficult  to  be
             confident that they could be relied upon to protect the rights
             of Nuba failed asylum seekers in Khartoum."

60. At paras 33-35, Dame  Rosalind  reiterated  her  view  that  Nuba  were
    particularly targeted under the  al-Bashir  regime  like  the  non-Arab
    Darfuris.  Noting the ongoing peace talks, at  para  35  Dame  Rosalind
    commented on  the  effect  those  peace  talks  might  have  on  social
    attitudes as follows:

         "35. The peace talks  between  the  armed  movements  and  the  new
             government that have just started  in  Juba  are  designed  to
             produce a  comprehensive  peace  agreement  with  four  tracks
             covering Darfur, the Two Areas, Eastern Sudan  and  the  North
             but starting with thematic issues in recognition of  the  fact
             that many of the issues facing the Nuba Mountains  are  common
             to all the marginalised areas. It is too soon to tell how  the
             peace talks will go. But even if the talks succeed, signing  a
             piece of paper is unlikely  to  change  social  attitudes  and
             mindsets overnight. Problems  related  to  ethnic,  religious,
             cultural and social discrimination may continue for some  time
             and will require further reconciliation efforts."

61. At paras 36-37, Dame Rosalind  reached  her  conclusion  that  the  new
    transitional  government  is  an  important  step  but  the   political
    situation was still "very fragile and volatile".  Based on what she had
    set out concerning continued attacks on civilians in South Kordofan and
    what she was told by the six young Nubian men about  the  situation  in
    Khartoum, she concluded that:

         "It would be too early to conclude that it is  now  safe  to  start
         returning Sudanese failed asylum-seekers of Nuba origin to  Sudan".



62. For Dame Rosalind (para 37), the position of Nuba is the same  as  that
    of non-Arab Darfuris as determined in the UT's CG decisions.

    6. Oral evidence (24/25October 2019)

63. In her oral evidence at the October hearing, Dame Rosalind stated  that
    the military retains effective power of veto in the SC as any decisions
    could only pass with a majority of two thirds of the members.  She said
    that two members of the cabinet had been  nominated  by  the  military,
    namely the Minister of Defence and the Minister of the  Interior.   She
    said that Hemeti was the most powerful man in Sudan and  that  his  RSF
    forces were active in the Nuba Mountains including the recent  incident
    she had identified in her report where civilians  in  a  gold  mine  in
    South Kordofan, which was owned by Hemeti and by members of  the  NISS,
    were attacked.  She said that the powers of the NISS (or GIS)  remained
    under the National Security Act which  had  not  yet  been  amended  to
    remove powers of arrest and detention because the  Legislative  Council
    had not been formed.

64. Dame Rosalind stated that the "deep state" had not been dismantled  and
    that  Islamists  remained  in  control  of  the  main  businesses   and
    companies.  Dame Rosalind said that the threat of  an  Islamic  counter
    revolutionary coup was a real one.  She  highlighted  the  failed  coup
    attempt in July 2019 and that the Nuba could be at risk were a coup  to
    materialise.

65. In relation to the demonstration on 21 October 2019, she said that  the
    Islamists had not  taken  part  although  there  had  been  reports  of
    incidents of Islamic activity in the days leading up to those protests.
     She said that the Islamists and NCP (the previous  ruling  party)  may
    seek to stand in the next elections in three years' time and  there  is
    concern that the "deep state" machinery might  be  able  to  rig  those
    elections.

66. Dame Rosalind said that the economic future of Sudan posed  a  "serious
    threat"  to  the  administration.   If  the  economic   situation   was
    unresolved, in her view, this posed a threat of growing discontent with
    the new government and if there was no tangible change there was a risk
    that the government would fall.  If this were to happen, her  view  was
    that the Nuba would be  targeted  again  by  those  who  supported  the
    policies of al-Bashir and by the RSF.  She said that a  further  threat
    to stability was the position taken by al Hilu, the  predominant  group
    within the SPLM-N, in  making  demands  for  self-determination  and  a
    secular state.  She stated  that  al  Hilu  had  signed  a  preliminary
    document in Juba on 21 October which was a road  map  for  negotiations
    and a preliminary agreement on how to handle the agenda.  It  was  not,
    however, a peace agreement and the talks were to resume on 21  November
    2019.  She said that the likelihood of a peace  agreement  depended  on
    how the transitional government, including the civilians and  military,
    were willing to compromise for peace.

67. Dame Rosalind said that  the  RSF  had  signed  an  agreement  for  the
    forthcoming peace talks and a joint cessation  of  hostilities  in  the
    South Kordofan region.  This would allow humanitarian access  to  areas
    under their control.  The government had agreed  that  that  assistance
    could come from outside Sudan as well as internally.

68. Dame Rosalind commented on a Home Office document, CPIT "Response to an
    information request" dated 23 October 2019 ("CPIT 1" below), where  the
    comments of an  official  of  the  British  Embassy  in  Khartoum  were
    reported that contacts had expressed surprise at  the  suggestion  that
    Nuba people were subject to systematic discrimination in Khartoum.  She
    noted that the document did not state whether the Embassy had spoken to
    any Nuba people.

69. Dame Rosalind said that the tea sellers, whom it had been reported were
    harassed, were all Darfuri or Nuba  women  displaced  from  their  home
    areas.  She said that the Public Order law  was  applied  with  a  wide
    discretion to detain, for example against women  wearing  inappropriate
    clothing.  She said that those Nuba men to whom she had spoken, one  of
    whom was a lawyer and another a teacher, had given examples of  day-to-
    day harassment in the shanty towns which was a Nuba majority area.  She
    also said that there was recruitment by the RSF of individuals who were
    forced to fight against their own communities.

70. Dame Rosalind stated that there were "close parallels" between the Nuba
    and  Darfuris.   First,   both   had   been   victims   of   historical
    marginalisation dating back to British rule which  had  been  continued
    and magnified by their treatment by the  al-Bashir  regime.   Secondly,
    they had suffered at the hands of the government having  been  targeted
    in  Khartoum  because  of  perceived  association  with  rebel  forces.
    Thirdly, they were both exposed to social and  economic  discrimination
    in the shanty towns and were often forcibly evicted by  the  government
    who wanted to redevelop land.   Both  Nuba  and  Darfuris  felt  under-
    represented in the transitional government.   She  said  that  although
    General Kabbashi was a member of the SC and  a  Nuba,  he  had  been  a
    member of the former al-Bashir regime and so did  not  provide  a  good
    example of how Nuba were represented.

71. When asked about the return of Nuba now, Dame Rosalind said that it was
    too soon safely to return failed asylum seekers of Nuba origin  because
    of the continuing fluidity of the situation and what might happen  over
    the transitional period.  There were a number of threats to the current
    government and if the military took over there would be a more  hostile
    environment for the Nuba.

72. In cross-examination, Dame Rosalind stated that there were no  accurate
    figures of the number of Nuba in Khartoum but said that it could be  as
    many as 1.5 million.  Not all lived in the 'Black Belt'.  Those  shanty
    towns traditionally had particularly intensive  security  presence  and
    informers to keep an eye on what was going on.

73. Dame Rosalind said that the political threat in 2019 was different from
    previously.  She stated that there had been a change in 2019  and  what
    was crucial was when Hemeti stopped supporting al-Bashir  and  arrested
    him in April.  She said that  the  crackdown  in  June  2019  was  very
    significant because the military came to realise  that  the  revolution
    could not be crushed and that they had to do a deal with the FFC.   She
    said that the potency of the military intervention in Darfur and  South
    Kordofan had "significantly declined".  She said  that  the  threat  in
    2008/2009 was primarily military but the current fear was economic  and
    a takeover by Hemeti and the Islamists.

74. With regards to the position of the Nuba in  Khartoum,  she  said  that
    some had managed to go to university but the majority lived  in  shanty
    towns and an underprivileged existence.  She stated that a  significant
    number of Nuba were Christian and that that could affect  the  risk  to
    them.  She said that Darfuri students were targeted  because  of  their
    association with rebel groups.  She stated that Darfuri  students  were
    seen as politically active.  The Nuba, she said, were  associated  with
    the SPLM-N.  She said that there was no evidence that in early 2019 the
    Nuba had been specifically targeted prior to the fall of the  al-Bashir
    regime.  There was also no evidence of Nuba randomly being arrested.

75. When asked about the position of failed asylum seekers on return,  Dame
    Rosalind said it  was  not  clear  whether  there  was  any  systematic
    procedure in place to monitor failed  asylum-seekers  on  return.   She
    said that she was unclear what  efforts  were  being  made  to  monitor
    failed asylum seekers and she expressed  the  view  that  the  Sudanese
    might also want to keep any such monitoring from the authorities.   She
    said that it might be expected that mistreatment, if it occurred today,
    would come up on social media.  She said there was no evidence that the
    British Embassy has checked or monitored any impact  on  failed  asylum
    seekers on return.  Dame Rosalind also said that there was still a NISS
    (GIS) desk at the airport  but  that  checks  were  more  cursory  than
    before.

76. Dame Rosalind said that at the time of al-Bashir's overthrow  in  April
    2019, the NISS mindset was to suspect failed  asylum  seekers  of  Nuba
    ethnicity with involvement with SPLM-N.  She  said  that  there  was  a
    concern that the remaining NISS members  at  airports  would  not  have
    changed their mindset and there remained a risk that Nuba failed asylum
    seekers would be subject to ill-treatment.

77. Turning to the events of early 2019, Dame Rosalind  stated  that  there
    appeared to be little focus upon  ethnic  background.   She  said  that
    there had been a degree  of  opening  up  of  democratic  space  and  a
    strengthening of civil forces  by  the  appointment  of  independently-
    minded persons and a commitment by the civilian Prime Minister and  his
    cabinet to put in place a radical set of reforms and dismantling of the
    'deep state' as set out in the Constitutional Declaration.

78. Dame Rosalind said that following the 3 June 2019  protests,  in  which
    large numbers had been involved,  the  authorities  had  realised  that
    strong armed tactics no longer worked.  There were external  pressures,
    economic  and  otherwise  on  the  authorities.  She  referred  to  the
    developments by the current authorities including the  announcement  of
    an independent inquiry into the  3  June  events.  The  civilian  Prime
    Minister had appointed a prominent human rights lawyer  with  power  to
    prosecute as the head of the committee.  She  said  that  eight  senior
    military  officers  had  been  charged  with  crimes  against  humanity
    following a military inquiry.

79. Dame Rosalind stated that the civilian Prime Minister had "done a  good
    job" and that there were fine people in  the  Cabinet.   Dame  Rosalind
    also said there had been the appointment of a  new  Chief  Justice  and
    Attorney General nominated by the civilian government.  She  said  that
    the Attorney General and the Ministry of Justice were  discussing  more
    far-reaching legal reforms in Sudan.

80. Dame Rosalind said that the combination of vested interests of powerful
    groups  (in  particular  the   military),   economic   challenges   and
    uncertainty and the risk of a lost  credibility  on  the  part  of  the
    civilian government in the absence of future economic  stability,  made
    the transition process uncertain.

81. When asked about  the  threat  from  Hemeti  and  the  Islamists,  Dame
    Rosalind said that that the Islamists posed no  immediate  threat.   It
    looked, she said, from a political point of view as if  their  strategy
    was to prepare for the elections in three years' time.   Dame  Rosalind
    said that the most likely scenario was that Prime Minister Hamdok would
    not survive the three-year period until  the  elections  and  that  the
    military  may  withdraw  their  co-operation  because  of   their   own
    interests.  Nevertheless, she said that the Prime Minister and civilian
    cabinet  were  committed  to  economic  and  security  reform  and   to
    dismantling the 'deep state'.

82. Dame Rosalind said that the present government, following a  speech  in
    September 2019 in Geneva, had indicated that a new UNOHCR office  would
    open in Sudan and that this was a quite different view than  previously
    taken by the Sudanese authorities.

83. In re-examination, Dame Rosalind was asked whether Nuba  ethnicity  and
    the fact that having claimed asylum overseas would create a risk.   She
    responded that this was a difficult question to answer, except that the
    security apparatus was still in place and that returning asylum seekers
    might be in a different category.  It would  depend  on  how  the  NISS
    (GIS) at the airport behaved.  They might well be  constrained  by  the
    new government which has a different approach.  She said that  she  did
    not have any information.   She  said  that  under  the  old  regime  a
    returning Nuba might have been at risk as suspected of  being  involved
    with the SPLM-N and might have been detained.  She said the same people
    (the NISS) were involved today but that she did not have  any  evidence
    as to how they were treating failed asylum seekers.

84. In relation to very recent events on 21  October  2019,  Dame  Rosalind
    said that the reformers were going to protest and the Islamists too and
    a clash was feared.  However, the Islamists failed to get, as  she  put
    it, "their people out on the street".  A factor may have been that  the
    military made it clear to the Islamists  they  would  not  be  able  to
    approach anywhere near military headquarters.  They had not sided  with
    the Islamists on 21 October.

85. In relation to the Nuba men that she met in  Khartoum  on  her  October
    visit, Dame Rosalind stated that there were  six  Nuba  men  whom,  she
    thought, were activists in the community.  Some  of  these  individuals
    had spoken of a personal experience of harassment within the two  weeks
    prior to the meeting.

B. Madeline Crowther

86. We also heard, and read, evidence from  Madeline  Crowther  who  is  an
    Executive Director and Head of Communications, Research and  Asylum  at
    Waging Peace, an organisation  which  campaigns  against  human  rights
    abuses in Sudan.  She gave oral evidence before us at both the 31 May/1
    June 2018 and 24/25 October 2019 hearings.  She also produced  for  the
    initial hearing a document entitled "Risks  to  Individuals  from  Nuba
    Mountains in Sudan" (March 2018) prepared under the auspices of  Waging
    Peace.  She also  produced  three  additional  written  reports:  dated
    January 2019 in relation to the F-FR 2018; and dated 27 August  and  17
    October 2019 dealing with the developments in Sudan following the  fall
    of the al-Bashir regime.

                 1. "Risks to individuals  from  Nuba  Mountains  in  Sudan"
                    (March 2018)

87. In her oral evidence Madeline Crowther adopted  as  her  statement  the
    Waging Peace report, "Risks to Individuals from Nuba Mountains in Sudan
    (March 2018).  She  stated  that  in  compiling  this  report  she  had
    consulted  a  number  of  organisations  such  as  Oxfam  and   Amnesty
    International and also Dr Tom Catena who worked in the  Nuba  Mountains
    region together with members of the Sudanese diaspora  community.   She
    said that Waging Peace did not pursue a  political  agenda  other  than
    peace in Sudan.

88. The Waging Peace report is a detailed  one.   The  "Executive  Summary"
    sets out the position recognising that individuals  of  Nuba  ethnicity
    are at risk in Sudan  as  targets  of  the  war  efforts  in  the  Nuba
    Mountains, the regime's campaign of 'Arabisation' and  the  association
    of the Nuba with rebel groups.  The summary also notes the return of  a
    number of individuals as failed asylum seekers who  alleged  that  they
    were subsequently detained,  interrogated,  ill-treated  and  tortured.
    The summary is as follows:

         "Individuals of Nuba ethnicity  are  at  risk  in  Sudan,  both  as
         targets of a war effort in the region itself, and of  the  regime's
         campaign of 'Arabisation' and  association  of  'being  Nuba'  with
         rebel loyalties, that makes them ready targets of persecution, ill-
         treatment, torture, or worse,  and  particularly  so  in  Khartoum,
         where security, military, and police officials  are  headquartered.
         This, as well more systemic forms of discrimination - limiting Nuba
         individuals' access to  equal  citizenship,  employment,  religious
         freedom, education, healthcare, and housing -  present  intolerable
         obstacles when trying to relocate internally to the capital.


         This risk is increased at times of political upheaval,  because  of
         the perception that all Nuba  are  associated  with,  or  at  least
         sympathetic to, rebel and opposition activity. Given the wide-scale
         protests in early 2018, which were marked by the  arrest  and  ill-
         treatment of hundreds of opposition figures, this is a particularly
         inopportune and dangerous moment  to  arrange  removals,  and  will
         likely remain so for the foreseeable future.

         Nuba individuals will also be at high risk due to their profile  as
         rejected asylum-seekers.  The  recent  normalisation  of  relations
         between Sudan and various EU Member States has led to the return of
         many individuals  that  allege  they  were  subsequently  detained,
         interrogated, ill-treated, and tortured, whereas others have simply
         disappeared on arrival. This testimony supports the conclusions  of
         our work on the issue of post-deportation risk over more  than  six
         years."

89. The report sets out the background to the war  in  the  Nuba  Mountains
    which has its roots in the Sudanese civil war that ended in 2005 with a
    Comprehensive Peace Agreement and the cessation of South  Sudan  as  an
    independent country in 2011.  The report notes that the war resumed  in
    the Nuba Mountains in June 2011.  The report comments on the nature  of
    the conflict as follows:


         "...it was noted that the Sudanese government placed even  more  of
         an emphasis on disrupting civilian  lives  there.  Attacks  focused
         particularly on civilians, disrupting farming schedules, and  using
         indiscriminate  and  targeted  bombing  of  civilian  targets  like
         schools and hospitals. We asked Dr Tom Catena, currently  the  only
         surgeon present in the Nuba Mountains, to comment on  the  bombing.
         He responded in an email dated 07.02.18:

             '... the areas bombed  were  not  military  barracks  or  even
             places which had any strategic importance.  They  were  random
             market places, schools, hospitals (ours  included  twice)  and
             farming areas. Many casualties of the aerial bombardments were
             civilians who were far from the front lines. We also had  many
             civilians wounded as  a  result  of  indiscriminate  artillery
             shelling.'


         The government has also blocked the delivery of humanitarian aid to
         the region for years, but as  this  issue  has  now  been  subsumed
         within wider political negotiations, it remains deadlocked.


         The situation on the ground has largely played itself out away from
         public attention. International NGOs and humanitarian agencies were
         already largely absent in the Nuba Mountains, and in 2011  were  in
         any case still reeling following  their  2009  en  masse  expulsion
         after  the  indictment  of  President   Omar   Al-Bashir   by   the
         International Criminal Court. Press coverage of events in the  Nuba
         Mountains is almost non-existent, following the regime's deliberate
         obstruction of  media  freedom.  Covering  the  conflict  in  South
         Kordofan has become a 'red line' issue for  NISS,  who  are  tasked
         with keeping the press in check. In its 2013  Freedom  on  the  Net
         report, Freedom House commented on the prosecution of a  number  of
         activists for their coverage of  the  conflict  areas  in  Southern
         Kordofan.

         In fact, one of our interviewees for this report whom we  spoke  to
         on 16.11.2018 (Ms B, an interview conducted with  her  in  2014  is
         also included in Annex I) was a former journalist in Sudan. She was
         tasked with covering South Kordofan, or the Two Areas (this term is
         used to refer to both  South  Kordofan  and  the  Blue  Nile).  She
         described intimidation tactics including an unwarranted  search  of
         her family home, being barred from relevant press  conferences,  or
         having an invitation  revoked  at  the  last  minute,  and  causing
         financial hardship. For instance, she was removed from a flight  to
         attend an event, questioned by security officials, and not  allowed
         to board. More seriously, she was also  sometimes  dragged  to  the
         police station when interviewing witnesses, and even held overnight
         on occasion. She says her only course of action was to  self-censor
         to avoid harassment. The  paper  for  which  she  worked  was  also
         harassed due to the issues it  covered.  Its  editor  had  to  flee
         abroad, sending money to his  team  via  couriers  on  cross-border
         flights, and paying a security guard as they were  regular  victims
         of 'random' crime like knife attacks."

90. The report then turns to consider the current  (March  2018)  situation
    and conditions in the Nuba Mountains:

         "The Nuba Mountains intermittently suffer  from  famine  conditions
         because their farms have been repeatedly targeted by  the  regime's
         campaign of aerial bombardment. The most reliable information about
         food security comes in the form of humanitarian  updates  from  the
         South Kordofan and Blue Nile Coordination Unit,  which  are  shared
         privately with agencies and NGO  partners.  The  latest  of  these,
         released in January 2018, stated that although January and February
         are historically the least lean  months  in  the  year  because  of
         harvest times: "Based on key informant interviews performed by  the
         CU [Coordination Unit], it is likely  the  current  harvest's  food
         stocks will not last beyond April. With the following early harvest
         beginning in August, this will create at least a 3 month food gap."
         Furthermore, The Famine Early Warning Systems Network reported that
         the rate of chronic  malnutrition  in  SPLM-N-controlled  areas  in
         South Kordofan  was  estimated  at  38.3%  due  to  long-term  food
         deprivation and recurrent  illness.  Dr  Tom  Catena  commented  on
         07.02.18:

             "Food security in our area is poor again this year. The  rains
             were not very good and we had one major  flood  which  damaged
             the sorghum crops of many. There  are  still  many  internally
             displaced people who are unable  to  cultivate  to  any  large
             extent. Insecurity prevents farmers from cultivating in  areas
             with good farmland as they fear  attack  by  Arab  nomads  and
             cattle raiders."

         There has been no aerial  bombing  activity  in  2017  because  the
         government of Sudan has been on its best behaviour,  negotiating  a
         normalisation of relations with the United States,  culminating  in
         the partial lifting of sanctions on the country  in  October  2017.
         Although the cessation of offensive  military  activity  should  be
         celebrated, it is not indicative of a change in approach or  policy
         towards the region by the Sudanese government, and  was  driven  by
         political expediency. It remains to be seen how the government will
         respond once the  next  stage  of  the  normalisation  of  US-Sudan
         relations,  the  lifting  of  Sudan  from  the  State  Sponsors  of
         Terrorism list, is concluded.

         The media black-out on events in the region continues. For  example
         in May 2017, the Press and Publications Court in Khartoum convicted
         Madiha Abdala, former Editor of Sudanese Communist Party  newspaper
         Al-Midan, of "dissemination of false information".  She  was  fined
         her 10,000 Sudanese  pounds  (around  $1,497),  for  publishing  an
         article on the conflict in South Kordofan in  2015.   It  would  be
         wrong to conclude that the lack of information coming from the Nuba
         Mountains suggests there is no news, an argument sometimes cited in
         Home Office refusals of which we have had sight.

         Meanwhile, a fresh leadership dispute  within  the  Sudan  People's
         Liberation Movement-North (SPLM-N) since March 2017  has  seen  the
         movement split into two rival factions, triggering  wider  conflict
         and displacement, though primarily  centred  in  nearby  Blue  Nile
         state. The dispute also places at risk the  political  negotiations
         with  Sudan's  government,  in  addition   to   discussions   about
         humanitarian aid delivery.

         Particularly  precarious  is  the  fate  of  mothers  in  the  Nuba
         Mountains. According to a 2017 Human Rights Watch report, women and
         girls living in rebel-held areas of the Nuba Mountains "have little
         or  no  access  to  contraception,  adequate  antenatal  care,   or
         emergency obstetric care-leaving them unable to control the  number
         and spacing of their children, and exposing them to serious  health
         complications and sometimes  death."  Moreover,  the  latest  South
         Kordofan and Blue Nile Coordination Unit  report  in  January  2018
         mentioned that: "Pediatric  care  in  particular  is  substantially
         lacking throughout the region.  As  reported  in  August  of  2017,
         access to basic pediatric medicines or  nutritional  commodity  was
         only 22% for the Central Region and 0% for the Western Jebels.  The
         CU is not aware of any changes to these metrics  over  the  last  6
         months and anticipates the child population still faces substantial
         disadvantages in their access to health care."

         Students from South Kordofan also suffer  routine  harassment.  For
         instance, as recently as January 2018, there were mass  arrests  of
         protestors at Aldalang University in the area. Students there  were
         demonstrating after an officer of  the  Sudan  Armed  Forces  (SAF)
         indiscriminately shot and killed two  students  on  the  university
         campus.   Joint   security   forces   (including   NISS,   Military
         Intelligence, SAF and police) raided the  university  in  response,
         detaining at least 49 students."

91. The position of Nuba "as a risk category" is dealt with under a  number
    of headings: political profile; current political  contexts;  treatment
    by  NISS  of  rejected  asylum  seekers;  and  recent  cases  of  post-
    deportation risk.

92. As regards whether Nuba are at risk because of an actual  or  perceived
    political profile, the report states as follows:


         "Political profile
         It should be clear that Nuba individuals are persecuted in a direct
         and sustained  fashion  as  part  of  the  regime's  war  in  South
         Kordofan. It is of particular relevance that it is this context  of
         conflict that provides the basis for the persecution of Nuba as  an
         ethnicity in Sudan. Nuba individuals are by their nature assumed to
         be either an active part of, or sympathetic  to,  the  SPLM-N,  and
         this then often  forms  the  basis  of  their  targeting  and  ill-
         treatment. It is  important  to  note  that  actual  membership  or
         allegiance to the SPLM-N is not required for this to be  the  case.
         It is sufficient for such qualities  to  be  imputed,  although  of
         course an active political profile would significantly increase  an
         individual's risk profile. And besides, most Nuba  individuals  are
         in some  manner  connected  to  the  SPLM-N  through  large  family
         networks.


         Moreover, the number of people assumed to have a political  profile
         varies according to how vulnerable the Sudanese government believes
         it is at a given moment. Its perception of risk is due  to  how  it
         assesses external circumstances,  in  particular  when  the  threat
         being posed originates with the SPLM-N.  The  testimony  of  Mr  C,
         sourced from one of our earlier reports and  included  in  full  in
         Annex II (we interviewed him separately for this report,  however),
         describes his poor treatment at the time of the elections  for  the
         governor of the Nuba Mountains region, saying "tensions were high".
         Accordingly, in late 2012 and early 2013 there were many arrests of
         Nuba due to their supposed, and sometimes actual, involvement in  a
         coup attempt  by  Brigadier-General  Mohamed  Ibrahim  Abdel-Galil,
         better known as 'Wad Ibrahim'. Most notably, crackdowns followed an
         April 2013 attack by joint forces including the SPLM-N,  named  the
         Sudan Revolutionary Forces (SRF), in the  towns  of  Um  Rawaba  in
         North Kordofan state, and Abu Kershola, in  South  Kordofan  state.
         The attack represented the high watermark  of  the  rebel  military
         advance. In response to their humiliation, the Sudanese  government
         arrested and detained a wide variety of Nuba individuals accused of
         supporting this coalition.

         We have spoken to several individuals who were targeted during this
         particularly restive period. One gentleman was detained for several
         days and then released, only to be re-detained for sixteen days and
         tortured in a manner that included sensory deprivation and solitary
         confinement, as well  as  beatings  to  the  head  later  requiring
         stitches. While detained he also saw several other Nuba individuals
         being tortured. He eventually collapsed and had  to  be  put  on  a
         drip. He still suffers from post-traumatic stress disorder,  and  a
         fear of the dark.

         It is therefore clear that at times of political upheaval, when the
         regime feels its survival is threatened, the first targets  of  the
         security services and other actors are marginalised groups that are
         assumed to be from conflict areas, and so sympathetic to  the  aims
         of rebel groups. Nuba individuals, identifiable by their skin  tone
         and other factors, are presumed to be associated either formally or
         informally with the SPLM-N, and so often bear the  brunt  of  these
         attacks."

93. Under the heading "Current Political Context" the report turns  to  the
    impact, if any, upon Nuba at times when the regime is threatened:

         "There is an established pattern  to  the  crackdowns  and  arrests
         following a perceived threat to the regime's survival. Thus it  can
         be predicted that a Nuba  individual  returned  to  Sudan  at  this
         juncture would readily be assumed to have a prior political profile
         on their arrival. Hence,  they  would  be  more  likely  to  suffer
         arrest, detention, ill-treatment, torture, or worse. This period of
         heightened risk will continue for the foreseeable future."

94. The report then returns to the treatment of failed asylum  seekers,  in
    particular by the security services, the NISS:

         "Treatment by NISS of rejected asylum-seekers
         It is also important to understand how the  very  act  of  claiming
         asylum is viewed as a political act in Sudan. The  government  sees
         Sudanese who have travelled abroad  as  more  easily  connected  to
         opposition and rebel activity, as is  evident  from  the  lines  of
         questioning outlined in the testimonies compiled in our reports  on
         post-deportation risk: 'The Danger of Returning Home'  (2012)  'The
         Long Arm of the Sudanese Regime' (2014)  and 'Recent cases of post-
         deportation risk' (2017).   Individuals  are  routinely  questioned
         about their political activities and  connections  in  the  country
         that have travelled from.

         During our interviews for this report, this fact was  corroborated.
         One  interviewee  (Ms  A)  mentioned  a  Nuba  individual  who  was
         questioned for  hours  on  his  arrival  into  Khartoum  about  his
         political activities and support for the rebels, despite  having  a
         French passport. Another interviewee (Mr C) talked  about  a  human
         rights activist who returned  to  Sudan  in  2014  with  a  British
         passport, but was nonetheless interrogated for one hour  about  the
         activities of the UK  community  group,  NMSA.  They  believed  the
         security officers limited themselves to one hour because he owned a
         British passport. Two of those whom we interviewed, Ms B and Mr  C,
         had their own stories of harassment on arrival, as included in  the
         Annexes. The testimony of those who have returned may  explain  why
         we were told that even those people with British documentation  are
         fearful of  returning  to  Sudan  because  of  their  treatment  on
         arrival. As a consequence, they may fear returning to Sudan even to
         attend the  funerals  of  close  family  members,  including  their
         parents, as recently described by Mr C. Ms A also said that she was
         advised by family members never to leave her  British  passport  at
         home when travelling around, for fear she  would  be  arrested  and
         detained without paperwork.

         This fear is also owing to the fact  the  NISS  continue  to  enjoy
         complete discretion as to who it targets  and  what  techniques  it
         employs, as per the conditions of the 2010 National Security Act  -
         judicial oversight is not stipulated. This  means  the  NISS  makes
         arbitrary judgments  about  whom  they  believe  has  a  sufficient
         political profile to warrant their interest - there is no checklist
         they consult - and that following this judgment,  they  can  detain
         someone for up to  four  and  a  half  months  without  independent
         oversight.  They are also granted complete immunity for any actions
         they take.


         This arbitrary targeting, in addition to NISS's immunity,  are  the
         sources of the fear felt by Nuba individuals living in Khartoum. Ms
         A commented as per our notes:
             "Every  day  we  heard   of   someone   kidnapped,   detained,
             disappeared from Nuba. We felt we had to leave, people we knew
             were  being  detained,  even  killed.  Normally   because   of
             political  values,  but  government  can  always  level  bogus
             charges - arrest first, ask later."

         More often, individuals are detained for only a few  days  if  NISS
         cannot immediately prove wrongdoing. In these cases, NISS's tactics
         change; they will release  the  individual,  intending  to  collect
         information from them later, at a given  date,  or  when  they  re-
         detain them in a 'cat and mouse' pattern.29 They will usually force
         a person to sign a document that releases them on family  guarantee
         or personal security, which obliges  them  not  to  engage  in  any
         political activities, or possibly leave the country, and gives  the
         police the right to  detain  them  at  any  time.  Several  of  our
         interviewees mentioned this tactic. Mr C commented,  "If  you  give
         information you're fine, but if you resist you face difficulties."

95. The report deals with a number of recent cases of claimed ill-treatment
    of returnees to Sudan from  Belgium,  Italy  and  France.   The  report
    begins by identifying the claimed risk  of  ill-treatment,  though  not
    uniquely to Nuba, as follows:

         "The risk faced by returnees into  Sudan  has  become  particularly
         evident  recently  because  of  reported  cases  of   ill-treatment
         following forcible repatriation over the past couple of years. This
         risk is not unique to Nuba individuals, but shared by all  rejected
         asylum-seekers, including those  from  other  marginalised  groups,
         such as non-Arab Darfuris. Therefore some  of  the  cases  outlined
         below do not strictly fit the profile under consideration for  this
         report, but they do demonstrate the risks facing those returned. It
         is clear that Nuba individuals returned to Sudan face  a  range  of
         responses by security officials  on  arrival,  routinely  involving
         arrest,  detention,  interrogation,  and  intimidation,  but   also
         regularly ill-treatment, torture, and even death."

96. The report goes on to note that they are "unable to advise the returnee
    be met at the airport, as this itself could put them  at  risk,  as  it
    would show engagement with local human rights defenders or groups,  and
    it would in  turn  put  those  human  rights  defenders  or  groups  at
    increased risk".  The report then turns to returnees  from  Belgium  as
    follows:

         "Belgium
         In December 2017 it was reported that several individuals  deported
         to Sudan from Belgium alleged they had been tortured.  The decision
         to  deport  them  was  made  by  the  Federal  Secretary  of  State
         responsible for Asylum and Migration, Theo Francken. This  followed
         Francken inviting Sudanese officials on an  identification  mission
         to assess Sudanese migrants, some of whom had been  arrested  in  a
         raid on a  makeshift  camp  in  Brussels'  Maximillian  Park.   The
         delegation was widely believed to have been from Sudan's NISS,  and
         they were allowed to question Sudanese  without  Belgian  officials
         present. The episode eventually  threatened  the  survival  of  the
         coalition  government  in  Belgium,  as  tensions  mounted  between
         Francken, a Flemish nationalist, and Prime Minister Charles  Michel
         from the other Francophone liberal party,  over  a  charter  flight
         scheduled after the allegations came to light.


         In total, the testimonies refer to  nine  Sudanese  who  were  sent
         home, including one gentleman from the Nuba Mountains.  We  are  in
         touch with the organisation that compiled this evidence, the Tahrir
         Institute for Middle East Policy.  Hence we have seen the  original
         testimonies, most of which were obtained over the messaging service
         WhatsApp. All describe a period of  detention  on  arrival  at  the
         airport and interrogation lasting several days, then being released
         on family guarantee/personal  security.  A  few  describe  physical
         torture (being beaten with  a  stick)  or  emotional  torture.  One
         testimony is from a gentleman from the north of Sudan.  He  credits
         the fact that he is not from one of  the  more  marginalised  areas
         (Darfur  or  the  Nuba  Mountains)  with  his   relatively   benign
         treatment.

         As it stands, the Belgian Commission  which  independently  handles
         asylum claims, the Office of the Commissioner General for  Refugees
         and Stateless Persons (CGRS), reported that it  did  not  find  the
         testimonies credible. Hence, Sudanese identification missions  will
         continue, though with more oversight by Belgian officials."

97. Then, in relation to Italy the report continues:


         "Italy
         Italy was one of the first European governments to put in  place  a
         formal bilateral agreement on returns and readmission. It signed  a
         Memorandum of Understanding in  August  2016  aimed  at  increasing
         police cooperation in the  fight  against  transnational  organised
         criminality,  and  especially  irregular  immigration.   Like   the
         Belgian  arrangement,  it  included  provisions  for  missions   of
         officials from  the  respective  territories  to  help  investigate
         details to facilitate returns, as well as of training and equipment
         for the Sudanese police.


         This led to the forcible return  of  around  40  individuals  on  a
         charter flight to Sudan in August 2016. Again, testimonies received
         by NGOs confirm accounts of detention and interrogation on arrival,
         with some individuals witnessing beatings, as documented by Amnesty
         International.  The  human  rights  monitoring  group  Huqooq  also
         provided  the  testimony  of  a  gentleman   nicknamed   'Barakat'.
         'Barakat' claims he was beaten by NISS during the period the  group
         was detained, and he has since gone into hiding. Other  testimonies
         seen by us also suggest that the deportees now  live  in  fear  for
         their physical security, as well as that  of  their  families,  and
         that they believe they are being monitored by NISS,  including  via
         their mobile phones.

         Just recently, these returnees received permission to appeal  their
         cases before the European Court of Human Rights for  violating  the
         principle of non-refoulement."

98. Then, in relation to France the report states:

         "France
         There are rumours that bilateral discussions have been held between
         the French and Sudanese governments to arrange for the  return  and
         repatriation of Sudanese living in France.  Documents  produced  by
         Sudan's Foreign Ministry have come to light that  mention  Sudanese
         concerns about a  particular  community  in  a  Paris  suburb  that
         Sudanese authorities wanted to see returned to Sudan, and a request
         for France to share  a  contact  database  (this  document  can  be
         provided on request). This letter indicates Sudan's clear  interest
         in the behaviour and members of its diaspora, particularly  insofar
         as they may be loyal or merely sympathetic to rebel and  opposition
         activity.

         A French journalist,  Tomas  Statius,  has  also  recently  started
         documenting cases where it seems individuals slated for  return  to
         Sudan were interviewed by a Sudanese delegation, in a  manner  that
         resembles the approach taken  in  Belgium.  The  mission  delegates
         seemed to show particular interest in  those  individuals  who  had
         been formerly imprisoned in Sudan. Mr Statius suggests this may  be
         because the security services are able to verify their presence and
         activity in the country through fingerprint technology  implemented
         in 2012. Mr Statius has identified four people  deported  to  Sudan
         following a Sudanese delegation visit. However, he encountered  the
         same difficulties as we have when trying to monitor those returnees
         and report on their well-being post-return."

99. The evidence concerning the Belgian returns featured  significantly  in
    the evidence before us both in cross-examination  of  Ms  Crowther  and
    also in relation to the  report  of  the  Office  of  the  Commissioner
    General for Refugees and Stateless Persons in Belgium  (February  2018)
    which we set out below.

100. Finally, the report deals with internal relocation  to  Khartoum.   The
    report first deals with an individual returning to Khartoum by air  and
    the likelihood of them being detained, interrogated and  released  only
    on condition that they either do not leave the  country  or  that  they
    gather  information  on  rebel  and  opposition  activities   for   the
    government.  The report's author states:

         "The experiences of those returned to the Sudanese capital via  the
         airport highlight the first difficulty in relocating internally  to
         Khartoum. It is likely that individuals returned will be  detained,
         and interrogated upon stepping off the plane, and released only  on
         the condition that they do not leave the country,  or  worse,  that
         they gather information  on  rebel  and  opposition  activities  to
         prepare for a future period of questioning.  The  concentration  of
         NISS, police, and other military  or  security  activities  in  the
         capital means returnees will have fewer opportunities to escape the
         attentions of these bodies. It is highly likely that they  will  be
         re-detained at a later stage, particularly if they  have  signed  a
         document on release for family guarantee/personal  security,  which
         enables the police to arrest and detain them  at  any  stage.  This
         type of process will be considerably easier if  plans  to  digitise
         citizenship records under  the  aegis  of  the  EU-Horn  of  Africa
         Migration Route Initiative,  in  particular  the  Better  Migration
         Management project run by Germany's development body, the  Deutsche
         Gesellschaft f�r Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ),  are  carried
         out."

101. The report then goes on to identify what it  describes  as  "systematic
    discrimination" faced by Nuba in Khartoum:

         "By far the biggest obstacle  to  Nuba  individuals  relocating  to
         Khartoum are the systemic forms of discrimination individuals  face
         there. The routine denial of these rights  and  opportunities,  and
         the  underlying  racism  of  the  Arab  elite  that   brings   Nuba
         individuals more readily to the adverse  attention  of  police  and
         security officials, amounts to a high degree of persecution."

102. The report identifies areas of discrimination: citizenship,  education,
    housing, healthcare, employment and religion.   However,  before  doing
    so, the report identifies that racial animus, linked  to  the  regime's
    stated aim to 'Arabise' the country, affects and impacts upon the Nuba:



         "Racial animus/'Arabisation'

         That race plays a role is clear from the language used towards Nuba
         individuals, both in everyday  life,  and  more  specifically  when
         being held by NISS or other military and security bodies.  This  is
         also the primary factor that would easily distinguish an individual
         as being of Nuban heritage - their 'blackness' is what would easily
         differentiate them from others in  Khartoum.  Mr  C  mentions  this
         factor in his full testimony, included in Annex II, saying  he  was
         verbally abused because of his  heritage,  and  we  regularly  hear
         similar scenarios in the testimony of other Nuba asylum-seekers  we
         support. The language of slavery is often employed, with  the  word
         'abid', meaning 'slave', being used. This reflects the Nuba  legacy
         of slavery, described above.


         This residual racism  also  helps  explain  why  the  use  of  skin
         whitening creams is so popular among  Nuba  women.  Having  lighter
         skin, or "trying to look Arab" in the words of Ms A, is seen  as  a
         gateway  to  success.  All  our  interviewees  mentioned   this   -
         "everybody's whitening their skin" commented Ms A.  What  is  more,
         because these creams only work temporarily,  they  are  a  purchase
         individuals need to repeat in order to see the benefits, a cost few
         can bear. There are also a multitude of medical  side-effects  that
         will disproportionately affect those with Nuba heritage.


         The context  to  this  is  the  Sudanese  regime's  stated  aim  to
         'Arabise'  the  country.  This  has   historically   involved   the
         suppression of the black, African, and animist (or other religious)
         expressions of Sudanese culture, in favour of those that  are  Arab
         and Muslim. All of our interviewees  mentioned  attempts  to  erase
         Nuban culture in the capital, either by omission (there is "nothing
         non-Arab on TV" said Ms A, or "very rare to see black faces on TV",
         said Mr C, except when  the  African  Union  is  in  town),  or  by
         deliberate cultural destruction. For instance,  we  hosted  an  All
         Sudan Cultural Day in March 2017, and there was  a  performance  of
         Nuba dancing. Many non-Nuban Sudanese in attendance  approached  us
         afterwards and said that they had never seen this type  of  dancing
         in their own country because of the media black-out.

         Additionally, we know some people by certain names. Yet, during our
         interviews, these individuals disclosed that these  names  are  not
         their original or family names. Mr C said that his name,  which  is
         Arabic-sounding, originated because a school teacher declared  that
         his Nuban name was hard to pronounce. The  teacher  announced  that
         the Arabic-sounding name was Mr C's new name. It thereby appears on
         school leaving certificates and official documents. Most people  we
         spoke to expressed outrage at this now that they are  safe  in  the
         UK. Many are currently in the process of changing their names  back
         to what they would have been originally, and  so  reclaiming  their
         Nuban identity."

103. As regards discrimination in the context of Sudanese  citizenship,  the
    report highlights problems faced by Nuba as follows:


         "Citizenship
         Often the suppression of Nuba identity is total. Hence, individuals
         may find deliberate or practical barriers to obtaining  a  national
         identity card entitling them  to  state  services  and  entrenching
         their rights, (for instance shielding them from undue attention  at
         road check-points). Ms B said that in order to obtain an  ID  card,
         or a 'national number', one needs a birth certificate.  Yet,  in  a
         May 2013 report on marginalisation in  Khartoum,  the  organisation
         International Refugee Rights Initiative (IRRI)  found  that  people
         may further be required to  provide  "a  residency  certificate;  a
         nationality by birth certificate, ID, or passport; a certificate of
         blood type or group and an employment letter.  Nuba communities  do
         not customarily own these, and where  they  might  be  acquired  by
         travelling to their home regions, it is to be noted that the  costs
         of travel may be prohibitive for some. The IRRI report further adds
         that some individuals are refused even where they do possess  these
         documents because they possess a 'Southern' name. Ms  B  said  that
         her parents were denied citizenship on that basis.


         This denial of citizenship  is  crucial,  because  an  ID  card  is
         required for access to most opportunities  and  services,  such  as
         employment, housing, and education."

104. The report then turns to the availability and  discrimination  directed
    against the Nuba in the context of education, housing,  healthcare  and
    employment as follows:

         "Education
         An ID card is required in order to sit the exams to leave secondary
         school, as was confirmed by Ms B. By not  taking  this  exam,  Nuba
         students are then also prevented from attending university. This of
         course  presumes  they   received   primary   and   secondary-level
         education. Schooling is not free, so many are unable to afford  it,
         or if they can, it will only be for one child out of  a  family  of
         many more children. In  addition,  there  are  often  few,  or  no,
         schools in the areas in which most Nuba communities live  (the  so-
         called 'Black Belt', discussed below). This  effectively  bars  the
         Nuba youth from educational opportunities.


         Where individuals do get to university, their achievements  may  be
         disparaged. For instance,  one  Nuba  gentleman  we  support  faced
         severe discrimination while at university: he had to repeat a year,
         and was only given a pass grade, despite the fact that  his  peers,
         whom he had tutored, received high marks.


         The suppression of the Nuban identity is also evident  in  attempts
         to eradicate  languages  other  than  Arabic  in  schooling.  Ms  A
         described that during  her  schooling  she  would  have  her  hands
         "beaten raw" for using her mother tongue, rather  than  Arabic,  in
         class. She lamented the fact that traditional  Nuba  languages  are
         becoming  lost,  as  newer  generations  speak  only  Arabic.  Nuba
         individuals are also not represented in school textbooks  or  study
         problems. For instance, exam questions will  say  'Mohammed  has  5
         pieces of fruit', or so on.


         Housing
         As mentioned, most of the Nuba live in certain peripheral areas  of
         Khartoum, nicknamed the 'Black Belt'. Ms A  called  the  conditions
         "heart-breaking", describing a  situation  where  individuals  were
         living  in  slums  without   permanent   structures,   electricity,
         government service provision, or  even  food  in  some  cases.  She
         described how the slums had become 'no go' areas for other Khartoum
         residents. Slum dwellers are  also  demonised  by  the  public  and
         politicians, often in ways that associate them with rebel activity.




         Healthcare
         There  is  no  access  to  the  admittedly  inadequate   healthcare
         accessible to Khartoum's other  residents,  because  there  are  no
         facilities in the 'Black Belt'. Article 46 of Sudan's  constitution
         determines that emergency and primary healthcare  should  be  free,
         but, in practice, it is not. Hence the majority of  doctors  refuse
         to work with the Ministry of  Health  (a  figure  as  high  as  70%
         according to a conversation in February 2018 with  someone  in  the
         sector). There have  been  widespread  strikes  among  the  medical
         profession (as in December 2016) in recognition of  the  fact  that
         the system was near collapse.

         Even were adequate healthcare on offer, Nubans  would  struggle  to
         access it,  because  they  lack  an  ID  card,  or  their  ID  card
         identifies them as a  Nuba.  This  means  they  cannot  access  the
         limited health insurance schemes on offer, and  one-  off  payments
         can push poor  families  into  'catastrophic  health  expenditure',
         where  the  sum  paid  would  seriously  disrupt  household  living
         standards.


         Employment
         All  our  interviewees  mentioned  the  difficulties   in   gaining
         employment, even though those who  spoke  to  were  from  wealthier
         backgrounds and had relevant qualifications.  For  instance,  Ms  B
         said she had to recite verses from the Quran in interviews, and was
         asked questions such as, "Where are you really  from?"  because  of
         the colour of her skin.  As  a  result,  she  ended  up  performing
         outsourcing roles for a computer company or a teaching association,
         where she would be paid, but her name  or  identity  would  not  be
         recorded.  This  adversely  affected  her  ability  to  prove   her
         employment history and skills to future employers.


         Ms A also described the difficulties her husband  faced.  From  his
         home  in  Khartoum,  he  started   an   organisation   focused   on
         development,  and  particularly  water  security,   in   the   Nuba
         Mountains. However, the government effectively barred him from work
         on local development projects. Mr C also said that  although  there
         is a government-run microfinance scheme for small businesses, aimed
         at graduates, and theoretically accessible to individuals from  the
         Nuba Mountains, a successful application requires a guarantor  from
         the government or  ruling  NCP,  something  unlikely  for  Nuba  to
         receive.

         Nuba individuals sometimes limit their horizons as  a  result.  But
         unfortunately, even some of the  lower-skilled  work  available  to
         Nuba individuals is the target of police action, as it  forms  part
         of Sudan's informal economy. For instance, many Nuba women  in  the
         capital work as tea-sellers, while also selling a lightly alcoholic
         drink called marissa. Some Nuba families even give it  to  children
         before school. There have been numerous cases of these women  being
         arrested or submitted to degrading punishments as a  result,  under
         the aegis of the Public Order Laws."

105. Finally, in relation to religion, and  the  fact  that  many  Nuba  are
    Christian, the report says this:


         "Religion
         Another aspect of the 'Arabisation'  programme  is  religious.  The
         Nuba Mountains is a fairly equal and harmonious mix  of  Christian,
         Muslim, and animist believers. However,  in  Khartoum  there  is  a
         sustained  assault  on  the  right  of  worship  and  belief  as  a
         Christian, or simply as a non-Muslim. This is problematic,  because
         as Mr C noted, Nuba individuals often gather, or  build  additional
         infrastructure, around churches as a place of sanctuary.

         Faith-based discrimination has a long history in Sudan, and some of
         our interviewees described the process by which young  men  in  the
         Nuba used to have to pay a dignia, or  tax,  when  they  reached  a
         certain age, as they were presumed to be non-Muslim. Ms  B  claimed
         this sometimes happens even today.

         The non-profit group, Open  Doors,  ranked  Sudan  the  fifth-worst
         country in the world for Christian persecution in 2017, ranked just
         above Syria. The US State Department's 2016 International Religious
         Freedom report said of Sudan, "The government arrests, detains, and
         intimidates clergy and church members. It denies  permits  for  the
         construction of new churches and is closing or demolishing existing
         ones."  The report  details  egregious  violations  of  freedom  of
         religion or belief in Sudan during 2016 and comprehensively details
         a  pattern  of  discrimination,  harassment,  and  persecution   of
         religious  minorities  in  Sudan  that  has  worsened   since   the
         independence of South Sudan in  2011.  A  letter  from  the  United
         States Commission of International Religious Freedom (USCIRF)  adds
         further detail, saying that since 2011, the government of Sudan has
         arrested nearly 200 Christians,  including  14  religious  leaders;
         prosecuted three religious leaders on  spurious  national  security
         charges;  demolished  or  partially  demolished  20  churches   and
         threatened at least 10 others; and refused  to  issue  permits  for
         church construction, arguing that no new churches are needed due to
         the secession of South Sudan and  the  presumed  exodus  of  ethnic
         Southerners, who were predominantly Christian. The  government  has
         also failed to make necessary amendments to the 1991 Criminal  Code
         which criminalises and permits death  sentences  for  apostasy  and
         prison sentences, lashing, or fines for blasphemy.

         In Khartoum specifically, there is a battle  between  the  Khartoum
         State Ministry of Education, and Christian  faith  leaders.  On  26
         July 2017, the  Khartoum  State  Ministry  of  Education  issued  a
         directive requiring Christian schools to open on a  Sunday,  taking
         Friday and Saturday as the weekend  break.  The  Coptic  Church  of
         Sudan was the first denomination to speak out against the order and
         noted that Christian schools have been permitted to take Sunday  as
         a holiday for religious observance since  the  creation  of  Sudan.
         The matter remains unsolved at present."

    2. Oral Evidence (May/June 2018)

106. Madeline Crowther's oral evidence, given at  the  hearing  in  May/June
    2018, was wide-ranging.  She said that she was in regular contact  with
    Nuba groups and her contact assessed that there were around 2,000  Nuba
    in the United Kingdom.

107. She said that the Sudanese government had blocked humanitarian  aid  to
    the South Kordofan region and the Nuba Mountains  for  many  years  and
    that press coverage of events there was non-existent.

108. She said that students from the Nuba tribes were seen  as  being  anti-
    government.  A further problem was that Nuba were  being  perceived  as
    being sympathetic to the SPLM-N.  She said that "most Nuba  individuals
    are in some manner connected to the SPLM-N to  large  family  networks"
    and that this gave rise to the individuals being perceived as having  a
    political profile.

109. She stated that  there  was  continuing  discrimination  against  Nuba.
    They were readily identifiable from their  skin  and  were  subject  to
    racial slurs such as "slave", "black", and the word "abid" was used  in
    a derogatory way.   The Nuba were identifiable  by  their  dialect  and
    customs and that religion was part of it, they did  not  all  follow  a
    strict Muslim code.  She said that Nuba face discrimination on the same
    basis as do non-Arab Darfuris.

110. Ms Crowther said being Nuba and a returned failed asylum seeker  was  a
    combination which put an individual at heightened risk of ill-treatment
    on return.

111. As regards the passages in  the  Waging  Peace  report  concerned  with
    returned failed asylum seekers, Ms Crowther said that she had seen  the
    original  testimony  the  Belgian  returnees  compiled  by  the  Tahrir
    Institute for Middle East Policy.  She said that, despite the  view  of
    the Belgian Commissioner,  she  believed  the  accounts  were  credible
    because she had compared them with other  cases  and  there  were  also
    secret communications through WhatsApp.

112. In relation to the returnees from Italy, Ms  Crowther  said  that  they
    had been in touch with human rights groups in Sudan and  they  were  in
    touch with some of those who had been detained.  Forty individuals  had
    been returned on a charter flight in August 2016  and  testimonies  had
    been  received  by  NGOs  confirming   accounts   of   detention,   and
    interrogation on arrival and some beatings.  In response to a  question
    from the Tribunal, when asked why she had said in her report  that  the
    returnees from Italy had been granted permission to appeal to the ECtHR
    which  was not the process of that court,  Ms  Crowther  said  she  had
    obtained that information from an article.

113. In relation to the returnees from  France,  Ms  Crowther  also  said  a
    journalist had seen documents in relation to the returnees from France.

114. Ms Crowther said that the NISS had  complete  immunity.   She  was  not
    aware of any NISS officers being reprimanded.  She was not sure whether
    NISS had a formal policy on the Nuba.  The  NISS  headquarters  was  in
    Khartoum.  They could be seen present at demonstrations and also family
    events,  for  example,  funerals.   Their  presence  in   Khartoum   is
    heightened.

115. Ms Crowther said there was a risk of  interrogation  and  detention  at
    the airport of up to one day.  There was a risk of re-detention  later.
    Whether individuals would be ill-treated would  depend  upon  what  the
    NISS found out.  If it was  discovered  that  they  had  links  to  the
    opposition they would be ill-treated but not if they did not.   If  re-
    detained, it was likely  would  be  asking  the  individual  to  gather
    information on the community and return to them.  Less likely to be ill-
    treated if that was the case. Individuals were likely never  to  return
    once released as not in their interest.

116. In cross-examination, Ms Crowther said that  not  all  Nuba  living  in
    Khartoum were at risk.  When asked whether the incidents were random or
    targeted, she said that she could not comment.  She  stated  that  many
    incidents were the targeting of activists referred to in the AIR Report
    for 2017/18.  However, she also said that she had  evidence  of  random
    targeting of apolitical Nuba.  She was asked about evidence  concerning
    200 arrests following the January 2018 protests.   She  did  not  agree
    that most had been released: she said 292 were left in detention.

117. Ms Crowther said that Waging Peace had interviewed a detainee  who  had
    witnessed a Nuba individual being questioned for hours  on  arrival  at
    Khartoum airport about his political activities  and  support  for  the
    rebels.  She said that the act of claiming asylum overseas is  seen  by
    the NISS as a political act.  The  NISS  is  not  subject  to  judicial
    oversight and enjoys complete impunity.    There  are  no  accounts  of
    disciplinary action having been taken against  NISS  officers  and  its
    headquarters and presence is  greatest  in  Khartoum  and  there  is  a
    greater likelihood of a Nuba individual being targeted in or around the
    capital.

118. Ms Crowther said that the Waging Peace report referred to a  journalist
    in Khartoum who had been subject to ill-treatment and that she  was  at
    heightened risk as she was trying to report on the 'Two Areas' for  her
    newspaper.  She did not agree that the journalist  had  passed  through
    the airport without any physical ill-treatment.  She said she had  been
    pulled aside and asked difficult questions.  A friend had advocated  on
    her behalf and she had not been detained.  She said that the journalist
    had not been pulled aside because of her Nuba ethnicity.

119. In relation to another individual referred to in the report -  who  was
    from the Nuba Mountains - Ms Crowther stated that he had been  studying
    in the United Kingdom and  had  been  funded  by  the  Government  Arab
    Company.  She said that, despite his Nuba ethnicity, he had  been  able
    to obtain government funding to study  overseas.   She  said  that  his
    arrest was not random but because he had been attending meetings in the
    UK Parliament about his home area.  She said that his arrest fitted the
    pattern of when the Embassy takes  interest  in  the  diaspora  in  the
    United Kingdom.  She said that these were only two examples  and  there
    were dozens of others referred to in footnotes.  She  said  that  if  a
    person was detained they were likely to be treated more harshly if they
    were from one of the 'Two Areas'.

120. Ms Crowther was, again, asked a number of questions about the  sections
    of the report dealing with the return of  failed  asylum  seekers  from
    Belgium, Italy and France.  Specifically, she was asked about the  fact
    that the Belgian Commissioner had  found  the  testimonies  not  to  be
    credible.  She did not accept that the testimonies were not credible in
    relation to the Belgian returnees.  She said that  the  inconsistencies
    in the testimonies  arose  from  the  Arab  language  used  and/or  the
    "fraught period" experienced by the speakers.  However, in her evidence
    subsequently, in her  answers  to  questions  from  the  Tribunal,  she
    accepted that she had never been to Sudan and that she  did  not  speak
    Sudanese Arabic.

121. In relation to the Italian returns,  she  said  that  one  witness  had
    observed a beating at the airport but had not himself been  beaten  and
    the second individual had  been  treated  reasonably.   She  was  asked
    whether she agreed that the Nuba background of the individuals had  not
    led to their arrest  or  ill-treatment.   She  replied  that  one  Nuba
    individual in a cohort considered he had been mistreated because he was
    Nuba but she stated that one man stated  that  he  had  not  been  ill-
    treated because he had said that he was not Nuba.

122. When asked why it was that there was no evidence  concerning  detention
    after individuals had passed through the airport, Ms Crowther said that
    no  one  was  monitoring   their   immediate   post-return   treatment.
    Individuals were released on an undertaking which could result in  them
    being re-detained.

123. Ms Crowther said that ethnic background was a gateway or  indicator  of
    political activity.

124. Ms Crowther was  also  asked  about  conditions  and  circumstances  in
    Khartoum for the  Nuba  as  set  out  in  the  report  in  relation  to
    education, housing, citizenship and religion.  She could  not  say  how
    many Nuba live in the 'back belt'.  She said that individuals  of  Nuba
    ethnicity had difficulties in obtaining ID documents  and  citizenship.
    It was harder for them to have the required  documents  to  obtain  ID.
    She stated that Nuba, particularly from South Kordofan, would  be  able
    to access education if they had primary level education but some  would
    not have that.   In  relation  to  housing,  she  did  not  accept  the
    proposition that Nuba could live anywhere in Khartoum.

125. Ms Crowther said Christians were not able to take Sunday as  a  holiday
    and could not attend Sunday school.  She said that she was not aware of
    any private Christian schools in Khartoum.

126. In re-examination, Ms Crowther said that given the  limited  number  of
    forced returns it was difficult to make an assessment of risk on return
    as a failed asylum seeker. She said that she was aware of  143  returns
    to Sudan; 56 in  2007  but  there  were  no  figures  specifically  for
    returned Nuba.

127. Ms Crowther said that there was a two-stage  process  at  the  airport:
    (1) with an immigration officer; and  (2)  then  with  the  NISS.   The
    separation  was  not  strict  and  there  were  conversations   between
    colleagues.  Her understanding was that they worked in concert.

128. Ms  Crowther  said  that  the  Nuba  were  targeted  because  of  their
    ethnicity.  She gave an example of children detained for  organising  a
    football game.  Ms Crowther said that a number of  factors  would  give
    rise to specific concerns of risk on return for Nuba:  students,  those
    participating in demonstrations, those engaged in political activities,
    those educated above primary level, those who had travelled abroad, and
    those returning with documents which identified them as  failed  asylum
    seekers.

129. Ms Crowther said, in relation to the Belgium returns, that even  though
    the Belgium Commissioner found the accounts not  to  be  credible,  she
    "would argue" that the instances tallied with dozens of accounts Waging
    Peace had collected

    3. Response to the Home Office Fact-Finding Report 2018 (January 2019).

130. Ms Crowther produced a  document  in  response  to  the  F-FR  2018  in
    January 2019.  When Ms Crowther came to give oral evidence before us in
    October 2019, Mr Jacobs indicated that he did not wish to rely  on  her
    January 2019 report and she was, as a result, not  cross-examined  upon
    it.   Although,  she  did  refresh  her  memory  from  it.   In   these
    circumstances, we do not consider that this document forms part of  the
    evidence relied upon by the appellant despite Mr Jacobs'  reference  to
    it in paras [120]-[123] of his final written  submissions.   Given  his
    position at the hearing, and that  Mr  Thomann  was  as  a  result  not
    required to cross-examine Ms Crowther on her January 2019  response  to
    the F-FR 2018, we need say no more about it. Ms Crowther's evidence is,
    in any event, fully detailed in her other evidence, including her  more
    recent "Report on the risk to Nuba Individuals  in  Sudan"  (27  August
    2019) and "Addendum report - risk to Nuba  individuals  in  Sudan"  (17
    October 2019).

    4. "Report on the risk to Nuba Individuals in Sudan" (27 August 2019)

131. In this report prepared for  the  October  2019  hearing,  Ms  Crowther
    stated  that  the  circumstances   in   Sudan   have   changed   "quite
    dramatically" since the May/June 2018 hearing (para 18).

132. Mr Jacobs draws attention to seven aspects of  her  evidence  which  we
    can summarise as follows.  First, the rising prominence of Hemeti  who,
    as leader of the  RSF,  oversaw  campaigns  of  violence  in  the  Nuba
    Mountains (para 19).  Secondly, Hemeti and  other  TMC  activists  were
    involved in acts of repression in Khartoum including the violence on  3
    June 2019 in which RSF soldiers intent on committing  rape  and  sexual
    violence used racist language to women from Darfur and Nuba  Mountains.
    Ms Crowther referred to  an  article  which  set  out  Hemeti's  racist
    language towards those occupying the  sit-in  prior  to  the  violence,
    referring  to  them  as  zurgha  (meaning  'dirty  black')  (para  21).
    Thirdly, the killing of tea ladies during the violence on June 3 (paras
    22 and  23).   Fourthly,  the  targeting  of  a  professional  national
    football player of Nuba background following his  participation  during
    the June protests (para 24).  Fifthly, the attacks which took place  in
    the 'Black Belt' after 3 June 2019 (para 25).  Sixthly, the failure  of
    the TMC to release 25 individuals of Nuba  and  Darfuri  ethnicity  who
    were not included in the TMC's release pardon  (para  26).   Seventhly,
    the al-Hilu  faction  of  the  SPLM-N  boycotted  the  signing  of  the
    agreement between the TMC and the FFC (para 30).

133. To her report, Ms Crowther attached a number of written responses  from
    individuals and organisations: including: (a) unnamed expert  A  (Annex
    II); (b) Koert Debeuf, Director of the Tahrir Institute for Middle East
    Policy Europe (Annex III); (c)  Mohaned  Elnour,  human  rights  lawyer
    (Annex IV); (d) South Kordofan/Blue Nile Coordination unit  (Annex  V);
    (e) Sir Henry Bellingham MP, Chair of the All Party parliamentary Group
    on Sudan & South Sudan (Annex VI); (f) Hafiz Mohamed,  activist  (Annex
    VII).

134. In para 31 of her report, Ms Crowther referred to parts of the  annexed
    material as follows:

           "Sudan expert A says 'the implications of the recent changes for
           Nuba specifically are not easy to  measure';  and  Koert  Debeuf
           from the Tahrir Institute for Middle  East  Policy  Europe  says
           'Everything is messy now.  Therefore it  is  risky  to  make  an
           assessment that can hold for more than one week.'  The All-Party
           Parliamentary Group, in their submission at Annex V1 said,  'The
           APPG for Sudan and South Sudan has heard from  senior  officials
           in the British Government who believed  that  the  situation  in
           Sudan had drastically improved only  to  give  a  more  cautious
           opinion within a matter of days after the situation deteriorated
           rapidly.  Given that the situation is unstable, at this point it
           is inappropriate to consider  South  Kordofan  safer  under  the
           current regime than it was under the old regime.'"

135.  Ms  Crowther  said,  based  upon  their  responses,  that  they   were
    "unanimous in cautioning against hastily optimistic interpretations  of
    the current situation" (at para 31).

136. As regards the NISS  (GIS)  activities  at  the  airport,  Ms  Crowther
    stated (at para 34):

           "I also  find  it  relevant  that  procedures  for  exiting  and
           entering the country remain largely unchanged, even despite  the
           limitation on NISS's role  to  simply  information-gathering   -
           activist [] confirmed to me that security officials  maintain  a
           desk at the airport at which they ask  you  about  your  planned
           activities out of or in the country.  It is  too  early  to  say
           how, and if, this will change in coming months."

137. In her concluding paragraph, she said this (at para 35):

           "In conclusion, now is not the time  to  say  whether  attitudes
           towards Nuba individuals have improved,  especially  considering
           the very recent fall of the Bashir regime and its replacement by
           a new transitory system.  The situation is  simply  too  new  to
           draw firm conclusions that would last more than the coming weeks
           or months, and many respondents to my  request  for  input  said
           they felt that even if better treatment  were  to  hold  for  an
           initial period, the historically marginalised  groups  would  be
           among the first to suffer should there be a  wider  governmental
           crisis.  There is ample evidence that attitudes among  the  TMC,
           chiefly originating in the RES and its leader Henetti, are anti-
           Nuba, both on ethnic/racial grounds, and because individuals are
           assumed  to  have  existing  anti-government  opinion.   It   is
           therefore my  opinion  that  someone  returned  to  Sudan  as  a
           rejected asylum seeker  could  foreseeably  face  difficulty  on
           arrival at the airport or otherwise, not least as their exposure
           to diaspora activities would single them out as being of further
           interest."

    5. "Addendum to Report on the risk to Nuba Individuals  in  Sudan"  (17
    October 2019)

138. This document was prepared following a  visit  in  late  November/early
    December 2018 to South Sudan, including a refugee settlement  near  the
    border with Sudan. Ms Crowther annexed three statements and emails from
    organisations: (a) the SPLM-N (Annex 1); (b) Dr Catena (Annex II)  and;
    (c) the Nuba Solidarity Group Abroad (Annex III).

139.  Ms Crowther said (at paras 5-6)  this  about  the  continued  role  of
    Hemeti and the 'deep state' and Islamists  and  the  treatment  of  the
    Nuba:

         "5.  Concerns continue to centre on the role taken by the  military
             in the process, and particularly of individuals implicated  in
             atrocity crimes under  the  previous  administration.  Mohamed
             Hamdan Dagalo, or 'Hemeti' - whose Rapid Support Forces  (RSF)
             are the re-branded Janjaweed responsible for the worst  abuses
             in Darfur at the height of the genocide  there;  whose  forces
             have fought in  South  Kordofan;  and  who  served  on  former
             President Omar Al-Bashir's security committee - maintains  his
             position, as does Abdel Fattah al-Bourhan,  who  held  a  high
             rank in the Sudanese Armed Forces (SAF) under Bashir.

         6.   But more relevant  still  is  the  presence  of  hundreds  and
            thousands  of  officials  who  served  under  Bashir   in   the
            transitional authorities. It remains an open source of  tension
            of what to do  with  those  individuals  with  affiliations  to
            Bashir's political party, the National  Congress  Party  (NCP),
            and who were on the government payroll. Short of a total purge,
            this  administrative  apparatus  will   be   maintained.   This
            apparatus was employed by Bashir during his rule to  conduct  a
            brutal policy of  Arabisation,  during  which  black,  African,
            animist, or other religious  expressions  of  Sudanese  culture
            were suppressed in favour of Arab and Muslim  identities.  Many
            Nuba on the ground and within the diaspora see disparaging  and
            racist  ideologies  as  the  most  pernicious  and   persisting
            legacies of the Bashir era - it is still common for jokes to be
            made about an individual's blackness, using words  like  'abid'
            which means slave. I expanded on this in my March  2018  report
            and wish to draw your attention to these  remarks.  It  remains
            the case that an individual will be readily identified as  Nuba
            because  of  their   skin   tone;   that   they   will   suffer
            discrimination  in  equal  citizenship,  employment,  religious
            freedom, education, healthcare, and housing, especially because
            of inability to obtain  official  documentation  that  entitles
            them to government services; and that in addition they will  be
            subject to the unchanged and hostile  administrative  apparatus
            of the state."

140. At para 7, Ms  Crowther  stated  that  a  clear  example  of  the  "the
    unchanged nature of the judicial system and  its  animus  against  Nuba
    Christians" was the confirmation  of  criminal  charges  against  eight
    leaders of the Sudanese Church of Christ which  is  a  primarily  Nuban
    denomination.

141. At paras 8-9, Ms Crowther stated that:

           "no further proposals have been forwarded regarding justice  and
           accountability for  historic  crimes,  including  those  of  war
           crimes, crimes against humanity, and genocide in Darfur, and the
           targeted  and  indiscriminate  aerial   bombardment   of   South
           Kordofan. Bashir still has  a  pending  arrest  warrant  at  the
           International criminal court, but is avoiding  handover  and  is
           instead  involved  in  a  domestic  court   case   relating   to
           corruption..."

142. Ms Crowther said (at para  10)  "there  was  at  least  initially  more
    hopeful progress on the peace file."  However, she then referred to the
    withdrawal of al-Hilu from that process as a result of further  attacks
    in the Nuba Mountains (para 10).  She also referred to the incidents of
    violence,  curfew,  arbitrary  arrests,  confiscation  of   goods   and
    checkpoints near  Dilling  in  South  Kordofan  (para  11).   She  also
    referred to incidents of  a  person  tortured  because  of  a  personal
    dispute with a military official and the  killing  of  two  individuals
    following a "run-in with the Popular  Defence  Forces  (PFD)  involving
    cattle grazing" (para 11).  She referred to the communication  from  Dr
    Catena (Annex II)  that  he  had  received  patients  from  government-
    controlled areas in recent months (para 11).  She also referred to  the
    incidents in September and October 2019 involving local  protests  near
    Talodi over the use of dangerous chemicals in the gold  mines  and  the
    raid by the RSF on the  goldmines  in  Talodi  to  protect  the  mining
    operation by Hemeti (para 12).  She stated that the response of the  SC
    to these incidents was "muted" while "the cabinet took  action  to  ban
    the use of toxic chemicals in the mining process." (para 12)

143. Ms Crowther stated that, despite the release of detained prisoners,  25
    individuals -  whom  she  stated  were  "Nuba  political  prisoners"  -
    remained detained (at para 13)

144. Ms Crowther stated that the Public Order  law  has  been  suspended  in
    central Khartoum but it remains in force in the 'Black Belt' where most
    Nuba live.  She said that she had heard reports that  the  police  have
    been raiding houses accusing inhabitants  of  producing  local  alcohol
    called  'Merisa'  and  confiscating  belongings  but  without   initial
    oversight (see para 14).

145. Ms Crowther said  that  "the  political  situation  remains  incredibly
    fragile" (para 15).  At para 16, Ms Crowther referred to the  continued
    existence of the NISS (rebrand the GIS) and that its powers  have  been
    "limited to intelligence-gathering".  But, she said that, as with other
    developments, the changes may not bring about change.  At para  21,  Ms
    Crowther referred to the (then) planned protest on 21 October  to  mark
    the date of the  1964  October  revolution.   She  said  (foreshadowing
    something that did not in fact occur) that this:

           "has  exposed  fault  lines  between  Islamists,  former  regime
           officials, and  the  regular  demonstrators  who  all  protest's
           leadership and merit, and  this  may  lead  to  an  outbreak  of
           further violence." (para 20)

146. Ms Crowther referred to violence  "at  recent  marches"  so  that  "the
    behaviour of police and other armed elements towards  demonstrators  is
    still of active concern" (para 20).

147.  Ms Crowther said this in her conclusion (at para 21):

           "the recent change in government should not be  exaggerated,  it
           is simply too early to tell whether earlier  stated  commitments
           to peace and respect for diversity will be  respected,  and  the
           initial  progress   is   discouraging,   particularly   as   the
           administrative  apparatus  of  the  Bashir  era  remains  mostly
           intact."

148.  Ms Crowther went on to state (at para 21) that popular  discontent  is
    growing in the Nuba communities in Sudan and the  diaspora  with  fears
    that

           "the conflict, persecution, discrimination, and  Arabisation  of
           the Bashir era will continue whilst its administrative apparatus
           and racist ideology remains in force."

    6. Oral evidence (25 October 2019)

149. At the 24/25 October 2019 hearing, Ms Crowther was tendered for  cross-
    examination.  She spoke of her visit to camps in South Sudan.  She said
    that humanitarian aid could only return to the Nuba  Mountains  if  the
    SPLM-N and al Hilu  forces  made  an  agreement.   She  said  that  the
    incidents of specific targeting were directed at high  profile  figures
    and those who were in  and  around  protests.   But,  she  stated  that
    incidents were more general.  She said  that  she  had  spoken  to  the
    director of the HUDO Centre who had told her that there was a crackdown
    in the 'Black Belt' on the day of the violence on 3 June 2019  followed
    by which there were days  of  harassment  by  the  RSF  which  involved
    looting, arresting people and confiscating belongings.

150. Ms Crowther was asked about the Home Office  document  CPIT,  "Response
    to an Information Request" (23 October 2019) which referred at para 3.6
    to prisoner releases, but, she said, this did not relate  to  the  Nuba
    and Darfuri detainees whom she had said in her evidence continued to be
    detained.

151. Ms Crowther said that releases were a confidence  building  measure  in
    advance of the peace process. She said that the 25 still detained  were
    Nuba or associated with the SPLM-N.

152. Ms Crowther was asked about some of the  material  annexed  to  her  27
    August 2019 report.

153. First, she was asked about expert A's view in Annex II.   She  accepted
    that expert A drew a distinction between Nuba present in  Khartoum  who
    were "pro-SPLM and anti-SPLM" and that expert A said that  "the  strong
    Nuba  presence  in  Khartoum"  were  "both  socially  and  economically
    marginalised, but not necessarily systematically persecuted".

154. Secondly, she was asked about the views of Koert Debuf  of  the  Tahrir
    Institute in Annex III.  There he said, in relation to South  Kordofan,
    that:

           "[i]t is very difficult, and even more so than in the  past,  to
           get an accurate picture of the situation in Sudan in general and
           in South Kordofan in particular.  From the  information  I  get,
           the situation is much better now as negotiations were  concluded
           in a rather good way."

155. In relation to Khartoum, Koert Debuf said:

           "Right now, it seems safe  for  Nuba  individuals  in  Khartoum.
           However...the situation remains prematurely stable.  Things  can
           collapse quickly.  If that happen, Nuba individuals, as well  as
           Darfuri people, might become the first  victims.   Therefore,  I
           would advise them to wait with relocations until  the  consensus
           become more stable."

156. Ms Crowther said that that was his assessment  and  that  she  did  not
    agree with everything he said.

157. Secondly, Ms Crowther was asked about Mohan Elnour's report (Annex  IV)
    of when, in December 2016,  she  met  a  person  (a  non-Arab  Darfuri)
    deported from Italy who had said that, on arrival, of the 40  deportees
    the NISS had allowed all but himself and 5 others  (two from  the  Nuba
    Mountains and three non-Arab Darfuris) to leave.  He had been  detained
    for 35 days by the NISS and  tortured  before  being  released  without
    charge.  He had no idea what had happened to the others.   Ms  Crowther
    said that this concerned 2016 and not anything that related to 2019.

158. Thirdly, in respect of the material from the South  Kordofan/Blue  Nile
    Coordination Unit (Annex V),  Ms  Crowther  agreed  that  the  material
    described individual incidents of "cattle raids" in Dilling  but  there
    was no evidence of general round-ups in South Kordofan.

159. Fourthly, in  relation  to  Sir  Henry  Bellingham  MP's  communication
    (Annex VI), Ms Crowther agreed that he had not given any examples.  She
    said the Sudanese government made it difficult to  obtain  an  accurate
    picture.

160. Fifthly, Ms Crowther was  asked  about  the  communication  from  Hafiz
    Mohamed (Annex VII).  Their he said that the "security and humanitarian
    situation" in South Kordofan had not changed and that the militias were
    still carrying out atrocities.  Ms Crowther  agreed  that  he  had  not
    given any specific examples because he was not asked to do so  although
    he had given her examples in discussion.  Ms Crowther  was  also  asked
    about Hafiz Mohamed's comments that the procedure at  Khartoum  airport
    was "still the same" involving a second desk  where  the  NISS  checked
    passports and asked questions  and that "they might move you to one  of
    their centres, that also depends on your ethnic background, Darfuri and
    Nuba treated very harsh".  Ms Crowther that the assessment by the  NISS
    was intelligence gathering and she agreed  that  no  specific  examples
    were given. At para 26 of her report, where she said he had stated that
    Nuba and Darfuri individuals  were  treated  "much  more  harshly",  Ms
    Crowther said this was a reference to the 3 June events.

161. Ms Crowther said  that  there  was  a  lack  of  widespread  abuses  or
    targeting but stated  that  this  lack  of  evidence  of  targeting  or
    rounding up  of  Nuba  in  Khartoum  "doesn't  mean  that  there  isn't
    evidence".   She said that the use of social media, in conjunction with
    the protests in 2019, had been "definitely helpful".

162. Ms Crowther said that the Nuba will continue to be associated with  the
    SPLM-N and suspected of being opposition activists - even if  they  are
    not engaged in active fighting themselves.  It was, she said, too  soon
    to conclude that there would not be a return  to  general  patterns  of
    discrimination and mistreatment.  She said that there was an increasing
    frustration with the lack of progress made by the  interim  government.
    She was also concerned that early progress with the peace  process  had
    stalled but she said that  there  had  been  a  number  of  encouraging
    developments as regards the new government's progress.

163. Ms Crowther was critical of the methodology of the F-FR 2018 and  that,
    unlike in the past, the British Embassy in Khartoum had  not  consulted
    widely and she referred to the view  of  the  All  Party  Parliamentary
    Group that the Embassy had not penetrated sufficiently into  the  lives
    of everyday Nubas or Darfuris.  She was critical of the failure of  the
    Home Office source to go into the 'Black Belt'.

164. Ms Crowther said that Salah Gosh, the former  head  of  the  NISS,  had
    disappeared.  He was, she said, part of the group who  had  ousted  al-
    Bashir and it was not known to what extent he was continuing to  be  in
    contact with NISS units and that maybe he was positioning himself for a
    political career.  She said it was positive that he was no longer  head
    of the NISS/GIS as  he  was  behind  the  most  egregious  abuses.   Ms
    Crowther said that the majority of NISS staff remain in post  and  that
    their perceptions of the Nuba would persist.  She said  that  the  Nuba
    would be the first to  suffer  if  the  situation  becomes  politically
    charged again in Sudan.  She said that this outcome is likely in  light
    of the demands of the SPLM-N (al Hilu faction) on cessation  and  that,
    given there had already been 22 rounds of peace negotiations which  had
    failed, any optimism should be cautious. In  re-examination,  she  said
    that the NISS still constituted a threat to the Nuba as attitudes would
    remain and an assumption that they were sympathetic to the cause of the
    SPLM-N.

165.  Ms  Crowther  was  asked  about  her   "Addendum   Report"   and   the
    communication from Dr Catena at Annex II of that report.  She was asked
    whether  incidents  of  violence  etc  were  now  widespread  in  South
    Kordofan.  She said that Dr Catena reported that he had started to  see
    casualties from government-controlled areas.  She said that  the  state
    of emergency seemed to be having  a  disproportionate  effect  in  Nuba
    areas through the RSF and security forces.

166. In answer to questions from the Tribunal, Ms Crowther said  that  there
    were Nuba in the Government.  The minister in charge of immigration and
    the minister for agriculture were both Nuba.  She also said that  there
    were two members of the SC who were Nuba, one a former military figure,
    and the other on the civilian side.

C. Dr Eric Reeves

167. Dr Reeves is a Senior Fellow at Harvard University  Centre  for  Health
    and Human Rights.  He has not visited Sudan since 2003.  He produced  a
    report dated January 2018 and also gave oral evidence via  Skype  on  1
    June 2018.  We are grateful to Mr Jacobs and Mr Thomann for their joint
    (largely in agreement) note of Dr Reeves' oral evidence which  we  have
    placed some reliance upon in what follows.

    1. "Risk to people from the Nuba Mountains Region on return  to  Sudan"
    (January 2018)

168. Dr Reeves set out the sum of his views in the  "Executive  Summary"  of
    his January 2018 report. In preparing his report, Dr Reeves consulted a
    number of individuals, including academics, researchers, historians and
    a Sudanese Human Rights lawyer.

           "Executive Summary

           The evidence availability collectively  strongly  suggests  that
           there  are  significant  dangers  for   Nuba   people   forcibly
           repatriated to Sudan, including to the Khartoum urban area.   By
           all expert accounts that I  have  solicited  in  preparing  this
           report, Nuba people would face unacceptable  risks,  even  those
           returned who have a very low profile.  Indeed, a  'profile'  can
           be created simply by virtue of seeking  political  asylum  in  a
           European country or re-entering Sudan (and thus  inevitably  the
           Khartoum airport) without proper papers or showing any signs  of
           forced repatriation.

           There is a long history of racial attitudes on the part  of  the
           ruling regime in Khartoum toward all  non-Arab/African  peoples.
           This  is  reflected   in   the   language   of   denigration...,
           discrimination   in   employment   (even   if   non-Arab/African
           applicants  have   superior   qualifications   and   educational
           attainments), harassment on the streets, arbitrary arrests,  and
           a lack of access to real political power (they  serve  sometimes
           as figureheads but never with real power to direct the  policies
           of the National Congress Party).

           The   current   economic   crisis   continues   to    accelerate
           dramatically,  and  there  are  already  signs  of  intensifying
           repression by the government.  In the  past,  non-Arabs/Africans
           have often been made scapegoats  at  such  threatening  moments.
           But even before the crisis emerged fully with  the  government's
           promulgation of the 2018 budge[t], which has  seen  catastrophic
           price increases for basic commodities (e.g., 300% for  bread,  a
           staple food for most Sudanese), there were clear threats to  any
           forcibly  repatriated  Nuba.   The   recent   Belgian   forcible
           repatriation of some 100 Sudanese, selected  by  representatives
           of the National Intelligence and Security Services  (NISS),  has
           provided graphic evidence of how badly such compulsion can be.

           The experts I have consulted  specifically  vis-�-vis  the  Nuba
           have all concluded emphatically that forcible repatriation would
           present  intolerable  risks   of   harassment,   discrimination,
           incarceration, torture, and/or murder.  Forcible repatriation of
           Nuba people to Sudan is, I believe in the light of these experts
           views, a violation of international law."

169. Dr Reeves referred to the  "continuing  imposition  of  a  humanitarian
    blockade over virtually all areas of the Nuba  Mountains"  (p.10).   He
    stated that the SPLM-N in the Nuba mountains "remains the most  serious
    threat" confronting Khartoum (p.10).  He stated  that  the  "continuing
    use  of  a   humanitarian   embargo"   was   deployed   as   a   "basic
    counterinsurgency weapon" (p.10).  He referred to "leaked minutes" from
    a meeting of senior military and  security  officials  in  August  2014
    making "explicit the goal of destroying that  year's  abundant  sorghum
    crop" (p.10).

170. Dr Reeves referred (p.11) to  a  person  interviewed  who  had  been  a
    returnee from Belgium in 2017 who claimed to have  been  questioned  by
    the NISS at Khartoum airport.  It is reported that the interviewee said
    that the NISS held most of the group returned and he had not  heard  of
    the fate of the others.

171. Dr Reeves stated that, based upon what  his  respondents  had  replied,
    "the chances of arrest, torture, and/or murder are  very  significantly
    increased if the Nuba person repatriated has  a  'political  profile'."
    (p.12)  Such a 'profile' may be created in a number of ways,  including
    applying for asylum in a Western country (p.12).  Dr Reeves states that
    judging whether a Nuba person  is  "political"  was  "entirely  at  the
    discretion of the NISS" which enjoys "total  impunity"  and  he  stated
    that he knows of no case  where an NISS officer  has  been  disciplined
    for human rights abuses (p.12).  Dr Reeves stated (at p.12)  that  this
    "widespread impunity" makes

           "the fate of any Nuba person seeking political asylum in the  UK
           entirely uncertain if forcibly repatriated to Sudan, even if the
           intention of the asylum seeker is to live  'non-politically'  in
           the Khartoum urban area."

172. Dr Reeves referred to the concentration of  the  security  services  in
    Khartoum and stated that the "opportunities for repression in the still
    predominantly ethnically Arab capital are  especially  numerous."(p.12)
    By repression he stated that he meant: "job discrimination, harassment,
    street beatings, incarceration, torture and  murder"  (p.12).  But,  he
    went on to state that the "NISS is pervasive in Sudan" and  that  there
    are "no safe havens  in  the  country  for  forcibly  repatriated  non-
    Arab/African peoples". (p.12)  Dr Reeves stated that as a result of the
    generalised hostility to non-Arab/African  peoples  from  regions  with
    continuing rebellions or strenuous political opposition:

           "mistreatment of  forcibly  repatriated  Sudanese  fitting  this
           ethnic/political profile are at acute danger." (p.12)

173. Foreshadowing (then) future events, Dr Reeves stated that  the  economy
    was in "an irreversible decline and that civil  unrest  will  grow  far
    beyond what we have seen to date" (p.13).  Dr Reeves stated that it was
    "quite likely" that "the  historical  scapegoating  tendency"  will  be
    directed against  non-Arab  Sudanese  including  these  from  the  Nuba
    Mountains and Blue Nile (p.13).   He stated that, for many, there would
    no escaping from the "violence that will be unleashed by  a  regime  in
    its death throes" (p.13).

174. Under the heading "Conclusion", Dr Reeves stated (p.14):

           "the risk of being persecuted soley on the basis of being a non-
           Arab Nuba person in Sudan, particularly in the Khartoum area, is
           unacceptably high.

           Nuba people cannot internally relocate to Khartoum to escape  or
           avoid persecution; although those with a political  profile  are
           most  likely  to  suffer  persecution  -  including  harassment,
           discrimination, illegal incarceration, torture, and even  murder
           - all are at potential risk".

    2. Oral Evidence (1 June 2018)

175. Dr Reeves stated in his oral evidence that he was  in  regular  contact
    with Dr Catena in the Nuba Mountains and, relying on an email dated  18
    May 2018 from Dr Catena, Dr  Reeves  stated  that  notwithstanding  the
    cease-fire there had been skirmishes  in  the  region  and  there  were
    rumours that militia would attack the goldmines in the area.  Dr Reeves
    referred to the Sudanese bombing attacks on civilian targets up to July
    2016 and the continuing humanitarian blockade imposed by the government
    in the Nuba Mountains.  Dr Reeves referred to  a  leaked  minute  of  a
    meeting of senior military and security officials  in  Khartoum  on  31
    August 2014 in which it was agreed that the Sorghum crop  in  the  Nuba
    Mountains should be destroyed to use starvation as a method of war.

176. Dr Reeves said that the Nuba were subject to severe discrimination  and
    that they were viewed as African, ill-educated and inferior.   He  said
    that there was no feasible  prospect  of  a  Nuba  living  in  Khartoum
    accessing education.  Dr Reeves stated that the  Sudanese  government's
    view of non-Arab or African Sudanese is inherently racist.  Their dark-
    skinned colour is referred to with offensive  language  "abid"  meaning
    'slave'.  In his view, the Nuba were subject to greater  discrimination
    than Darfuris.  Whilst Darfur provided soldiers for the  North  in  the
    civil war, the Nuba sided with the SPLA rebel army.  There was residual
    anger against Nuba in respect of this.

177. Dr Reeves said that there  had  been  a  media  blackout  in  the  Nuba
    Mountains and that no journalist had been permitted to report from  the
    area since June 2011 when the fighting began.  He said that the actions
    of the government towards the Nubas in the Nuba Mountains had  amounted
    to genocide.  In particular, in June 2011 in Kadougli  there  had  been
    house to house killings and civilians were hunted  down  by  helicopter
    gunships.  Dr Reeves stated  that  the  humanitarian  blockade  of  the
    region was still in place.

178. Dr Reeves stated that, although  the  government  had  ceased  military
    bombardment in the Nuba Mountains, the situation  could  easily  change
    and that there was a likelihood that hostilities  would  resume.   This
    was because the government was not able to tolerate large parts of  the
    country that it could not control.  Much of Darfur had been subdued  by
    government forces but the same was not true in the Nuba Mountains.   He
    said  that  the  present  risk  was  starvation,  lack  of   education,
    availability of vaccinations and medicines.

179. As regards returnees, Dr Reeves stated that  he  considered  that  Nuba
    failed asylum seekers who returned on emergency travel  documents  were
    almost certain to be singled out for detention and the  probability  of
    torture was high.  Dr Reeves said that the mere fact that  a  Nuba  had
    travelled abroad would mark him out as suspicious on  return  and  give
    rise to a real risk of mistreatment.  The  ability  to  have  left  the
    country showed resourcefulness and  the  fact  of  having  applied  for
    asylum overseas would lead to imputed political opinion.  As fewer Nuba
    are returned than Darfuris, the Nuba returnees would, in his  view,  be
    more likely to be singled out.

180. In cross-examination, Dr Reeves was asked about the number of  Nuba  in
    Khartoum.  He was uncertain of the number but finally stated that there
    were about 100,000 to 200,000 but that was a  'guesstimate'.   When  he
    was asked whether he agreed with Waging  Peace's  estimation  of  2,000
    Nuba in the UK, Dr Reeves  said  that  he  could  not  comment  on  the
    accuracy of that figure.

181. Dr Reeves stated, when asked about there  being  no  evidence  of  Nuba
    students being targeted in Khartoum,  that  it  was  much  less  likely
    (compared to Darfuris) that they would be sufficiently educated  to  go
    to University.

182. Dr Reeves accepted that the basis of his report was  his  sources.   He
    was asked about its reliance upon a 2003 Amnesty  International  Report
    as the one example of there being a general risk to Nuba  and  that  no
    reference was made to the F-FR 2016.  Dr Reeves said that  2003  report
    it showed the history.  He was aware of the F-FR 2016 but it was flawed
    in so many ways and was not as valuable as his sources.  He  was  asked
    about a response by Ted Dagne which was not included in his report.  Dr
    Reeves said this was his  mistake.   Dr  Reeves  was  asked  about  Ted
    Dagne's email which  said  that  if  an  individual  was  not  a  known
    political activist, he would not be of significant interest.  Dr Reeves
    said that his English was not good - he is Ethiopian - and there was no
    distinction between activists and others.

183. Dr Reeves did not accept the proposition that a 'low level' Nuba  would
    not be subject to interrogation  and  ill-treatment  upon  return.   He
    stated that  in  Sudan  to  be  Nuba  is  to  be  both  ethnically  and
    politically identified and the Nuba are seen by the government as  part
    of the opposition.   Dr  Reeves  said  he  saw  forced  removal  as  an
    aggravating factor which would make it more  difficult  to  avoid  ill-
    treatment at the hands of  the  Sudanese  authorities  on  return.   He
    relied on the instances reported in the Belgian COI Focus  report.   In
    response to questions from the Tribunal, Dr Reeves said  that  he  only
    knew of one returning Nuba who was detained.  The  number  of  returned
    was relatively small.  Returnees were arrested at the  airport  because
    of political profile; it was relevant that  they  were  being  forcibly
    repatriated and had claimed political asylum.

184. Dr Reeves disagreed with Peter Verney's view expressed in  evidence  in
    AI and IM that black Africans are not at  risk  on  that  basis  alone.
    Ethnicity was extremely important.  Dr Reeves stated  that  it  may  be
    that a Nuba returnee would not be arrested but it  increases  the  risk
    which is unacceptably high.

185. Dr Reeves said that  returnees  to  Khartoum  airport  would  be  asked
    details of their ethnicity.   He referred to a killing of a returnee in
    November and he stated that the NISS and other security services saw no
    distinction between non-Arabs from  Darfur  and  those  from  the  Nuba
    Mountains.  The fact that fewer  Nuba  will  return  would  lead  to  a
    greater risk attaching to a return-Nuba as a member  of  a  politically
    active diaspora and a returned Darfuri.

186. Dr Reeves stated that the return to the NISS of Salah Gosh was  a  sign
    by the regime that it wished to adopt a more extreme line.   Dr  Reeves
    referred to the speech of  al-Bashir  in  December  2016  in  which  he
    threatened protestors with "what we did before".  Dr Reeves stated that
    this indicated a return to a shoot to kill policy.

187. In re-examination, Dr Reeves said  a  returning  failed  asylum  seeker
    would be identified if forcibly repatriated; that gave  you  a  profile
    and the NISS has extensive surveillance presence in  Europe  especially
    in the UK.  A returnee would be seen as part of the diaspora. The  NISS
    would distinguish an ordinary Sudanese returnee - whom they  would  not
    care about - and a Nuba returnee.  They would  be  subject  to  intense
    interrogation, almost  certain  detention  and  may,  or  may  not,  be
    tortured and tasked with reporting on  release.   Activists  and  those
    perceived as activists would be treated the same.

D. Country Background Evidence

188. The parties, over the course of the hearings  before  us,  supplied  us
    with some eight volumes of background material running  into  thousands
    of pages.  Both Mr Jacobs and Mr Thomann,  at  our  request,  drew  our
    attention in their written submissions specifically to  the  background
    material upon which they placed reliance.  We  have  focussed  on  that
    material as relevant to our decision.

    1. Joint  Danish  Immigration  Service  and  Home  Office  Fact-finding
    Missions (4 August 2016) ("F-FR 2016")

189. Both parties referred us to a Joint Report of  the  Danish  Immigration
    Service and the Home Office in relation  to  fact-finding  missions  to
    Khartoum, Kampala and  Nairobi  ("Situation  of  Persons  from  Darfur,
    Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile in Khartoum" (August 2016)).  The  F-FR
    2016 relates to visits conducted between February and March 2016.

190. At para 1.1, the F-FR  2016  estimates  the  size  of  population  from
    Darfur and the Two Areas living in Khartoum as "ranging  from  hundreds
    of thousands and up to a million or greater".  The report  states  that
    the highest figure estimated was 5 million and that two  sources  refer
    to the size of these communities as 60-70% of the total  population  of
    Khartoum.  At para 1.2 the F-FR 2016  states  that  the  two  principal
    drivers  why  individuals  have  moved  to  Khartoum  is  the  security
    situation in their home areas and socioeconomic factors.

191. Section 2 of the F-FR 2016 deals  with  the  treatment  on  arrival  at
    Khartoum airport of persons from Darfur and the Two  Areas.   Paragraph
    2.1 sets out the security arrangements at the airport amounting to  two
    types of control:  an  immigration  desk  where  travel  and  residence
    documents  would  be  checked  and  NISS  security  desk.   The  report
    continues:

         "2.1.  Western  Embassy  (A)  noted  that  NISS  officers   checked
         passports against a database, which principally listed persons with
         links  to  international  terrorist  groups;  Western  embassy  (C)
         confirmed the existence of a NISS security database.

         Information provided by some sources indicated that  the  level  of
         questioning by NISS officers at the security desk could  vary.  For
         example, whilst Western embassy (A)  observed  that  this  security
         check was usually undertaken without conversation,  the  two  human
         rights lawyers from Khartoum advised that the purpose  of  security
         checks at  the  airport  was  to  gather  information  about  those
         arriving and so various questions would be asked such as where  the
         returnee was coming from, what they had done abroad and  why  there
         were coming to Sudan."

192. In para 2.2, the F-FR 2016 deals with returning failed  asylum  seekers
    and what evidence, if any, there  was  that  returnees  who  were  from
    Darfur or the Two Areas experienced difficulties:


         "2.2. A number of sources stated that they had  no  information  to
         indicate that failed asylum seekers / returnees from Darfur or  the
         Two Areas would generally  experience  difficulties  on  return  to
         Khartoum International Airport (KIA), or they did not consider that
         claiming asylum overseas would put such a person at  risk  per  se.
         Western Embassy (C) noted that they had monitored the forced return
         of two persons from Europe in 2015 and had  no  reason  to  believe
         that they experienced any difficulties  or  mistreatment,  although
         the source acknowledged that they were not present  throughout  the
         arrival procedure. The diplomatic source mentioned  that  they  had
         experience of a very few rejected  asylum  seekers  being  deported
         from Switzerland and Norway. According to the source it was unclear
         whether these returnees could get support  upon  return  to  Sudan.
         However, the source added that those sent back from Norway had  not
         faced any problems upon return.
             Some sources noted:
                 .   a lack of coordination in the  return  operations  from
                   deporting  countries  to  inform  those  concerned   when
                   precisely returnees would arrive at KIA
                 .   a general absence of independent organisations at  KIA,
                   including UNHCR, when forcibly returned  persons  arrived
                   in Sudan, although IOM was present for voluntary returns
                       . a limited number of enforced returns from Europe

         EAC advised that at the security desk, officers asked  a  range  of
         questions of failed asylum seekers returning to Sudan (for instance
         about how long they had stayed abroad; why  they  did  not  have  a
         passport; or  political  affiliations  and  acquaintances  abroad).
         ACPJS remarked that persons returning without travel  documents  or
         under escort would be subject to questioning.

         Several sources noted that Israel and Jordan had deported a  number
         of Sudanese nationals, including persons who  had  claimed  asylum.
         Sources mentioned that the most recent  incident  was  in  December
         2015 and involved the large-scale deportation of Sudanese nationals
         from Jordan, with some sources indicating  the  number  of  persons
         deported was over 1,000 persons.

         Some sources noted that deportees  from  Israel  and  some  of  the
         deportees from Jordan were arrested on arrival and  detained,  some
         may have experienced prolonged detention or  physical  mistreatment
         and/or  were   placed   on   reporting   arrangements   or   travel
         restrictions.  Other sources noted that returnees from  Jordan  had
         been processed smoothly.   There  is  however,  lack  of  detailed,
         accurate information regarding these events, including  information
         on whether these deportees have been de facto refugees.

         UNHCR was not able to verify whether any of the returnees had  been
         detained. However, the source stated that if a person  had  a  high
         political profile, one could not rule out the possibility  that  he
         could face difficulties with  the  authorities.   Information  from
         some other sources about the deportation of Sudanese nationals from
         Jordan and Israel also indicated that those returnees who were held
         in prolonged detention may have  been  detained  because  of  their
         political profile.

         Some sources highlighted that those returning from Israel were more
         at risk of being subjected to thorough questioning and/or  arrested
         upon return than those returned from other countries."

193. At paragraph 2.4 the F-FR 2016 deals with the impact  of  a  "long-term
    stay abroad" stating that in itself it is not a risk  factor  but  that
    those from Darfur or the  Two  Areas  would  be  subject  to  extensive
    questioning about their political activities:

         "2.4 A number of sources confirmed that  in  their  view  long-term
         residence abroad would not in itself be a risk factor. Some sources
         additionally observed that there were established Sudanese diaspora
         communities living overseas.

         NHRMO considered that those from Darfur or the Two Areas,  who  had
         been outside Sudan for a considerable period, would  be  questioned
         extensively about their political activities and  risked  detention
         if they were suspected of activities against the government."

194. At paragraph 2.5, the F-FR 2016 notes that several  sources  said  that
    travelling on emergency travel documents would not in itself be a  risk
    factor.

195. At paragraph 2.6, the F-FR 2016 deals with  the  "Impact  of  Political
    Profiling" as a relevant factor in whether a returnee would be  subject
    to questioning and/or arrest at the airport:

         "2.6.  Several  sources  noted  that  those  returnees  who  had  a
         political profile may be thoroughly questioned and/or  arrested  at
         KIA.

         For example, ACPJS was aware of cases in which political  activists
         had been detained both when attempting to leave and  on  return  to
         Sudan, mentioning the example of a lawyer and a political  activist
         who were detained on return; DBA (Kampala)considered that activists
         from Darfur and the Two Areas would be  at  the  greatest  risk  at
         Khartoum airport (KIA); the two human rights lawyers from  Khartoum
         cited examples in which political activists had  been  detained  at
         the airport and explained that treatment on arrival depended  on  a
         person's political opposition activities and their affiliation with
         rebel groups; NHRMO referring to their own human rights  monitoring
         work, considered that it would not be safe for NHRMO staff to visit
         Khartoum and referred to  a  specific  case  of  detention  at  the
         airport involving a  Nuba  person  who  was  detained  for  alleged
         political activity.

         Two sources in Kampala noted that  security  protocols  were  often
         adopted when activists travelled into and out of  Sudan,  to  avoid
         their country of departure being detected  by  the  NISS  (see  2.8
         Impact of country of departure).

         Some sources indicated that persons, who had  a  political  profile
         from Darfur and the Two Areas, may be prevented from  obtaining  an
         exit stamp and leaving  Sudan  or  replacing  their  passport  from
         overseas missions.

         Two sources observed that persons from Darfur and the Two Areas who
         held a political profile may not always be detained or targeted  on
         arrival. Ahmed Eltoum  Salim  (EAC),  referring  both  to  his  own
         experiences and other persons he  knew,  noted  that  high  profile
         persons, including political activists who had been granted  asylum
         abroad, had returned  to  Sudan  and  were  now  working  with  the
         government. The Khartoum based human rights organisation also noted
         that the authorities did not arrest returnees who had  a  political
         profile to the same extent as was the case before 2005 when signing
         of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement led  to  the  return  of  many
         Sudanese opposition groups.

         Referring  to  the  detention  of  political  persons  at  Khartoum
         International Airport (KIA), Ahmed Eltoum Salim (EAC), the Khartoum
         based human rights organisation and the two  human  rights  lawyers
         from Khartoum indicated that the  behaviour  of  the  NISS  at  the
         airport was slightly improved and that the detention  of  political
         persons on arrival was less common now.

         The two human rights lawyers from Khartoum noted that it  was  less
         likely now for persons to be arrested at the airport for  political
         reasons, although sometimes this  happened.  The  source  explained
         that at  the  security  desk  it  is  now  more  common  to  obtain
         information about a person and for them to be picked  up  later  if
         they are deemed of interest."

196. Paragraph 2.7 deals with the  "Impact  of  Ethnic  Affiliation"  noting
    that several  sources  did  not  consider  that  a  person's  ethnicity
    generally affected their treatment but also noting  that  some  sources
    said that there would be more extensive questioning,  for  example,  of
    ethnic Nuba who were "most likely to experience harassment":

         "2.7. Several sources indicated that a person's ethnicity  did  not
         generally  affect  their   treatment   on   arrival   at   Khartoum
         International Airport (KIA), or otherwise had no information to the
         contrary to contradict this assessment.

         Western embassy (C) noted that upon arrival at  KIA,  Darfuris  and
         persons from the Two Areas may be treated impolitely  and  probably
         asked to pay a bribe, but they would not face any  difficulties  if
         they already were not 'flagged' by the NISS.  NHRMO  observed  that
         those from the Two Areas travelling through Khartoum  International
         Airport (KIA) would be subject to more intensive questioning  about
         their background and political involvement, with ethnic  Nuba  most
         likely to experience harassment.

         EAC pointed out that there were officers from Darfur  and  the  Two
         Areas working at the airport, for example Lieutenant  General  Awad
         El Dahiya,  Head  of  Passports  and  Civil  Registrations  at  the
         Ministry of Interior was from Southern Kordofan.

         EHAHRDP considered that all asylum seekers from Darfur and the  Two
         Areas would be at risk on return."

197. At para 2.8 the F-FR 2016 states that those sources  did  not  consider
    that in general travelling from  overseas  countries  would  result  in
    persons being targeted or detained on arrival.

198. Section 3 of the F-FR 2016 deals with the "treatment  of  persons  from
    Darfur and the Two Areas by the authorities".  At para 3.1, the  report
    states that the role of the NISS  and  the  National  Security  Act  in
    dealing with the monitoring arrests and detention of politically active
    persons including persons from Darfur and the Two  Areas  in  Khartoum.
    The F-FR 2016 says this:

         "3.1.  Several  sources  cited  cases  in  which  the   NISS   were
         responsible for acts of harassment and intimidation as well as more
         serious human rights violations, including acts of  torture.  Cases
         of arbitrary arrest and use of in-communicado detention  were  also
         reported.  Freedom House cited a report from the African Centre for
         Peace and Justice Studies (ACPJS), recording 169 unlawful  killings
         during civil unrest in September 2013.  According  to  the  source,
         the report referred to  NISS  agents  fraudulently  changing  post-
         mortem documentation to cover up the number of  persons  killed  by
         the NISS. According to Freedom House only one security officer  was
         ever convicted following the government's  investigation  into  the
         incident.

         Several sources referred to  the  National  Security  Act  2010  as
         providing a broad remit for the NISS to operate with  impunity.  In
         particular sources highlighted that the 2010 Act permitted extended
         powers  of  detention  and  prevented  NISS  officers  from  facing
         prosecution for offenses committed in the course of their duties.

         Several sources referred to the  NISS  conducting  surveillance  of
         persons in Khartoum and having a network of  informants,  including
         within the Darfuri and Two  Area  communities44,  for  example  DBA
         (Khartoum) noted that  the  NISS  had  informants  in  the  Darfuri
         student population who had informed the NISS about who  was  active
         in  demonstrations.  One  source  referred  to  the  NISS'  use  of
         electronic  surveillance,  for  example  tapping  phone  calls   or
         monitoring online social media.

         However, Freedom House commented that the NISS was poorly organised
         and lacked up to date intelligence and that this  could  result  in
         the NISS arbitrarily targeting a person.  Western Embassy (A) noted
         that it was difficult to understand the reasons why the authorities
         targeted some individuals and provided an example in which a former
         member  of  an  armed  opposition  group  whose  father  had   been
         interrogated even though the individual was no longer active in the
         group. Western Embassy (C) referred to a case in which  a  Sudanese
         national who worked at a  school  was  harassed  by  the  NISS  for
         unknown reasons. He  subsequently  left  the  country  and  claimed
         asylum in a western country."

199. At para 3.2, the F-FR 2016 deals with  "Profile  of  Persons  Targeted"
    emphasising, in particular, targeting of those with political  profiles
    such as students activists, including from Darfur and  the  Two  Areas,
    along with  others  such  as  persons  affiliated  with  rebel  groups,
    journalists, human rights activists and the like:

         "3.2. A majority of sources observed that those from Darfur or  the
         Two Areas who were critical of the government and/or had apolitical
         profile may be monitored and targeted by the NISS in Khartoum. This
         could include many different forms of activism.

         Several sources identified student activists from  Darfur  and  the
         Two Areas as being at risk of  being  targeted.  Different  sources
         provided   examples    demonstrating    extra-judicial    killings,
         mistreatment in detention  as  well  as  cases  of  harassment  and
         intimidation by the NISS and  their  affiliated  militias.  Sources
         noted that one of the main reasons why the student  population  was
         targeted was because they were  the  most  active  politically  and
         intent in voicing their criticism of the government. Such  a  trend
         had become more prevalent in recent years.

         A number of sources noted that other groups targeted  by  the  NISS
         included:  persons  affiliated  with  rebel  groups;  lawyers   and
         journalists;  civil  society  leaders;  human   rights   activists,
         including  women  activists.  From  these  groups,  three   sources
         highlighted those with an affiliation  to  rebel  groups  as  being
         particularly at risk.

         Political profile was also identified as a factor when  considering
         risk on arrival at Khartoum International Airport (KIA)."

200. Section 3.2.1 deals with "Trends and Changes in Treatment" noting  that
    several sources observe that security operations including arrests  and
    detentions (including by the NISS) "was not constant, but changed  over
    time".   The report states that the reporting of

         "discriminatory practices suffered by Darfuris and persons from the
         Two Areas were systematic, but not constant, and  that  there  were
         many periods where discriminatory  practices  were  more  intensely
         pursued and conversely times  when  discriminatory  practices  were
         less pronounced".

201. The F-FR 2016 goes on to state:

         "The SDFG advised that it was difficult to say what  was  happening
         in Khartoum today or the extent to which persons from Darfur or the
         Two Areas were targeted by the NISS now.  According to the  source,
         it was predominantly politically active persons who  were  targeted
         by the NISS."

202. Section 3.3 deals with the "Impact of Ethnic  and  Tribal  Affiliation"
    stating that a number of sources observed that those from Darfur or the
    Two Areas could be at risk of mistreatment by the NISS in Khartoum  and
    that they might be targeted by the authorities due to  their  ethnicity
    alone.  The report states that no specific  information  examples  were
    given.  The greater suspicion and risk of worse treatment in  detention
    are for those from Darfur and the Two Areas "and in particular those of
    African ethnicity".  The F-FR 2016 says this:

         "3.3. Four sources observed that all communities from Darfur or the
         Two Areas in Khartoum could be at risk of mistreatment by the  NISS
         or indicated that persons from these communities may be targeted by
         the authorities due to their ethnicity alone.  However, none of the
         sources provided specific information indicating that persons  from
         Darfur or the Two Areas were being subjected to mistreatment by the
         authorities exclusively due to their ethnic background.

         Faisal Elbagir (JHR) noted that whilst there was no official report
         on ordinary civilians (that is persons who  were  not  involved  in
         political activities) from Darfur or the Two Areas  being  targeted
         by the authorities merely due to  their  ethnic  affiliation,  such
         cases could be found on social media.  However,  the  source  could
         not give examples of such cases which had  been  verified.  Elbagir
         also remarked that due to media restrictions in Sudan, it was often
         difficult to obtain accurate news reports about cases of detention.

         Khartoum based journalist (1) noted that it was the type and  level
         of political activity rather than one's ethnic background which was
         the determining factor behind who was monitored and targeted by the
         NISS.  ACPJS explained that  ethnicity  was  complicated  and  that
         ethnic disputes were often exploited by the  government  to  pursue
         political goals.  ACPJS highlighted that in general anyone who  was
         suspected of political opposition against the government  could  be
         targeted, including persons from Arab tribes.

         Some sources advised with regard  to  the  arrest  of  Darfuris  in
         Khartoum that there had been  no  largescale  arbitrary  arrest  of
         Darfuris in Khartoum in recent years  compared  to  that  of  2008,
         following the JEM assault on Omdurman55. Sources noted that at that
         time widespread security operations in Khartoum took  place,  which
         were often based on the skin colour and ethnicity of a person.

         A number of sources, however, noted that those from Darfur and  the
         Two Areas, and in particular those of African ethnicity, were  more
         likely to be viewed with greater suspicion  and  treated  worse  in
         detention than other tribes from Darfur and the Two Areas  if  they
         did come to the attention  of  the  NISS  due  to  their  political
         activity.  Some sources also mentioned Ingessana from the Two Areas
         among the tribes being suspected by the authorities  for  political
         activity.  Several sources noted that the Darfuri and the Two  Area
         communities were perceived by the NISS to be  'rebel  sympathisers'
         and consequently these communities would be more closely  monitored
         by the NISS, for example through the use of  informants.   Khartoum
         based  journalist  (3)  held  the  view  that  it  was  only  those
         communities arriving in Khartoum post 2003 who would be monitored.

         DBA (Kampala) and ACPJS observed  that  those  from  other  Darfuri
         tribes (i.e. not the Fur, Masalit and Zaghawa), would not generally
         be perceived as opposed to the regime or commonly  associated  with
         rebel groups and hence not being monitoring by the NISS.   However,
         DBA (Khartoum) noted, in the context of how persons from Darfur and
         the Two Areas were treated on arrest, that  other  African  Darfuri
         tribes, including the Tunjur, Meidob, Tama, Mima,  Gimir  and  Dago
         tribes, were treated more harshly than Arab-origin  tribes  because
         the authorities assumed that these  groups  supported  armed  rebel
         groups. DBA (Kampala) also observed that activists of  Arab  origin
         may experience harsh treated for advocating in favour of the rights
         of non-Arab tribes.

         EHAHRDP commented that it was difficult to  be  prescriptive  about
         which tribes would be at greater risk,  although  considered  those
         from Arab Baggara tribes as less likely to experience  mistreatment
         because  these  tribes  were  commonly  associated  with  the  pro-
         government Janjaweed militia.

         UNHCR noted, however, that it was difficult in  practice  to  treat
         persons differently on the basis of their tribal  affiliation.  The
         source explained that it was difficult to say which group would  be
         targeted and which would not due to the sheer number  of  different
         tribes in Darfur (over 400), and  the  fact  that  mixed  parentage
         occurred."

203. Section 3.4 deals with "Treatment upon Arrest" and  the  risk  of  ill-
    treatment, torture and extra-judicial killing, including by  the  NISS,
    of those in detention.

204. Section 4 of the  F-FR  2016  deals  with  the  "living  conditions  in
    Khartoum for persons from Darfur and the Two Areas".

205. Section 4.1 deals with "Access to Documentation" and cites a number  of
    sources as indicating that persons from Darfur and the Two Areas

         "would, in general, have access to civil documentation, including a
         National ID number... required to access  services  and  to  obtain
         other types of documents such as passport etc".

206. Several sources are quoted, however, as indicating  that  persons  from
    Darfur or the Two Areas may experience difficulty in  reacquiring  lost
    civil documentation "because of the need to obtain witnesses  to  prove
    their identity".    One  source,  however  "noted  that  Sudanese  from
    conflict areas living in Khartoum lacked access to basic services,  and
    faced economic, social and political exclusion".

207. Section 4.2 deals with "Access to Housing/Accommodation"  referring  to
    sources stating that there was "no systematic  discrimination"  against
    persons from Darfur and the Two Areas with regards to where they  could
    live in Khartoum but that the "only real difficulty regarding access to
    housing" for persons from Darfur or the Two Areas was "whether a person
    had sufficient income or financial resources to live  in  a  particular
    place".

208. The report then refers, to what has been called before  us  the  'Black
    Belt' where persons from Darfur and the  Two  Areas  usually  lived  as
    follows:

         "... Sources noted that usually persons from  Darfur  and  the  Two
         Areas had limited financial means and so were forced to live in the
         poorer slum communities on the outskirts of the city, where housing
         was generally of  a  poor  standard.  The  districts  of  Mayo  and
         Omdurman were mentioned as having sizeable populations from  Darfur
         and the Two Areas. Several sources also noted numerous other  areas
         in Khartoum where such communities lived.

         The Commissioner for Refugees, Ministry  of  Interior,  noted  that
         there were no areas in Khartoum  exclusively  inhabited  by  people
         from Darfur and the Two Areas.  Both EAC and the  Commissioner  for
         Refugees remarked that persons from Darfur and the Two Areas  often
         stayed with relatives  in  Khartoum,  at  least  initially.  Forced
         evictions occurred in these slum communities. Usually this resulted
         in communities being forced to live further outside Khartoum, where
         access to services was very limited.

         The international consultant observed that Darfuris tended to  live
         in large enclaves in  new  conurbations  in  Khartoum  with  water,
         electricity etc., but observed that 'people had  to  pay  for  it'.
         Some sources pointed out that there  were  economically  better-off
         Darfuris and people from the Two Areas who lived in better parts of
         Khartoum including the centre of the city."

209. Section 4.3 deals with "Access to Healthcare" referring  to  statements
    by sources that access to healthcare in some areas was "generally poor"
    and that there were fewer public hospitals  in  Khartoum.   The  report
    refers to sources stating that there was "no systematic discrimination"
    against persons from Darfur and the Two Areas in  accessing  healthcare
    in Khartoum "providing they could pay  for  it".   It  then  reports  a
    source recording that  Sudanese  from  the  conflict  areas  living  in
    Khartoum "lacked access to  basic  services,  although  mentioned  that
    general access to healthcare in Khartoum was better than in Darfur  and
    the Two Areas".

210. Section 4.4 deals with "Access to Education".  Again, stating  that  it
    was "generally limited and the quality of education was  poor"  in  the
    slum areas but that there  is  "no  systematic  discrimination  against
    persons" from those Two Areas in accessing  education  "providing  they
    could pay for it".  EHAHRD commented that those from the conflict areas
    living in Khartoum

         "lacked access to basic services, although  mentioned  the  general
         access to education in Khartoum was better than in Darfur  and  the
         Two Areas".

211. Section 4.6 deals with "Access to Employment".   It  says  that  forces
    highlighted that:

         "improved economic conditions, including access to  employment,  as
         one of the pull factors driving migration from Darfur and  the  Two
         Areas to Khartoum".

212. The F-FR 2016 then goes on to deal with  employment  in  the  "informal
    sector", there being "some degree of discrimination" limiting access to
    certain types of jobs or sectors in the labour market  for  those  from
    Darfur or the Two Areas.  The report says this:

         "4.6. .... Several sources indicated that persons  from  Darfur  or
         the Two Areas experienced some degree of discrimination  which  was
         reflected in their limited access to certain types of  jobs/sectors
         in the labour market in Khartoum. For instance, such persons  would
         likely find it difficult to secure skilled employment;  enter  into
         certain qualified professions  or  sectors  especially  within  the
         public  sector.   Several  sources  also  pointed  at  the  adverse
         economic conditions and the general shortage of jobs in Sudan as an
         additional factor, which made it difficult for Darfuris and persons
         from the Two Areas to access employment in the formal sector.91As a
         result those with an academic background tended to leave  Sudan  to
         work overseas, for example in the Gulf states or Europe.

         The international consultant noted that those from  Darfur  or  the
         Two Areas were broadly divided into  two  groups  -those  who  were
         educated and who were professionally employed, e.g. as teachers  or
         self-employed, and those who lacked a formal education  and  worked
         in the informal sector, such as agriculture or construction.

         The Khartoum based human rights  organisation  noted  that  Darfuri
         African tribes, such as the Masalit, Fur and  Tunjur  or  (African)
         tribes from the Nuba  Mountains  were  more  likely  to  experience
         employment discrimination. Western embassy (C)  likened  employment
         discrimination against African (non-Arabs) from Darfur and the  Two
         Areas as similar to the difficulties faced  by  migrants/  refugees
         seeking employment in Europe.

         Some  sources  indicated  that  loyalty  to  the  regime/NCP  would
         influence the likelihood of employment in some sectors.

         Other sources identified that Darfuris and  persons  from  the  Two
         Areas could be found employed in the armed  forces,  including  the
         police.   However,  based  on  his  experience,  the  international
         consultant considered it unlikely that the provisions in  the  Doha
         Document  for  Peace  in  Darfur   (DDPD),   aimed   at   improving
         representation of Darfuris in government positions  and  the  armed
         forces had been met."

213. Section 5 deals  with  social  circumstances  in  Khartoum  and  racial
    discrimination:

         "A number of sources observed that persons from Darfur and the  Two
         Areas, and in particular those of African descent, experienced some
         level of discrimination or societal harassment. To illustrate this,
         five sources referred to the use  of  derogatory  phrases  such  as
         'slave', especially from those belonging to Riverine Arab tribes.

         Crisis  Group  noted  that  despite   'systematic'   discrimination
         restricting those from Darfur  and  the  Two  Areas  in  conducting
         political activities, such communities were able to  live  'day  to
         day' in Khartoum. The source also  considered  that  the  level  of
         discrimination an individual  may  experience  was  linked  to  how
         politically involved a person was and how long they  had  lived  in
         the city; according to the source those with established links over
         a longer period would  likely  experience  less  discrimination  in
         Khartoum. Western embassy (A) remarked that there  was  no  visible
         societal discrimination against the Darfuri and  persons  from  the
         Two Areas, except within the student community.

         DBA(Kampala)noted  that  discrimination  tended  to  be  from   the
         authorities, rather than the civilian populace. The source referred
         to cases of discrimination involving the POP who  targeted  illegal
         tea sellers; in cases of recruitment into the civil service  or  in
         the over-taxation of Darfuri businesses. Three  sources  considered
         day to day discrimination from officials working  in  the  Sudanese
         authorities to be reflective  of  a  wider  'racist  narrative'  or
         supremacist ideology, which placed  emphasis  on  a  person's  skin
         colour  and  was  prejudicial  towards  those  of  African/non-Arab
         descent.

         Two sources considered societal discrimination and  racism  against
         persons from Darfur and the Two Areas as a major problem in Sudan."

214. There is one final section of the F-FR 2016 with which we  should  deal
    which concerns the "Public Order laws".  Section 4.7 refers to the wide
    deployment of the public order police (POP) in Khartoum who enforce the
    public order law.  The report then goes on to record sources  reporting
    the use of that law against women from Darfur and the Two Areas selling
    tea illegally and to enforce Islamic standards of dress against  women.
    The report says this:

         "4.7. A number of sources noted that women from Darfur and the  Two
         Areas selling tea illegally  (i.e.  without  required  licence)  or
         selling alcohol were at risk of  being  targeted  by  the  POP  for
         violating Public Order laws.  ACPJS observed that the POP was  more
         prevalent in the slum areas where persons from Darfur and  the  Two
         Areas more commonly lived. Freedom House advised  that  any  person
         undertaking such activities could be targeted, not just those  from
         Darfur or the Two Areas, but explained that the marginalisation  of
         communities from  Darfur  and  the  Two  Areas  limited  employment
         opportunities and so  they  were  commonly  found  in  such  roles.
         Sources advised that there were reports of bribery,  extortion  and
         harassment committed by the POP.

         ....

         Some sources noted that public order offences  could  also  include
         matters such as not conforming to standards of Islamic dress  (e.g.
         wearing trousers or not wearing a headscarf). Western  embassy  (B)
         explained that POP would harass Christian Nuba women  if  they  did
         not observe Islamic dress, explaining that such a person  would  be
         treated differently, for  example  compared  to  Western  women  or
         Coptic Christian women who did not observe Islamic dress. When  the
         FFM delegation advised Freedom House that they  had  seen  a  large
         number of women without a headscarf in  the  streets  during  their
         stay in Khartoum, Freedom House commented that such an indiscretion
         would be less problematic for those from wealthy families who  were
         well connected, but it may give rise to difficulties for those from
         marginalised communities such as Darfur or the Two Areas.  However,
         Freedom House also noted that small acts of  political  opposition,
         such as not wearing a headscarf, were  increasingly  tolerated  and
         explained  that  Sudan  was  relatively  more  progressive  in  the
         implementation of such  laws,  then  for  example,  countries  like
         Iran."

215. The fact-finding missions, which provided the material for the  report,
    as we noted, were conducted between February and  March  2016.   During
    the course of the  hearing,  a  Home  Office  fact-finding  mission  to
    Khartoum took place between 10 and 17 August 2018  and  resulted  in  a
    report in November 2018.

    2. Report of a Fact-Finding Mission to Khartoum, Sudan (November  2018)
    ("the F-FR 2018")

216. The F-FR 2018 published in November 2018 is a detailed one  and  mainly
    deals with the treatment of non-Arab Darfuris.  The  parties,  however,
    placed reliance upon some passages in the report which, in  particular,
    referred to individuals from South Kordofan or the Nuba Mountains.   We
    have already referred  to  this  document  as  it  was  raised  in  the
    additional written reports of the experts, and in the oral evidence  we
    heard, at 24/25 October 2019 hearing.

217. In section 1  of  the  F-FR  2018,  reference  is  made  to  the  large
    population of Darfuris and  also  those  from  the  Nuba  Mountains  in
    Greater Khartoum.   Reference is made to  the  migration  of  different
    groups to Khartoum including Darfuris  and  that  they,  together  with
    people from the Nuba  Mountains,  live  in  "shanty  towns  surrounding
    Khartoum" (see para 1.1.3).  That is a reference to the  'Black  Belt'.
    At para 1.3.6, an activist is noted as saying that:

         "[t]here are no IDP camps for Darfuris or those from South Kordofan
         in Khartoum but many live in shanty towns".

218. It is also reported  (para  1.3.4)  by  one  source  from  the  British
    Embassy that it is:

         "[mu]ch harder to get a sense of the [Darfuri] population in  other
         groups because they are so well integrated...  Nuba,  Christian  or
         South Sudanese who live in 'ghettos', and [are] poorer, are easy to
         identify, but cannot say this of Darfuris as  they  are  so  spread
         across society."

219. At para 1.3.13, a source is recorded as  stating  that  in  the  shanty
    towns "Darfuris  share  the  area  with  Nuba,  but  the  majority  are
    Darfuri."

220. One issue, raised  in  other  evidence  that  we  heard,  concerns  the
    ability to identify the Nuba in society.  This is dealt with  in  paras
    1.7.3-1.7.13.  Again, in particular, in relation  to  identifying  non-
    Arab Darfuris.  Their particular physical features are relied  upon  by
    sources as a means to make them "easily identifiable".  At para  1.7.11
    the source says: "the features of NADs,  Nuba  and  Arab  Darfuris  are
    different" (NAD = Non-Arab Darfuri).  That source goes on to say:

         "It is also possible to identify a Darfuri by the way they speak  -
         anyone who speaks a local language most likely speak Arabic with an
         accent.  This is the same for other groups too, such as Nuba."

221. The F-FR 2018 goes on to deal with the treatment  of  non-Arab  Darfuri
    by the government but also refers to the position of  individuals  from
    the Nuba Mountains.  At para 3.2.6, a university professor is  reported
    as saying that:

         "... the three groups that government has most suspicions  are  the
         Zaghawi, Massalit and Fur - most security sensitive as linked  with
         rebel groups.  People from South Kordofan face similar problem,  as
         do peoples from Blue Nile and East Sudan."

222. Another source (Siddig Yousef) is reported as stating (para 3.2.10):

         "...  the  Nuba  are  treated   badly,   but   face   less   social
         discrimination than the Darfuris ...  society  generally  does  not
         treat the Darfuris and the people from South  Kordofan  differently
         from other groups.  But the government and NISS treat  them  badly,
         considering them supporters of the armed groups."

223. At section 3.3 under the heading "Arrest and Detention  -  general"  it
    is reported by an official at the British Embassy that the  roundup  of
    Darfuris was linked to the war in Darfur and now that that conflict has
    reduced in intensity, "there is no need  to  lock  up  Darfuris".   The
    individual is recorded as  stating,  however,  that  Darfuris  do  face
    issues with "poverty, marginalisation but they are not affected anymore
    than other groups".

224. A further source is recorded as saying that he is "not aware  of  wide-
    scale arrests of Darfuris".  At para 3.3.16, a number  of  sources  are
    recorded as referring to  protests  in  Khartoum  during  January  2018
    during which

         "a range of groups, including Darfuris,  demonstrated  against  the
         deteriorating of the economic situation, fuel shortages  and  rises
         in prices.  There were  a  large  number  of  arrests,  one  source
         estimated 500 arrested, including some  members  of  civil  society
         interviewed by the FFT."

225. In section 3.4 under the heading  "Profiles  and  specific  groups"  at
    paras 3.4.5-3.4.8 the F-FR 2018 refers to the targeting of Darfuris who
    took part in demonstrations and also, from one source, the  association
    of the Nuba people like Darfuris, with rebel groups:

         "3.4.5 Siddig Yousef thought that 'Darfuris would  be  targeted  if
         they took part in demonstrations'. He also observed, when asked who
         the state may have an interest: 'Whole areas of South Kordofan  are
         not under  government  control  whereas  all  of  Darfur  is  under
         government control. Nuba are  ill-treated  by  the  government  [in
         South Kordofan], also  in  Khartoum...  the  government  is  facing
         opposition from everyone - because of the lack of fuel, increase in
         prices. There is a state of emergency in  9  out  of  18  states  /
         provinces, including 5 in Darfur, 3 in South Kordofan  and  one  in
         Kassala... the public order laws are against women. If a  woman  is
         not covering her head, may be oppressed, arrested and lashed - only
         in Khartoum state... many women are affected every day - 1000s -all
         women of different groups.'

         3.4.6 The official of Western Embassy A considered  '...  that  any
         high-level opposition members would be at  risk.  However,  reasons
         would be required to arrest someone with a high profile as it would
         be reported in the media.  For  someone  with  a  low  profile,  no
         reasons would be required as there would be less interest  [in  the
         media].' Similarly, the IOM official  observed  that  while  '[t]he
         nature of NISS' likely priorities are not known... it is assumed to
         be in those who are suspected of being a threat to state  security,
         but  qualified  this  by  noting  that  'IOM  works  closely   with
         immigration, not NISS'

         3.4.7 The civil society activist observed '[t]he  Nuba  people  and
         Darfuris are often associated with the SPLM-N,  SLM-AW  and  JEM  -
         they are seen as rebels. Most cases  that  the  organisation  deals
         with [are] Darfuris and Nuba, to whom it provides  legal  aid.  The
         organisation has a lot of contact with  Darfuris  in  Khartoum,  as
         well as those in Gezira, White Nile  and  Kordofan.'  However,  the
         human rights defender considered that '...  not  all  Darfuris  are
         suspected of supporting rebels; just those that  are  suspected  of
         opposing the government, it is a well-known  fact  that  there  are
         many Darfuris who are members of the ruling party and  some  assume
         high ranks within the party and the government.

         3.4.8 In regard to state treatment/targeting, the activist  thought
         it not possible to generalise and 'could not say every Darfuri  has
         a problem. If he is a politician, an activist... each  case  should
         be considered/dealt with on its merits.' When asked  what  profiles
         of person would  be  of  interest  to  the  government  the  source
         'thought it would be any opposition, anyone not affiliated  to  the
         NCP... human rights defenders, politicians. They don't want  people
         to help the South Sudanese in IDP/refugee camps."

226. Then, at 3.4.9 the F-FR 2018 states that there are  difficulties  faced
    by non-Arab Darfuri students including arrest and detention:

         "Sources generally agreed  that  non-Arab  Darfuri  students  faced
         difficulties  from  the  state,  including  arrest  and  detention,
         because  of  their  perceived  opposition  to  the  government  and
         (suspected) links to rebel groups. However, there was not consensus
         amongst sources on the nature and type of risks faced, and  whether
         all students were  at  risk  or  only  those  who  participated  in
         activities that were, or were perceived, to oppose or criticise the
         government."

227. At para 3.4.10, the F-FR 2018 goes on to deal with the size of  student
    population in Khartoum noting, from some sources,

         'a strong presence of' and 'many' Darfuri students in Khartoum. The
         Second Secretary Political considered that Darfuri  students  'came
         to Khartoum/Omdurman for better quality education. Students are  of
         mixed  backgrounds,  predominately  Fur,  then  Massalit,  Zaghawa,
         Berti."

228. At para 3.4.15 the F-FR 2018 refers to  a  report  concerning  problems
    faced by Darfuri students from the Sudanese state and reports incidents
    in 2012 when 70 students were arrested and  only  66  released  with  4
    disappearances whose dead bodies were thrown into an irrigation  canal.
    The report records a source as saying that "13 Darfuri  students"  were
    killed by government affiliated bodies  between  2003  and  2016.   The
    report continues:

         "There are NISS agents (informants) and  NISS  offices  on  campus.
         When something happens, NISS arrest everyone... This happens to all
         students, including non-Darfuris, especially if they are  political
         activists. There are  problems  for  students  who  join  different
         student organisations... many  Darfuri  students  are  involved  in
         activist groups due to the continuous  conflict  in  Darfur,  which
         makes them more politically aware. Also there  are  problems  faced
         Darfuris who join other (i.e. not rebel)  opposition  groups.  They
         are being more targeted by the security forces than others  in  the
         same opposition parties."

229. At para 3.4.19 a  university  professor  from  Darfur  is  reported  as
    stating that:

         "'All Sudanese opposition parties have their student activists, but
         the Darfuri students tend to be more agitative."

230. At para 3.4.21 a civil society activist is  reported  as  stating  that
    students are:

         "... labelled as trouble due  to  their  perceived  rebel  support.
         There is a lot of violence, including people being  shot  dead,  on
         campus at the Universities. The targets are mainly the Darfuri  and
         the Nuba."

231.  The  F-FR  2018  goes  on  to  consider  the   economic   and   social
    circumstances, mainly for non-Arab Darfuris.  However,  some  reference
    is made to the Nuba.  At para 3.5.5 a civil society activist is  quoted
    as saying: "Darfuris  do  better  than  the  Nuba  in  terms  of  socio
    economics".  He continues:

         "'In general Darfuris are better off than the Nuba people. Nuba IDP
         families rely on income generated by their children collecting  re-
         cyclable items to sell from rubbish dumps."

232. At para 3.5.9 under the heading "Employment", one  source  is  recorded
    as saying:

         "Other marginalised groups, for example the Nuba, are  also  denied
         high-ranking places."

233. At section 3.6, the F-FR 2018 deals with  "Access  to  ID  numbers  and
    cards".  The report refers to the views of differing sources on whether
    Darfuris would be able to readily access an ID number which, a  British
    Embassy source states, is needed by all  Sudanese  "to  get  a  driving
    licence,  a  job,  to  go  to  university,  etc."  (para  3.6.2).   The
    difficulty of obtaining a national ID number is noted at paras 3.6.3  -
    3.6.14.  At para 3.6.3 one source notes:

         "The government makes it impossible to get a National ID number  as
         verification from a male relative is required (and  in  many  cases
         women do not have a surviving male relative) [however [the  source]
         also noted that many Darfuris are at school and university which he
         acknowledged was likely to require having an ID number and card]."

234. The same source then goes on to say:

         "Other people, for example from the East, Blue Nile  and  the  Nuba
         Mountains,  are  also  discriminated  against  on   these   grounds
         (particularly in the respect of women that are not able  to  obtain
         verification as they do not have male relatives)."

235. In section 5 under the heading "Government  monitoring"  it  is  stated
    that:

         "Most sources who commented thought there was government monitoring
         of the Sudanese population, some suggesting there was a  particular
         focus on non-Arab Darfuris because of  their  possible  links  with
         rebel  groups.   Sources   expressed   different   views   on   the
         effectiveness of state monitoring."

236. An official at the British Embassy is reported as saying (para 5.1.5):

         "There   is   general   monitoring   of   all   Sudanese   by   the
         government...[but] thought that it was not interested  in  Darfuris
         unless they were in some way politically active or having  ties  to
         rebel groups. The  government  does  not  like  demonstrators.  The
         government does not monitor Darfuris  in  particular  ...  did  not
         consider that Darfuris were targeted for monitoring  more  so  than
         other groups."

237. The F-FR 2018, nevertheless, goes on to refer to sources  stating  that
    informers and other means of monitoring are used by the NISS.

238. In section 5.2 under the heading "Overseas - monitoring the  diaspora",
    an official at the British Embassy reported (at para 5.2.1):

         "NISS do monitor the diaspora for rebel activities, many people  in
         the UK report to the Sudanese. Sudan has a big monitoring/reporting
         culture - the regime  is  paranoid.  However,  as  rebel  influence
         diminishes, the government's interest in them declines."

239. The monitoring of activists in  Europe  is  also  reported  by  another
    source (see para 5.2.2).

240. Section 6 deals with "Returns" to Sudan.  This section is focused  upon
    the return of non-Arab Darfuris.  At para 6.1.1 the  report  states  as
    follows:

         "Officials from 4 of the  western  Embassies  interviewed  (Norway,
         Switzerland, and Western Embassies A and B)  confirmed  that  since
         2017 these countries have  returned  voluntarily  and  by  force  a
         number  of  Sudanese  nationals,  including   unsuccessful   asylum
         seekers,  to  Sudan...  the  Home  Office,  as  the  UK  government
         department responsible for managing migration and asylum cases,  at
         the time of writing (November 2018) continues  to  remove  Sudanese
         who have  no  right  to  remain  in  the  UK  voluntarily  and,  if
         necessary, by force on a case-by-case basis."

241. At para 6.2 the ethnic profile or place of  origin  of  a  returnee  is
    discussed but only in the context of whether  they  were  from  Darfur.
    The evidence from the Western Embassies was mixed: some were not  aware
    whether any returnees were from Darfur and  others  that  some  of  the
    returnees were likely to be from Darfur.  No reference is made  to  any
    of the returns relating to the Nuba; nor was that issue directly raised
    with the Western Embassy.

242. Section 6.3 deals with the "Treatment of  returnees".   At  para  6.3.1
    the Sudanese head of immigration is quoted  as  saying  that  returnees
    were supported and most were economic migrants and that:

         "Unless there is a criminal case pending against a returnee they do
         not face any problems on return....  [he]  was  not  aware  of  any
         arrests. Returnees are interviewed to establish nationality."

243. He goes on to say that "claiming asylum abroad is not seen a crime."

244. However, other sources stated that (para 6.3.2):

         "They had heard about problems for individuals returning to  Sudan,
         including arrest, detention and  ill-treatment,  or  considered  it
         likely that returnees may experience difficulties."

245. Another source, although he  had  no  direct  knowledge  of  returnees'
    experiences, stated that he:

         "had heard mixed accounts  from  his  research  assistant  who  had
         interviewed people who had returned."

246. The source goes on to  say  that  some  had  not  had  their  passports
    stamped, maybe some returning from Israel had been  detained  and  then
    released whilst: "some others had been detained from  the  airport  and
    kept longer."

247. Another source from the Darfur Bar  Association  is  quoted  as  saying
    (para 6.3.4):

         "Returnees will be treated severely simply by the  fact  of  having
         claimed asylum. They will be treated as opponents of the government
         and accused of being rebels. Most people arrested  at  the  airport
         are accused of being rebel sympathisers. There have  been  100s  of
         arrests of returnees from Jordan and Israel."

248. However, it is also reported (para 6.3.5) that  when  this  source  was
    asked to give examples he was:

         unable to provide specific detail  and  had  not  investigated  any
         cases of returns being arrested/detained on arrival.   He  knew  of
         such arrests from relatives of returnees arrested."

249. Another source (Siddig Yousef) is quoted at para 6.3.7 as saying

         "... any activist outside of Sudan, regardless of tribe,  may  face
         problems".

250. When he was asked whether a Darfuri,  who  had  made  an  asylum  claim
    which had been rejected and had then been returned to Sudan,  would  be
    of interest, this source said that he had no idea (para 6.3.7).

251. At para 6.3.21, the report states that a number of  sources,  including
    the King of the Berti were not aware of specific problems of  returnees
    including unsuccessful asylum seekers.

    3. Asylum Research Consultancy, "Situation in Khartoum and Omdurman" (9
    September 2015)

252. Mr Jacobs referred us to three passages in this report. At  para  1.1.2
    under the heading "Violence against members of specific groups" and the
    sub-heading "Nuba":

         "The African Centre for Justice and Peace Studies  (ACJPS)  reports
         that "On the night of 22 June [2014] police in the Almolazmeen area
         of Khartoum's twin city Omdurman arrested 40  individuals  of  Nuba
         ethnicity,  beating   those   arrested   and   using   racist   and
         discriminatory language  against  them.  According  to  eye-witness
         accounts, at least 40 police were deployed to the area and targeted
         people based on their Nuba ethnicity in  apparent  retaliation  for
         the beating of a police officer accused of raping a woman  of  Nuba
         ethnicity along with two other police officers earlier that  night.
         The 40 detainees, including at least 14 children and the woman  who
         was reportedly gang-raped by police officers prior to  her  arrest,
         were taken to Omdurman central police station".

253. In the same paragraph 1.1.2, the document continues:

         "In the days building up to the April 2015 elections ACJPS reported
         that "Members of the Nuba ethnic group also  appear  to  have  been
         targeted, possibly on  the  grounds  of  their  presumed  political
         affiliations to armed movements. Four members of  the  Nuba  ethnic
         group in Khartoum were arrested by the NISS and held for three days
         on suspicion of being members of the  SPLM-N.  They  were  released
         onto  a  street  in  Khartoum  blindfolded.  All  four  individuals
         reported being subjected to torture  and  ill-treatment,  including
         being beaten with water pipes, whilst in NISS custody."

254. Finally, at para 1.3.2 under the heading "Prison  conditions"  and  the
    sub-heading "Nuba", the document says this:

         "The African Centre for Justice and Peace Studies  (ACJPS)  further
         notes in a June 2015 report that "The use of torture  across  Sudan
         is endemic. Sudanese authorities use torture and other forms of ill
         treatment to intimidate and silence perceived political  opposition
         to the policies of the ruling National Congress Party (NCP).  Human
         rights defenders, political and other social activists,  internally
         displaced persons (IDPs) and students are  particularly  vulnerable
         to torture and ill-treatment".113 It further notes that "Members of
         ethnic minority groups, including Darfuris and people hailing  from
         Sudan's Blue Nile  and  South  Kordofan  states,  are  particularly
         vulnerable to  torture  and  ill-treatment.  ACJPS  has  documented
         threats of sexual violence against male and  female  detainees,  as
         well as cases of rape against female detainees  in  state  custody.
         Detainees have also reported the use of racist verbal abuse"."

    4. Asylum Research Consultancy, "Sudan: Query Response"  (13  September
2018)

255. This is a detailed document and Mr Jacobs placed reliance  upon  it  as
    confirming the position as set  out  in  the  F-FR  2016.   We  confine
    ourselves to referring to the passages he relied on.  The report  draws
    heavily on the F-FR 2016 and other reports (and news items) such as the
    Waging Peace Report of March 2018.  We did not understand Mr Jacobs  to
    suggest that there was anything uniquely supportive of his case in this
    document.

256. Mr Jacobs referred us to para 4.2  concerning  the  position  of  those
    from the Two Areas travelling through Khartoum International Airport:

         "...persons from the Two Areas will be treated differently  because
         of being perceived to  be  affiliated  with  the  SPLM-N  [Sudanese
         Peoples Liberation Movement- North] and they  will  be  subject  to
         more intensive questioning about  their  background  and  political
         involvement.  Ethnic Nuba persons will be most likely to experience
         harassment and will be easily identifiable from the name."

257. At para 1.1.1, the ARC document cites the F-FR 2016:

         "a person from Darfur or the Two Areas could also be targeted  even
         if they were not politically active."

258. At para 1.1.3, the  ARC  document  again  quotes  the  F-FR  2016  that
    sources indicated that there was a risk of mistreatment by the NISS  of
    communities from Darfur or the Two Areas in Khartoum and that

         "persons from these communities may be targeted by the  authorities
         due to  their  ethnicity  alone.   However,  none  of  the  sources
         provided specific information indicating that persons  from  Darfur
         or the  Two  Areas  were  being  subject  to  mistreatment  by  the
         authorities exclusively due to their ethnic background".

259. At para 1.1.2 the ARC document  refers  to  the  F-FR  2016  report  of
    targeted harassment of women  including  Darfuri  and  Nuba  women  and
    including tea-selling Nuba women in Khartoum.

260. Mr Jacobs also referred us to sections  in  the  ARC  document  dealing
    with "discrimination", "access to documentation", "living conditions in
    Khartoum", "access to employment",  "access  to  housing",  "access  to
    healthcare" and "access to education" at pages 61-67 of the report.  He
    did so without specific reference to the detail.  It is unnecessary for
    us to set it out as the document largely relies upon, and reflects, the
    F-FR 2016 which we have set out in detail earlier.

    5. "COI Focus, Sudan: Risk upon Return" (2018)

261. We were referred to a number of passages  in  the  report  "COI  Focus,
    Sudan: Risk upon Return" (6 February  2018)  produced  by  the  Belgium
    Office of the Commissioner General for Refugees and Stateless  Persons,
    which, Mr Jacobs submitted, confirmed the  risk  to  Nuba  upon  return
    owing to reputed political opinion.  The first passage  at  para  2.1.1
    dealt  with  the  treatment  of  returned  Sudanese  national  and  the
    procedure on arrival at Khartoum International airport:

         "2.1.1. Immigration procedures and security check

         According to a range  of  sources,  there  are  two  controls  upon
         arrival at Khartoum  International  Airport  (KIA):  first  by  the
         immigration service and  then  by  the  National  Intelligence  and
         Security Service (NISS). Sources contacted by  the  CGRS  indicated
         that travel and  residence  documents  are  checked  first  at  the
         immigration desk and that this is followed by a security  check  at
         the NISS desk. This information confirms  what  the  2016  British-
         Danish was told by its sources (several western embassies, Sudanese
         human rights lawyers, regional NGOs, IOM)

         According to the British embassy in Khartoum, there is  a  standard
         immigration procedure for every person  identified  as  a  rejected
         asylum applicant: their documents are temporarily withheld and they
         are detained for a maximum period of 24 hours for interrogation. If
         this interrogation does not yield  any  results,  the  returnee  is
         released. If the investigation reveals criminal activity  or  other
         nefarious reasons  for  the  original  departure  from  Sudan,  the
         returnee is  blacklisted  from  leaving  Sudan.  If  the  crime  is
         outstanding, the returnee will be arrested.

         The IOM explained to the British-Danish fact-finding  mission  that
         there are two categories of  voluntary  returnees:  those  with  an
         ordinary travel document (passport) and  those  with  an  emergency
         travel document (ETD),  such  as  a  laissez-passer,  issued  by  a
         Sudanese embassy. Returnees with a passport do  not  encounter  any
         problems. The IOM and some other sources (a  western  embassy;  two
         NGOs in Khartoum) are of the opinion that a return with an ETD does
         not in itself entail a risk for the returnee. However,  a  returnee
         with an ETD  can  expect  a  more  detailed  interrogation  by  the
         intelligence service, according to some sources (IOM; Sudanese NGOs
         in Khartoum and Kampala). The IOM added that returnees with an  ETD
         are questioned about the reasons for their earlier  departure  from
         Sudan at the immigration desk. This takes about fifteen  to  twenty
         minutes, and the person is then  free  to  go.  Not  only  rejected
         asylum seekers undergo such interrogations,  but  all  persons  who
         have lost their passport, according to the IOM.

         According to some sources contacted by the CGRS (Waging Peace; ICG;
         Sudanese human rights activist in Khartoum  (A);  Baldo  S.;  DRDC)
         returnees with an ETD run a greater risk of being targeted  by  the
         authorities. According to Maddy Crowther of Waging Peace,  this  is
         because they are identified as rejected  asylum  applicants,  which
         gives  them  a  political  profile.92The  Sudanese  journalist  and
         analyst Tajeldin Adam stated that returnees with an ETD are usually
         taken away by the NISS for further verification, during which  they
         may be  subjected  to  discrimination  or  persecution,  especially
         political opponents or members of vulnerable  groups.93DWAG  stated
         that even when they have a valid passport, returnees  face  a  high
         risk of detention, torture or even death.  Waging  Peace  knows  of
         several  cases  where  a  holder  of  a  British   passport   faced
         problems.95Suliman Baldo referred to the recent arrest of a British
         journalist and an American activist of Sudanese origin.

         Regarding verifications carried out by  the  NISS,  the  Australian
         Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT) stated that the NISS
         is strongly present at the airport  and  checks  all  documents  of
         departing and arriving passengers. The British embassy in  Khartoum
         pointed out that the intelligence service only intervenes when  the
         immigration procedure is  completed  and  that  returnees  are  not
         systematically subjected to further investigation. This only  takes
         place when the NISS views a returnee  as  "a  potential  person  of
         interest", for instance when their name appears on a  travel  watch
         list, or because they had contacts with the Sudanese opposition  or
         were active in opposition groups abroad.

         Two western embassies told the British-Danish fact-finding  mission
         that the NISS  checks  passport  numbers  in  their  database.  Two
         Sudanese  human  rights  activists  stated  that  the  intelligence
         service also uses this security check to collect information  about
         incoming passengers and to ask questions about their origin,  their
         activities abroad  and  the  reasons  for  their  visit  to  Sudan.
         Rejected asylum applicants are moreover asked questions  about  the
         duration of their stay abroad, the lack of  a  passport  and  their
         political affiliations,  according  to  the  European  and  African
         Centre for Research, Training and Development (EAC), an NGO working
         in Khartoum on legal migration.

         The British embassy stated that it is not entirely  clear  how  the
         immigration service identifies a  returnee  as  a  rejected  asylum
         applicant but that indicators such as the use of  an  ETD  (e.g.  a
         laissez-passer), the absence of a valid exit visa or  the  presence
         of an escort may draw the attention  of  the  immigration  service.
         Waging Peace also pointed out that an incoming  passenger  escorted
         by British immigration agents to Khartoum airport can be identified
         as a rejected  asylum  applicant.   Mukhtar  Alqabir  (KACE  Sudan)
         explained in an e-mail to the CGRS that  repatriated  Sudanese  are
         usually intercepted by the NISS on board  or  near  the  plane  and
         taken by a separate route to the NISS office.

         A Sudanese human rights lawyer stated in his  e-mail  to  the  CGRS
         that the authorities,  when  they  have  doubts  about  a  person's
         nationality, ask the person to have a relative come to the airport.
          Niemat Ahmadi (DWAG) added that detainees often refuse to give the
         names of their relatives so as not to put them at risk.

         A Sudanese human rights activist (C) in Khartoum told the  CGRS  in
         her e-mail that she travelled to Khartoum in February 2017 with  an
         ETD because she had lost her passport in London. She was  taken  by
         the NISS to a separate office, where she was asked  to  fill  in  a
         "forced deportation form" with questions  about  her  journey,  her
         family and her ethnic origin. As she refused to  answer  this  last
         question, she was taken to another building and was  only  released
         when the NISS was told her ethnic origin by a  family  member.  The
         Sudanese activist wondered  what  would  happen  with  an  incoming
         passenger belonging to an ethnic group which the  government  views
         with hostility."

262. Under the heading "Ethnic Profiles" the report  (para  2.3.2),  dealing
    largely with non-Arab-Darfuris but also those from the Nuba  Mountains,
    states that the risk to them was "not assessed by all  sources  in  the
    same way":

         "The risk for persons from conflict areas, such as Darfur and South
         Kordofan (Nuba Mountains) and Blue Nile States, especially for non-
         Arab Darfuris, is not assessed by all sources in the same way.

         The British Upper Tribunal considered in a decision  of  2015  that
         the term "Darfuri" is to be understood as an ethnic  term  relating
         to origins, not as a geographical term. Accordingly,  the  risk  is
         the same for all non-Arab Darfuris,  whether  they  were  born  and
         lived in Darfur or not.

         In their latest decisions regarding Darfuris,  the  Upper  Tribunal
         and the ECtHR have ruled against repatriation of non-Arab Darfuri.

         The Upper Tribunal quoted the UK Border Agency  (UKBA)  Operational
         Guidance Note on Sudan of 2 November 2009: "All non-Arab  Darfuris,
         regardless of their political or other affiliations,  are  at  real
         risk of persecution".  In 2015, the ECtHR concluded again that  the
         Sudanese  government  is  extremely  suspicious  of  Darfuris   who
         travelled or lived abroad.

         Both jurisdictions refer to a UNHCR  report  of  28  November  2008
         stating that Darfuris in the Khartoum area are at  heightened  risk
         of  being  subjected  to  arbitrary  arrests  and   that   Darfuris
         travelling abroad may be viewed  with  suspicion  by  the  security
         forces.

         The British Sudan researcher Peter Verney considers  that  non-Arab
         Darfuris may also be arrested and detained for racist  motives,  as
         part of the  "genocidal"  and  "ethnocidal"  destruction  of  their
         societies, and not because of actual evidence of links  with  rebel
         groups. The Sudanese authorities attribute a  political  colour  on
         the basis of ethnicity, and not on the basis of  a  real  political
         profile. According to Verney,  hundreds  of  low  profile  non-Arab
         Darfuris are being arrested.

         In a document released in October 2017, Waging  Peace  stated  that
         non-Arab Darfuris still are at risk in Sudan, also  when  they  are
         sent back to Khartoum. According to Waging Peace,  ethnic  Darfuris
         (or persons supposed to belong to  this  ethnic  group)  face  more
         systematic forms of discrimination and persecution in the  capital,
         which prevents their relocation.

         In 2013, the British embassy in Khartoum was told by  human  rights
         organizations that returnees from Darfur and the Nuba Mountains run
         a higher risk of arrest upon arrival than other Sudanese returnees.

         Amnesty  International  considered  that  Sudanese  from  conflict-
         affected areas such as Darfur and  South  Kordofan  and  Blue  Nile
         States should not be sent back to Sudan, where  they  would  be  at
         real risk of serious human rights violations.  A number of  sources
         contacted by the CGRS (Amnesty International; Sudan expert  for  an
         international organization;  Sudanese  journalist;  DWAG;  Tajeldin
         Adam; ACJPS; DRDC; KACE Sudan) hold the same view.   Suliman  Baldo
         declared that the Sudanese security  services  are  more  prone  to
         subject detainees from conflict areas to racist  insults  and  ill-
         treatment, including torture, compared with detainees from north or
         central Sudan. Most youths leaving the country come  from  conflict
         areas, according to Baldo.  Some sources (DWAG; DBA;  human  rights
         lawyer in Khartoum; ACJPS; DRDC) stated that the Fur, Massalit  and
         Zaghawa are the ethnic groups which  are  most  often  targeted  in
         Sudan.181A Sudanese professor of human rights law stated  that  not
         every returnee faces problems at  KIA  but  perceived  a  risk  for
         persons who combine a specific  ethnic  background  with  political
         activities, for instance a Darfuri suspected of involvement with  a
         rebel group.

         A number of sources contacted by  the  CGRS  (Eric  Reeves;  Waging
         Peace; Sudanese human rights activist (A);  Sudanese  human  rights
         activist in Khartoum (D))  were  of  the  view  that  Darfuris  are
         particularly  under  suspicion,  all  the  more  so,  according  to
         Tubiana, when they have requested asylum in the West or in  Israel.
         Most sources also mentioned other Sub-Saharan ethnic groups such as
         the Nuba. Darfuris with "political profiles"  (sometimes  based  on
         distant family ties with rebel groups or involvement in  some  form
         of political activity, according to Reeves)  run  a  high  risk  of
         arrest,  detention  and  torture.  Waging  Peace  noted  that  many
         activities have a political side and that this could  also  be  the
         case for the activities  of  journalists,  teachers,  human  rights
         activists, humanitarian aid workers etc. Applying for  asylum  will
         also draw attention  from  the  authorities,  according  to  Waging
         Peace.

         Abdelrahman Elgasim (DBA) stated that  passports  of  Darfuris  are
         usually confiscated and their holders are interrogated about  every
         aspect of their life  (place  of  birth,  ethnic  origin,  parents,
         brothers and sisters, partners, political affiliation,  occupation)
         and have to sign a written commitment not  to  leave  the  country.
         They are then blacklisted from  leaving  the  country.  Elgasim  is
         aware that a number of Darfuris occupy senior government  functions
         but most of them are members of the Islamic Movement, and are  tied
         through their religion to the Islamic government.

         Other sources stated that  an  ethnic  profile  entails  in  itself
         insufficient risk upon return and pleaded for a more individualized
         approach which would take into  account  the  returnee's  political
         profile.

         Several sources (IOM; UNHCR; western embassies; Sudanese NGO)  told
         the British-Danish  fact-finding  mission  in  early  2016  that  a
         person's ethnicity did not  generally  affect  their  treatment  on
         arrival at KIA. UNHCR explained  that,  due  to  ethnic  diversity,
         especially in Darfur, and to mixed parentage, it  is  difficult  in
         practice to treat persons differently on the basis of their  tribal
         affiliation. A western embassy noted  that  upon  arrival  at  KIA,
         Darfuris and persons from the Two Areas may be treated  rudely  and
         will probably be asked to pay a bribe, and according to a  Kampala-
         based Sudanese NGO, the National Human Rights Monitors Organization
         (NHRMO), they would be subjected to more intensive questioning  and
         if they are suspected of  anti-government  activities,  they  could
         face detention.

         In  May  2013,  the  Swiss  Federal  Administrative   Court   (FAC)
         considered that, although still unstable, the situation  in  Darfur
         was improving  and  that  attacks  against  non-Arab  Darfuris  had
         decreased. The FAC concluded that Darfuris had to adduce additional
         distinguishing features, such as political or  other  affiliations,
         to substantiate their fear of persecution.

         The British embassy in Khartoum stated in 2016  that  its  contacts
         with Darfuri within civil society and political  parties,  with  UN
         agencies and other embassies do not suggest ethnic  persecution  of
         non-Arab Darfuris settled in regions outside Darfur.187The  British
         embassy added that many Darfuris, including non-Arab Darfuris,  are
         represented at senior levels in government,  the  security  forces,
         and the media.

         In August 2017, the British Home Office  considered  that  non-Arab
         Darfuris are not generally at risk of persecution or  serious  harm
         in Khartoum solely on the grounds of  their  ethnicity.  This  view
         departs from the British  Upper  Tribunal's  jurisprudence  holding
         that non-Arab Darfuris are eligible  for  international  protection
         and have no internal relocation  alternative,189and  from  its  own
         policy guideline of  2016,  which  followed  the  Upper  Tribunal's
         jurisprudence.190The Home Office is of the view that a person's non-
         Arab Darfuri ethnicity is likely to be a  factor  which  may  bring
         them to the attention of the state and, depending on other  aspects
         of their profile and activities, may lead to a risk of serious harm
         or persecution. The Home Office added  that  Darfuris  in  Khartoum
         face discrimination in accessing  public  services,  education  and
         employment, experience forced eviction,  societal  harassment  from
         other Sudanese, and do not have access to humanitarian  assistance.
         However in general such treatment is  not  so  severe  that  it  is
         likely to amount to persecution. Each case has to be considered  on
         its individual facts.  The  Home  Office  further  noted  that  all
         returns are to Khartoum and considers  this  a  reasonable  option,
         including for persons not previously resident in Khartoum.  If  the
         person is able to demonstrate a risk of persecution or serious harm
         in Khartoum, internal relocation to another part of Sudan will  not
         be reasonable.

         The ACJPS told the CGRS it did not  have  any  evidence  suggesting
         that persons are targeted because of their  ethnic  background  and
         stated that ethnicity is  a  complicated  matter  and  that  ethnic
         disputes are used by the government to achieve political goals."

263. Under the heading "Political Profiles" the report  (para  2.3.2)  deals
    with the sources on the issue of what risk,  if  any,  faced  by  those
    viewed as political opponents of the Sudanese government:

         "All sources agree that Sudanese political opponents face a risk of
         persecution upon  return  if  they  have  been  politically  active
         abroad, where the diaspora is kept under close surveillance by  the
         Sudanese secret service.

         Several sources  of  the  British-Danish  mission  (UNHCR;  western
         embassies; Sudanese lawyers and activists in Khartoum and  Kampala;
         Sudanese journalist) emphasized that  returnees  with  a  political
         profile or with rebel  connections  may  be  thoroughly  questioned
         and/or arrested at KIA.

         A range of sources contacted  by  the  CGRS  (Sudan  expert  of  an
         international  human  rights  organization;  ACJPS;  human   rights
         activist (C) in Khartoum; DBA; a journalist in  Khartoum;  Sudanese
         professor; KACE Sudan) share the view that activists, vocal critics
         of the regime and members of the opposition all  run  a  risk  upon
         return. Activists known to be communist,  secularist  or  political
         opponents run a heightened  risk  of  ill-treatment,  according  to
         Muqhtar  Alqabir  (KACE  Sudan).  The  ACJPS  stated  that  arrests
         sometimes do not last long and are rather a form  of  intimidation,
         but that returnees who are viewed as a real threat may be  detained
         for a longer time. The ACJPS  is  primarily  thinking  of  lawyers,
         journalists and students. Arrests may even take place during social
         visits, according to the Sudanese human rights activist.  A  member
         of the  Sudanese  Congress  Party  was  arrested  at  his  mother's
         funeral. This is an arbitrary process depending on  the  perception
         of NISS agents and immigration staff.


         According to Geir Skogseth of Landinfo, the  Sudanese  authorities,
         especially the NISS, keep a close watch  on  political  activities,
         broadly defined. This also extends to political activities  in  the
         diaspora.  Individuals  with  political   activities   abroad   may
         experience problems  with  the  NISS  upon  their  return,  whether
         voluntary  or  forced.   A   collaborator   of   an   international
         organization stated that the way a person is  treated  upon  return
         strongly depends on the person's individual  profile.  It  is  very
         dangerous for someone who is publicly active in the diaspora to  be
         sent back, but persons who left Sudan merely to find a better  life
         will only face interrogation.

         The DBA considered that activists from Darfur  and  the  Two  Areas
         would be at greatest risk at KIA. The NHRMO told the British-Danish
         fact-finding  mission  that  persons  from  these  areas  would  be
         questioned extensively about their political activities and  risked
         detention  if  they  were  suspected  of  activities  against   the
         government. The NHRMO declared  that  it  is  not  safe  for  their
         collaborators to go to Khartoum.  Two  human  rights  lawyers  from
         Khartoum mentioned that political activists are sometimes  detained
         at the airport but that this is not very common.  It  is  now  more
         common for the authorities to obtain information about a  returnee,
         and to arrest him later if he is deemed of interest. The  EAC,  who
         is active in  Khartoum,  noted  that  arrests  of  persons  with  a
         political profile have become less common since the  conclusion  of
         the 2005 Comprehensive Peace Agreement197and the return to Sudan of
         a number of opposition groups.

         A Sudan researcher at HRW pointed out in July 2017 to the  Austrian
         Centre for Country of Origin & Asylum  Research  and  Documentation
         (ACCORD) that a Darfuri returning to  KIA  would  probably  not  be
         targeted  merely  because  of  his  ethnic   background.   Possible
         discrimination of a Darfuri returnee at KIA would rather depend  on
         the profile of the person, on his ethnic background  and  political
         activities, which might arouse suspicion of rebel  sympathies.  The
         HRW researcher added that membership of the Hizb al-Umma  (National
         Umma Party, NUP)  and  some  other  opposition  parties  would  not
         necessarily be considered an aggravating factor as  this  party  is
         part of  the  "acceptable  opposition"  with  a  handful  of  other
         parties.

         On the other hand, J�r�me Tubiana stated in his e-mail to ACCORD of
         July 2017 that Darfuris are likely to be interrogated by  security,
         and possibly beaten or tortured,  detained,  and  even  killed.  He
         added that Hizb al-Umma  or  other  opposition  affiliation  is  an
         aggravating factor.

         Amnesty International considers that  Sudanese  coming  from  areas
         other than Darfur and the Two Areas must not be sent back to  Sudan
         when they are accused of opposition activities.

         The British Upper Tribunal estimated in April  2016  that  not  all
         political opponents suffer persecution and that for this to happen,
         their level of political engagement has  to  be  fairly  high.  The
         Upper Tribunal added that sur place activities may entail  a  risk,
         for instance when the  activities  are  public  and  known  to  the
         intelligence service. It does not take much for the NISS to  create
         a file on an opponent but this does not necessarily mean  that  the
         file will be used later on.   However,  the  British  Sudan  expert
         Peter  Verney  told  the  Upper  Tribunal  that  little  more  than
         suspicion is sometimes enough to detain someone.

         Relying on the Upper Tribunal's  jurisprudence,  the  British  Home
         Office noted that there is a risk of persecution  or  serious  harm
         for those who oppose  the  government,  including  members  of  the
         political  opposition  or  civil  society,  student  activists  and
         journalists,  who  may  be  subjected  to  arbitrary   arrest   and
         detention, forced disappearance and ill-treatment. The Home  Office
         added that not every person belonging to a category at risk will be
         persecuted and assessed the risk as follows:

             "The risk a person faces will  depend  on  their  profile  and
             activities, and whether they are likely to be perceived  as  a
             threat to, and attract the attention of,  the  authorities  in
             such a way that amounts to more than  a  routine,  commonplace
             risk of detention and questioning but meets the threshold of a
             real risk of persecution or serious harm."

         In an e-mail to the CGRS, Waging  Peace  deplored  that  the  Upper
         Tribunal and the Home Office are minimizing the risk of  widespread
         arrests and detention, so as not to reach the threshold of "risk of
         serious harm". The NGO considers this an "unwarranted reformulation
         of the Refugee Convention". Moreover, according  to  Waging  Peace,
         it's up to the asylum applicant to prove that he or she is a person
         of interest, whereas repression in Sudan is of an arbitrary  nature
         and claiming refugee status is in itself a political act.

         A number of sources contacted by  the  CGRS  (Waging  Peace;  human
         rights activist (C) and journalist in Khartoum; human rights lawyer
         in Khartoum; Sudanese professor) have knowledge of a  blacklist  of
         persons wanted by the authorities.  The NISS relies on  a  detailed
         and sophisticated database, according  to  Reeves207,  and  creates
         files on individuals, according to a Sudanese human rights activist
         and a collaborator of an  international  organization.  The  latter
         does not believe that files are created on individuals who are  not
         viewed as a threat.

         A number of testimonies included in Waging Peace's report  of  2014
         show  that  Sudanese  activists  and  opposition  members  returned
         several times to Sudan without problems, possibly because of  their
         status, but that this privilege can be revoked  when  tensions  are
         high. The moment of the return to Sudan can  therefore  also  be  a
         risk factor. Waging Peace refers to  the  detention  of  Mariam  El
         Mahdi, vice-president of the Hizb al-Umma, and to the testimony  of
         Dr Sidgi Awad Kaballo, member of the Sudanese Communist Party."

264. At section 4.3  under  the  heading  "Surveillance  of  the  Diaspora",
    setting out the passage in full and upon  which  Mr  Jacobs  relied  in
    part, the report says this:

         "The British embassy in Khartoum reported that under  the  Sudanese
         2014 Asylum Act, the Commissioner for Refugees has  an  "obligation
         to monitor  the  situation  of  Sudanese  refugees  abroad  and  to
         expressly encourage them to return to Sudan".  The  Office  of  the
         Commissioner for Refugees comes under the Ministry of Interior, but
         maintains close relations with the NISS.

         The British embassy also wrote that it has no independent  evidence
         of  overseas  surveillance  of  asylum  seekers  by  the   Sudanese
         government, but that  in  October  2012  a  Sudanese  diplomat  was
         expelled from Norway following allegations of  spying  on  Sudanese
         refugees.346In 2013, a Sudanese asylum applicant was  found  guilty
         in Norway of spying on the diaspora, according to Landinfo.

         The ECtHR noted that there is no  systematic  surveillance  by  the
         NISS, which does not have the means to spy on every member  of  the
         diaspora. The NISS surveys specific persons, for instance those who
         have a political past in Sudan, are  engaged  in  public  political
         activities  abroad  or  have  family  or  personal  ties  with  the
         opposition in exile.

         In 2013  and  2014,  The  Telegraph,  relying  on  statements  from
         Sudanese activists, wrote that the  Sudanese  intelligence  service
         was  infiltrating  opposition  circles  and   that   the   Sudanese
         government coordinated a network of spies in cities across  the  UK
         where the Sudanese opposition is strongly present. According to the
         activists, spies also work at  the  Sudanese  embassy,  where  they
         collect information on the diaspora.

         The British Home Office wrote in 2016  that  Sudanese  intelligence
         conducts surveillance on politically active members of the diaspora
         within the UK and is likely to focus attention on those who (or are
         perceived to) pose most risk to the regime.

         In 2012 and 2014, Waging Peace collected testimonies among Sudanese
         from the diaspora and Sudanese who had been interrogated upon their
         return to Sudan about  their  activities  in  the  UK.  From  their
         testimonies, Waging  Peace  concluded  that  Sudanese  intelligence
         spies on the diaspora and closely monitors political  meetings  and
         demonstrations abroad. Information collected by  the  NISS  may  be
         used against returnees to Sudan. Waging Peace is also of  the  view
         that the NISS does not have the means to monitor all activists  who
         are less actively engaged."

    5. Respecting the Principle  of  Non-Refoulement  when  Organising  the
    Return of Person to Sudan (February 2018)

265. In the "COI Focus" report, the Belgian authorities  considered  reports
    of  documented  repatriations  to  Sudan  from  a  number  of  European
    countries, including Belgium, Italy, France, Germany,  The  Netherlands
    and Norway and from  a  number  of  non-European  countries,  including
    Jordan and Israel (see section 1 at pages 10 - 15; and section  2.4  at
    pages 31 - 38).

266. These formed the basis  of  an  investigation  by  the  Office  of  the
    Belgian  Commissioner  General  for  Refugees  and  Stateless   Persons
    resulting in a  report  entitled  "Respecting  the  Principle  of  non-
    Refoulment when Organising the Return of Persons to Sudan  (8  February
    2018).  These returns, largely resulting from an investigation  by  the
    Tahrir Institute were relied upon by Madeline Crowther in her  evidence
    as demonstrating a risk to returned asylum  seekers  (including  Nuba).
    The Belgian Commissioner General found that "some  important  elements"
    of the individual's counts "were not true, to such an extent that  this
    raises  serious  doubts  about  the  rest  of  the   testimony".    The
    Commissioner General's assessment leading to that conclusion is set out
    at pages 7-10 of the report as follows:


         "An assessment
         Main findings:

           . Efforts were made to obtain more  specific  information  about
             the facts of the treatment or ill-treatment  encountered  upon
             arrival in Khartoum. The descriptions were very summary.

                 o    The conversations with Mr Koert Debeuf and the person
                   identified as "a Sudanese refugee", who seemed  to  have
                   played an important part in  the  investigation  by  the
                   Tahrir Institute, did not yield  more  information  than
                   the information mentioned in  the  note  of  the  Tahrir
                   Institute. An analysis of the conversations on  WhatsApp
                   with some persons  who  were  returned  to  Sudan  (made
                   available  by  Mr  Koert  Debeuf),  did  not  yield  any
                   additional  information  either.  For  some  aspects,  a
                   (slight) difference was found between  the  declarations
                   made and their transcription in the note.

                 o    The conversation the CGRS had on WhatsApp with one of
                   the persons who had been removed to Sudan did not  yield
                   any additional information either. This person  did  not
                   seem to be disposed to give additional information.

                 o    Several embassies of EU member states let us know that
                   no incidents or cases of  ill-treatment  of  persons  who
                   were  recently  removed  to  Sudan  had  come  to   their
                   attention.  Neither did the UNHCR and  IOM  possess  such
                   information.  The UNHCR informed us that they do not as a
                   rule monitor rejected asylum seekers or persons  who  did
                   not apply for asylum after their return.

           . The CGRS has not been able to  obtain  absolute  certainty  or
             clarity about the question whether the facts mentioned in  the
             report of the Tahrir  Institute  have  actually  taken  place.
             There is no hard evidence that the facts actually took  place.
             Neither could it be established with certainty that the  facts
             mentioned did not take place. However, some  findings  of  the
             CGRS give rise to serious doubts, at least regarding  some  of
             the testimonies.

            ( A distinction must be made between  the  person  who  returned
             voluntarily under the IOM REAB program, and the  nine  persons
             who were removed. For the  voluntary  returnee,  it  has  been
             alleged that he had in fact been forced to return. This  claim
             does not  appear  to  be  well-founded.  Regarding  the  first
             testimony reproduced in the note of the Tahrir Institute,  the
             following was stated: "MR. ... was  going  through  a  process
             organized by the IOM and didn't leave Belgium voluntarily. ...
             They forced me to sign the papers to go to Sudan. They told me
             we will do you  a  business  investment,  they  will  forcibly
             deport me, so they intimidated me so I signed the papers.  ...
             They told me I will get 1.700 euros. ... They cheated me, they
             didn't do anything for me. They didn't even give me  one  euro
             until today." But on the other hand it appears that on the day
             after his detention (on 5 September 2017), the person involved
             announced that he wanted to return voluntarily and that  on  3
             October 2017, he benefited from special counselling by the IOM
             and  reiterated  on  that  occasion   his   wish   to   return
             voluntarily. The visit  of  the  identification  mission  took
             place after the person concerned announced that he  wanted  to
             return voluntarily. It also appears that the IOM did  all  the
             necessary  to  support  the  business  plan  of   the   person
             concerned: on 16 October 2017 (four days after  his  arrival),
             the person concerned visited the IOM for the  first  time.  He
             then came back several times  to  put  his  business  plan  in
             order. Financial aid was due to be paid  on  16  November  but
             because the  person  concerned  did  not  present  himself  in
             person, the payment could not be  executed.  The  project  was
             eventually concluded in January 2018: "Mr. ... has been  fully
             assisted -on Monday 22nd of  January  2018  business  of  play
             station center will be established in his area of origin Rabak
             -White Nile state". Regarding this person, the report  of  the
             Tahrir Institute also stated: "I am from Darfur and our  lives
             are  difficult  in  Darfur.  ...  My  life  is  difficult  and
             dangerous in Darfur". According to his statement (included  in
             his file at the Immigration Office), he  was  born  in  Rabak,
             capital of the State of White Nile. This is also mentioned  on
             the laissez-passer. And IOM confirmed that he is to start  his
             integration project in "his area of origin Rabak  -White  Nile
             state". Many elements in the testimony appear not to be  true.
             One therefore wonders if the other elements mentioned  in  the
             testimony are true. This concerns the person  mentioned  first
             in the report of the Tahrir Institute, whose testimony is  the
             most extensive.

            ( For one person (the second testimony  in  the  report  of  the
             Tahrir Institute), it appears that he made his first visit  to
             the IOM office on the day  of  his  arrival  in  Khartoum.  He
             appears to have visited this office for the first time  on  22
             October 2017 and to have arrived  in  Khartoum  shortly  after
             midnight on the same  day  or  shortly  before  midnight.  IOM
             confirmed the following: "MR ... approached our office for the
             first time  on  22  October  2017.  He  received  his  in-kind
             entitlements on 28 January for purchasing  mobile  phones  for
             release. We did not come across any harsh treatment  complaint
             from Mr. ..., neither has he  shown  any  traces  of  possible
             harsh treatment." On the other hand, it appears that according
             to  the  report  of  the  Tahrir  Institute  he  claimed   the
             following: "Upon arrival in Khartoum, he was detained  at  the
             airport for two days and interrogated  on  political  charges:
             questioned on where he was  from  in  Darfur  and  accused  of
             working with the Darfur  opposition.  He  denied  it  and  was
             tortured physically (beaten with a stick) and  psychologically
             for three hours. ... ". Contrary to the statement as reported,
             it appears from the analysis of the WhatsApp conversation that
             the person concerned declared to have been  detained  for  one
             day. On 26 January 2018, the CGRS  had  a  brief  conversation
             with this person on WhatsApp.  During  this  conversation,  he
             repeated that he had been  detained  for  one  day,  from  the
             afternoon until the next morning. He did  not  give  any  more
             information about possible ill-treatment.  After some time, he
             seemed no longer willing to  continue  the  conversation.  His
             testimony seems incompatible with the fact that he visited the
             IOM office on the day of his arrival. The  same  can  be  said
             regarding his statement that he cannot leave his room and look
             for work.

            ( The CGRS found that three of  the  persons  mentioned  in  the
             report of the Tahrir Institute have contacted IOM to start  an
             integration project in Sudan. This concerns  the  first  three
             persons mentioned in the note of the  Tahrir  Institute,  i.e.
             the three persons who gave a direct testimony. Two of them had
             the most outspoken complaints about ill-treatment after  their
             arrival in Khartoum. The third person has not  mentioned  ill-
             treatment upon arrival. For all three persons,  IOM  confirmed
             that they  visited  their  office  at  least  once  to  obtain
             financial help to start an integration project in Khartoum  or
             Rabak. For all three persons, IOM also  confirmed  that  while
             visiting the IOM office, they did not say anything  about  any
             incidents upon  their  arrival.  The  fact  that  those  three
             persons are not "persecuted" at the moment can  be  considered
             as an indication of the  fact  that  they  do  not  belong  to
             special categories at risk.

            ( Because the CGRS has not been able to  thoroughly  assess  the
             situation of  the  persons  concerned,  it  is  impossible  to
             formulate a clear conclusion regarding their profile  and  the
             risk in case of return. Most of the persons  who  returned  or
             were removed may very well belong to profiles that are not  at
             risk of being persecuted, tortured or treated  in  an  inhuman
             way; for some of them,  questions  can  be  raised  about  the
             credibility of their claims or their profile, for others there
             are no concrete indications.

            ( A special situation concerns  the  last,  indirect  testimony
             mentioned in the   updated version of the report of the Tahrir
             Institute.  Regarding this person, the report  of  the  Tahrir
             Institute  states:  "He  said  he  was  from  Darfur  and  was
             recruited for the armed struggle. He claimed he  was  a  minor
             (16 years old) but a medical examination (bone  scan)  carried
             out by the Belgian authorities determined he is 20  years  old
             +/-2 years. ... Once in Khartoum he was questioned and  beaten
             for a fully day, then released. He went home to his family.  A
             week later, a group of men (probably form  intelligence)  came
             to violently take  him  away  from  his  home,  and  this  was
             witnessed  by  the  relatives  present.  Since  then,  he  has
             disappeared. One of his uncles -a deportee  from  Israel  -was
             recently  killed  for  having  attempted  to   migrate."   The
             information mentioned in the report about an attempted removal
             via Istanbul, from where the person  concerned  was  allegedly
             sent  back  to  Belgium  with  an  escort   by   the   Turkish
             authorities, is clearly not  true:  the  planned  removal  via
             Istanbul was cancelled before the departure to Istanbul.  This
             raises doubts about the accuracy of the rest of the testimony.
             It is likely that the testimony is not based on the own  words
             of the person concerned or of a family member who has met  the
             person concerned. In order to find out more about this aspect,
             the CGRS had a conversation with two  Sudanese  nationals  who
             were said to have more information or to be in touch with  the
             person concerned or his relatives. The first person,  who  was
             contacted on the advice of Mr Koert Debeuf, informed  us  that
             he did not know that much and had  go  this  information  from
             another person. This  person  (still  detained  in  a  removal
             centre, heard on 7 February 2018) in turn let us know that  he
             had not had any direct contact. However, he  claimed  to  have
             been present during a conversation of  a  fellow  inmate  (who
             left for Italy in  the  meantime)  with  a  person  living  in
             France, at the end  of  December.  This  person  in  turn  was
             allegedly in touch with relatives  of  the  "missing"  person.
             Until  now  the  CGRS  has  not  been  able  to  obtain   more
             information. Therefore, it is difficult to assess the  profile
             of the person concerned and the claims  made,  especially  the
             fact that the person has disappeared. But in this  case  also,
             some elements of the so-called testimony are clearly not true,
             which raises doubts about the truthfulness of the rest of  the
             testimony. Moreover, it was found that  various  persons  gave
             the impression that they had been in  touch  with  the  person
             concerned, whereas this appeared to be untrue."

267. In its conclusions, the report states (page 15) that:

         "The CGRS has not been able to obtain absolute certainty or clarity
         regarding the question whether the facts mentioned in the  note  of
         the Tahrir Institute have actually taken place.  But for the  three
         most important testimonies from the report of the Tahrir Institute,
         some important parts of the testimony have been found to be untrue,
         to the extent that this casts serious doubt  on  the  rest  of  the
         testimony.  To obtain more certainty  in  this  matter,  additional
         research would be necessary."

268. The report concludes (page 16) that:

         "...the removal or return  of  persons  to  Sudan  can  be  resumed
         providing the protection need of each of the persons concerned  has
         been assessed 'on its merit'  beforehand  (including  a  protection
         need regarding article 3 ECHR)."

    6. Landinfo Response to UK Home Office Query on Sudan (April 2018).

269. We were referred to short passages in the  Landinfo  (Norway)  response
    to an enquiry via EASO, by the Home Office (dated 9 April  2018).    In
    section 2 of the response, the document deals with the interest of  the
    NISS in individuals coming from the conflict areas as follows:

         "In meetings with Landinfo in Sudan,  our  sources  have  generally
         stated that NISS definitely has a special focus on the  populations
         coming from the conflict areas. According to one source, NISS has a
         special "tribal branch" dedicated to monitoring political  activity
         among populations with origins in  the  periphery.  Activists  with
         origins in South Kordofan have pointed out that NISS in  particular
         monitors four  groups  among  Nubans:  people  belonging  to  armed
         groups,  activists,  those  with  higher  education,   and   recent
         arrivals.

                 .     People belonging to armed groups will face arrest if
                   identified by NISS. This applies especially  to  persons
                   who have taken up arms and people who provide  practical
                   support, but also to political supporters.

                 .    Activists are in focus as they are seen as people who
                   actively influence others to support organisations  that
                   are critical towards the regime's politics regarding the
                   "Two Areas". The definition of activist is wide and  not
                   limited to members of political parties or the political
                   wings of armed groups. (Activists  from  conflict  areas
                   belonging to civil society  organisations  or  political
                   parties are fairly often  suspected  and/or  accused  by
                   NISS of supporting armed groups.)

                 .     People with higher education (high school  or  more)
                   are followed more  closely  than  others,  as  they  are
                   "potential activists" and  people  with  influence  over
                   others within the community.

                 .      Recent  arrivals  from  zones  with  ongoing  armed
                   conflict are followed closely to keep them from  sharing
                   information about recent developments, the  humanitarian
                   situation  and  human  rights  violations  committed  by
                   Sudanese armed forces  or  their  proxies  to  activists
                   reporting on the human rights situation.

         What is difficult to tell, is whether NISS operatives  outside  the
         "Two Areas" fine tune their monitoring to mainly include people who
         are known to belong to ethnic groups or  other  social  communities
         that are perceived as being "in opposition", or if  they  focus  on
         people with Nuba origin in general."

270. In relation to the issue of discrimination, the response says this:

         "There  is  no  institutional,  explicit  discrimination  based  on
         ethnicity regarding access to state services and the like.  On  the
         other hand, the regime does very  little  to  level  out  the  deep
         rooted social and economic differences in Sudanese society, whether
         these differences follow ethnic (or regional, or religious) divides
         or not. Therefore, access  to  public  services  and  resources  is
         generally easier for the urban middle class, which is dominated  by
         Nile River Arabs, than for other segments - especially  those  with
         origins in the periphery."

E. The Respondent's Documents

271. Mr Thomann placed before us a number of recent  Home  Office  documents
    prepared by the Country Policy and Information Team (CPIT) relating  to
    the current situation in Sudan.  The main document is a "Response to an
    Information Request: Sudan" (23 October 2019) ("CPIT 1").  In addition,
    in relation to a specific issue of return there was a "Response  to  an
    Information Request: Sudan" (22 October  2019)  ("CPIT  2").   We  were
    further referred to a document produced  by  the  International  Crisis
    Group, "Safeguarding Sudan's Revolution" (21 October  2019)  ("the  ICG
    report").  That document is extensively referred to and cited in CPIT 1
    and we refer to its detail  in  the  citation  from  that  Home  Office
    document.

272. With one exception, Mr Jacobs in his written submission  accepted  that
    the Home  Office  documents  were  "broadly  uncontentious".   The  one
    exception concerned an email from the British Embassy  in  Khartoum  at
    Annex A of CPIT 1, the content of which was in dispute and  dealt  with
    by Dame Rosalind in her evidence.

    1. Response to an Information Request: Sudan (23 October  2019)  ("CPIT
    1")

273. The political situation is summarised in paras 2.1.1 -  2.1.2  of  CPIT
    1, relying heavily on the ICG report, as follows:

         "2. Political situation: summary

         2.1.1. International Crisis  Group  (ICG)  in  a  report  dated  21
         October 2019, based on interviews  with  informed  individuals  and
         publicly  available  sources,  summarised  events  leading  to  the
         formation of the transitional government, the main political actors
         and dynamics, and key challenges facing the country:

         'Sudan has swung between hope and despair since  11  April  [2019],
         when the most sustained civilian protest movement in the  country's
         modern history swept Omar  al-Bashir  from  power.   Many  Sudanese
         celebrated Bashir's ouster, seeing him as responsible for  economic
         ruin and severe rights abuses.  But  the  generals  who  sought  to
         placate the demonstrators by deposing Bashir have shown  reluctance
         to cede power.  The  security  forces'  brutal  3  June  attack  on
         protesters in Khartoum repulsed the world  and  galvanised  support
         for mediation that yielded a power-sharing agreement on 17  August.
         Still, more outside support is needed to  keep  the  transition  on
         track.  The African Union (AU) should  appoint  an  envoy  to  help
         bridge the gap  of  mistrust  between  parties.   For  their  part,
         Western powers should signal willingness to open the taps of  badly
         needed financial support, encourage Khartoum  to  make  peace  with
         rebel factions on Sudan's periphery, and sustain  pressure  on  the
         generals' Gulf allies to ensure that all sides abide  by  the  deal
         Sudan needs to move ahead after Bashir's rule.

         There have been encouraging steps since the military leadership and
         civilian opposition signed a constitutional declaration sealing the
         power-sharing agreement at a ceremony by the Nile in Khartoum.  The
         parties named representatives to an eleven-member sovereign council
         that is to steer the country to free elections over the  39  months
         following  17  August.   A  widely  respected  economist,   Abdalla
         Hamdock, became prime minister four days after the ceremony, and  a
         new cabinet took office on 8 September.  But the generals  continue
         to wield enormous influence, and they have  shown  few  signs  that
         they intend to respect the Sudanese people's demand for a civilian-
         led administration.  In Sudan's lopsided, patronage-driven economy,
         the top brass has a clear interest in clinging to political power.

         That is just one challenge among many.   In  addition  to  being  a
         potential  spoiler,  the  security  establishment  is   fragmented,
         unaccountable and subject to dangerous internecine rivalries.   The
         once-dominant army has  lost  its  primacy  to  the  Rapid  Support
         Forces, a paramilitary  group  formed  from  the  remnants  of  the
         Janjaweed militia of Darfur  infamy  and  run  by  Muhammad  Hamdan
         Dagalo "Hemedti", who may be the most powerful man in  Sudan.   The
         country's primary military and paramilitary orgnaisations should be
         unified under one command, but that project will  require  patience
         and encouragement from outside powers like  Saudi  Arabia  and  the
         United Arab Emirates (UAE).  Forcing  the  issue  could  result  in
         confrontation at a time when the last thing  Sudan  needs  is  more
         conflict.

         Then there is  the  challenge  of  maintaining  the  unity  of  the
         extraordinarily broad civilian coalition -  named  the  Forces  for
         Freedom and Change - that has been at the vanguard of the uprising.
           Comprising  professional  associations,  civil  society   groups,
         unions, political parties and armed groups, the coalition  has  had
         its own internal struggles.  It will need  to  deftly  manage  them
         lest the security establishment use fissures in its unity  to  peel
         off constituents and weaken it politically.

         There are also wars on the country's periphery - in the Blue  Nile,
         Kordofan and Darfur regions - that tear at national cohesion.   The
         transitional government should focus on ending these conflicts.

         Yet for all the challenges standing in Sudan's  transitional  path,
         there are reasons for hope.  For one thing, the protest  movement's
         strength and increasing sophistication set it apart  from  anything
         in the country's recent history.  The generals  have  already  seen
         that strong-arm tactics of the sort used to quell prior movements -
         for example in 2013 - are not likely to  work  here.   For  another
         thing, a botched transition could stymie prospects for a  surge  of
         desperately needed international support and investment in  Sudan's
         flailing economy.  That is an outcome for which the security forces
         will almost certainly not wish to be blamed.'

         2.1.2. The ICG report also observed:

         'There is also much to do on the economic front.  Rescuing  Sudan's
         anaemic economy will require broad international support through  a
         major multilateral donor initiative.  Hamdok has estimated that the
         country needs a [US] $10 billion infusion over the next two  years.
         Donors, including the US, the EU and its member  states,  and  Gulf
         countries, should begin taking steps to support this request.   The
         US should also move expeditiously to rescind Sudan's designation as
         a state sponsor of terrorism, which forbids international financial
         institutions  from  issuing  loans  and   impedes   other   foreign
         investment, thereby hobbling Sudan's private sector.   Lifting  the
         designation would help the newly appointed, civilian-led cabinet by
         giving it an early win  and  would  be  an  important  step  toward
         Sudan's qualifying  for  debt  relief.   External  partners  should
         couple these supportive measures with stern warnings that  spoilers
         in Khartoum who impede the economic and political reforms necessary
         for Sudan's successful  transition  will  be  subject  to  targeted
         sanctions on part of the AU, EU and US.

         Sudan is one  of  Africa's  most  important  countries,  sandwiched
         between two major powers, Ethiopia and Egypt, abutting the Red  Sea
         and located in a region scarred by instability.  The benefits of  a
         successful transition are potentially enormous,  and  the  cost  of
         state failure would be  vast.   Until  recently,  it  was  hard  to
         imagine a moment of opportunity like the  country  now  faces.   It
         would be a mistake to squander it.' "

274. Section 3 of  CPIT  1  deals  with  the  peace  talk  between  the  new
    government and the rebel forces.  The section draws again upon the  ICG
    report but also a number  of  other  sources,  some  less  formal  than
    others, to describe the recent developments in Sudan:



         "3.  Peace talks with armed opposition
         3.1.     Armed groups.
         3.1.1. Radio Dabanga reported on 15 October  2019  that  the  Sudan
         Revolutionary
                   Front (SRF) is an:
             '... alliance [that] consists of the Sudan People's Liberation
             Movement-North faction led by Malik Agar (SPLM-N Agar) in Blue
             Nile state, and the Darfuri Justice and Equality Movement, the
             Sudan Liberation Movement  faction  under  the  leadership  of
             Minni  Minawi  (SLM-MM),  and  the  SLM-Transitional   Council
             faction headed by El Hadi Idris.
             In March 2017, Abdelaziz El Hilu resigned from his position as
             SPLM-N deputy chairman, blaming  the  movement's  peace  talks
             delegation of neglecting the right  to  self-determination  in
             the conflict regions. The Nuba Mountains  Liberation  Council
             publicly supported the resignation and replaced leader  Agar
             with his deputy El Hilu, which paved the way for  a  split  in
             the SPLM-N.
             The mainstream Sudan Liberation Movement under the  leadership
             of Abdelwahid El Nur withdrew from the SRF when  the  alliance
             opted for a peaceful solution instead of continuing the  armed
             struggle.   El   Nur   says he   will   only   join   peace
             negotiations after  Khartoum  has  restored  stability   and
             security in Darfur.'

         3.1.2. The ICG report observed that:

             'The [SRF]... has  since  splintered,  however,  limiting  its
             relevance as an armed force. Among its constituent parts,  the
             Sudan People's Liberation Movement-North faction  under  Malik
             Agar, of Blue Nile, and Yasir Arman, of northern  Sudan,  lost
             most of its fighters following a bitter split in 2017. Darfuri
             rebel leader Minni Minnawi's Sudan Liberation Army faction  is
             now based in  Libya  as  mercenaries  fighting  on  behalf  of
             General  Haftar.   The  fighting  force  of  the  Justice  and
             Equality Movement under Jibril  Ibrahim  is  thought  to  have
             dwindled below a few hundred  operating  in  South  Sudan  and
             Libya.  These groups' political  strength  among  Sudanese  is
             difficult to gauge but is likely eroding, even in war-affected
             regions.

             Though vocal in its efforts to get a seat at the table  during
             transitional  agreement  talks,  the  Front  is   in   reality
             overshadowed by larger, more powerful armed  groups  that  sit
             outside it. One is the  Sudan  People's  Liberation  Movement-
             North faction led by Hilu, who took most of the rebel fighters
             with him in the 2017 split. Hilu has a  secure  stronghold  in
             the Nuba Mountains of South Kordofan and commands the  largest
             rebel faction in Blue Nile. Another is  the  Sudan  Liberation
             Movement faction of Abdul-Wahid  al-Nur,  which  is  the  only
             remaining significant rebel force in  Darfur.   Nur's  faction
             has declined in power in its Jebel Marra stronghold during his
             long self-imposed exile in France, as has the strength of  his
             personal command. Both leaders disengaged from peace talks  in
             Bashir's final years - especially Nur,  who  earned  notoriety
             among  diplomats  for  his   consistent   refusal   to   enter
             negotiations.'

         3.2.   Peace Process - Juba Declaration of Principles

             3.2.1. The ICG report of 21 October 2019 noted

             'The new transitional government must reckon with  the  legacy
             of decades of efforts by  elites  in  the  wealthier  riverine
             centre to subdue rebellions across the country by force.  This
             legacy encompasses several  regions  devastated  by  conflict,
             huge displaced populations and an array  of  rebel  movements,
             some scattered outside  Sudan's  borders.  Bringing  peace  to
             warring areas should be a  priority  during  the  transitional
             period  and  will  require  careful   consideration   of   the
             accommodations that the  rebels  are  seeking.  These  include
             steps to reverse the imposition of Islamic  law  on  religious
             minorities, separate religion and state,  and  provide  for  a
             fairer distribution of power and resources  to  areas  in  the
             periphery, including  by  allowing  them  to  elect  governors
             rather than imposing these from distant Khartoum.'

             3.2.2. Radio Dabanga observed that "In the Juba Declaration of
             Principles, signed by the Sudanese government  and  the  rebel
             movements on September 11  [2019],  it  was  agreed  to  begin
             negotiations mid-October [2019] for a period of thirty days, a
             comprehensive ceasefire by the two  sides,  the  abolition  of
             death sentences facing leaders of  armed  movements,  and  the
             release of prisoners of war."  The same source  also  reported
             that on Monday 14 October 2019 "Sudanese peace talks began  in
             Juba, at the invitation  of  South  Sudanese  President  Salva
             Kiir. During  the inaugural  session,  the  chairman  of  the
             Sudanese Sovereign Council,  Lt  Gen  Abdelfattah  El  Burhan,
             stressed Khartoum's commitment to  achieving  a  comprehensive
             peace in the country".

             3.2.3. However, the Sudan  Tribune  reported  that  the  Sudan
             Liberation Movement - Abel Wahid al-Nur (SLM-N)  "...  refuses
             to take part in the Juba peace process and called  to  hold  a
             referendum on the legitimacy  of  the  transitional  authority
             before to join the peace process."

             3.3. Peace agreement

             3.3.1. Radio  Dabanga  went  on  to  note  that  "The  current
             chairman of the Sudan Revolutionary Front (SRF, an alliance of
             Sudanese armed movements), El Hadi Idris, emphasised the SRF's
             commitment to reach a comprehensive peace  agreement,  stating
             that the change in Sudan which happened with  support  of  the
             rebel movements has created a new reality open for peace."

             3.3.2. The Sudan Tribune reported on 20 October that:

             '[The] Transitional government and the Sudanese  Revolutionary
             Front have reached a political agreement paving  the  way  for
             the launch of talks for peace in Darfur  region  and  the  Two
             Areas.

             According to the  draft  political  agreement  seen  by  Sudan
             Tribune, the parties will sign also an agreement renewing  the
             cessation of hostilities for humanitarian purposes.

             Also, "the government  will  deliver  humanitarian  assistance
             from inside and outside Sudan to conflict-affected areas".

             The former regime had failed to sign  such  agreement  in  the
             past as the government wanted to control the humanitarian  aid
             and demanded that all the assistance be delivered through  the
             government-controlled  areas....  Under  the  would-be  signed
             agreement, the parties also  agree  to  negotiate  all  issues
             related to the  Sudanese  crisis,  including  areas  of  armed
             conflict, national issues and specific issues.

             The deal provides to review previous decisions on dams and the
             territory of the northern state, referring to the  dispute  on
             Kajabar dam.'

             3.3.3. Radio Dabanga similarly reported  on  21  October  2019
             that '[t]he Sudan Revolutionary Front  (SRF,  an  alliance  of
             Sudanese  armed  movements)  and  the  Sudanese   transitional
             government, today signed  an  agreement  in  the  South  Sudan
             capital of Juba, paving the way for the launch  of  talks  for
             peace in Darfur and the Two Areas'.  The article  went  on  to
             note that:

             'The political agreement also includes an  agreement  renewing
             the cessation of hostilities for  humanitarian  purposes.  The
             government will  also  deliver  humanitarian  assistance  from
             inside and outside Sudan to conflict-affected areas.

             The parties agreed to negotiate  all  issues  related  to  the
             crisis in Sudan, including areas of armed  conflict,  national
             issues, and specific issues.'

             3.3.4. On the  peace  agreement  with  the  rebel  groups,  DW
             reported on 21 October 2019 that:

             'Sudan's government has signed a  political  declaration  with
             rebels, calling it a major step toward ending years  of  civil
             war. A nationwide cease-fire was  also  extended  as  part  of
             efforts to create a lasting peace.

             Sudan's new government and major rebel groups  have  signed  a
             declaration opening the door for further political talks while
             also renewing a cease-fire  for  three  months,  all  part  of
             efforts to end the country's years long civil wars.

             "The political declaration will pave  the  way  for  political
             negotiations and is a step toward a  just,  comprehensive  and
             final peace in Sudan," said General Mohamed  Hamdan  Daglo  on
             Monday. Daglo is a key figure in the transitional  government
             that is tasked with transitioning to civilian rule  after  the
             ouster of President Omar al-Bashir in April.

             The Khartoum administration also agreed to let aid  into  war-
             torn areas including Darfur, the Nuba Mountains and Blue  Nile
             regions, which were cut off from humanitarian groups during al-
             Bashir's rule.'

             Peace agreement - SPLM-N (El Hilu)

             3.3.5. The Sudan Tribune  observed  that  'The  government  is
             holding a separate process with the SPLM-N led by  Abdel  Aziz
             al-Hilu [from discussions with the SRF] The rebel group  which
             is not part of the SRF umbrella demands  the  right  of  self-
             determination  if  the  government  fail  to  repeal   Islamic
             legislations and ensure fair representation  to  the  Sudanese
             minorities in the state institutions.'

             3.3.6. However, on 16 October  2019,  Radio  Dabanga  reported
             that the SPLM-N (El Hilu):

             '... has  suspended  negotiations  with  Sudan's  transitional
             government  on  Wednesday  accusing   government   forces   of
             violating the agreed ceasefire.

             A statement issued by Ammar Daldoum, head  of  the  movement's
             delegation to the negotiations in Juba ... said  that  [on  15
             October 2019,] elements of  the  Rapid  Support  Forces  (RSF)
             government militia driving Land Cruisers  reportedly ambushed
             civilians on the road which connects the western  and  eastern
             regions, near Khor Waral in Habila locality, which is part  of
             the "liberated  areas".  The  RSF  detained  16  people.  They
             released three  of  them  later,  but  still  hold  13  people
             including their goods and belongings.'

             3.3.7. In response,  the  "Chairman  of  Sudan's  Transitional
             Sovereign Council (TSC), Lt  Gen  Abdelfattah  El  Burhan,  on
             Wednesday issued a constitutional decree  declaring  a  cease-
             fire "on al fronts throughout Sudan". He asserted  that  "this
             decree affirms the sincerity of the leadership to move forward
             for achieving peace, halting the  bloodshed  and  meeting  the
             demands of the Sudanese people and leading the country to  the
             ranks of developed countries".

             3.3.8. On 18 October 2019, after  resuming  discussions,  "the
             Sudan People's Liberation  Movement-North  faction  under  the
             leadership of Abdelaziz El  Hilu  (SPLM-N  El  Hilu)  and  the
             Sudanese government reached an  agreement  on  a  roadmap  for
             peace negotiations concerning South Kordofan."  The agreement

             '... defines three  negotiating  items  concerning  political,
             security, and humanitarian arrangements.

             The spokesman for the SPLM-N El Hilu negotiation team, El  Jak
             Mahmoud, reported  in  a  press  conference...  that  the  two
             negotiating parties expressed the  necessity  to  agree  on  a
             Declaration of Principles as a roadmap for the  regulation  of
             the peace talks process.  Also,  the  two  parties  agreed  to
             present their perceptions on the political agenda.

             'The agreement was signed by  Lt  Gen  Shamseldin  Kabashi  on
             behalf of the Sudanese government, Amar Daldoum,  chairman  of
             the SPLM-N El Hilu  negotiation  team,  and  Tut  Galwak,  the
             chairman of the South Sudanese mediation committee.'

             3.3.9.  The  Sudan  Tribune  reporting  on  21  October   2019
             observed:

             'Deputy leader of the Sudan People's Liberation Movement-North
             (SPLM-N) led by Malik Agar Yasir  Arman,  predicted  that  the
             humanitarian situation in the war-affected areas will  improve
             after the Sudanese Transitional Authority agreed to  introduce
             relief from inside and outside the country.

             The transitional government  and  the  Sudanese  Revolutionary
             Front (SRF) signed a political agreement and  a  cessation  of
             hostilities agreement providing to open humanitarian access to
             the rebel areas.

             "The government  will  deliver  humanitarian  assistance  from
             inside and outside Sudan to conflict-affected areas" read  the
             agreement signed in Juba on Monday [21 October 2019].

             'It is the first time since the long-time  Operation  Lifeline
             Sudan (OLS)  that  the  government  accepts  the  delivery  of
             humanitarian assistance from outside the country and the armed
             groups  accepts  food  delivery  by   government   agencies...
             According to the signed deal, the parties will seek a  mandate
             from the Peace and Security Council of the African Union.

             Further, besides the national issues such as  development  and
             national wealth distribution,  the  tracks  will  discuss  the
             armed conflicts in Darfur and the Two Areas, and the issues of
             eastern and northern Sudan.'

275. At para 3.4 CIPT 1 records the announcement of  a  permanent  ceasefire
    in the three conflict zones, including South Kordofan as follows:

         "3.4. Ceasefire

         3.4.1.  As  part  of  the   peace   agreement   (and   during   the
         negotiations), the government announced a  permanent  ceasefire  in
         the 3 conflict  zones  (Darfur,  Blue  Nile  and  South  Kordofan).
         Aljazeera reported that there  had  been  unofficial  ceasefire  in
         place since the former President Omar al-Bashir had been overthrown
         in April 2019."

276. In section 4,  CIPT  1  sets  out  the  new  government's  constitution
    including the two ministers from the Eastern Sudan region and Blue Nile
    State, the appointment of a  new  Chief  Justice,  a  highly  respected
    Supreme Court Judge and the first woman to  hold  that  position  along
    with the appointment of a new Attorney General.

277. Section 5 of CPIT 1 deals with the security  situation,  again  drawing
    heaving on the ICG report, as follows:

         "5. Security sector power and reform

         5.1.1. The ICG report of 21 October 2019 observed:
         'In practice, however, and though the civilian-led cabinet has wide
         popular support, the security establishment continues to hold  most
         instruments of raw power in the country.  It  has  control  of  the
         streets, a grip on  Sudan's  illicit  economy,  and  political  and
         financial backing from foreign capitals, principally Riyadh and Abu
         Dhabi.
         This establishment is far from being a cohesive body. At its  core,
         it  comprises  the  Sudanese  Armed  Forces,  Hemedti's  RSF,   the
         intelligence services and allied  militias.  It  is  vulnerable  to
         internecine  rivalries.  Its  constituent  parts  have  their   own
         loyalties and political backgrounds.  Against  this  backdrop,  the
         security sector represents a dual threat to the peace  process.  It
         is, first and foremost, a spoiler that may try  to  block  civilian
         oversight of the transitional government in order to  preserve  the
         extensive prerogatives it enjoyed under Bashir and has not yet been
         forced to yield. Additionally, its internal  divisions  could  spur
         instability if they blow up into armed clashes.'
         5.1.2. The ICG report goes on to discuss the strengths and weakness
         of the key security actors - the Lt-General Burham and the Sudanese
         Armed Forces; General 'Heme Dagalo (known  as  'Hemedti')  and  the
         Rapid Support Forces; Salah  Gosh  and  National  Intelligence  and
         Security Services  (NISS;  now  renamed  the  General  Intelligence
         Services) - and its recommendations for  managing  these  competing
         interests within the government."

278. Section 6 deals with "Political Opposition" and the context of the  FFC
    and its future  role  in  sustaining  democratic  change.   Again,  the
    document draws heavily on the ICG report:

         "6. Political opposition

         6.1. Diversity and cohesion

         6.1.1. The ICG considered that:
         'The Forces for Freedom  and  Change  is  a  fragile  coalition  of
         parties, political personalities, unions and civil activist  groups
         often  with  competing  interests,  divergent  constituencies   and
         opposing ideologies. Some veteran opposition party  leaders  within
         its ranks are part of the same old guard that many Sudanese view as
         sharing  responsibility  for  the  country's  woes.   Its   younger
         leadership cohort,  however,  particularly  the  professionals  and
         civil society figures who organised  the  protest  movement,  enjoy
         great  credibility  with  the  public,  as  demonstrated  by  their
         capacity repeatedly to summon tens of thousands  of  Sudanese  into
         the streets.
         Throughout, the opposition has shown  not  only  determination  but
         also a mastery of optics. The sit-in outside  the  army's  Khartoum
         headquarters was redolent with  symbolism  -  and  made  for  great
         television. In naming Ahmed al-Rabia, a schoolteacher who drives  a
         taxi at night to supplement his income, as  a  chief  spokesman  in
         April, the opposition drew a sharp  contrast  between  its  support
         base - ordinary Sudanese seeking change - and the generals who  got
         rich during Bashir's long rule.'
         6.1.2. The ICG report cautioned 'The Forces for Freedom and  Change
         coalition is expected to form the bedrock of support for efforts to
         institute full civilian rule at the end  of  the  pivotal  39-month
         transition, but it is  a  work  in  progress.  For  all  the  FFC's
         accomplishments, it is not yet clear  whether  its  many  component
         organisations  will  maintain  the  unity  required  to  check  the
         security sector.'
         6.1.3. The ICG report goes on to discuss the opposition groups  and
         their internal dynamics
         6.1.4. Radio Dabanga reported on 13 October 2019 that:
         'El Sadig El Mahdi, head of Sudan's opposition National Umma  Party
         (NUP),  has  warned  that  "the  current  transitional  regime   is
         deadlocked because of manoeuvres on peace, conspiracies  by  former
         regime members, opportunistic foreign  interventions,  as  well  as
         economic conditions"... He called for what he called  "digging  out
         the manoeuvres of the peace project". He said he considers peace as
         part  of  the  permanent  constitution,  adding  that   among   the
         challenges facing the transitional system will be imbalances within
         the Forces for Freedom and Change (FFC).
         He described the transitional emergency programme  submitted  by  a
         committee of the FFC as "weak", stressing the support  of  the  NUP
         for the transitional government until the  end  of  the  transition
         period.'

279. Section 6.2  of  CPIT  1  deals  with  demonstrations  and  marches  in
    Khartoum during October and citing the Middle East Monitor, para 6.2.7:

         "6.2.7. The MEM also observed that:

           'A statement by the police  stressed  that  "the  constitutional
           document and the law guarantee the right of peaceful  expression
           and demonstration." It also called on all  parties  to  "provide
           the requirements for the holding and conduction of  rallies  and
           marches, and to stick to  routes  and  timings,  to  secure  and
           protect those gatherings."  ...  To  date,  no  violent  clashes
           between  security  authorities  and  demonstrators   have   been
           reported.'"

280. In section 6.3, CPIT 1, again with citation from the ICG report,  deals
    with "Islamic discontent":

         "6.3. Islamic discontent

         6.3.1. The ICG report of 21 October noted:

         'The coup against Bashir and the generals' consolidation  of  power
         with Gulf backing has put  Sudan's  Islamist  political  machinery,
         embodied in recent years primarily by the ruling National  Congress
         Party, out of order. Its  incapacity  may  be  temporary,  however,
         since it  still  controls  layers  of  the  state  bureaucracy  and
         military. A failed counter-coup  attempt  on  24  July,  reportedly
         involving Islamist-allied  military  personnel,  suggests  that  at
         least some  of  Bashir's  old  guard  may  see  themselves  as  his
         legitimate heirs.
         Sudan's version of the so-called deep state has its  roots  in  the
         country's Islamist movement, which Bashir co-opted first  to  mount
         his own coup in 1989 and later to extend his rule.  This  movement,
         the National Islamic Front,  was  led  by  the  prominent  preacher
         Hassan al-Turabi for almost ten years. It was a major component  of
         Sudan's  ruling  party  and  controlled  much  of  the   government
         bureaucracy....
         By standing  apart  from  the  transition,  and  in  fact  defining
         themselves in opposition to both the  civilian  coalition  and  the
         generals, parties associated with Islamism could well  profit  from
         the inevitable challenges that  the  transitional  government  will
         face. Because they are outside of it, they  stand  to  gain  public
         support should the transitional government be unable to deliver  on
         key promises, especially with  respect  to  reviving  the  economy.
         Further, they may be able to call upon eager patrons in  Qatar  and
         Turkey, which are both looking for opportunities  to  regain  their
         foothold in Khartoum.
         That said, both Abu Dhabi and Riyadh are keen to keep parties  with
         strong links to Islamists in political exile. These two  monarchies
         calculate that Sudan's security forces are  their  most  dependable
         ally in that regard. The civil society component of the  opposition
         coalition has also consistently  rejected  any  accommodation  with
         Muslim Brotherhood-style  political  Islam,  identifying  it  as  a
         legacy of Bashir that must be swept away.'
         6.3.2. The Sudan Tribune reported on 20 October:
         'The  Sudanese  army  called  on  political  forces   planning   to
         demonstrate on Monday to stay away from  the  headquarters  of  the
         armed forces in Khartoum and the various positions of its forces in
         the country.
         The warning comes after calls by Islamist groups to demonstrate  on
         the 55th anniversary of the 21 October  Revolution  to  demand  the
         army seize power and remove Forces  for  Freedom  and  Change  from
         power.
         The anti-revolutionary calls triggered other calls by the  Sudanese
         Professionals Association, the spearhead of protests  that  brought
         down the al-Bashir regime to demonstrate and hold public rallies on
         Monday to defend the revolution and demanding  the  dissolution  of
         the National Congress Party.
         On the same vein, the Sudanese Communist Party called for a protest
         to demand the transitional authority to realize the  goals  of  the
         revolution.
         In a statement issued on Sunday evening,  Sudanese  army  spokesman
         Brigadier General Amer Mohamed al-Hassan renewed the support of the
         Sudan Armed Forces for the December Revolution  and  recalled  that
         peace will not be  achieved  without  political  stability  in  the
         country.
         Al-Hassan also  stressed  that  the  armed  forces  will  remain  a
         "faithful guardian of the  country",  but  will  not  interfere  in
         political practices.'"

281. Section 7 deals with the economic crisis and the fall of the  al-Bashir
    regime.  At  para  7.1.3,  the  report  states  that  the  aim  of  the
    government is to remove blocks on accessing  international  finance  by
    achieving Sudan's removal  from  the  US  list  of  state  sponsors  of
    terrorism.

282. Section 8 of CPIT 1 deals with changes to the law and the intention  to
    give prosecution powers to an independent investigation committee  into
    the brutal attacks on the pro-democracy protesters in June 2019 and  to
    a commitment to abolish the Public Order law:



         "8. Prosecution for past crimes, impunity and legal reform
         8.1.1 The Sudan Tribune reported on 17 October 2019:

         '[The] Minister of Justice, Nasr al-Din  Abdel  Bari  and  Attorney
         General Taj al-Sir al-Hebir on Thursday discussed the  drafting  of
         laws  allowing  to  dismantle  the  former  regime  based  on   the
         constitutional document.

         The two officials further agreed to give prosecution powers to  the
         independent investigation committee on the brutal attack on the pro-
         democracy protesters.

         The meeting discussed the amendment of the Public Prosecution  Law,
         the National Investigation Committee formed under the  Transitional
         Constitutional Document, the Joint Committees and the files  before
         the Ministry of Justice related to some major  corruption  affairs,
         said a statement released by the office of the Attorney  General...
         According to the statement, the Attorney General  agreed  to  grant
         prosecution  powers  to  the  Independent  National   Investigation
         Committee, to draft amendments to the Public Prosecution  Law,  and
         other laws restricting freedoms.'

         8.1.2. The Sudan Tribune also reported on 19 October 2019:

         '[The]... Justice Minister Nasr al-Din Abdel Bari on  Saturday  [19
         October] reiterated the  transitional  government's  commitment  to
         abolish the Public  Order  Law  and  to  amend  the  Criminal  Code
         articles that violate women basic rights.

         The minister made his remarks after receiving a memorandum on women
         rights from women  groups  at  the  inauguration  of  the  Violence
         Against  Women  Database  project  launched   by   Darfur   Lawyers
         Association and  the  Ma'an  (Together)  Cultural  Centre...  Under
         Sudan's public order, Sudanese women face arrest and punishment  of
         up to 40 lashes if they violate Article 152 of the Criminal Act  of
         1991, which broadly prohibits "indecent and immoral acts."

         Most of the offences prohibited under this  law  relate  to  gender
         interactions, dance, choice of dress, smoking, and other behaviours
         that the authorities consider as violating moral Islamic standards.

         In a report on the Public Order Law in 2010;  Human  Rights  Watch,
         citing police sources, said that in 2008the police  brought  43,000
         public order charges against women in Khartoum state alone.'

         8.1.3. The Sudan Tribune reported that:

         '[The]...  transitional  government  has  announced  a  three-month
         extension of the state of emergency.

         ""The Presidential Decree No. (8) extending the state of  emergency
         in all regions of the country for three months will take effect  on
         Friday, 11 October 2019,"  said  Mohamed  al-Faki,  member  of  the
         Sovereign Council in a statement issued on Thursday.

         Al-Faki stressed that during the state of emergency, the Council of
         Ministers may take any measures that  do  not  restrict,  partially
         repeal or limit the effects of the Constitutional Document.

         The ruling Forces for Freedom and Change (FFC) this week  announced
         the extension of the state of emergency allow the detention of  the
         leaders of the former regime who are not yet investigated or facing
         justice.

         However, the Islamist Popular Congress Party which was part of  al-
         Bashir's government condemned the extension saying it is  "contrary
         to the revolution of the Sudanese people.""

283. In section 11, CPIT 1 considers the position of the Nuba  first  as  an
    overview, then in Khartoum and finally outside Khartoum:

         "11. Nuba: human rights violations

         11.1. Overview

         11.1.1. There is limited information in sources consulted  in  this
         note about the treatment  of  Nuba  generally  or  in  Khartoum  in
         particular prior to and following the formation of the transitional
         government in August 2019.

         11.1.2. Radio Dabanga, which "produces  independent  news  to  make
         sure that everyone, wherever they are in Sudan is  aware  of  vital
         information, including outbreaks of disease, gender-based violence,
         and human rights abuses.  It is the belief  of  Radio  Dabanga  the
         representation of these issues in the  media  can  help  to  foster
         information exchange, understanding, and eventually peace in Sudan"
         does report on incidents involving suspected SPLM-N sympathisers in
         South Kordofan, for example (see below)

         11.2. Khartoum

         11.2.1. An official at  the  British  Embassy  in  Khartoum  in  an
         emailed response to the country policy and information  team  dated
         16 October 2019 observed:

         '... I don't think we will be  able  to  provide  information  more
         detailed or evidently useful than what you  have  already  produced
         [reference to 1 October 2019 draft of COI response 10/19-068, final
         version dated 4 October 2019].

         Anecdotally, Sudanese  contacts  have  expressed  surprise  at  the
         suggestion   that   Nuba   people   are   subject   to   systematic
         discrimination or mistreatment in Khartoum, with the exception that
         they might find it more difficult to obtain  employment.   However,
         this was placed in the context of  high  unemployment  and  broader
         cultural discrimination whereby employers in  Sudan  favour  people
         from their own tribes.  General Shams al-Din  Kabbashi,  who  is  a
         member of Sudan's newly formed Sovereign Council... is Nuba  and  a
         significant number of Nuba are studying at university in  Khartoum.
         Conversely but also anecdotally, DFID colleagues have advised of  a
         small number of violent incidents in  open  areas  in  Khartoum  in
         which people were killed.  These are not known to have specifically
         targeted Nuba but more generally "southerners".

         On the current situation, we are still monitoring for  evidence  of
         meaningful change in how the  security  apparatus  and  police  are
         operating.  Your political situation update  [COI  response  10/19-
         068, as above] correctly notes that RSF Commander  Hemeti  sits  on
         the Sovereign Council.   The  new  Minister  of  Interior  who  has
         responsibility for the police is also one of two  ministers  (along
         with Defence) who were not civilian appointees and this might  mean
         that there will be little change in how they operate.'

          11.2.2. The US Commission on Religious Freedom (USCIRF)  reporting
         on events up to April 2019, but mainly focussing on events in  2018
         and  therefore  prior  to  the  formation   of   the   transitional
         government, stated:

         'Christians  from  the  Nuba  Mountains  are   uniquely   targeted,
         highlighting the convergence of  discrimination  against  religious
         and ethnic minorities by the government. For example, security  and
         land authorities particularly target members and evangelical church
         leaders of the Sudanese Presbyterian Evangelical Church (SPEC)  and
         Sudanese Church of Christ (SCOC). During USCIRF's meetings in 2018,
         evangelical  leaders  said  that  the  Ministry  of  Guidance   and
         Endowments has directly interfered in their  church  affairs  since
         2012. SCOC and SPEC interlocutors reported  officials  confiscating
         their  papers  documenting  property  rights.  In  2016,   Sudanese
         authorities placed 27 churches on a list to be destroyed,  claiming
         issues  with  zoning  and  illegal  construction,  but   reportedly
         rescinded the  order  in  2017.  Nevertheless,  in  February  2018,
         authorities  bulldozed  a  SPEC   church   in   the   Hajj   Yousif
         neighbourhood in Khartoum. Church members told USCIRF  that  police
         gave no notice and demolished the building in spite  of  a  pending
         decision  on  the  church's  property  rights.  Police  confiscated
         belongings from within the church, including all  of  the  church's
         books, and reportedly gave  them  to  another  individual  claiming
         ownership of the land. Sudanese officials told USCIRF that churches
         were not uniquely targeted, and claimed that mosques had also  been
         demolished for similar issues with zoning regulations... In  August
         2018, authorities dismissed the cases of and  released  eight  SCOC
         leaders who were arrested in 2017. Minority religious  leaders  and
         their  lawyers  have  been  monitored,  harassed,  and   frequently
         arrested for various reasons such as  proselytization  or  speaking
         out against the government, accused of criminal activity, detained,
         forced to defend themselves in court, fined,  and  released,  on  a
         repeated basis. One Muslim human rights lawyer, who  advocated  for
         non-Muslims' rights and was repeatedly arrested and  harassed,  was
         forced to f lee Sudan in 2018. Some of these arrests have been  due
         to religious leaders' protest  over  authorities'  interference  in
         church affairs and leadership decisions.'

         11.2.3. The USCIRF also observed problems faced by women,  although
         specifically stating if Christian, or Christian  Nuba  women,  were
         directly affected:

         'In 2018,  authorities  continued  to  target  women  with  arrest,
         harassment, and detention by applying existing religious  laws.  In
         particular, the enforcement of Sudan's public order laws under  the
         1991 Criminal Act and other  state  and  local  laws  continued  to
         uniquely impact women through criminalization of indecent dress and
         other  offenses  based  on   state   interpretations   of   Islamic
         principles.  Penalties  for  these   offenses   regularly   include
         imprisonment,  fines,  and  lashings,  and  research  by   Sudanese
         nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) has shown that women have been
         more likely to receive harsher penalties for some infractions  than
         men. Determinations for arrests are at  the  discretion  of  public
         order police. Public order cases are common; according to  Sudanese
         civil society actors, more  than  40,000  public  order  cases  are
         processed annually in Khartoum State alone.'

         11.3. Outside Khartoum

         11.3.1. Radio Dabanga reported on 10 October 2019:

         'Security forces in rural South  Kordofan  reportedly  continue  to
         violate the rights and freedoms of residents and  confiscate  their
         property in the name of the emergency security measures  applicable
         in the state.

         According to neighbourhood committees in  Hajeri  Djawad  south  of
         Delling, the violations include curfews, arbitrary arrests, and the
         confiscation of consumer goods in rural areas of the Nuba Mountains
         through checkpoints stationed at Abujebel Bridge and Hajeri Djawad.

         The  committees  confirmed  complaints  filed  by  residents  about
         arbitrary confiscation of their property.

         Hasan Kitan, a member of  the  Sudanese  Professionals  Association
         (SPA) in Delling, told Radio Dabanga  that  indiscriminate  arrests
         are ongoing, the latest being the arrest of  Jabir  El  Basha,  the
         Headmaster of Hajeri Djawad Secondary School two days  ago  because
         of a statement on the conflict between herders and farmers  in  the
         area.

         The neighbourhood committees demanded  the  emergency  measures  be
         lifted immediately and an acceleration the peace process.

         Kitan said  after  a  conference  organised  by  the  neighbourhood
         committees of Hajeri Djawad on Tuesday  that  despite  the  changes
         that took place in the country after  the  revolution,  the  people
         living in Delling locality  do  not  feel  that  change  while  the
         emergency measures continue.'

         11.3.2. Radio Dabanga reported on 21 October 2019 that:

         'Military Intelligence agents briefly held a group of  people,  who
         they  said  they  suspected  of  being  Sudan  People's  Liberation
         Movement-North  (SPLM-N)  supporters,  in  El  Abbasiya  in   South
         Kordofan on Thursday [17 October 2019].  They  still  hold  one  of
         them.

         One of the victims told Radio Dabanga said that members of Military
         Intelligence halted a passenger vehicle returning shoppers from the
         Grand Market of El Abbasiya market to their villages  west  of  the
         town on Thursday.

         They  accused  us  of  supporting  the  Sudan  People's  Liberation
         Movement-North (SPLM-N) in  the  area  and  that,  they  needed  to
         inspect the vehicle and our purchases," he reported, "but they just
         stole most of our belongings."

         When passenger El Taj Yousef protested the  inspection,  they  took
         him to the garrison of El Abbasiya.

         The source said that the people  living  in  El  Abbasiya  strongly
         reject the continual  detentions  and  confiscations  "despite  the
         changes that took place  in  the  country  and  statements  of  the
         governor speaking about freedom of movement in the region".'"

    2. Response for an Information  Request:  Sudan,  Returns  (22  October
2019) ("CPIT 2")

284. The final document relied upon (CPIT 2), relates to  returns  to  Sudan
    and is dated 22 October 2019.  It  is  a  response  to  an  information
    request concerning the figures for returns to Sudan which were compiled
    with the assistance of Eurostat's published numbers  and  the  European
    Asylum Support Office.  The figures do not purport to be comprehensive.
     The numbers cover the period January 2014 to October 2019.

285. The total numbers in each of the countries recorded for  forced  return
    is relatively low ranging between 0 (Slovenia)  and  27  (Switzerland).
    Belgium retuned 13  and  Sweden  7.   The  UK  returned  15.    Of  the
    countries considered, only Switzerland confirmed that it returned  Nuba
    to Sudan (see  para  4.2.5).   The  figures  for  Switzerland  do  not,
    however, disclose if any of the forced returns  were,  in  fact,  Nuba.
    Three countries  -  Belgium,  Switzerland  and  the  United  Kingdom  -
    accepted that applicants for asylum included those  belonging  to  Nuba
    groups (para 4.2.4).   Slovenia  indicated  that,  whilst  it  returned
    rejected applicants for asylum, their returnees did  not  include  Nuba
    (or non-Arab Darfuri).  Cyprus,  likewise,  did  not  return  Nuba  (or
    indeed non-Arab Darfuris) but it did not  return  any  rejected  asylum
    applicants and had no applications from Nuba.

286. At para 1.2.1, the document notes  that  the  UK  government  does  not
    monitor returned asylum seekers.


                                 APPENDIX 2


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00006/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 February 2017                           |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHALKLEY

                                   Between

                                     k m
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Sinfield of Albany Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sudan who was born on 31 May 1987.  He is
    a member of the Nuba tribe.

 2. The appellant left Sudan on 21  November  2014  and,  having  travelled
    through a number of countries, arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  on  31
    August 2015 and claimed asylum.

 3. On 18 December 2015, the Secretary of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    claim for asylum, humanitarian protection and under Article  8  of  the
    ECHR.

 4. The basis of the appellant's claim is set out in the decision letter at
    paras 2 and 9.  The claim was as follows.  First, the appellant claimed
    to be at risk from the Sudanese government because he belonged  to  the
    Nuba Tribe.  Secondly,  he  claimed  that  he  had  been  arrested  and
    detained by the government  and  accused  of  being  a  member  of  the
    opposition  party,  the  Sudan  People's  Liberation  Movement  (SPLM).
    Thirdly, he claimed to fear the SPLM  whom  he  had  refused  to  join.
    Finally, the appellant relied upon sur place activities.

The Appeal

 5. Following the refusal of his claim, the appellant appealed to the First-
    tier Tribunal.  His appeal was heard by Judge Sweeny on 3 August  2016.
    Judge Sweeny dismissed the appellant's appeal on  all  grounds.   Judge
    Sweeny accepted that the appellant was a Sudanese citizen and a  member
    of the Nuba Tribe.  However, the judge rejected the appellant's account
    that he had been arrested and detained by the Sudanese government.  The
    judge concluded that the appellant would not be at risk from  the  SPLM
    not least because they had shown  no  adverse  interest  in  him  since
    2011/12.  Finally, the judge rejected the appellant's claim  to  be  at
    risk because of his sur place activities.

 6. The appellant then sought permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    In his grounds, the appellant did not  challenge  the  judge's  adverse
    credibility finding nor his finding that the appellant  had  failed  to
    establish he would be at risk because of his sur  place  activities  or
    from the SPLM.  However, the grounds argue that  the  judge  failed  to
    consider the risk to the appellant because of his Nuba ethnicity.   The
    grounds argue that the  background  evidence  submitted  to  the  judge
    demonstrated that a person of Nuba ethnicity was at risk simply due  to
    their ethnicity.  They were, in effect, a non-Arab tribe similar to non-
    Arab Darfuris who were recognised to be at risk following MM (Darfuris)
    Sudan CG [2015] UKUT 10 (IAC).

 7. On 27 September 2016, the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  M  J  Gillespie)
    granted the appellant permission to appeal on that ground.

 8. On 10 October 2016, the Secretary of State filed  a  rule  24  response
    seeking to uphold the judge's decision, inter alia, on the  basis  that
    the appellant had not claimed to be at risk as a result of belonging to
    the Nuba Tribe.

The Submissions

 9. We heard oral submissions from Mr Sinfield on behalf of  the  appellant
    and Mr Kotas who represented the Secretary of State.

10. Mr Sinfield submitted that the appellant had directly raised  his  fear
    of persecution due to his ethnicity in his witness statement  dated  25
    July 2016 (at A1-A6 of the bundle),  in  particular  at  para  10.   Mr
    Sinfield submitted that the background evidence and the  expert  report
    of Dr Bekalo also raised the  risk  to  those  of  Nuba  ethnicity  and
    equated their position to those of non-Arab ethnicity from Darfur.   He
    accepted that, on reading the judge's  determination,  the  appellant's
    (then) Counsel may not have  pressed  this  basis  of  the  appellant's
    claim.  However,  it  was  properly  raised  and,  in  particular,  was
    referred to in Counsel's skeleton argument before the judge at paras 14-
    15.

11. Mr Kotas submitted that the judge had not failed to consider a relevant
    basis upon which the appellant put his claim.  He drew our attention to
    para 29 of the determination where the judge pointed out  that  Counsel
    had said that the "widespread violence against the Nuba Tribe  ...[was]
    ... a red herring".  Mr Kotas submitted that in paras 14 and 15 of  the
    skeleton argument Counsel was not seeking to put the  appellant's  case
    based upon a simple risk because of his ethnicity but rather to support
    his claim (and credibility) based on the fact that he had been arrested
    and detained by the Sudanese authorities.  Mr Kotas submitted that  the
    expert report of Dr Bekalo dated 3 May 2016 (at B3-B15) was based  upon
    the appellant's claim to have been  arrested  and  detained  which  the
    judge considered at paras 98-100 but had properly given  little  weight
    to as he had rejected the appellant's account to have been arrested and
    detained.  Mr Kotas submitted that the judge's decision should stand.

Discussion

12.  At  the  conclusion  of  the  submissions,  and  following   a   short
    adjournment, we informed the representatives of our  decision  that  we
    had concluded that the judge had erred in law in  failing  to  consider
    the risk to the appellant based upon his Nuba ethnicity.   Our  reasons
    for reaching that decision are as follows.

13. First, we accept that the appellant's (then) Counsel does not appear to
    have focused to any great extent, or at all, upon the appellant's claim
    to be at risk because of his Nuba ethnicity.  That is supported by what
    Counsel is reported to have said at para 29 of the determination  which
    we set out above.  The focus of the case was, undoubtedly, the risk  to
    the appellant  having  been  arrested  and  detained  by  the  Sudanese
    authorities and any risk due to his sur place activities.

14. Secondly, however, the appellant undeniably raised before the judge  in
    his evidence a fear based upon  his  ethnicity.   At  para  10  of  his
    witness statement he states the follows:

         "It is well documented that there is  war  in  the  Nuba  Mountains
         (paragraphs 37-28RFRL).  The government is bombing and  killing  us
         in the Nuba Mountains and persecuting and discriminating against us
         everywhere else in Sudan.  The Sudanese  government  is  trying  to
         ethnically cleanse my people in the same way that they  are  trying
         to ethnically cleanse the Africans in Darfur."

15. That the appellant was relying, as one basis for his claim  to  asylum,
    upon his ethnicity could not be clearer.

16. Thirdly, whilst the matter is not entirely free from doubt, we  do  not
    accept Mr Kotas' submission that paras 14 and 15 of Counsel's  skeleton
    argument did not raise a claim  based  on  the  appellant's  ethnicity.
    Those paras are as follows and appear under the heading "Nuba Tribe":

         "14.     The objective evidence supports the assertion  that  those
             who reside in the Nuba Mountains in South  Kordofan  and  Blue
             Nile have been subject to numerous indiscriminate attacks  and
             armed  conflict  [C73  Amnesty  2015/2016].   The  Appellant's
             account as to indiscriminate arrest by security forces in  the
             South Kordofan is also consistent with the objective  evidence
             [C166].

         15.  The Respondent's position that the Appellant would not  be  at
             risk on return to Omdurman is misconceived.  The  Tribunal  is
             invited to note the treatment of Nubans generally in  Omdurman
             [C253]  and  the  treatment  of  perceived  political   Nubans
             [C254]."

17. Whilst those paragraphs can, in part, be seen as  adding  substance  to
    the preceding two paragraphs which  identify  a  claimed  risk  to  the
    appellant due to his arrest and detention, we are  not  persuaded  that
    they do not also raise, particularly when  read  with  the  appellant's
    evidence, a claim based upon his ethnicity.

18. Fourthly, there is  also  at  least  some  supporting  evidence  in  Dr
    Bekalo's expert report relevant to a claim that the  appellant  was  at
    risk as a non-Arab from the Nuba Tribe.  So, at para 3.1 (at B10) it is
    stated that:

         "It is well documented that human rights violations of  persecution
         continue  unabated  in  Sudan.   There   is   a   political-economy
         monopolisation and marginalisation, by  the  so-called  Arab  tribe
         groups  over  non-Arab  tribes,  which  fuel  the  widely  reported
         conflict in Nuba/Kordofan and Darfur regions and  elsewhere  across
         Sudan.  There is on-going mistreatment and persecution by  the  GoS
         against individuals and  groups,  who  object  marginalisation  and
         those believed or perceived to be supporters of rebel groups."

19. The report then goes on to refer to the atrocities and genocide in  the
    Darfur region.

20. Again, the contrast between  Arab  tribes  and  non-Arab  tribe  -  the
    appellant belonging to the latter - is  referred  to  on  a  number  of
    occasions in the report reflecting on  the  adverse  treatment  of  the
    latter.  At B5 of the report, Dr Bekalo refers to "conflicts" which are
    "raging" in Darfur and Nuba/Kordofan.

21. Fifthly, although we were not  specifically  taken  to  the  background
    evidence, attacks upon, and ill-treatment of, those of  Nuba  ethnicity
    can be readily identified in the material, for  example,  Human  Rights
    Watch Report, "Sudan: Cluster bombs used in Nuba Mountains"  (15  April
    2015) (at C93-C96)  and  Asylum  Research  Consultancy,  "Situation  in
    Khartoum and Omdurman" (9 September 2015) (at C261-C311) especially  at
    para  1.2.2.   We  do  not  say  that  these  documents  establish  the
    appellant's claim but they are undoubtedly relevant to any claim to  be
    at risk because of Nuba ethnicity.

22. In short, therefore, we are satisfied that the  issue  of  whether  the
    appellant was at risk because  of  his  Nuba  ethnicity  was  a  matter
    properly raised on the material before the judge.   We  are  unable  to
    conclude that any such claim was bound to fail and that, therefore, the
    judge's failure to deal with this aspect of the claim  was  a  material
    error of law.

Decision

23. For the above reasons, the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    dismiss the appellant's appeal involved the making of an error of  law.



24. We indicated at the end  of  the  hearing  that  the  appeal  would  be
    retained in the Upper Tribunal in order to remake  the  decision.   The
    sole issue will be the appellant's claim to be at  risk  on  return  to
    Sudan because of his Nuba ethnicity.

25. The judge's adverse credibility finding and his findings on  the  other
    aspects of the appellant's claim stand and are preserved.






                                 Signed


                                 A Grubb
                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                 Date



                                 APPENDIX 3

               DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE BEFORE THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

|Item |Document                                            |Date             |
|     |Overseas Development Institute: "Where to Now?      |March 2009       |
|     |Agency Expulsions in Sudan: Consequences and Next   |                 |
|     |Steps"                                              |                 |
|     |Hansard Online: Africa: Post-Conflict Stabilisation |08/07/2010       |
|     |Overseas Development Institute: "City limits:       |January 2011     |
|     |Urbanisation and Vulnerability in Sudan Khartoum    |                 |
|     |Case Study, Sara P�ntuliano et al"                  |                 |
|     |Hansard Online: Sudan                               |07/02/2011       |
|     |Hansard Online: Migrant Domestic Workers            |08/06/2011       |
|     |Hansard Online: South Sudan                         |26/03/2012       |
|     |Hansard Online: Queen's Speech                      |17/05/2012       |
|     |Home Office: "Sudan OGN v 17.0"                     |August 2012      |
|     |Waging Peace: "The Danger of Returning Home"        |September 2012   |
|     |Hansard Online: Sudan and South Sudan: EUC Report   |17/10/2012       |
|     |Enough Project: Crime against Humanity: Sudan Burns |06/12/2012       |
|     |26 Nuban Villages across 54 Square Miles            |                 |
|     |Enough Project: Sudan Caucus Brief: Crisis in the   |11/12/2012       |
|     |Nuba Mountains                                      |                 |
|     |British Embassy Letter                              |08/04/2013       |
|     |Enough Project: Life in the Nuba Mountains -        |October 2013     |
|     |Humanitarian Needs Assessment in Sudan's South      |                 |
|     |Kordofan State                                      |                 |
|     |Enough Project: Sudan Minister Speaks on Resilience |10/10/2013       |
|     |as Dire Need in Nuba Mountains Made Public          |                 |
|     |Hansard Online: Sudan                               |28/10/2013       |
|     |Small Arms Survey, Andrew McCutchen: "The Sudan     |2014             |
|     |Revolutionary Front: Its Formation and Development" |                 |
|     |Hansard Online: South Sudan                         |24/03/2014       |
|     |Enough Project: School in Nuba Mountains Bombed for |27/03/2014       |
|     |Second Time                                         |                 |
|     |Asylum Research Consultancy (ARC): "Sudan COI Query |11/04/2014       |
|     |Response"                                           |                 |
|     |Enough Project: Human Security Alert: Massive       |15/04/2014       |
|     |Mobilization of Sudan Armed Forces (SAF) in the Nuba|                 |
|     |Mountains                                           |                 |
|     |Hansard Online: Republic of Sudan: Human Rights     |14/07/2014       |
|     |Sudanreeves.org: Minutes of the Military and        |31/08/2014       |
|     |Security Meeting Held in the National Defence       |                 |
|     |College [Khartoum]                                  |                 |
|     |Article 1, Waging Peace: "The Long Arm of the       |September 2014   |
|     |Sudanese Regime"                                    |                 |
|     |Enough Project: Extermination by Design - The Case  |November 2014    |
|     |for Crimes against Humanity in Sudan's Nuba         |                 |
|     |Mountains                                           |                 |
|     |Enough Project: Mass-Scaled Human Suffering in Nuba |20/11/2014       |
|     |Mountains, Sudan                                    |                 |
|     |Hansard Online: Modern Slavery Bill                 |08/12/2014       |
|     |British Embassy Letter                              |19/02/2015       |
|     |International Refugee Rights Initiative: "We just   |April 2015       |
|     |want a rest from war." Civilian perspectives on the |                 |
|     |conflict in Sudan's Southern Kordofan State         |                 |
|     |Nuba Mountains Peoples Foundation: "Alternative     |April 2015       |
|     |Report to the Committee on the Elimination of Racial|                 |
|     |Discrimination (CERD)"                              |                 |
|     |HRW.org: "Sudan: Cluster bombs used in Nuba         |15/04/2015       |
|     |Mountains"                                          |                 |
|     |The Conversation: "The World's Unexplained Silence  |20/05/2015       |
|     |over Human Tragedy in the Nuba Mountains of Sudan"  |                 |
|     |Amnesty International: "Don't we matter? Four years |July 2015        |
|     |of unrelenting attacks against civilians in Sudan's |                 |
|     |South Kordofan"                                     |                 |
|     |Asylum Research Consultancy (ARC): "Situation in    |09/09/2015       |
|     |Khartoum and Omdurman"                              |                 |
|     |Enough Project: Life as a Surgeon in Sudan's Nuba   |26/10/2015       |
|     |Mountains: Atavist Feature                          |                 |
|     |Amnesty International: "Hotspot Italy - How EU's    |2016             |
|     |Flagship Approach Leads to Violations of Refugee and|                 |
|     |Migrant Rights"                                     |                 |
|     |Nuba Reports.org                                    |2016             |
|     |Humanitarian Aid Relief Trust: "Report on Sudan and |January 2016     |
|     |South Sudan"                                        |                 |
|     |Joint Report of the UK Home Office and the Danish   |February to March|
|     |Immigration Service: Situation of Persons from      |2016             |
|     |Darfur, Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile in Khartoum |                 |
|     |UN General Assembly Report Summarising Stakeholder  |19/02/2016       |
|     |Submissions: Compilation prepared by the Office of  |                 |
|     |the United Nations High Commissioner for Human      |                 |
|     |Rights in accordance with paragraph 15(b) of annex  |                 |
|     |to Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 and paragraph|                 |
|     |5 of the annex to Council resolution 16/21 - Sudan  |                 |
|     |Australian Government Department of Foreign Affairs |April 2016       |
|     |and Trade: "Country Information Report - Sudan"     |                 |
|     |Sudantribune.com: "SPLM-N accuses Sudanese army of  |11/04/2016       |
|     |indiscriminate bombardments in S. Kordofan"         |                 |
|     |Home Office: "Country Information and Guidance      |May 2016         |
|     |Sudan: Persons involved in 'sur place' activities in|                 |
|     |the UK"                                             |                 |
|     |Foreignpolicy.com: "The Shrapnel Finds Us Wherever  |19/05/2016       |
|     |We Hide"                                            |                 |
|     |South Kordofan June 2016 Situation Report           |June 2016        |
|     |Asylum Research Consultancy: "South Kordofan and    |01/06/2016       |
|     |Blue Nile Country Report"                           |                 |
|     |VOA news.com: "Sudanese still feeling South Kordofan|03/06/2016       |
|     |5 years into war"                                   |                 |
|     |Wikipedia: "Sudanese Conflict in South Kordofan and |11/07/2016       |
|     |Blue Nile"                                          |                 |
|     |Joint Report of the UK Home Office and the Danish   |August 2016      |
|     |Immigration Service: Situation of Persons from      |                 |
|     |Darfur, Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile in Khartoum |                 |
|     |British Embassy Letter                              |29/09/2016       |
|     |Refworld: Sudan and Chemical Weapons - a Serial     |10/10/2016       |
|     |Offender?                                           |                 |
|     |Refworld: Amnesty International Report              |2017-2018        |
|     |Refworld: World Report 2017 - Sudan                 |12/01/2017       |
|     |Amnesty International Report 2016/2017: "The State  |22/02/2017       |
|     |of the World's Human Rights"                        |                 |
|     |US State Department: "Country Report on Human Rights|March 2017       |
|     |Practices for 2016, Sudan"                          |                 |
|     |Hansard Online: International Women's Day           |09/03/2017       |
|     |SKBN Coordination Unit: Humanitarian Update         |April 2017       |
|     |The Conversation: "Tragedy in the Nuba Mountains -  |17/07/2017       |
|     |Hunger and Starvation are Constants"                |                 |
|     |Home Office: "Sudan: Country Policy and Information |07/08/2017       |
|     |Note; Opposition to the government, including sur   |                 |
|     |place activity"                                     |                 |
|     |Home Office: "Sudan: Country Policy and Information |10/08/2017       |
|     |Note; Rejected asylum seekers"                      |                 |
|     |US State Department "Sudan 2016 International       |15/08/2017       |
|     |Religious Freedom Report"                           |                 |
|     |Austrian Centre for Country of Origin & Asylum      |14/09/2017       |
|     |Research and Documentation (ACCORD): "Sudan, second |                 |
|     |quarter 2017: Update on incidents according to the  |                 |
|     |Armed Conflict Location & Event Data Project        |                 |
|     |(ACLED)"                                            |                 |
|     |National Human Rights Monitors Organisation: "The US|October 2017     |
|     |lifts sanctions against Sudanese despite opposition |                 |
|     |from Sudanese in the Nuba Mountains"                |                 |
|     |Hansard Online: Sri Lanka                           |12/10/2017       |
|     |Human Rights Watch: "World Report 2018, Sudan"      |January 2018     |
|     |Refworld: World Report 2018 - Sudan                 |18/01/2018       |
|     |Belgian Government, Office of the Commissioner      |06/02/2018       |
|     |General for Refugees and Stateless Persons (CGRS):  |                 |
|     |"COI Focus, Sudan: Risk upon return"                |                 |
|     |Belgian Government (CGRS): "Report on Sudan"        |08/02/2018       |
|     |Human Rights and Development Organization (HUDO     |11/02/2018       |
|     |Centre): "Report on Human Rights Situation in South |                 |
|     |Kordufan, Blue Nile States/Sudan, January-December  |                 |
|     |2017"                                               |                 |
|     |Amnesty International: "Annual Report 2017/18"      |22/02/2018       |
|     |UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian      |13/03/2018       |
|     |Affairs: "Humanitarian Response Plan, January -     |                 |
|     |December 2018"                                      |                 |
|     |Waging Peace: "Risk to Individuals from Nuba        |19/03/2018       |
|     |Mountains in Sudan"                                 |                 |
|     |DG ECHO Daily Map: "European Union, Sudan, Refugees,|28/03/2018       |
|     |IDPs and Malnutrition"                              |                 |
|     |US State Department: "Country Report on Human Rights|April 2018       |
|     |Practices for 2017, Sudan"                          |                 |
|     |Landinfo: "Response to an information request from  |April 2018       |
|     |the UK Home Office"                                 |                 |
|     |African Centre for Justice and Peace Studies: "Human|11/04/2018       |
|     |rights violations in South Kordofan"                |                 |
|     |EASO COI Query Response: "Sudan: People from Nuba   |18/04/2018       |
|     |Mountains; State and Societal Treatment of the Nuba |                 |
|     |in Khartoum and Elsewhere; Freedom of Movement from |                 |
|     |South Kordofan to Khartoum"                         |                 |
|     |US State Department: Sudan 2017 Human Rights Report |20/04/2018       |
|     |US Commission on International Religious Freedom:   |25/04/2018       |
|     |"Sudan"                                             |                 |
|     |Amnesty International Letter                        |24/05/2018       |
|     |National Human Rights Monitors Organisation: "Human |25/05/2018       |
|     |Rights Update: September 2017 - February 2018"      |                 |
|     |Home Office: "Report of a Fact-finding Mission to   |26/11/2018       |
|     |Khartoum, Sudan (2018)"                             |                 |
|     |All Party Parliamentary Group (APPG) for Sudan and  |10/12/2018       |
|     |South Sudan: "Report from Visit to Sudan in         |                 |
|     |September 2018"                                     |                 |
|     |SKBN Coordination Unit: "Humanitarian Update"       |January 2019     |
|     |Human Rights Watch: "Sudan: Security Forces Killing,|07/01/2019       |
|     |Detaining Protesters"                               |                 |
|     |African Centre for Justice and Peace Studies        |09/01/2019       |
|     |(ACJPS): "Sudan Update: Deaths in Custody, Continued|                 |
|     |Arbitrary and Incommunicado Detention of Peaceful   |                 |
|     |Protesters and Obstruction of Media Coverage of     |                 |
|     |Protests"                                           |                 |
|     |Reporters Sans Frontieres: "Sudan's NISS Steps Up   |15/01/2019       |
|     |Harassment of Media Again"                          |                 |
|     |African Centre for Justice and Peace Studies        |17/01/2019       |
|     |(ACJPS): "Sudan: Activists Targeted with Arbitrary  |                 |
|     |Arrest and Incommunicado Detention whilst the Media |                 |
|     |Remains Restricted amidst Crackdown on December 2018|                 |
|     |Peaceful Protest"                                   |                 |
|     |European Parliament Resolution of 17 January 2019 on|17/01/2019       |
|     |Sudan (2019/2512(RSP))                              |                 |
|     |Human Rights Watch: "World Report 2019 - Sudan"     |17/01/2019       |
|     |Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for  |17/01/2019       |
|     |Human Rights (UNHCR): "Reports of Excessive Force   |                 |
|     |against Sudan Protests Deeply Worrying - Bachelet"  |                 |
|     |Amnesty International: "Sudan: Security Forces      |18/01/2019       |
|     |Continue Deadly Onslaught on Protesters and Medical |                 |
|     |Personnel"                                          |                 |
|     |US State Department: "US Concern Over Sudanese      |23/01/2019       |
|     |Government Response to Protests"                    |                 |
|     |The Arab Weekly: "Al-Bashir Cannot Pin Sudan's      |27/01/2019       |
|     |Crisis on Foreign Plots"                            |                 |
|     |Human Rights Watch: "Sudan: Video Footage Shows     |10/02/2019       |
|     |Extreme Violence, Abuse"                            |                 |
|     |Reporters Sans Frontieres: "At Least 79 Journalists |14/02/2019       |
|     |Arrested in Two Months of Protests in Sudan"        |                 |
|     |Reuters: "Sudan's economic decline provides fuel for|20/02/2019       |
|     |anger against Bashir"                               |                 |
|     |International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH):   |21/02/2019       |
|     |"Sudan: 30 Women Detained in Inhumane Conditions    |                 |
|     |Following Involvement in Protests"                  |                 |
|     |Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for  |22/02/2019       |
|     |Human Rights (UNHCR): "Report of the Special        |                 |
|     |Rapporteur on the Situation of Human Rights         |                 |
|     |Defenders: Observations on Communications           |                 |
|     |Transmitted to Governments and Replies Received     |                 |
|     |(February 2019) [Sudan excerpt]"                    |                 |
|     |Amnesty International: "Sudan: State of Emergency   |25/02/2019       |
|     |Intensifies Brutal Government Crackdown on Protests"|                 |
|     |United Nations News Centre: "Darfur Peace Process at|25/02/2019       |
|     |a 'Standstill' as Demonstrations against Sudanese   |                 |
|     |Government Continue"                                |                 |
|     |International Crisis Group: "Bashir Moves Sudan to  |26/02/2019       |
|     |Dangerous New Ground"                               |                 |
|     |SKBN Coordination Unit: "Flash Update "             |March 2019       |
|     |US State Department: "2018 County Reports on Human  |13/03/2019       |
|     |Rights Practices - Sudan"                           |                 |
|     |African Centre for Justice and Peace Studies        |15/03/2019       |
|     |(ACJPS): "Sudan Protests: Deep Concern for the      |                 |
|     |Safety and Wellbeing of Eight Activists Detained    |                 |
|     |Incommunicado"                                      |                 |
|     |Radio Dabanga: "Massacre in Ardamata, West Darfur   |17/03/2019       |
|     |Widely Condemned"                                   |                 |
|     |Radio Dabanga: "Sudan Uprising - Fourth Month of    |20/03/2019       |
|     |Mass Demos, Vigils"                                 |                 |
|     |US Commission on International Religious Freedom,   |April 2019       |
|     |Annual Report 2019, Sudan                           |                 |
|     |African Centre for Justice and Peace Studies        |04/04/2019       |
|     |(ACJPS): "Sudan Protests: NISS Introduces a New     |                 |
|     |Tactic Targeting Chief-Editors after Lifting        |                 |
|     |Censorship against Four Newspapers"                 |                 |
|     |Global Observatory: "How Peaceful Protests in Sudan,|05/04/2019       |
|     |Violently Suppressed, Could Yield Political Change" |                 |
|     |CNN: "As Sudan Brutalizes its People"               |09/04/2019       |
|     |The Times: "Army Splits to Shield Protesters from   |09/04/2019       |
|     |'Butcher of Darfur'"                                |                 |
|     |The Times: "Middle-class, Professional Women Become |10/04/2019       |
|     |Symbol of Sudan's Revolt"                           |                 |
|     |BBC-Monitoring: Media Guide - Sudan                 |10/07/2019       |
|     |US Congressional Research Service: "Sudan's         |17/07/2019       |
|     |uncertain transition"                               |                 |
|     |BBC Monitoring: "Explainer: What next for Sudan     |18/07/2019       |
|     |after power-sharing deal?"                          |                 |
|     |BBC: "Sudan to charge eight military officers over  |27/07/2019       |
|     |deadly crackdown"                                   |                 |
|     |De Waal, Alex: "Sudan: a political marketplace      |Circa August 2019|
|     |framework analysis"                                 |                 |
|     |Nubsud Human Rights Monitors Organisation: "Human   |04/08/2019       |
|     |Rights Update: April - June 2019"                   |                 |
|     |Radio Dabanga: "Sudan uprising: Timeline of         |12/08/2019       |
|     |tumultuous change"                                  |                 |
|     |Waikwa Wanyoike: "'Sudan's Constitutional Charter is|13/08/2019       |
|     |a Ray of Hope but Tough Times Lie Ahead' Int'l J.   |                 |
|     |Const. L. Blog"                                     |                 |
|     |BBC: "Sudan crisis: What you need to know"          |16/08/209        |
|     |International Crisis Group: "Nurturing Sudan's      |20/08/209        |
|     |Fledgling Power-sharing Accord"                     |                 |
|     |Sudan Tribune: "Al-Burham forms Sudan's Sovereign   |20/08/2019       |
|     |Council"                                            |                 |
|     |US Congressional Research Service: "Sudan: In focus"|21/08/2019       |
|     |Human Rights Watch: "Sudan: Prioritize Justice,     |23/08/2019       |
|     |Accountability"                                     |                 |
|     |BBC: "Sudan's revolutionaries pin hopes on PM       |28/08/2019       |
|     |Abdalla Hamdok"                                     |                 |
|     |Radio Dabanga: "Port Sudan conflict abates"         |28/08/2019       |
|     |The New Humanitarian: "Briefing: Sudan comes in from|29/08/2019       |
|     |the cold as it transitions to civilian rule"        |                 |
|     |International Crisis Group: "Crisis Watch - Sudan"  |September 2019   |
|     |Radio Dabanga: "Prime Minister Hamdouk presents new |06/09/2019       |
|     |Sudanese government"                                |                 |
|     |Aljazeera: "African Union lifts suspension of Sudan"|07/09/2019       |
|     |                                                    |                 |
|     |Aljazeera: "Sudan's first cabinet since Omar        |08/09/2019       |
|     |al-Bashir's removal sworn in"                       |                 |
|     |Radio Dabanga: "Sudan PM, South Sudan President Kiir|12/09/2019       |
|     |discuss peace, open borders for free trade"         |                 |
|     |Radio Dabanga: "Sudan armed movements: Juba         |13/09/2019       |
|     |Declaration is a major step forward"                |                 |
|     |Sudan Tribune: "Expelled aid groups can return to   |15/09/2019       |
|     |Sudan: official"                                    |                 |
|     |Middle East Eye: "Sudan's Hamdok government fails   |16/09/2019       |
|     |first democracy test"                               |                 |
|     |Sudan Tribune: "Sudan releases 17 POWs says SPLM-N  |16/09/2019       |
|     |Agar"                                               |                 |
|     |Radio Dabanga: "Tens of thousands demonstrate in    |20/09/2019       |
|     |Sudan for justice"                                  |                 |
|     |Middle East Eye: "Sudan's new PM Hamdok orders      |22/09/2019       |
|     |investigation into killing of protestors"           |                 |
|     |Human Rights Watch: "Sudan's New Investigation      |23/09/2019       |
|     |Committee Raises Concerns"                          |                 |
|     |The New Arab: "Sudan requests $2 billion from World |23/09/2019       |
|     |Bank to fund economic rescue plan"                  |                 |
|     |Radio Dabanga: "Minister of Finance: sanctions      |24/09/2019       |
|     |against Sudan will not be lifted within a year"     |                 |
|     |UN Web TV: "Nasr Al Deen Abdel Bary (Sudan) - 31st  |24/09/2019       |
|     |Meeting, 42nd Regular Session Human Rights Council" |                 |
|     |Janes: "Sentinel Country Risk Assessments, Sudan,   |25/09/2019       |
|     |Internal Conflict, updated 25 September 2019"       |                 |
|     |UN Office for the High Commissioner for Human       |25/09/2019       |
|     |Rights: "Bachelet signs "milestone agreement" to    |                 |
|     |open UN Human Rights Office in Sudan"               |                 |
|     |Radio Dabanga: "Sudan rebels to send delegation to  |26/09/2019       |
|     |Khartoum after successful Cairo talks"              |                 |
|     |Radio Dabanga: "Sudan signs international           |26/09/2019       |
|     |undertaking for media freedom"                      |                 |
|     |Sudan Tribune: "SRF to hold public debates on peace |26/09/2019       |
|     |in Khartoum before negotiations"                    |                 |
|     |Sudan Tribune: "Sudan agrees to open UN Human Rights|26/09/2019       |
|     |office in Khartoum"                                 |                 |
|     |Radio Dabanga: "Sudan's National Human Rights       |27/09/2019       |
|     |Commission: junta played no role in June 3 massacre"|                 |
|     |UN News: "At UN, Sudanese Prime Minister says 'great|27/09/2019       |
|     |revolution has succeeded', country will rebuild,    |                 |
|     |restore values"                                     |                 |
|     |Sudan Tribune: "Al-Nur renews rejection to join     |30/09/2019       |
|     |Sudan's peace process after meeting Hamdok"         |                 |
|     |Washington Post: "Seize this moment in Sudan"       |30/09/2019       |
|     |BBC: "Sudan PM meets Darfur rebel chief in France"  |01/10/2019       |
|     |Just Security: "Bringing the Rule of Law to Sudan"  |01/10/2019       |
|     |Sudan Tribune: "Sudan Call accepts al-Mahdi's       |01/10/2019       |
|     |resignation"                                        |                 |
|     |Al-Intibaha (accessed via BBC Monitoring): "Deal    |02/10/2019       |
|     |reached on Sudan's chief justice and prosecutor     |                 |
|     |nominees"                                           |                 |
|     |Baj News (accessed via BBC Monitoring): "Sudan to   |02/10/2019       |
|     |name chief judge and prosecutor within 24 hours"    |                 |
|     |Radio Dabanga: "Sudan Minister of Finance: France   |02/10/2019       |
|     |will support debt relief"                           |                 |
|     |Sudan Tribune: "Sudan's removal from terror list "is|02/10/2019       |
|     |a process, not an event": U.S. diplomat"            |                 |
|     |Radio Dabanga: "Rebel forum calls for unity,        |03/10/2019       |
|     |cohesion, and an end to racism in Sudan"            |                 |
|     |Radio Dabanga: "US Assistant Secretary of State:    |04/10/2019       |
|     |'Sudan now is a partner we can cooperate with'"     |                 |
|     |Sudan Tribune: "Sudan has long road ahead before    |04/10/2019       |
|     |foreign debt relief: World Bank"                    |                 |
|     |Radio Dabanga: "Security forces abusing emergency   |10/10/2019       |
|     |measures in Sudan's Nuba mountains"                 |                 |
|     |Radio Dabanga: "Sudan appoints its first woman Chief|10/10/2019       |
|     |Justice"                                            |                 |
|     |Sudan Tribune: "Sudan's [sic] extends state of      |10/10/2019       |
|     |emergency for three months"                         |                 |
|     |Radio Dabanga: "Marches for peace and missing       |11/10/2019       |
|     |demonstrators all over Sudan"                       |                 |
|     |Radio Dabanga: "NUP leader El Mahdi: Sudan's        |13/10/2019       |
|     |transitional government 'deadlocked'"               |                 |
|     |Radio Dabanga: "Sudanese peace negotiations launched|15/10/2019       |
|     |in Juba"                                            |                 |
|     |Radio Dabanga: "University of Khartoum to resume    |15/10/2019       |
|     |studies this month"                                 |                 |
|     |British Embassy, Khartoum: email                    |16/10/2019       |
|     |Radio Dabanga: "Attorney General: 'Rule of law to   |16/10/2019       |
|     |prevail in Sudan'"                                  |                 |
|     |Radio Dabanga: "Sudanese rebels suspend Juba peace  |16/10/2019       |
|     |talks after militia ambush in South Kordofan"       |                 |
|S    |Sudan Culture Minister: "No censorship" at 15th     |16/10/2019       |
|     |Khartoum International Book Fair                    |                 |
|     |Sudan Tribune: "IMF maintains negative growth       |16/10/2019       |
|     |forecast for Sudan in 2019 & 2010"                  |                 |
|     |Sudan Tribune: "Sudan transitional government       |16/10/2019       |
|     |appoints two new ministers"                         |                 |
|     |Aljazeera: "Sudan peace talks resume after deadlock"|18/10/2019       |
|     |Radio Dabanga: "SPLM-N El Hilu, Sudan Government    |18/10/2019       |
|     |agree on peace talks roadmap"                       |                 |
|     |Sudan Tribune: "Sudan's Justice Minister, Attorney  |18/10/2019       |
|     |General discuss reforms to dismantle former regime" |                 |
|     |Sudan Tribune: "Sudan releases new batch of POWs    |19/10/2019       |
|     |from armed groups"                                  |                 |
|     |Baj News (accessed via BBC Monitoring): "Sudan      |20/10/2019       |
|     |parties to boycott 21 October protest marches"      |                 |
|     |Sudan Tribune: "Government, SRF to sign political   |20/10/2019       |
|     |agreement on peace in Sudan"                        |                 |
|     |Sudan Tribune: "Sudan Justice Minister pledges to   |20/10/2019       |
|     |end discrimination against women"                   |                 |
|     |DW: "Sudan renews ceasefire pact with reels, lets in|21/10/2019       |
|     |aid"                                                |                 |
|     |International Crisis Group: "Safeguarding Sudan's   |21/10/2019       |
|     |Revolution                                          |                 |
|     |Radio Dabanga: "SRF rebels, Sudan government sign   |21/10/2019       |
|     |agreement in Juba"                                  |                 |
|     |Radio Dabanga: "Student factions clash in Khartoum" |21/10/2019       |
|     |Sudan Tribune: "Sudanese army calls to stay away    |21/10/2019       |
|     |from its sites ahead of protests by pro and         |                 |
|     |anti-revolutionary forces"                          |                 |
|     |Home Office: Response to an Information Request -   |22/10/2019       |
|     |Sudan                                               |                 |
|     |Middle East Monitor: "Launch of 'Million-People     |22/10/2019       |
|     |March to Accomplish Revolution' in Sudan"           |                 |
|     |Radio Dabanga: "Friends of Sudan supports planned   |22/10/2019       |
|     |economic reforms"                                   |                 |
|     |Sudan Tribune: "Juba Political Agreement will       |22/10/2019       |
|     |improve humanitarian situation in Sudan: Arman"     |                 |
|     |Sudan Tribune: "Sudanese demonstrate calling to     |22/10/2019       |
|     |swiftly dismantle the former regime"                |                 |
|     |Home Office: Response to an Information Request -   |23/10/2019       |
|     |Sudan                                               |                 |
|     |African Centre for Justice and Peace Studies: "Sudan|Undated          |
|     |Human Rights Monitor Report December 2014 - January |                 |
|     |2015"                                               |                 |
|     |Amnesty International: "Sudan 2015/2016 Report"     |Undated          |
|     |CHR, Michelsen Institute: "Sudan Working Paper,     |Undated          |
|     |2016, Civilians' Survival Strategies amid           |                 |
|     |Institutionalized Insecurity and Violence in the    |                 |
|     |Nuba Mountains, Sudan"                              |                 |
|     |Darfurwomendaction.org: "Niemat's Story"            |Undated          |
|     |Radio Dabanga: "About Us"                           |Undated          |
|     |Reporters Sans Frontier: "Sudan country page"       |Undated          |
|     |Reporters Sans Frontier: "Violations of press       |Undated          |
|     |freedom barometer"                                  |                 |
|     |Soas.ac.uk: "Ahmed H Adam - Overview"               |Undated          |
|     |UN Human Rights Council: Report of Independent      |Undated          |
|     |Expert on the Situation of Human Rights in Sudan    |                 |
|     |Warmfoundation.org: "J�r�me Tubiana"                |Undated          |
|     |Wikipedia - Nuba Mountains                          |Undated          |
|     |Wikipedia - Omer Ismail                             |Undated          |


