





R (on the application of AM (a child by his litigation friend OA and  OA)  v
Secretary of State for the Home Department (Dublin - Unaccompanied  Children
- Procedural Safeguards) [2017] UKUT 00262 (IAC)


                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                               Judicial Review



                             Notice of Decision




                       The Queen on the application of
              AM (a child by his litigation friend OA) (1) and
                                   OA (2)

                                                                  Applicants
                                      v

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent



            Before The Honourable Mr Justice McCloskey, President
                       and Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

Having considered all documents lodged by the parties and having  heard  the
parties' respective  representatives,  Ms  C  Kilroy  and  Ms  M  Knorr,  of
counsel, instructed by Bhatt Murphy Solicitors on behalf of  the  Applicants
and Ms A Walker, of counsel, instructed by the Government  Legal  Department
on behalf of the Respondent, at hearings at Field House, London on 05  &  11
May 2017.



   i) Regulation 604/13/EU (the Dublin Regulation)  occupies  the  field  to
      which it applies and operates as a measure of supreme EU law therein.


  ii) It is  not  open  to  the  Secretary  of  State  to  unilaterally  and
      selectively disapply certain provisions of the Dublin  Regulation  and
      its sister implementing Commission Regulation as this is  contrary  to
      EU law.


 iii) The dilution and disapplication of the procedural fairness and kindred
      protections enshrined  in  the  Dublin  Regulation,  the  implementing
      Regulation, Article 8 ECHR and the common law are not justified on the
      grounds of expedition and humanitarian challenge.


  iv) Any remedial order in this type of case should take into  account  the
      best interests of the child concerned  and  the  need  to  accommodate
      child safeguarding checks and processes.



                                  ANONYMITY

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) I make an Anonymity Order.  Unless the Upper Tribunal or  Court
orders otherwise, no report of any proceedings or any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original  Appellant.  This
prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.





                                    INDEX




      |Introduction                                    |[1] - [5]           |
|Interim Relief                                  |[6] - [7]           |
|AM's Challenge                                  |[8] - [14]          |
|The Secretary of State's Response               |[15] - [35]         |
|The Expedited Process in AM's Case              |[36] - [45]         |
|Legal Framework                                 |                    |
|                                                |                    |
|The Dublin Regulation                           |[46] - [49]         |
|The Commission's Implementing Regulation        |[50]                |
|Article 8 ECHR: Substantive Protection          |[51] - [57]         |
|Article 8 ECHR: Procedural Protections          |[58] - [61]         |
|The CRC and GC14                                |[62] - [64]         |
|The Dublin Regulation: Procedural Safeguards    |[65] - [72]         |
|The Common Law: Procedural Safeguards           |[73] - [76]         |
|Public Law Protection Generally                 |[77]                |
|Specific Issues                                 |                    |
|                                                |                    |
|The Contours of AM's Challenge                  |[78] [90]           |
|The Respondent's Duties of Candour and          |[91] - [92]         |
|Disclosure                                      |[93] - [115]        |
|Did the Dublin Regulation Apply?                |[116] - [128]       |
|Procedural Fairness: Issues and Conclusions     |[129]               |
|The Outworkings of the Above Conclusions        |                    |
|Remedy                                          |[130] - [134]       |
|Costs                                           |[135] - 136]        |
|Permission to Appeal                            |            [137]   |
|                                                |                    |
|Anonymity                                       |[138]               |
|APPENDIX 1                                      |Decision on Stay    |
|                                                |                    |
|APPENDIX 2                                      |Interim Relief Order|
|                                                |and Directions      |







      McCLOSKEY P

Introduction

 1) The background to these judicial review proceedings can be  ascertained
    from my preliminary ruling in this case and the related case of  AO  at
    the hearing conducted on 29 March  2017  (see  Appendix  1).   By  such
    ruling I refused the Secretary of State's application  for  a  stay  of
    proceedings pending determination of the Administrative Court  case  of
    Citizens UK  v SSHD (CO/5255/2016), which is scheduled to be  heard  on
    23/24 May 2017.  There is also another somewhat related pending case in
    the  Administrative  Court,  R   (Help   Refugees   Limited)   v   SSHD
    (CO/5312/2016).

 2) This is  one  of  seven  cases  in  which  judicial  review  permission
    applications were lodged in this Tribunal at around the same  time,  in
    late March 2017. By virtue of their common features they belong to  the
    same group.  They may be loosely described as "post-Calais" cases.


 3) In broad outline, all of them involve unaccompanied teenagers from non-
    EU countries currently residing in France  and  asserting  a  range  of
    pressing personal needs and circumstances.  All seven children survived
    for varying periods in the notorious "Jungle" in  Calais,  in  northern
    France, until its demolition in mid-October 2016.  These seven children
    were members of a substantially larger group of around 2,000 identified
    by, or on behalf of, Home Office officials as candidates  for  possible
    transfer to the United Kingdom. In conjunction with the  demolition  of
    the "Jungle" the dispersal of all of these children to 73 ad hoc French
    state operated reception centres, scattered throughout France,  ensued.
    This was accompanied by the soi - disant "expedited process",  a  joint
    Anglo - French exercise,  giving  rise  to  decisions  that  all  seven
    children would be refused transfer to the United  Kingdom.  It  appears
    that a small number of positive transfer decisions were made during the
    brief  window  immediately  preceding  the  demolition  and   dispersal
    exercises.


 4) Those initial refusal decisions of the Secretary of State, more  recent
    decisions to like effect and the Secretary of State's  decision  making
    processes all form part of the matrix of the judicial review challenges
    which have materialised.  In the formal  pleading  the  target  of  the
    Applicant's challenges is the Secretary of State's  continuing  refusal
    to transfer them to the United Kingdom.  The remedy sought by  each  of
    the Applicants is a mandatory order requiring the Secretary of State to
    admit them to the United Kingdom.  In two of  the  seven  cases,  which
    were initiated more or less simultaneously, the Secretary of State  has
    acceded to this  petition.   As  a  result  there  are  five  remaining
    judicial review Applicants of whom AM is one.

 5) I granted this Applicant  permission  at  the  stage  of  refusing  the
    Secretary of State's application for a stay.  For purely administrative
    reasons, this case was, ultimately, paired with that of SASA in which I
    had directed a "rolled up" hearing.  The other three remaining cases  -
    MHA, KIA and SS - have been heard in the same mode. As of today's  date
    judgment has either been handed down or circulated in draft in all five
    cases.  All of the Applicants have succeeded and the remedy granted  is
    the same in each case.


Interim relief

 6) In Section 3 of the Judicial Review Claim Form,  under  the  rubric  of
    "Details of the Decision to be Judicially Reviewed", it is stated:


         "Failure to transfer the first Applicant to the  UK  in  accordance
         with his substantive Dublin III rights and  his  Article  8  rights
         ......
         Refusal/failure to act since 16/12/16 ongoing."


    This formulation is common to all  of  the  Applicants,  each  of  whom
    pursued the mandatory order noted above.  All of  the  Applicants  also
    pursued, by interim relief, an order mirroring the  substantive  relief
    claimed.  This gave rise to an  order  of  the  Tribunal.  I  refer  to
    Appendix 1 hereto.  In short, reflecting the advent of significant  new
    evidence in all of the cases  and  for  the  other  reasons  given,  an
    interim relief order was made requiring the Secretary of State to  make
    new decisions in all cases. While, as the title  indicates,  the  order
    was  designed  to  embrace  all   five   live   cases,   the   parties'
    representatives  understood  the  present  case  to  be   excluded   as
    permission to apply for judicial review had already been granted.  As a
    result the Secretary of State made no fresh decision in AM's case.

 7) By way of further introduction, another interlocutory  order  was  made
    authorising amendment of the Applicants' grounds  in  all  five  cases.
    Amended grounds were duly devised in the  other  four  cases.   No  new
    decision of the Secretary of State having been made amendment  did  not
    occur in the instant case.



 AM's Challenge

 8) This Applicant asserts that he is aged 16 and of Eritrean  nationality.
    The cornerstone of his case is that he wishes to establish family  life
    with a person whom he claims  to  be  his  uncle,  "OA",  a  recognised
    refugee residing in Manchester.  On the  facts,  the  lynchpin  of  the
    Secretary of State's case is that this  asserted  relationship  is  not
    accepted   This is the sole ground upon which the Secretary of  State's
    impugned refusal decision was based.


 9) This Applicant was interviewed by Home Office officials at  the  French
    reception centre (the "CAOMIE") to which he and some 40 other  children
    had been transferred from Calais.   This  occurred  on  06/07  November
    2016. Certain  aspects  of  the  evidential  matrix  relating  to  this
    interview and subsequent events will be examined infra.  It  is  common
    case that, in this context, he provided details relating to  OA,  whose
    evidence will also be considered infra.

10)  Evidence  in  support  of  the  asserted  relationship  includes  OA's
    residence  permit,  a  photograph  of  the  two  people  together   and
    identification documents said to relate  to  the  Applicant's  maternal
    grandmother.  There is also evidence of  an  Arabic  interpreter  whose
    expertise is unchallenged and which I shall treat as  expert  evidence,
    in the form of  a  witness  statement.   This  explains  the  differing
    descriptions of the first name of the Applicant's mother, "Fatima"  and
    "Fatna".  In addition OA has, through the medium of a witness statement
    of the Applicant's solicitor (Mr Scott), provided further detail of his
    telephone contact with the Home Office Official (supra).  He highlights
    in  particular  the  lack   of   prior   notice,   the   unsatisfactory
    circumstances,  linguistic  and  communication  difficulties  and   the
    absence of any opportunity  to  consider  and  certify  the  record  of
    interview.

11) The evidence includes a report of Dr Susannah  Fairweather,  Consultant
    Psychiatrist.  This was based  on  the  various  documentary  materials
    identified and an assessment of the Applicant by Skype about which  the
    author says the following:


         "There were limitations to the assessment due to the medium used
         .....


         However, it became increasingly apparent  that  the  difficulty  in
         establishing an adequate rapport ....  was not primarily due  to  a
         lack of face to face contact but his withdrawn and emotionally 'cut-
         off' mental state."




    Dr Fairweather opines as follows:


         "My psychiatric assessment found him to  be  suffering  from  major
         depressive disorder ....


         It also became apparent he has considerable  post-traumatic  stress
         disorder symptoms  but  not  to  the  extent  he  meets  diagnostic
         threshold.  These symptoms are linked to  the  severe  violence  he
         witnessed others being subjected to whilst he was held in captivity
         in Libya.  However, given his withdrawn state in the assessment, it
         is very likely he has under reported his symptoms and over time  he
         may disclose more.  He has severely struggled  with  the  delay  in
         being  reunited  with  his  uncle,  manifesting  on  occasion  with
         suicidal ideation."




12) Other significant passages  in  Dr  Fairweather's  report  include  the
    following:


         "I am in no doubt that [the Applicant's] current situation is  both
         causative and exacerbating of his psychiatric disorders.   It  does
         not  meet  his  developmental  needs  of  adult   support,   social
         relationships and stable accommodation. His needs  are  only  being
         met in a very basic way - make shift accommodation, some  level  of
         education ....  and food .... It is clear that [the processes] have
         had a detrimental impact on  his  mental  state,  as  seen  as  his
         increased suicidality with plan on how he would  act.   This  shows
         his state of desperation and hopelessness ....


         The delay is having a significant exacerbating impact on his mental
         state causing him increased distress  and  increasing  his  despair
         ....  [He] is severely struggling with the delay in being  reunited
         with his uncle ....


         This relationship has particular meaning, given his  orphan  status
         ....  A withdrawn state indicates a decline  in  his  mental  state
         .....


         Existing in this dissociated state over a chronic  time  period  is
         very detrimental for children.  In my professional  experience,  it
         worsens prognosis over time and makes  it  harder  to  treat  young
         people as this emotional functioning becomes their norm despite  it
         actually being maladaptive and pathological for them .....


         [He]  is  at  risk  of  becoming  actively   suicidal   if   prompt
         reunification does not occur as his mental state  will  deteriorate
         further ....


         [His] prognosis would  be  significantly  improved  with  a  prompt
         transfer to the UK so he can be with  an  adult  he  identifies  as
         supportive and whom he trusts, ie his uncle."


      [My emphasis.]




13) In the fluctuating matrix of this case the Applicant, at one stage, ran
    away from the CAOMIE.  Dr  Fairweather  comments  on  this  development
    thus:


         "In my psychiatric opinion,  it  is  highly  concerning  that  [the
         Applicant] has run away and is not making contact with  those  that
         know him.  He  is  highly  vulnerable  to  exploitation  given  his
         psychiatric disorder and  symptoms  and  his  desperation  for  his
         situation to be resolved.  His risk of self  harm  and  suicide  is
         likely to be escalated given he will be  facing  further  stressors
         such as a need to find accommodation and food.  In my  opinion,  he
         requires social stability  to  support  recovery  from  his  mental
         health disorder as soon as possible."




    Fortunately this recent development was  shortlived  and  the  evidence
    establishes that the Applicant returned to the  centre  shortly  before
    the substantive hearing.




14) Dr Fairweather's detailed report, digested  above,  followed  upon  her
    initial "Summary of Psychiatric Assessment", dated 14 March 2017 which,
    clearly, was prepared by her for  the  purpose  of  ensuring  that  her
    summarised views formed part of the evidence  to  be  included  in  the
    judicial review permission bundle.



The Secretary of State's Response

15) Much of the Secretary of State's pre-proceedings  and  post-proceedings
    responses are devoted to the subject of  the  expedited  process.   The
    Secretary of State's initial response was made in  a  letter  dated  24
    February 2017 replying to the pre-action protocol ("PAP") letter.  This
    contains the following passage:


         "All minors who had been resident in the Calais migrant  camp  were
         transferred to specialist centres across  France  on  Wednesday  02
         November [2016].  Home Office staff assisted the French authorities
         during this process and  accompanied  the  children  on  the  buses
         leaving Calais. Specialist UK staff were deployed to centres across
         France to assess children who may be eligible to  come  to  the  UK
         either under the family reunion criteria of the  Dublin  Regulation
         or the criteria set  out  in  the  Guidance  on  Implementation  of
         section 67 of the Immigration Act  2016  in  France,  published  in
         GOV.uk .....


         I can confirm that  your  client  was  assessed  as  part  of  this
         process.  Your client was not accepted  under  the  family  reunion
         process because there were a number of inconsistencies between  the
         family details provided between your  client  in  the  UK  and  the
         applicant in France ....


         The SSHD was therefore unable to determine that your client met the
         definition of family or relative under Articles 8.1 or 8.2  of  the
         Dublin III Regulation."


                  [My emphasis.]




    The letter continues:


         "Any further evidence should be supplied to the French authorities.
         Following an asylum claim in France, the French authorities can ask
         the SSHD to consider a take charge request in  the  light  of  this
         material."




    Addressing the decision in R (ZT) (Syria) v SSHD [2016] EWCA  Civ  810,
    the author states:


         ".....  it is only in exceptionally compelling  circumstances  that
         an individual can turn to the authorities and Courts in the  United
         Kingdom.  The evidence you have  provided  does  not  suggest  your
         client meets this threshold."




    I observe, in passing, that this letter does not attempt to engage with
    the disclosure requests made by the Applicant's solicitors.




16) The second element of the Secretary of State's response is contained in
    the witness statement of Julia Farman of the UKVI European Intake Unit.
     This essentially replicates the aforementioned  PAP  response  letter.
    Furthermore, it suggests that the "only contact"  which  the  Applicant
    and OA claim to have had took place in  "the  Jungle"  in  Calais.   Ms
    Farman also adverts to the need for vigilance where there is a risk  of
    child trafficking.  She also describes the conduct of OA as "a paradigm
    example of asylum shopping", without engaging with the  indelible  fact
    that OA was granted asylum in the United Kingdom.   She  questions  why
    they did not seek asylum together in France and enters a  caveat  about
    the Applicant's best interests.   This  is  followed  by  an  elaborate
    critique of Dr Fairweather's initial summary report.  It  also  evinces
    an intention to seek to cross examine Dr Fairweather  (which  has  been
    taken no further).  Ms  Farman's  witness  statement  adds  essentially
    nothing to the  evidential  matrix.  It  is  replete  with  adversarial
    argument and mere comment.

17) The evidence includes a quite heavily redacted version of  the  witness
    statement filed on behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State  in  the  Help
    Refugees Case (supra).  Its author, Mr Cook, describes himself  as  the
    Head of EU and International Asylum Policy in  the  Home  Office.   His
    witness statement is dated 24 November 2016.  He asserts that  by  this
    date over 300 children had been transferred to the United  Kingdom  "as
    part of the UK Government's  support  for  the  Calais  camp  clearance
    operation".  He deposes that there are over 4,000 unaccompanied  asylum
    seeking children in the case of UK local authorities.  Between  January
    and November 2016 some 480 unaccompanied asylum seeking  children  were
    accepted in the UK from Europe for the  purpose  of  determining  their
    asylum claims.  Approximately three quarters of  these  transfers  were
    under the Dublin Regulation, the balance being pursuant to  section  67
    of the Immigration Act 2016.  The deponent  refers  repeatedly  to  the
    Dublin Regulation. The transfers  of  children  under  section  67  are
    distinguished on the basis that members of this cohort do  not  qualify
    for transfer under the Dublin Regulation.


18) There is a notable reference to Article 17 of the Dublin Regulation  in
    Mr Cook's statement:


           "It was initially thought that the transfer of children  to  the
           UK under section 67 could use  Article  17  ....    which  is  a
           discretionary  clause,  to  provide  the  legal  mechanism   for
           transfer in cases where the child had no  close  family  in  the
           UK".


       Mr Cook then  refers  to  "work  on  improving"  the  implementation,
      together  with   steps  designed  to  bring   about   "a   significant
      improvement in our operation" of,  the  Dublin  Regulation.   This  is
      followed by  certain  averments  addressing  specifically  the  Calais
      context:


           "Prior to the operation by the French authorities to  clear  the
           Calais camp, which began on 24 October 2016, the  UK  Government
           made substantial  efforts  to  identify  children  eligible  for
           transfer to the UK and to encourage the  French  authorities  to
           make the necessary request to transfer them to the UK under  the
           Dublin Regulation.   As  a  result  of  these  efforts  over  80
           unaccompanied asylum  seeking  children  were  transferred  from
           France to the UK from 01 January to 01 October 2016."


      Mr Cook then recounts the formation and activities of a dedicated Home
      Office  Team  which  liaised  with  the  relevant  French  authorities
      concerning the camp demolition in Calais.  He continues:


           ".... UK Officials have been working  closely  with  the  French
           authorities to improve the operation of  the  Dublin  Regulation
           and speed up the identification, processing and transfer to  the
           UK of unaccompanied children  in  the  Calais  camp  with  close
           family links here ....


           It was not agreed that UK officials could operate  in  the  camp
           before the week commencing 17 October 2016."


      Mr Cook continues:

           "In late September 2016, the estimated number of children in the
           Calais camp was circa 860, of whom 640 were unaccompanied ....


           The UK made clear to the French authorities  that  the  priority
           must be to ensure as many children as possible with close family
           in the UK were transferred out of the camp  ahead  of  clearance
           .... [and] ....  moved to safe accommodation."




19) According to Mr Cook, in  early  October  2016  agreement  was  reached
    between Home Office officials and their French counterparts.  He avers:




           "...  The UK reached agreement with the  French  authorities  to
           combine  the  three  asylum  registration  interviews  for   the
           unaccompanied asylum seeking children into one interview for the
           Dublin process.  In addition, French  agreement  was  given  for
           Home Office officials to work  alongside  FTDA  [a  charity]  to
           register  asylum  claims  in  the  Calais   camp.    This   work
           significantly  reduced  the  processing   time   for   assessing
           applications in Calais under the Dublin Regulation  from  around
           10 days to approximately 48 hours, depending on the  outcome  of
           the checks undertaken  by  the  Home  Office.   The  UK  secured
           agreement to undertake interviews in the camp  from  17  October
           until 28 October except for 24 and  25  October  when  the  camp
           clearance was underway."


    Next, from 22 October 2016 the  French  authorities  arranged  for  all
    children to be accommodated in a secure area of the camp.  For the Home
    Office, the prevailing conditions were plainly far from perfect:

           "The situation ahead of and during the French operation to clear
           the Calais Camp from 24 October 2016  was  extremely  fluid  and
           operationally challenging.  The lack of  accurate  data  on  the
           number of children in the camp and their profile meant that  the
           Home Office had  to  be  flexible  and  adapt  its  approach  to
           circumstances ....."


      The narrative continues:

           "On 24 October 2016 the SSHD made a statement to  Parliament  in
           which she stated that the UK had  transferred  almost  200  from
           Calais under  Dublin  or  section  67.   Importantly,  the  SSHD
           explained that UK officials had only had access to the camp  for
           the last 7  days  and  that  in  that  time  800  children  were
           interviewed."

      Mr Cook records the UK Government's  substantial  concerns  about  the
      efficacy of data and information gathering facilities in the camp  and
      explains that with effect from 28 October 2017 "...  interviewing  and
      transfers ceased".  At this stage, some 300 unaccompanied children had
      been transferred to the UK, while  1850  children  were  dispersed  to
      reception centres.  Mr Cook observes:


           "This was almost double the initial estimates of both the French
           authorities and the NGOs operating in the camp in early  October
           and over three times the estimates from late August."




20) Mr Cook has also made a detailed witness statement in the  Citizens  UK
    case.  This  contains  a  dedicated  section  entitled  "The  Expedited
    Process".   He  avers  that  the  agreement  reached  with  the  French
    authorities, taking effect from 14 October 2016, was to -


           "...  set up an expedited process for considering  claims  based
           on the reunion criteria of the Dublin  Regulation,  but  without
           undertaking the procedural  aspects  of  the  Dublin  procedure,
           namely the requirement for an asylum claim to be  registered  in
           France and a take charge request made of the  UK  via  DubliNet.
           Transfers from  17  October  up  until  the  completion  of  the
           transfers made as  a  result  of  interviews  conducted  at  the
           CAOMI's, the majority of which were  concluded  by  09  December
           2016, were therefore operated on an expedited basis  outside  of
           the Dublin framework."


    Continuing,  Mr  Cook  explains  that  in  order  for  a  child  to  be
    transferred to the United  Kingdom  under  the  expedited  process  the
    following six conditions had to be satisfied:


           "(a)  The UK was satisfied that the child was under the  age  of
    18; and


           (b)   They had a claim family member or relative in the UK  that
                 would qualify under Article 8(1)  or  8(2)  of  the  Dublin
                 Regulation; and


           (c)    UK  Visas  and  Immigration  [UKVI]  case  workers   were
                 satisfied,  based  on  the  evidence  available  to   them,
                 including evidence collected  during  interviews  with  the
                 minor  and  interviews  with  their  claim  family  member,
                 sibling or relative in the UK and any  relevant  supporting
                 documentation that the relationship was as claimed; and


           (d)   For Article 8(2) cases, the relative stated that they were
                 willing and able to take care of the child  and  that  this
                 was backed up by local authority  assessments  where  these
                 had been completed; and


           (e)   Relevant security and criminality checks on the child  and
                 receiving family member, sibling or relative  were  passed;
                 and


           (f)   The Home Office was satisfied that it would be in the best
                 interests of the child to be transferred to the UK."


21) Mr Cook elaborates on the expedited process thus:


           "Where the  claimed  family  relationship  was  one  that  would
           qualify under Article 8(1) or Article 8(2) of Dublin, the family
           member, sibling or relative in the UK was contacted to establish
           that the  claimed  relationship  was  genuine  and  whether  the
           person(s) in the UK would be willing to receive the child .....


           Those with an Article 8(1) relationship [ie a "family member  or
           a sibling"] were accepted for transfer to the UK whether or  not
           the family member or sibling stated that they were able to  take
           care of the child, whereas under  Article  8(2)  ["a  relative"]
           cases were not accepted unless the  relative  stated  that  they
           were able to take care of the child. At the  same  time,  checks
           were requested from  the  local  authority  where  the  relative
           resided to conduct an assessment  of  the  reception  conditions
           available to the children."



      Next, Mr Cook makes clear that in some cases children were transferred
      to the United Kingdom and then placed in the temporary care  of  local
      authorities pending completion of the enquiries and steps noted above.
       The immediately following averments in Mr Cook's  witness  statement,
      in [56],  make  clear  (as  confirmed  by  other  evidence)  that  the
      Secretary of State operated a blanket prohibition on the  transfer  of
      children in the expedited process  under  Article  17  of  the  Dublin
      Regulation.


  22) Mr Cook expresses the belief that by operating the  expedited  process
      the Secretary of State  exceeded  her  obligations  under  the  Dublin
      Regulation by dispensing with the twin steps of  an  asylum  claim  in
      France and a take charge request by France to  the  UK.   This  is  of
      course a pure question of law, not a matter for Mr Cook, which will be
      addressed later in this judgment.


  23) Mr Cook's witness statement also devotes  several  paragraphs  to  the
      discrete topic of "Opportunity  for  Review".   I  summarise  his  key
      averments thus:


      i) In his view it would not have been possible for  the  Secretary  of
         State to produce individualised written decisions in  each  of  the
         cases.  (No reason for this is proffered.)


     ii) He considers that for some cases the cryptic formulae of "aged over
         18" or "relationship cousin" was a sufficiently  reasoned  decision
         in any event.


    iii) By 09 December 2016 decision-making had been completed in all cases
         bar 40.


     iv) Negative decisions were reviewed provided that  they  entailed  the
         provision of "new information not available at  earlier  interviews
         conducted by Home Office officials".


      v) In cases where a review yielded a positive decision "...   a formal
         take charge request following the lodging of  an  asylum  claim  in
         France would first have to be made, with the UK reserving the right
         to deny the request  upon  formal  consideration  of  the  evidence
         submitted".  (While it is suggested that in some cases reviews gave
         rise  to  positive  decisions,  no  corresponding   disclosure   of
         documentation of this kind has been made.)


    Finally, Mr Cook explains that all decisions were collated by the Home
    Office on a spreadsheet which was provided to the French Dublin Unit
    and, in turn, conveyed to the Director of each reception centre: see
    infra.


24) Certain documents generated contemporaneously during the events of  the
    final quarter of 2016 are included in the evidence.  Among these  is  a
    GLD  letter  dated  26  October  2016  generated  in  the  Citizens  UK
    litigation.  This letter responds to certain requests  for  information
    and disclosure made by the Claimant's solicitors.  One of the questions
    addressed was:


    "What training on Dublin III have [officials] ....   received?  Please
    provide details and training notes. This request refers to officials in
    the UK's Dublin unit and officials seconded to Calais/Northern France."


    The response was:


         "Please see attached training materials and templates redacted as
         appropriate."




    One of the documents attached is entitled "Dublin III Regulation: Adult
    Provisions", which begins as follows:


         "This note is intended for use by  Home  Office  operational  staff
         working in France on camp clearances ....


         The aim of this note is to assist with considering cases  involving
         adults under the Dublin Regulation ....


         The following cases may be considered for transfer to  the  UK  for
         consideration of their asylum claim,  provided  they  have  claimed
         asylum in France and a take charge request has  been  submitted  by
         France."




    This is followed by certain "illustrative examples".  This is clearly a
    Home Office document.


25) The GLD letter attached a second document entitled "UASC Decision Maker
    Process". Having regard  to  its  contents,  this  clearly  relates  to
    unaccompanied  minors.   Articles  8,  9,  10  and  17  of  the  Dublin
    Regulation are reproduced in full.  Following the text of Article 17 is
    the statement:


         "Article 17  is  most  commonly  applied  by  the  UASC  team  when
         considering cases of applicants applying to join relatives  who  do
         not meet the definition of Article 8.1 and 8.2."


    The text continues:


         "For the most part decision makers are required to  assess  whether
         applicants and their claimed UK relatives  are  indeed  related  as
         claimed. If the relationship is accepted, the transfer  is  in  the
         best interests of the child and checks reveal no  issues  then  the
         formal request is accepted and arrangements are made for transfer."




    Various pre-acceptance "checks" are then particularised, followed by  a
    section entitled "Verifying relationships" which contains the following
    passages:


         "There are numerous ways that  relationships  can  be  demonstrated
         depending on the relationship but the main methods  are  as  below:
         .....


         Applicants often provide documentation in an effort to  verify  the
         relationship ....   such as  family  books,   Taskira's  and  other
         documents .....


         In cases with UK reps  we  tend  to  get  sent  a  lot  of  witness
         statements from app and relative  provided  as  evidence  as  [sic]
         relationship.  There is  also  a  trend  of  psychological  reports
         recommending that the minor is transferred to join  family  in  the
         best interests of their health.  We do not accept either  of  these
         alone.  We  would  still  require  documents  or  another  form  of
         verification least [sic] to accept relationship for transfer."




26) This discrete evidential matrix is completed by a further  exchange  of
    communications between the Citizens UK solicitors and the GLD.   In  an
    email dated 16 December 2016 the GLD stated:


         "The current phase of transfers which arose from the closure of the
         camp is being concluded.   This  is  a  planned  process,  done  in
         conjunction  with  the  French  authorities.   We  have  taken  all
         reasonable steps to interview all the children who were transferred
         from the camp to the children's centres in France in line with  the
         published guidance."




    I have drawn attention to the highlighted words since it is  not  clear
    in any of these cases what the "published guidance" is and  this  issue
    has not been addressed in either disclosure or the Secretary of State's
    witness statements.  The  GLD  lawyer  next  reproduces  the  following
    question:


         "If these documents are not  being  applied  to  those  adults  and
         children, please disclose   the  current  policy/policies/processes
         applicable to them."




    This is answered thus:


         "The SSHD will continue to comply with her  obligations  under  the
         Dublin Regulation  and  will  continue  to  transfer  unaccompanied
         refugee children to Britain who can prove they have family  members
         living in the UK, in line  with  the  timescales  set  out  in  the
         Regulation."




    Followed by:


         "The SSHD is also complying with her duties under section 67 of the
         Immigration Act 2016 in respect of children who would not  have  an
         entitlement to come to the UK under Dublin III."




27) This was later supplemented by a GLD letter dated 13 January 2017 which
    states, inter alia:

         "There is no guidance specifically relating to  Dublin  III  cases.
         The obligations are set out clearly within the Regulation  and  the
         SSHD considers that she fully abides by them. The SSHD has  already
         sent you training material for HO officials which was produced as a
         result of the need to assess a large number of  cases  in  a  short
         space of time as part of the Calais camp being dismantled.  In  any
         event, in respect of the Dublin III Regulation, the  only  relevant
         aspect of your claim was your allegation that the SSHD was under an
         obligation  to  provide  children  in  the  camp  in  Calais   with
         information about the Dublin III process.  Your client's claim does
         not include any challenge to the operation of the Dublin Regulation
         itself."

    In the ensuing section of the letter, under the  rubric  "Usual  Dublin
    process", it is stated:

         "We can confirm that in the week leading up to the  dismantling  of
         the Calais camp, and immediately following, there were  adjustments
         to the way in which the take charge process under  the  Dublin  III
         regulation would normally be operated.  These adjustments concerned
         the process only and did not affect the substance or nature of  the
         consideration of any claimed family relationship in  the  UK  which
         would otherwise be accepted under the Dublin  III  Regulation.   By
         adjusting the process in this manner, whilst fully  respecting  and
         adhering to her obligations under the Dublin  III  Regulation,  the
         SSHD was able to support the Calais camp operation in an  expedited
         time frame."


         [Emphasis added.]


    In  response  to  the  request  to  supply  the  numbers  of   children
    transferred under Articles 8.1 and 8.2  of  the  Dublin  Regulation  in
    October 2016 and subsequently, the letter states:


         "Over  750  unaccompanied  asylum  seeking   children   have   been
         transferred to the UK as a result  of  the  Calais  camp  clearance
         operation, of which  over  550  were  transfers  under  the  Dublin
         Regulation.  The SSHD will publish total  figures  for  the  Calais
         Camp clearance operation in due course."


28) The evidence bundles assembled in  the  Citizens  UK  proceedings  have
    formed part of the materials considered in this  group  of  cases.   Mr
    Cook's witness statement has been summarised above. It is  supplemented
    by other witness statements, including one of Ms  Farman.   While  this
    overlaps substantially with that of Mr Cook, it contains the  following
    noteworthy averments:


      i) As of August 2016 the average time lapse in the United Kingdom from
         receipt of a take charge request to decision was 10 days.


     ii) Prior to the Calais camp clearance  child  inhabitants  wishing  to
         make an asylum claim registered this with the French charity France
         Terre D'Asile ("FTDA"), evidently acting as  agent  of  the  French
         Governmental authorities.  This was followed by submission  of  the
         claim to the appropriate authority, the Sous Prefecture  in  Calais
         and attempts to appoint an ad  hoc  administrator  to  support  the
         child in the asylum process, with a view to a take  charge  request
         ensuing.


    iii)  From  early  October  2016  "accelerated  and   expedited   Dublin
         processes" agreed with the French authorities were operated  for  a
         finite period.


     iv) The mechanism of single appointment/single registration was devised
         in order to inject speed.


      v) By this mechanism "French and UK  officials  would  work  alongside
         each other to record bio-data  details  of  the  child,  map  their
         family tree, ascertain contacts about the family member in  the  UK
         and note any health or medical issues".


     vi) This would  entail  a  single  interview  with  an  interpreter  in
         attendance and photographing every child with a view to producing a
         travel document.


    vii) Home Office officials worked in tandem with FTDA in the  camp  from
         14 to 22 October and on 28/29 October 2016.


   viii) As regards logistics some 200 Home Office officials  were  deployed
         during the aforementioned period, generating some 80 interviews  in
         the span of  7 days.


     ix) Following the dispersal of the children  to  the  sundry  reception
         centres in various regions of France and an interlude of some  five
         days, the expedited  process  continued,  involving  some  90  Home
         Office staff together with interpreters and UK social workers.


      x) This was following by yet another identifiable phase, occupying the
         period 07 - 25 November 2016 and involving 9 UK teams each with  10
         - 12 members carrying out 1872 interviews at 73  reception  centres
         in  France.   Any  children  already  interviewed  in  Calais  were
         interviewed again during this phase.


     xi) At the end of every day  all  completed  interview  pro-formae  and
         photographs were transmitted by email to the Home  Office  where  a
         spreadsheet was compiled and a decision on "...  whether the  child
         was eligible for transfer under section 67 or the Dublin  criteria"
         was  made.    Where  the  child  was  considered  to  have   Dublin
         Regulation eligibility "security checks and locating  and  checking
         UK based relatives" followed. By 14 December 2016 a composite  list
         containing all acceptance and refusal decisions was provided to the
         French authorities.  The  expedited  process  itself  was  "largely
         completed" by 09 December 2016.  There  were  then  42  outstanding
         cases which were completed subsequently.




29) There are some striking averments in  Ms  Farman's  witness  statement.
    First, the expedited process is described as "...  ultimately a  French
    - led operation, with the UK providing support and  only  in  agreement
    with  the  French  authorities".   Second,  it  is  averred  that   the
    assessment of every child was made "against  the  family  reunification
    criteria of the Dublin Regulation" only, together with the  section  67
    "published criteria".   Third,  of  some  530  cases  reconsidered  (or
    reviewed)  by  the  Home  Office  at  the  instigation  of  the  French
    authorities, around 10 had positive outcomes during the period  January
    to March 2017 and, in  each  of  these  discrete  cases,  the  transfer
    mechanics were of the orthodox Dublin Regulation variety, namely a take
    charge request and acceptance thereof.  Fourth, the Home Office, in the
    interests of speed, would not have countenanced devoting as much as two
    hours to the exercise of interviewing a child.


30) The last of the Secretary of State's witness statements which  featured
    in evidence and argument is that of one Mr Gallagher, a policy  adviser
    in the  Home  Office  Asylum  Policy,  Immigration  and  Border  Policy
    Directorate.  He recounts that between 07 and 19 November 2016 he was a
    member of one of the 9 Home Office teams deployed in France.  His  team
    was assigned to work in 10 reception centres in South  Eastern  France.
    Its membership comprised six Home Office employees, three  interpreters
    and two Kent County Council social workers.  Each child was interviewed
    in the presence of an interviewer and a social worker at one  of  three
    interview "stations" established ad  hoc  in  a  single  room.   French
    officials did not routinely attend.


31) Each interview (per Mr Gallagher) began with  photographing  the  child
    and recording name, nationality and date of  birth.   The  duration  of
    each interview was  "about  20  minutes".   This  has  some  individual
    variation.  Some children  provided  additional  information  following
    completion of the interview, the pre-requisite being that the  visiting
    team was still at the centre.   It would appear  that  visits  to  each
    centre occupied a couple of days.  Home  Office  officials  and  social
    workers in tandem carried out  "some  age  assessments"  of  residents.
    Every transfer decision was made by Home Office officials in the United
    Kingdom.  Each  interview  pro-forma  was  completed  manually  by  the
    interviewer.   A  spreadsheet  of  the   interviews   was   transmitted
    electronically  to  the  team  based  in  Dover   daily.    The   "time
    compression" factor  was  aggravated  by  considerations  of  distance,
    conditions in individual reception centres and avoidance of  the  "very
    real concern" of disruption of interviews by the subjects.


32) The final element of the Secretary of State's response  is  the  formal
    pleading contained in the Detailed Grounds of Defence.  This contains a
    description  of  the  "expedited  process",  linked  to  the  following
    assertion that the impugned decision -


         "....  was reached following interviews with AM and OA in  November
         2016 pursuant to an expedited process  developed  by  the  SSHD  in
         response to the closure by the French authorities, at short notice,
         of the 'jungle' .....


         The expedited process was a time limited  process  and  related  to
         unaccompanied children who were or had been resident  in  the  Camp
         and who claimed to have a qualifying family  in  the  UK  (for  the
         purpose of Article 8 of the  Dublin  III  Regulation)  and  allowed
         admission to the UK without all of  the  requirements  of  [Dublin]
         being satisfied."




    The pleading continues:


         "The expedited process was an exceptional short-term measure, time-
         limited to the Camp clearance operation. It was  a  reasonable  and
         rational measure for the SSHD to adopt, but  she  was  not  legally
         required to have done so.  The process did not and  does  not  give
         rise to any continuing legal obligations beyond what is set out  in
         the Dublin III regulation ....


         The expedited process,  involving  an  assessment  of  the  claimed
         family link, was designed to enable the  expedited  processing  and
         transfer of children who would otherwise be eligible to have  their
         asylum claims transferred to the UK under Dublin III Article  8  in
         the exceptional circumstances pertaining to the  Camp  closure  and
         the dispersal of the children  to  73  CAOMIS  across  France.   It
         successfully resulted in the transfer of over 550 children within a
         very short period of time."


    The explanation proffered for the refusal to transfer this Applicant is
    described pithily as "discrepancies in the accounts given by AM and his
    claimed relative".


33) The Secretary of State's pleading  further  avers  that  the  so-called
    expedited process -


         "... did not supplant, replace or subvert  [the  Dublin  Regulation
         process] ...


           Moreover, the whole point of the expedited process was that,  in
           aid of the expedition given the exceptional circumstances of the
           Camp closure,  the  'initial  procedural  stage'  would  not  be
           required."




      "Initial procedural stage" is a phrase taken from  [100]  of  ZAT  and
      Others.  The Secretary of State's core argument is, in brief  compass,
      that the Applicant must demonstrate that the  Dublin  III  process  in
      France provides him with no effective resolution of his circumstances.
       The pleading continues:


         "At the heart of the SSHD's case is that she was not  compelled  to
         make fresh decisions on any further material  under  the  expedited
         process, that process having concluded ....


         Alternatively, even if there is a general public law  duty  on  the
         SSHD to consider further evidence and review all of her  decisions,
         the process  for  doing  this  is  .....    through  the  Applicant
         availing himself of the functioning Dublin III system  by  claiming
         asylum and the Member State where the child  is  present  making  a
         take charge request."




    This is followed by a contention  that  the  evidence  to  be  properly
    considered by this Tribunal should be limited to the evidence extant at
    the time of the December 2016 refusal decision.




34) The Secretary of State's detailed grounds of defence in the Citizens UK
    proceedings also featured in argument  before  us.   One  of  the  main
    contentions which this enshrines is that the  Secretary  of  State,  by
    engaging in a process which involved the identification  and  interview
    of children on French territory, exceeded the  obligations  imposed  by
    the Dublin Regulation.  While it is averred that the Secretary of State
    "set up" the expedited process, this is  manifestly  inconsistent  with
    the evidence of Ms Farman noted in [30] above.  The  expedited  process
    is described as a "one-off operation".  This is followed by a series of
    contentions  that  various  provisions   of   the   Dublin   Regulation
    (specifically Articles 4, 5, 6, 22, 26 and 27) had  no  application  to
    the expedited process.  Ditto Article 19 of  Directive  2003/9/EC  (the
    Reception Directive)  and  Article  17  of  Directive  2005/85/EC  (the
    Procedures Directive).



35) In the Citizens UK case the summary  grounds  of  defence  contain  the
    following noteworthy passages:



         "[5]     The Secretary of State is working closely with the  French
             authorities in Paris and in Calais to ensure that  as  far  as
             possible any unaccompanied asylum seeking children  who  would
             qualify for transfer to the UK under the Dublin III Regulation
             on the basis of close family links (primarily under Article  8
             of the Regulation, once they have claimed asylum in France and
             a request  has  been  made  by  the  French  authorities)  are
             transferred to the UK before the camp is closed ....


         [7]      In advance of the expected closure of the camp, and on the
             invitation  of  the  French  Government,  Home  Office  Asylum
             Experts  began  working  with   partners   from   the   French
             administration and  voluntary  sector  in  Calais  to  further
             accelerate the identification of eligible cases and fast track
             them  through  the  Dublin  process  as  an  exceptional   and
             temporary measure ....


         [9]      In practice the Dublin process is now being  completed  in
             as little as 48 hours and children are arriving daily  in  the
             UK."


    The date of this pleading, 26 October 2016, is of some significance.





    The Expedited Process in AM's Case




36) As appears from [15] - [35] above, the expedited process has  been  the
    subject of protracted attention in communications  written  by  and  on
    behalf of the Secretary of State, witness statements in  other  pending
    litigation contexts and formal  pleadings.   There  are  certain  other
    noteworthy sources of evidence which are of a  rather  different  kind,
    focussing on specific aspects  of  the  application  of  the  expedited
    process  to  AM  individually.   We  outline  these  in  the  following
    paragraphs.




37) First there is  the  completed  pro-forma  of  the  interview  of  this
    Applicant, which invites the following analysis:



      i) He was asked a total of 17 questions.


     ii) These questions related to his identity, gender, date and place  of
         birth, nationality, main language, telephone details and any family
         members in the United Kingdom.


    iii) In this way the Applicant identified his  claimed  maternal  uncle,
         his telephone contact  particulars,  his  whereabouts  (the  United
         Kingdom), their interaction in the Calais "jungle" and  their  last
         contact, being a telephone conversation two days previously.


     iv) Part 2 of the pro forma specifies a series of questions to  be  put
         to the interviewee under the rubric of "best interest  assessment".
         None of these questions was put to the Applicant. The Secretary  of
         State's explanation  of  this  is  that  children  being  "assessed
         against" Article 8(1) and (2) of  the  Dublin  Regulation  did  not
         receive best interests assessments. We observe  that  this  is  not
         compatible with Article 6(1), Article 8 (1) or Article 8 (2) of the
         Dublin Regulation.


      v) Paragraphs 1.34 and 1.35 of the pro-forma require  the  interviewee
         to be asked whether all of the questions posed have been understood
         and to be invited to provide "anything you would  like  to  add  or
         change to your response": neither of these questions was put to the
         Applicant.


     vi) Similarly,  there  is  no  answer  to  any  of  the  six  questions
         formulated under the rubric of "Family".


    vii) Ditto the questions:


           "Based on the information we have given,  would  you  prefer  to
           come to the UK to  claim  asylum  other  than  claim  asylum  in
           France?


           What are the reasons why you would like to come to the UK rather
           than stay in France?


           If needed, probe: family/other links, language skills."




   viii) Ditto the questions relating to "health/special needs".


     ix) Ditto the two questions to be answered by the interviewer under the
         same rubric.


      x) Two further questions replicating those noted  in  (v)  above  were
         evidently not put to the Applicant (numbers 2.5 and 2.6).


     xi) Next, the interviewer was required to answer a series of  questions
         relating broadly to the interviewee's  best  interests  (paragraphs
         2.7 - 2.11): none of these was answered.


    xii) Next, in paragraph 2.12, provision is made for the signature of the
         social worker and the date thereof: there is a blank.


   xiii) This is followed by Part 4, a "Continuation Sheet", which evidently
         records information provided  by  the  Applicant  relating  to  his
         parents, grandparents and only sibling.  Within this  section,  the
         following is recorded:


           "Material aunts and uncles: my mother has only one brother ....
           Osman Ababakar Osman Ali".



         This relationship is asserted by both the Applicant and the  author
         of the witness statements noted in [11] above.  In the Home  Office
         record, the spelling of the second name is "Ababakar".  In both the
         witness statement of OA and the exhibited UK residence permit,  the
         spelling is "Abubakar".  In all other  respects,  the  spelling  is
         identical.


38) The evidence includes the Applicant's response to the interview  record
    set out in a statement of Mr Scott.  First, he confirms that there were
    communication difficulties.  Second, he avers that  his  mother's  name
    was  incorrectly  recorded  and  he  challenges  the  accuracy  of  the
    responses recorded to questions concerning maternal aunts and the  date
    of his parent's deaths.  The pro-forma questions were not directed  to,
    and did  not  probe,  his  early  life  association  with  OA  and,  in
    consequence, none of this was documented.



39) Disclosure of a further "Interview Record" has also been made.  This is
    another  pro-forma  document.   It  purports  to  record  a   telephone
    conversation between a Home Office official and OA.  It also  documents
    the "Decision  Outcome",  viz  "reject",  which  is  followed  by  this
    rationalisation:




           "Relative confirms no contact with minor since he  left  him  in
           the jungle.  He first met the minor (nephew) in the  jungle  and
           looked after him for 3 month [sic] before he left him to come to
           the UK (application for asylum is  in  progress).   Knew  family
           tree but didn't know [the Applicant's] brother  which  would  be
           [the relatives] sister's son??   I'm  not  convinced  that  this
           relative is a true relative therefore decision  made  to  reject
           case".







    This document requires confirmation of a "senior case worker check" and
    the name of such person: neither is provided.  The  document  is  dated
    15th November 2016.







40) The "Interview Record" documents a series of questions put to OA during
    a telephone conversation.  No date or times are specified.   It  yields
    the following analysis:




      i) At the outset of the conversation OA, evidently without hesitation,
         identified the Applicant accurately, specified his  year  of  birth
         accurately, asserted the uncle/nephew  relationship  and  confirmed
         the Applicant's anxiety to come to the United Kingdom.




     ii) He stated that he was unaware of the Applicant's exact  whereabouts
         on this unspecified date. The pro-forma aside in this part  of  the
         form clearly exhorted decision makers to  make  adverse  inferences
         where  a  reply  of  this  kind  was  made,  without  reference  to
         considerations such as how the child - an unaccompanied minor  from
         a foreign country recently dispersed from the "Jungle" in traumatic
         circumstances - could  fairly  and  realistically  be  expected  to
         reliably confirm such information to any family  relative.  Nor  is
         any allowance made for the time factor.



    iii) OA provided his Home Office reference number and full name.



     iv) OA is recorded as providing an unintelligible email address.



      v) OA was then asked a series of questions about family relationships,
         in response to which inter  alia,  he  identified  the  Applicant's
         mother as "F A M (A)" and his father.



     vi) In response to the question "How  often  do  you  speak  with  your
         relative in France", the interviewer recorded "No  contact  between
         me and him as no such communication available,  first  meeting  and
         known of him when in the jungle  and  separated  from  there  after
         three months".  The evidence establishes  that  this  question  and
         answer formed one of the cornerstones of the Secretary  of  State's
         negative decision.  The documented text confirms that this was  not
         a verbatim response and, further, that it was  not  probed  by  the
         interviewer.



    vii) Next, OA confirmed that he and the Applicant had  made  contact  in
         the "jungle" prior to April 2016, following  which  they  "remained
         together for three months".



   viii) OA then identified the region of Eritrea from which  the  Applicant
         originates.



     ix) Next OA stated that there would be "no problem" with  his  landlord
         in the Applicant joining  him  in  his  NASS  accommodation,  which
         consists of two bedrooms and is shared by two others.



      x) OA  then  replied  affirmatively  to  the  enquiry  concerning  his
         willingness and availability to accommodate the Applicant,  provide
         him with meals, ensure his access to schooling and medical care and
         to facilitate a property check by Social Services.



     xi) At the end of the pro-forma was  a  requirement  to  indicate  "any
         inconsistencies in the interview when compared to  the  information
         supplied by the minor":  this box is blank.



    xii) Furthermore, the interviewer was exhorted to "ask further questions
         and note the responses below": there is no entry.







41) Some further comments on this interview record are appropriate.  First,
    it is clear that some of OA's responses  were  not  recorded  verbatim.
    Second, there is no indication of any attempt to clarify or augment any
    of the responses made.  This is particularly significant with regard to
    the response to question 20:




         "How often do you speak with your relative in France?   No  contact
         between me and  him  as  no  such  communication  available,  first
         meeting  and  known  of  him  when  in  the  jungle  and  separated
         thereafter three months."







    This reply was  an  obvious  candidate  for  probing  and  elucidation:
    however  neither  occurred.   Furthermore,  the   pro-forma   questions
    contained no enquiry relating to any previous family life  linking  the
    Applicant with OA.  One of his responses is especially striking:




         "He is  my  relative.   I  would  do  all  the  possible  means  to
         accommodate him as I looked after him in the jungle."







    Finally,  the  pro-forma  makes  no   provision   for   recording   any
    communication difficulties - linguistic,  technical,  environmental  or
    otherwise.




42) We juxtapose the above with a  witness  statement  from  OA,  dated  27
    February 2017, which has three main themes.  First, he explains in some
    detail his blood relationship  with  the  Applicant.  Fundamentally  he
    claims to be the brother of the Applicant's deceased  mother.   Second,
    he outlines his interaction with the Applicant  during  earlier  years.
    Being the Applicant's only living family member in Europe, he expresses
    his desperation that they be reunited. OA describes the following:


         "...  I was contacted by someone from a UK Government office, I  am
         not sure which, on the phone.  They spent about  one  hour  on  the
         phone with me.  they asked me about my relationship with  [AM],  my
         history and they asked for my National Insurance number, but I  was
         not asked for any documents. They also  asked  me  if  I  would  be
         willing and able to care for him if he came to live with me  and  I
         said yes."




    Subsequently he sent photographic ID, his  contact  details,  a  letter
    containing his National Insurance number and a  letter  confirming  his
    willingness to care for the Applicant to the CAOMIE.


43) OA's account of the telephone interview is that he was called,  without
    prior notice, when walking along a  busy,  noisy,  urban  street.   The
    questions were asked quickly.  He  found  some  of  them  difficult  to
    understand.  They were not repeated. The interview was  conducted  with
    an interpreter in an Arabic dialect which he did not recognise and  had
    some difficulty understanding. He was given no opportunity to verify or
    confirm the correctness of what  was  being  recorded.   The  interview
    record was not sent to him subsequently. OA avers that the name of  the
    Applicant's  mother  which  he  provided  was   incorrectly   recorded.
    Furthermore, he is adamant that he did not reply that he did  not  know
    the name of the Applicant's older brother. He further avers that  while
    the record documents the ages of  the  Applicant's  parents  when  they
    died, he would not have been capable of supplying this information.  OA
    further avers  that  the  response  to  question  31,  which  requested
    "details of everyone living at your accommodation, their dates of birth
    and their nationalities ....",  which  on  its  face  is  detailed  and
    complete, was not made by him.  Rather, when this question was posed he
    passed his mobile phone to the person concerned who, coincidently,  was
    walking with him at the time. None of this is recorded.  OA also  draws
    attention to the manifestly incorrect email address documented.




44) The initial negative decision in this Applicant's case was made  by  an
    official who had not conducted, attended or otherwise  participated  in
    either of the aforementioned interviews.  The rank of this official  is
    unclear.  This   person   evidently   made   the   decision   following
    consideration of the two interview records.   There  is  no  indication
    that the decision was preceded by any consultation or other interaction
    with  either  of  the  interviewers.  Thus   the   accuracy,   clarity,
    intelligibility and completeness of the interview records  was  plainly
    of critical importance.



45) We shall consider infra the issues of the Secretary of State's duty  of
    candour and the duty to disclose all material documents.



    Legal Framework



    The Dublin Regulation




46) In ZT (Syria) the judgments of this Tribunal and the  Court  of  Appeal
    harmonised,  with   the   single   exception   that   this   Tribunal's
    characterisation of the potency of the Dublin Regulation was considered
    to be insufficiently strong.  The Court of Appeal took  no  issue  with
    this Tribunal's formulation of the legal framework and governing  legal
    principles.  The starting point is the presumption - a rebuttable one -
    that EU Member States will comply with their international obligations,
    which include the duties imposed on  them  by  the  Dublin  Regulation.
    Linked to this are the principles of mutual confidence and  solidarity.
    These are the ingredients underlining the Court of  Appeal's  conferral
    of highly elevated status on the Dublin Regulation, echoing its earlier
    decision in CK (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 166.




47) Having regard to the contours of the present  challenge  Article  8  of
    Dublin is of central importance and it is appropriate to reproduce  its
    first four paragraphs:



           "1.   Where the applicant is an unaccompanied minor, the  Member
           State responsible shall be that  where  a  family  member  or  a
           sibling of the unaccompanied minor is legally present,  provided
           that it is in the  best  interests  of  the  minor.   Where  the
           applicant is a married minor whose spouse is not legally present
           on  the  territory  of  the  Member  States,  the  Member  State
           responsible shall be the Member State where the  father,  mother
           or other adult responsible for the minor, whether by law  or  by
           the practice  of  that  Member  State,  or  sibling  is  legally
           present.




           2.    Where the applicant is an unaccompanied minor  who  has  a
           relative who is legally present  in  another  Member  State  and
           where it is established, based  on  an  individual  examination,
           that the relative can take care of him or her, that Member State
           shall unite the minor with his or her relative and shall be  the
           Member State responsible,  provided  that  it  is  in  the  best
           interests of the minor.




           3.    Where family members, siblings or relatives as referred to
           in paragraphs 1 and 2, stay in more than one Member  State,  the
           Member State responsible shall be decided on the basis  of  what
           is in the best interests of the unaccompanied minor.




           4.    In the absence of a family member, a sibling or a relative
           as  referred  to  in  paragraphs  1  and  2,  the  Member  State
           responsible shall be that  where  the  unaccompanied  minor  has
           lodged his or  her  application  for  international  protection,
           provided that it is in the best interests of the minor. "





    Article 2(g) defines "family members" in the following terms:

         "insofar as the family already existed in the  country  of  origin,
         the following members of the applicant's family who are present  on
         the territory of the Member States:

         ....

         - when the applicant is a minor and unmarried, the  father,  mother
         or another adult responsible for the applicant, whether by  law  or
         by the practice of the Member State where the adult is present,

         - when the beneficiary of international protection is a  minor  and
         unmarried, the father, mother or another adult responsible for  him
         or her whether by law or by the practice of the Member State  where
         the beneficiary is present."



    Article 2(h) defines "relative" as -

         "...  the applicant's adult aunt or uncle  or  grandparent  who  is
         present in the territory of a Member State, regardless  of  whether
         the applicant was born in or out of wedlock or adopted  as  defined
         under national law."



48) The following substantive provisions of the Dublin  Regulation  are  of
    significance:



      a) By Article 6, the best interests of the child shall  be  a  primary
         consideration at all stages; due account shall be taken  of,  inter
         alia, family reunification possibilities; the  minor's  well  being
         and social development  and  safety  and  security  considerations;
         unaccompanied minors shall be provided with a  representative;  and
         following the lodgement of an unaccompanied minor's application for
         international protection, appropriate action shall be taken as soon
         as possible to identify the family members, siblings  or  relatives
         of the unaccompanied minor on the territory of other Member States,
         whilst protecting the child's best interests.



      b) Article 17, the so - called "discretionary clause", empowers Member
         States to take charge of an applicant notwithstanding  the  absence
         of any obligation to do so via the application of the  take  charge
         criteria.


      c) Per Article 18(1), the responsible Member State shall  take  charge
         of an applicant who has lodged an application in a different Member
         State, under the conditions specified in Articles 21, 22 and 29.


      d) By Article 20(1), under the rubric "Start of  the  Procedure",  the
         process of determining the responsible Member State begins as  soon
         as an application for international protection is first lodged with
         one of the Member States; and, per Article 20(2), this  act  occurs
         as soon as the application, whether in  writing  or  otherwise,  is
         received by the competent authority.


      e) By Article 21(1):

             "Where  a  Member  State  with  which   an   application   for
             international  protection  has  been  lodged  considers   that
             another  Member  State  is  responsible  for   examining   the
             application, it may, as quickly as possible and in  any  event
             within three months of the date on which the  application  was
             lodged ......  request that other Member State to take  charge
             of the applicant."

    [Emphasis added.]

         The responsible Member State shall be the  first  in  circumstances
         where it has not made a take charge request of  the  second  within
         the aforementioned time limits.

      f) Article 22(1) provides that where a "take charge" request is  made,
         the "requested Member State" shall make the  necessary  checks  and
         give a decision on the request "within two months of receipt".


      g) By Article 29, where the requested  Member  State  agrees  to  take
         charge of the person concerned, there shall be consultation between
         the Member States concerned  and  the  ensuing  transfer  shall  be
         effected "as soon as practically possible and at the latest  within
         six months of acceptance of the request ...."  This is  accompanied
         by a series of procedural, humanitarian and default provisions.



49) As the decision in R (MK) v SSHD [2016]  UKUT  IJR  (IAC)  231  (infra)
    highlights, the applicable procedural safeguards in this field  are  to
    be found in both  the  Dublin  Regulation  and  its  sister  instrument
    (infra).  Under the Dublin Regulation:



      a) By Article 4 there is  a  duty  to  provide  every  applicant  with
         specified information, including "the criteria for determining  the
         Member State responsible, the hierarchy of such criteria...  "  and
         the objectives of the Dublin Regulation.

      b) There must be a personal interview of the applicant: Article 5(1).


      c)  Such  interview  must  "allow  the  proper  understanding  of  the
         information supplied to the applicant in  accordance  with  Article
         4":  ditto.


      d) The interview must be conducted in a  language  understood  by  the
         applicant, with the facility  of  an  interpreter  where  required:
         Article 5(4).


      e) The interviewer must be a qualified person: Article 5(5).


      f) A written summary of the interview containing "at  least  the  main
         information supplied by the applicant"  must  be  provided  to  the
         applicant and/or his legal or other representative: Article 5(6).

      g) "In assessing the best interests of the child, Member States  shall
         closely co-operate with each other and shall, in  particular,  take
         due account of the following factors:


          a)     Family reunification possibilities;


          b)     The minor's wellbeing and social development;


          c)     Safety and security considerations,  in  particular  where
             there is  a  risk  of  the  minor  being  a  victim  of  human
             trafficking.


         (d)      The views of the minor, in accordance with his or her  age
             and maturity."


         Per Article 6(3)


      h) Per Article 6(4):


             "For the purpose of applying Article 8, the Member State where
             the   unaccompanied   minor   lodged   an   application    for
             international protection shall,  as  soon  as  possible,  take
             appropriate action to identify the family members, siblings or
             relatives of the  unaccompanied  minor  on  the  territory  of
             Member States, whilst protecting the  best  interests  of  the
             child".

         The exchange of relevant information between Member States shall be
         in a specially devised form: Article 6(5).




      i) Every child applicant must  have  a  representative  with  suitable
         qualifications and expertise: Article 6(2).





    The Commission's Implementing Regulation




50) The sister measure of the Dublin Regulation  is  Commission  Regulation
    (EC) 1560/2003 (the "implementing Regulation") as amended by Commission
    Implementing Regulation (EU) No 118/2014.  This prescribes criteria and
    mechanisms for the application of Dublin.  It has the expressed aim  of
    establishing arrangements which -




         "......   must be clearly defined so as to facilitate  co-operation
         between the authorities of the Member States ....   as regards  the
         transmission and processing of requests for the purpose  of  taking
         charge and taking back, requests for information and  the  carrying
         out of transfers."




    The Dublin procedural safeguards and protections  are  supplemented  in
    the following provisions in particular:



      a) Take charge requests shall be made in the standard  form  provided:
         Article 1.  They must include all appropriate evidence.


      b) The consideration of take charge requests by the  requested  Member
         State must be undertaken "... exhaustively and objectively, on  the
         basis of all information directly or  indirectly  available  to  it
         ...": Article 3.


      c) Every decision refusing a take charge  request  "...   shall  state
         full and detailed reasons": Article 5.


      d) In certain defined situations decisions  concerning  children  must
         observe the heightened standards enshrined in Article 12, including
         the  presence  of  a  qualified  representative  at  the   personal
         interview held under Article 5 of Dublin III.

      e) Requests replies and  all  written  correspondence  between  Member
         States  shall  be  via  the  'DubliNet'  electronic  communications
         network: Article 15.


      f) A laissez-passer  for  the  purposes  of  transfer  is  acceptable:
         Article 22.


      g) The "elements of proof and circumstantial  evidence"  mentioned  in
         Article 22(2) of  Dublin,  for  the  purpose  of  establishing  the
         responsible Member State, shall be included in  every  take  charge
         request, having regard to the broad range of  types  of  "probative
         evidence" and "indicative evidence" specified in Annex II:  Article
         1(1)(a).




    Article 8 ECHR: Substantive Protection




51) The stream of ECtHR jurisprudence to which this Tribunal had regard  in
    ZAT, in due discharge of its duty under section 3 of the  Human  Rights
    Act 1998, was considered in part by the Supreme Court in  R  (Quila)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] 1AC 621,  at  [30]  -
    [43] per Lord Wilson JSC.  The scope for invoking  Article  8  ECHR  in
    support of the duty for which the  Applicants  contend  is  illustrated
    particularly by two decisions of the ECtHR.  The  first  is  Tuquabo  -
    Tekle v The Netherlands [Application No 60665/00], where the  applicant
    claimed that the Netherlands was  under  a  positive  obligation  under
    Article 8 to admit her son, aged 13 years and with whom family life had
    been enjoyed previously in their country of origin,  Eritrea,  for  the
    purpose  of  re-establishing  family  life  with  the  family  unit  in
    question.  The ECtHR adopted the following approach, in [42]:

         "The Court reiterates that the essential object of Article 8 is  to
         protect the individual  against  arbitrary  action  by  the  public
         authorities. There may in addition be positive obligations inherent
         in effective 'respect' for family life.   However,  the  boundaries
         between the State's positive and negative  obligations  under  this
         provision  do  not  lend  themselves  to  precise  definition.  The
         applicable principles are, nonetheless, similar. In  both  contexts
         regard must be had to the  fair  balance  that  has  to  be  struck
         between the competing  interests  of  the  individual  and  of  the
         community as a whole; and in  both  contexts  the  State  enjoys  a
         certain margin of appreciation."

    Drawing together the governing  principles,  the  Court  continued,  at
    [43]:

         "(a)     The extent  of  a  State's  obligation  to  admit  to  its
             territory relatives of settled immigrants will vary  according
             to the particular circumstances of the  persons  involved  and
             the general interest.


         (b)      As a matter of  well  established  international  law  and
             subject to its treaty obligations, a State has  the  right  to
             control the entry of non-nationals into its territory.


         (c)      Where  immigration  is  concerned,  Article  8  cannot  be
             considered to impose  on  a  State  a  general  obligation  to
             respect the choice by married couples of the country of  their
             matrimonial residence and to authorise family reunion  in  its
             territory."

52) In  its  reasoning  the  Court,  without  purporting  to  prescribe  an
    exhaustive list of touchstones, placed  emphasis  on  the  age  of  the
    children concerned, their current situation in their country of  origin
    and the extent to which they are dependent on their parents.  In  [47],
    it described the settlement of the child concerned with his family unit
    in the Netherlands as "the most adequate means for the various  members
    to develop family life together."  In finding a breach  of  Article  8,
    the Court concluded that the Netherlands -

         "...   has failed to strike a fair balance between the  applicant's
         interests on the one hand  and  its  own  interest  in  controlling
         immigration on the other."

    See [52]. The Court's earlier decision in Sen v Netherlands  [2003]  36
    EHRR 7 is to similar effect.

53) In Mayeka  and  Mitunga  v  Belgium  [2008]  46  EHRR  23,   the  basic
    ingredients of a moderately complex matrix were a mother, a national of
    the Democratic Republic of Congo ("DRC"); the grant of  refugee  status
    to the mother in Canada; her daughter, then aged five  years,  who  was
    accompanied by the mother's brother (the  daughter's  uncle),  both  of
    whom travelled from the DRC to Belgium; an aspiration  that  the  uncle
    would continue to take care of his niece until the latter  had  secured
    permission to reunify with her mother in Canada; actions of the Belgium
    authorities involving the arrest of the uncle and the detention of  the
    child for a period of some  two  months;  and,  following  the  child's
    release pursuant to a court order, her immediate deportation to the DRC
    where the Belgium authorities had identified the  presence  of  another
    uncle, a student who protested that he did not have the means  to  look
    after the child.

54) In considering the mother's and daughter's claims under Articles 3  and
    8 ECHR, the ECtHR drew on, inter alia, Articles 3, 10  and  22  of  the
    United  Nations  Convention  on  the  Rights  of  the   Child.    These
    provisions, respectively, concern  the  best  interests  of  the  child
    principle, the obligation on  States  to  handle  family  reunification
    applications in a positive,  humane  and  expeditious  manner  and  the
    separate  duty  on  States  to  provide  appropriate   protection   and
    humanitarian assistance to child refugee applicants, whether  alone  or
    accompanied. The ECtHR also  invoked  a  2002  publication  of  the  UN
    Committee on the Rights of the Child, which  recommended,  inter  alia,
    that unaccompanied minors be informed of their rights and  have  access
    to legal representation in the asylum process.  The  Committee  made  a
    separate recommendation  for  improved  co-operation  and  exchange  of
    information among all relevant agencies.  The Court decided the Article
    8 claims of mother and daughter as follows, at [90]:

         "The Court .....  reiterates that the Belgium  State  had  positive
         obligations in the instant case, including an  obligation  to  take
         care of the second applicant  and  to  facilitate  the  applicants'
         reunification.  By deporting the second applicant,  the  Court  did
         not assist their reunification.   Nor  did  they  ensure  that  the
         second applicant would in fact be looked after in  [the  DRC].   In
         these circumstances, the Court considers  that  the  Belgium  State
         failed to comply with its positive obligations and interfered  with
         the applicants' rights to  respect  for  their  family  life  to  a
         disproportionate degree."


    To summarise, the main features of this case were those of pre-existing
    family life between the separated persons concerned,  an  unaccompanied
    minor, special vulnerability and a positive  obligation  to  facilitate
    family reunification.

55) The close association between substantive  and  procedural  protections
    emerges in some of the jurisprudence belonging to this discrete sphere.
     For applications by minors and  refugee  family  reunion  applications
    generally it has been held that there is an obligation under Article  8
    ECHR  to  ensure  that  such  applications   are   "examined   rapidly,
    attentively, and with particular diligence": Senigo Longue &  others  v
    France (App 11903/09, 10 July 2014), [69]; Tanda-Muzinga  v  France  at
    [73] and Mugenzi v France at [52]. Further  "the  state's  interest  in
    foiling attempts to circumvent immigration rules must not  deprive  ...
    foreign minors, especially if unaccompanied, of  the  protection  their
    status warrants": Mayeka at [81]. In such cases, "the  child's  extreme
    vulnerability  is  the  decisive  factor  and  takes  precedence   over
    considerations relating to the status of illegal immigrant...  Children
    have specific needs that are related in particular  to  their  age  and
    lack of independence, but also to their asylum-seeker status": Tarakhel
    v Switzerland [2015] 60 EHRR 28 at [99], ZT (Syria) at [75].



56) Likewise, applications for refugee family reunion  should  be  examined
    "flexibly and humanely" and in particular with  sufficient  flexibility
    where applicants cannot produce specific  documents:  Tanda-Muzinga  at
    [76]. It is relevant to take into account the fact that family life was
    interrupted by reason of fleeing  persecution  and  that  there  is  no
    alternative means of resuming family life: Muzgenzi  at  [53]  and  any
    fears for the family member's safety,  their  precarious  position,  or
    particular vulnerabilities while waiting for visas: Mugenzi  at [55].



57) The consideration that there is no pre-existing family life between  or
    among the persons concerned does not  exclude  the  engagement  of  the
    family life dimension of Article 8 ECHR: see R (Ahmadi) v  SSHD  [2005]
    EWCA Civ 1721, with its notable emphasis on the significance of  future
    plans and intentions: see especially [17] - [18].



    Article 8 ECHR: Procedural Protections.




58) So much for the substantive reach of Article 8 ECHR in a  context  such
    as the present.  The challenges in this case and its sister cases  also
    have a significant procedural dimension, discernible in some  parts  of
    the jurisprudence digested above.  In brief it is  contended  that  the
    Secretary of State's decision making process was procedurally irregular
    and unfair.  This engages the Senigo-Longue principle  [supra]  and  is
    reflected in decisions such as R (Dirshe) v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 421; R
    (AN & FA) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ  1636  and  JA  (Afghanistan)  v  SSHD
    [2014] EWCA  Civ  450.   These  decisions  highlight  the  need  for  a
    procedurally fair interview process  and  the  imperative  of  specific
    safeguards for children.


59) It is well established that Article 8  ECHR  positive  obligations  can
    include a right to procedural fairness, particularly in decisions  that
    have a serious impact on the Article 8 rights of children: McMichael  v
    United Kingdom (1995) 20 EHRR 205 at [102]; R (Gudanaviciene &  Others)
    v Lord Chancellor [2015] 1 WLR 2247 at [62], [65], [69] and [71].   The
    effect of this is that the child and their affected family members must
    be involved in the decision-making process, viewed as  a  whole,  to  a
    degree sufficient to provide them  with  the  requisite  protection  of
    their interests.  It has been held that a failure to  ensure  this  can
    give rise to a breach of their rights to respect for family life  which
    is disproportionate.  McMichael at [87] - [92] and W  v  UK  [1988]  10
    EHRR [68].



60) The test to be distilled from the Strasbourg Jurisprudence  is  whether
    those affected by the decision under scrutiny have been involved in the
    decision making process, viewed as a whole, to a degree  sufficient  to
    provide them with the requisite protection of  their  interests.   This
    procedural aspect of Article 8 is  designed  to  ensure  the  effective
    protection of a person's substantive Article 8 rights.  As the decision
    of the Court of Appeal in Gudanaviciene makes clear there  is  a  close
    association with the protections afforded by Article 6 ECHR when issues
    concerning the procedural embrace of Article 8 arise: see the  judgment
    of Lord Dyson MR  at [70] - [71].



61) In cases where procedural requirements arise under Article 8 ECHR their
    content may be informed by similar procedural rights arising under  the
    United Nations Convention on  the  Rights  of  the  Child  ("CRC"),  in
    particular an obligation to involve  children  in  the  decision-making
    process, taking reasonable steps to ensure that relevant  and  accurate
    information is  assembled  and,  at  heart,  making  properly  informed
    decisions about the child's best interests: see Articles 3  and  12  of
    the CRC and the UN Committee on  the  Rights  of  the  Child's  General
    Comment 14 ("GC14").

    The CRC and GC14

62) The influence of the CRC and the associated GC14 have been  recognised:
    see ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] 2 AC 166 [34] -[37]; R(MK, IK and HK) v
    SSHD at [21] - [25]; and Mayeka at [39] - [40].  Relevant rights  under
    the CRC include:


      i) Article 3(1), on which  Article  24(2)  CFR  is  based,  and  which
         provides  that  "in  all  actions  concerning   children,   whether
         undertaken by public or private social welfare institutions,  court
         of law, administrative authorities or legislative bodies, the  best
         interests of the child shall be a primary consideration";


    (ii)   Article 10, which requires that applications by a child to enter
         a State Party for the purpose  of  family  reunification  shall  be
         dealt with "in a positive, humane and expeditious manner".


    (iii)  Article 22 requires "appropriate measures to ensure that a child
         who is  seeking  refugee  status...  shall...  receive  appropriate
         protection and humanitarian assistance", and that states  cooperate
         "to protect and assist such child and... trace the....  members  of
         the family... to obtain  information  necessary  for  reunification
         with his or her family".


    (iv)   Article  39,  which  requires  that  States  Parties  "take  all
         appropriate measures to promote physical and psychological recovery
         and social reintegration of a child victim of: any form of neglect,
         exploitation, or abuse; torture or any other form of cruel, inhuman
         or degrading treatment or  punishment;  or  armed  conflicts.  Such
         recovery and reintegration shall take place in an environment which
         fosters the health, self-respect and dignity of the child."


63) GC14 is of extensive reach.  Inter alia it:


    (i)    confirms the central importance of a  child's  right  to  family
         unity including in situations where  children  are  separated  from
         family members as a result of migration [58], [59], [60] and [ 66];




    (ii)   states that where children are defending their interest in court
         proceedings  confirming  family  reunification,  the  courts   must
         provide for the best interests to be considered in  all  situations
         and decisions, whether of a procedural or  substantive  nature  and
         must demonstrate that they have done so:  [29];


    (iii)   recognises  the  particular  vulnerability  of  asylum  seeking
         children, with the  attendant  requirement  that  their  particular
         vulnerability informs the best interests assessment: [75]  -  [76].
         This recognition is consistent  with  the  case-law  of  the  Grand
         Chamber  of  the  Strasbourg  court  which  has  held   that   "The
         requirement  of  "special  protection"   of   asylum   seekers   is
         particularly important where the persons concerned are children, in
         view of their specific needs and their extreme  vulnerability"  and
         stressed the importance of ensuring that reception  conditions  for
         child asylum seekers must not "create... for them  a  situation  of
         stress and anxiety, with particularly traumatic consequences":  see
         Tarakhel at  [119];


    (iv)   confirms that where when a  "best  interests  determination"  is
         made "strict procedural safeguards" apply: [46]; and


    (v)    emphasises that facts and information relevant to  a  particular
         case must be obtained in order to draw up  all  elements  necessary
         for a best interests assessment, an exercise  which  could  include
         interviewing relevant persons: [92].


64)  GC14 has been held to rank as authoritative guidance as to the content
    of that right: R (SG) v Secretary of State for Work and Pensions [2015]
    UKSC 16, [2015] 1 WLR 1449, at [105] - [106], approved in  Mathieson  v
    Secretary of State for Work and Pensions [2015] UKSC 47  at  [39].   In
    Mathieson Lord Wilson (giving the judgment of the  Court)  adopted  the
    three-fold concept of best interests set out at [6] of GC14, at [39]:


         "The first aspect of the concept is the child's  substantive  right
         to have his best interests  assessed  as  a  primary  consideration
         whenever a decision is  made  concerning  him.  The  second  is  an
         interpretative principle that, where a legal provision is  open  to
         more than one interpretation, that which  more  effectively  serves
         his best interests should be  adopted.  The  third  is  a  rule  of
         procedure, described [in General Comment No. 14] as follows:


         Whenever a decision is to be  made  that  will  affect  a  specific
         child, an identified group of children or children in general,  the
         decision-making process must include an evaluation of the  possible
         impact (positive or negative) of  the  decision  on  the  child  or
         children concerned ... Furthermore, the justification of a decision
         must show that the right has been  explicitly  taken  into  account
         ..."




    The Dublin Regulation: Procedural Safeguards


65) The challenges in this group of cases have a further discrete dimension
    based on certain provisions of the Dublin Regulation, the  Commission's
    implementing measure (see above) and this Tribunal's  decision  in  MK.
    This decision involved consideration of the obligations on the SSHD  to
    investigate  claimed  family  relationships  in   considering   whether
    children had substantive rights to family  reunification  under  Dublin
    III.  It was held that the SSHD  had  breached  her  investigative  and
    evidence gathering duties in failing to investigate and facilitate  DNA
    testing where the children's inability to prove their relationship with
    their mother was a barrier to admission: [36] and [43] - [44].


66) This Tribunal further held that Dublin III subjects the SSHD to "duties
    of enquiry, investigation and evidence gathering" - [38] - and that the
    discharge of these duties will be factually and contextually  sensitive
    and is governed by the principle that the Secretary of State is obliged
    to take reasonable steps.  It was considered that the same  duties  may
    arise via the procedural dimension of Article  8  ECHR  and  under  the
    common law: [24], [26] and [36].  It was further held that those duties
    continue even after an initial refusal to  accept  a  transfer  and  in
    particular where they were not  discharged  in  refusing  to  accept  a
    transfer: see [41] and [47]


67) In R (NS Afghanistan)  v  Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    [2013] QB102, the Grand Chamber held that when a Member State  makes  a
    decision under the  discretionary  clause  of  the  Dublin  Regulation,
    namely whether to examine  an  asylum  application  which  is  not  its
    responsibility under the prescribed criteria, it is implementing EU law
    for the purposes of Article 6 TEU and Article  51  of  the  Charter  of
    Fundamental Rights of the European Union ("CFR").   We  agree  with  Ms
    Kilroy's submission that, by logical extension, the same reasoning must
    apply to Article 8 of the Dublin Regulation.


68) In a very recent decision, CK and Others v  Slovenia  [Case  C-578/16],
    the CJEU ruled on the correct interpretation of Articles 3(2) and 17(1)
    of the Dublin Regulation in the  context  of  a  preliminary  reference
    arising out of the proposed transfer by Slovenia to Croatia of a Syrian
    national and an Egyptian national for the purpose of determining  their
    claims for asylum.  The Court held, firstly, that  the  application  of
    the discretionary  clause  under  Article  17(1)  involves  a  question
    concerning the  interpretation  of  EU  law.   The  remainder  of  this
    decision, concerning Article 4 of the CFR,  is  of  no  moment  in  the
    present context.


69) We reject Ms Walker's submission, based on [97] of the  Court  judgment
    and [62] and [67]  of  the  Advocate  General's  Opinion,  that  CK  is
    authority for the proposition that claims based on Article 17  are  not
    "justiciable" (her word).  We consider that, fundamentally, this  is  a
    decision on the  construction  and  scope  of  Article  17.  This  non-
    justiciability argument is  also  confounded  by  ZT  (Syria)  at  [85]
    (infra).


70) Account must also be  taken  of  the  decision  of  the  CJEU  in  K  v
    Bundesasylamt [Case C245/11].  Here it was held, at [51] and  [52],  in
    the context of considering the Dublin Regulation dependency clause  viz
    Article 16(3) in a situation where the  asylum  applicant  had  already
    transferred from the first Member State to the host -Member  State  and
    an asylum claim had been made, that the act of  making  a  take  charge
    request of the  host  Member  State  would  be  a  purely  formal  one.
    Accordingly in certain circumstances  compliance  with  an  essentially
    formal (or remedial) requirement enshrined  in  the  Dublin  Regulation
    will not be an essential prerequisite to the discharge by Member States
    of their substantive obligations thereunder. Thus the making of a  take
    charge request did not have the status of a sine qua non.


71) The significance of the decision in  K  is  its  demonstration  of  the
    willingness of the CJEU to ensure the practical and effective operation
    of the Dublin Regulation by relegating certain specific requirements to
    the level of the purely formal.  Judges and practitioners in  a  common
    law jurisdiction would recognise this as an illustration  of  purposive
    construction. Furthermore this decision  resonates  with  an  important
    principle of the common law, the Padfield principle, which  holds  that
    legislation is to be construed so as to give effect to the  policy  and
    objects  of  the  measure  under  scrutiny:  Minister  of  Agriculture,
    Fisheries and Food v Padfield [1968] AC 997 at page 1033 per Lord Reid.



72) The  K  decision  is  of  some  significance  in  the  present  context
    notwithstanding that the focus in these proceedings is  on  Article  8,
    rather than Article 16, of Dublin.  Furthermore, it resonates with what
    the Court of Appeal stated in [83] - [84] of ZT.  First, at [83]:


         "Moreover, the authorities do not suggest that, event  in  what  Mr
         Eadie described as  the 'initial procedural stages',  there  is  an
         absolute rule that the  determination  of  the  responsible  Member
         State must be by the operation of the Dublin Process and Procedures
         in the Member State in which the individual is present."






    And developing this theme at [84]:


         "The need for expedition in cases involving particularly vulnerable
         persons  such  as  unaccompanied  children  is  recognised  in  the
         Regulation and authorities .... Chikwamba v Secretary of State  for
         the Home Department [2008] 1 WLR 1420 and Mayeka  v  Belgium  46...
         show  that  the   operation   of   a   procedural   rule   may   be
         disproportionate ....   the urgency of particular circumstances may
         require a shorter period than the periods specified as  long  stops
         in the Regulation."


    We also draw attention to [85]:


         "A further reason  for  rejecting  Mr  Eadie's  submission  in  its
         absolutist form is Article 17 of the Dublin III  Regulation.  Since
         the relevant officials in the second Member  State  have  power  to
         assume responsibility in a case in which the Regulation assigns  it
         to another Member State, it cannot be said that it is never open to
         an individual to request that state to do that. Mr Eadie suggested,
         or came close to suggesting, during the course of the hearing  that
         a  refusal  to  exercise  the  power  under  Article  17  was   not
         justiciable. That, in my judgment, is unsound in principle and also
         finds no support in the authorities. ......In a  context  in  which
         the exercise of power  relates  to  relations  between  two  member
         states as to the operation of a treaty arranging for the allocation
         of responsibility for examining  applications  for  asylum  between
         member states, this is clearly correct. There will be a wide  range
         of relevant considerations for  the  decision-maker  to  take  into
         account: see all the factors that the UT stated  were  relevant  to
         the assessment of proportionality. But  subject  to  the  effective
         scope of judicial  review  being  narrower  for  this  reason,  the
         exercise by the Secretary of State of her discretion is subject  to
         the  ordinary  public  law  principles  of  propriety  of  purpose,
         relevancy  of   considerations,   and   the   longstop   Wednesbury
         unreasonableness category ( Associated  Provincial  Picture  Houses
         Ltd v Wednesbury Corpn  [1948]  1  KB  223)  and,  because  of  the
         engagement of article 8 of the European Convention , the  intensity
         of  review  which  is  appropriate  in  the   assessment   of   the
         proportionality of any interference with Article 8 rights."


    We accept Ms  Walker's  submission  that  one  must  be  alert  to  the
    particular contexts of the decision in K and the  reflections  in  [83]
    -[84] of ZT. Of course neither of these decisions is on all fours  with
    the  present  case.   But  this  consideration  does  not  preclude  an
    examination of the principled basis and juridical  orientation  of  the
    passages under scrutiny. The main factor which links the decision in  K
    with the present case (and the other members  of  this  group)  is  the
    absence of a take charge request by the  first  Member  State,  coupled
    with how this was treated by the Court.




    The Common Law: Procedural Safeguards


73) Last,  but  far  from  least,  since  becoming  seized  of  the  family
    reunification claims in this case and the other members  of  the  group
    the Secretary of State has been subject to a series of well  recognised
    public law obligations.  These have entailed, in particular,  the  duty
    to ensure a procedurally regular and fair decision making process;  the
    duty to take into account all material facts  and  considerations;  and
    the duty to prevent the intrusion of the immaterial.  It  may  be  said
    that the Tameside duty of enquiry, considered by this Tribunal  in  MK,
    was born out of the latter two duties and, in every context where it is
    engaged, constitutes an  important  mechanism  for  ensuring  that  the
    foregoing EU and Article 8 ECHR duties are discharged. So too does  due
    observance of procedural regularity and fairness. To this I  would  add
    that the specific EU law duties to which the Secretary of State was  at
    all material times subject did not operate to excuse, modify or  dilute
    the content of these  co-existing  public  law  duties.   All  of  them
    operate in harmonious co-existence and with mutual respect.


74) There is a notable illustration of the impact of the common law in  the
    specific context of asylum decision making in the decision of the Court
    of Appeal in Dirshe.  There the central question was whether a  refusal
    of asylum decision was vitiated on the ground of  a  procedural  unfair
    decision  making  process.   The  court  supplied  an  uncompromisingly
    affirmative answer.  At [14] Latham LJ, delivering the judgment of  the
    court, stated:

         "The interview is a critical part of the procedure for  determining
         asylum decisions.  It provides the applicant with an opportunity to
         expand on or explain his written account and  for  the  respondent,
         through the interviewing officer, to test that account and  explore
         any apparent inconsistencies in that account.  The interview  could
         well be critical to any determination by either the  respondent  or
         appellate authorities as to the credibility of the applicant.   The
         record of the interview is created by the interviewing officer, who
         is acting on behalf of the respondent.  It  follows  that  fairness
         requires that  the  procedure  should  give  to  the  applicant  an
         adequate opportunity to challenge its reliability or adequacy."




    Next, the court adopted the analysis of Pitchford J in R (Mapah) v SSHD
    [2003] EWHC 306 (Admin) at [62]:


         "(1)     Problems of interpretation can and do occur;
         (2)      Questions, translated into the applicant's language and
             replies given in that language, are not recorded as such but
             in the English translation;
         (3)      Records cannot always, despite exhortation, be literally
             verbatim;
         (4)      The reversal of the requirement for read back removed a
             measure of protection against unremarked mistakes in recording
             by the interviewer;
         (5)      An applicant does not necessarily have the benefit of
             representation or his own interpreter. Such an applicant will
             be at a disadvantage in identifying errors of translation;
         (6)      Immigration officials and Tribunals of Appeal frequently
             judge credibility against a criterion of consistency;
         (7)      Tape recording of an interview by the applicant or by the
             Secretary of State would do much to alleviate these problems
             if and when they occur."




75) The judgment  in Dirshe continues, at [16]:


         "So long as the Secretary of State continues with the  practice  of
         relying upon a written record of the interview in its present form,
         the applicant must have an adequate  means  of  ensuring  that  the
         record is, as we have said, both adequate and reliable".


    Next, attention is directed to the variable factors of the  skills  and
    qualifications of the interpreter and the quality of the  transcription
    by the Interviewing Officer, together with the  factor  of  digest,  or
    summary.  The court emphasised the vital importance of providing a tape
    recording of such interviews.  While the context under consideration in
    Dirshe does not mirror precisely that of the present case  the  general
    tenor of the judgment and the procedural concerns identified apply with
    a degree  of  modification  and  resonate  in  the  present  litigation
    context.


76) While the decision of the House of Lords in R v SSHD,  ex  parte  Doody
    and Others [1994] 1 AC 531 involved a very  different  context,  namely
    the release of prisoners sentenced to  life  imprisonment,  I  consider
    that the terms in which Lord Mustill devised  his  celebrated  code  of
    procedural fairness makes clear that  it  is  of  general  application.
    Furthermore, its association with the  EU  and  ECHR  legal  rules  and
    principles outlined above is unmistakable.  The passage in question (at
    page  560D)  is  not  susceptible  to  cherry   picking   and   demands
    reproduction in full:


          "My Lords, I think it unnecessary to refer by  name  or  to  quote
         from, any of the often-cited authorities in which the  courts  have
         explained what is essentially an intuitive judgment.  They are  far
         too well known. From them, I  derive  that  (1)  where  an  Act  of
         Parliament confers an administrative power there is  a  presumption
         that it will be exercised in a manner which  is  fair  in  all  the
         circumstances. (2) The standards of  fairness  are  not  immutable.
         They may change with the passage of time, both in the  general  and
         in their application to decisions of a  particular  type.  (3)  The
         principles of fairness are not to be applied by rote identically in
         every situation. What fairness demands is dependent on the  context
         of the decision, and this is to be taken into account  in  all  its
         aspects. (4) An essential feature of the  context  is  the  statute
         which creates the discretion, as regards both its language and  the
         shape of the legal  and  administrative  system  within  which  the
         decision is taken. (5) Fairness will  very  often  require  that  a
         person who may be adversely affected by the decision will  have  an
         opportunity to make representations on his own behalf either before
         the decision is taken with a view to producing a favourable result;
         or after it is taken, with a view to procuring its modification; or
         both. (6) Since the person affected usually cannot make  worthwhile
         representations without knowing what factors may weigh against  his
         interests fairness will very often require that he is  informed  of
         the gist of the case which he has to answer."




    Pausing briefly, it has not been argued on behalf of the  Secretary  of
    State - correctly in our estimation - that the  common  law  principles
    outlined above did not apply to the so-called expedited process.




    Public Law Protections Generally


77) The operation of public law standards and duties in the context of  the
    Dublin Regulation expressly recognised by the Court of Appeal  in  [85]
    of ZT (Syria), in the context of rejecting  the  Secretary  of  State's
    argument that Article 17 is not justiciable:


         "...There will be a wide range of relevant considerations  for  the
         decision maker to take into account: see all the factors  that  the
         UT stated where relevant  to  the  assessment  of  proportionality.
         That subject to  the  effective  scope  of  judicial  review  being
         narrower for this reason, the exercise by the Secretary of State of
         her discretion is subject to the ordinary public law principles  of
         propriety of purpose, relevancy of considerations and the long stop
         Wednesbury unreasonableness category ....    and,  because  of  the
         engagement of Article 8 of the European Convention,  the  intensity
         of  review  which  is  appropriate  in  the   assessment   of   the
         proportionality of any interference with Article 8 rights."




    Even if it were appropriate to hold that the Dublin Regulation did  not
    apply, in whole or in part, to the expedited process it is difficult to
    identify any principled basis for concluding that this process  was  in
    some way immune from the orthodox duty of every United  Kingdom  public
    authority to comply  with  the  common  law  principles  and  standards
    considered above.  The unseen companion of  the  Secretary  of  State's
    officials in their journey across the Channel to 73 outposts in  France
    and thereafter was the omnipresent common law.

Specific Issues

    The Contours of AM's Challenge

  78) At the time of the initial impugned  decision  the  question  for  the
      Secretary of State was whether the Applicant qualified for transfer to
      the United Kingdom.  The determination of this question turned on  the
      assessment of the Applicant's asserted nephew/uncle relationship  with
      OA.  Stated succinctly, the outcome was negative because the  decision
      maker was not persuaded that this relationship had  been  established.
      This decision was made on an  unspecified  date  in  November/December
      2016.

79) Since 31 January 2017, the date of the PAP letter, the question for the
    Secretary of State has evolved.  The PAP letter, while contending  that
    the substantive criteria in the Dublin Regulation were satisfied in the
    Applicant's case, also unambiguously made the case that  the  Secretary
    of State had a duty to admit the Applicant to the United Kingdom  under
    Article 8  ECHR  and  Articles  7  and  24(2)  of  the  EU  Charter  of
    Fundamental Rights, citing Home Secretary v ZAT and Others [2016]  EWCA
    Civ 810 ("ZAT").  Thus the legal landscape had  altered  and  broadened
    significantly. In passing, there is no issue of delay on  the  part  of
    the Applicant.

80) We consider that the  Secretary  of  State  failed  to  recognise  this
    evolution. This   failure is abundantly clear from  the  PAP  response,
    the witness statement of Ms Farman and the detailed grounds of defence.
     In short, since the PAP  letter  the  Secretary  of  State's  dominant
    preoccupation has been to defend  and  justify  the  mid-December  2016
    refusal decision. This we consider misconceived for the reasons  given.
    This myopic stance is reflected in  the  Judicial  Review  Claim  Form,
    which challenges an ongoing failure on the part  of  the  Secretary  of
    State and invokes both the Applicant's Article 8 ECHR  rights  and  his
    Dublin Regulation rights.  Ultimately, the Secretary of State  did  not
    take the  opportunity  to  make  a  fresh  decision,  protesting  that,
    notwithstanding the marked evolution  noted  and  the  accumulation  of
    substantial recent evidence, there was no legal obligation to do so. On
    ordinary public law grounds alone this stance is questionable.

81) In [5] of the Tribunal's ruling dated 12 April 2017 [cf Appendix 2]  it
    was stated:

         "All of these cases have one feature in common  namely  that  fresh
         evidence has been generated.  Broadly the fresh evidence takes  the
         form of a series of witness statements and expert reports.  None of
         this fresh evidence has been considered by the Secretary  of  State
         other than in the somewhat cursory fashion disclosed in the witness
         statements of Ms Farman.  It is  common  case  that  these  do  not
         purport to contain or amount to a new decision, a reviewed decision
         or a reconsidered decision.  This is  based  on  the  Secretary  of
         State's unremitting position which is that fresh decisions will not
         be made voluntarily in  any  of  these  cases.   This  position  is
         justified on the basis of the contention that the expedited process
         was of the "one off" variety and  that  all  of  the  new  evidence
         belongs exclusively to  the  framework  of  the  Dublin  Regulation
         process and, accordingly, can only be deployed within that process.
          Thus, it is argued, all new evidence belongs solely  to  a  Dublin
         Regulation application for asylum to the French authorities."

    The ruling and its underpinning reasoning are set forth in [9] - [10]:


         "[9]     The following analysis arises irresistibly from the nature
             of the challenge that is  brought  in  each  of  these  cases.
             These are individual  rights  challenges.   They  are  founded
             fundamentally on Article 8 of  the  Human  Rights  Convention.
             They base themselves on the principles which were espoused  by
             this Tribunal in ZAT And Others and approved and developed  by
             the Court of Appeal. The decision in ZAT makes clear  that  in
             certain circumstances Article 8 provides the appropriate legal
             vehicle for securing admission to the United  Kingdom  and  it
             does so outwith and  apart  from  the  regime  of  the  Dublin
             Regulation.   Whether  any  of  these  Applicants   ultimately
             succeeds in making good their claim in this fashion  does  not
             arise at this stage.

         [10]     Once one applies that analysis the unsustainability of the
             Secretary of State's position  becomes  clear.   The  decision
             which the Secretary of State is obliged to make must be viewed
             through that lens.  It is based on duty.  First of all  it  is
             the ordinary public law duty of a  public  authority  invested
             with relevant decision making powers and discretions to make a
             decision when reasonably required to do  so.   Second,  it  is
             based on section 6 of the  Human  Rights  Act,  which  applies
             directly to the Secretary of State in this Article 8  context.
             It would be manifestly incompatible with the Convention rights
             of the Applicants if the Secretary of  State  were  simply  to
             refuse to assess the merits of a human rights claim at all."

      For  essentially  technical  reasons,  the  parties'   representatives
      believed that this order  did  not  encompass  the  present  case,  as
      permission had already been granted. The order  did  indeed  expressly
      apply to this case also. In any event,  our  observation  in  [81]  is
      unaffected.

  82) It was submitted on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State  that  this
      Tribunal should consider only the evidence available to the  Secretary
      of State at the time when the initial  refusal  decisions  were  made.
      This submission is based upon the misconception identified above.   It
      also neglects, and fails to engage with, [5] - [12] of the  Tribunal's
      earlier ruling. In addition this submission fails to  take  cognisance
      of both the target of the Applicant's challenge - an ongoing failure -
      and the fact that the  Secretary  of  State  has  now  considered  the
      evidence in its totality in these  proceedings.  Furthermore,  it  has
      been repeatedly stated in a variety  of  contexts  that  human  rights
      cases  are  about  substance  rather  than   form   or   technicality.
      Furthermore there is no clear indication that AM has received a review
      decision, in circumstances where his entitlement to  this  is  not  in
      dispute.


83) In this context we would add that while  expedition  and  finality  are
    readily identifiable themes in the Dublin  Regulation  and  its  sister
    measure there is no suggestion that second, or subsequent, applications
    for protection are excluded -  and  no  argument  to  this  effect  was
    advanced on behalf of the Secretary of State.  EU  law,  at  heart,  is
    nothing if not a champion of substance over form. The  availability  of
    this  facility  would,  of  course,  be  subject  to  well   recognised
    principles revolving around  the  concept  of  misuse  of  process  and
    improper purpose.

84)  Finally in this context we consider  the  analogy  with  the  "rolling
    review" which was developing in HN and SA (Afghanistan) v  SSHD  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 123 inapposite.  That was not a human  rights  case  involving
    vulnerable isolated children, nor did it consider a failure to  make  a
    decision and I refer to, without  repeating,  [12]  of  the  Tribunal's
    earlier ruling in this case.

85)  In  summary,  the  Secretary  of  State's  submission  identifies   no
    principled basis for disregarding the post-December 2016  evidence  and
    we reject it. While  the  analysis  and  conclusions  at  [78]  -  [84]
    vindicate this Applicant's challenge and, in principle, entitle him  to
    a remedy there are other issues to be considered.

    The Expedited Process Considered

86) "Expedited" is the adjective repeatedly applied in the evidence to  the
    October/December 2016 process.  Whether it was preceded by a very short
    lived "accelerated" process (see Ms Farman's long witness statement) is
    of no real moment.  The evidence makes clear that the expedited process
    was a joint French/British venture. According to Miss Farman - see [30]
    above - it was "French-led" with UK "support".  We  are  alert  to  the
    reality that France was the host sovereign state and the United Kingdom
    was operating on French territory with the agreement  and  approval  of
    the French government.  We  rather  doubt  whether  any  more  profound
    analysis of this relatively simple issue is required.  Furthermore,  in
    any event, such an exercise would  be  unsatisfactory  given  that  the
    issue is mainly addressed through  the  medium  of  litigation  witness
    statements with no associated contemporaneous  records.   How  and  why
    this has come to pass we do not know and decline to speculate.

87) What is abundantly clear is that the  process  was  both  designed  and
    operated in such a way that decisions were made quickly. While we  note
    the references in the Secretary of State's evidence to a one month time
    period applicable to the expedited process, which featured also  in  Ms
    Walker's  submissions,  we  find  no  convincing  indications   of   an
    inflexible  time  measurement  of  this  kind.   Time  pressures  there
    undoubtedly  were,  driven  by  a  combination  of  child  welfare  and
    resources.  However, we note the specific indications in the evidence -
    for example Mr Cook's witness  statement  at  [51]  -  that  as  of  09
    December 2016, when the exercise was some two months old,  the  process
    of interviewing all the children was continuing.


88) This simple, objective  analysis  confounds  M.  Sodini's  'one  month'
    assertion which suffers from the further  frailties  of  vagueness  and
    want of particularity. Moreover, his witness statement  is  (improperly
    and unhelpfully) undated and unsigned and initially appeared to  us  to
    have been made  midstream  the  expedited  process  (viz  mid  to  late
    November 2016). We note and have no reason to doubt  the  clarification
    provided by the GLD's solicitor that it was in fact made in late  March
    2017.   We take  into account also the absence of any concrete evidence
    of a completion date:  this  is  strikingly  absent  from  Ms  Farman's
    detailed timeline.  Furthermore, it is clear that the review  mechanism
    had the effect of extending the overall process to a  total  period  of
    three to six months. Regrettably the evidence does not  permit  a  more
    precise time measurement.


89) Notwithstanding the  above,  it  was  argued  by  Ms  Walker  that  the
    expedited process had to be begun and completed within a period of  one
    month, by virtue of some kind of ordonnance on the part of  the  French
    authorities.  We  consider  this  argument  unsustainable.   First,  no
    documentary  evidence  of  this  has  been  provided,  albeit  we  have
    considered the claims to this effect in litigation witness  statements.
    This  witness  evidence  does  not  establish  this  point  clearly  or
    satisfactorily.  It  falls  short  of  asserting,  or  establishing,  a
    process so rigid and a time limit so absolute in a situation  so  fluid
    that an unforgiving and rigid guillotine fell irrevocably  and  on  cue
    one month following the commencement date (which itself is not clear).


90)  Furthermore, this assertion is confounded by the Secretary of  State's
    own evidence which, read fairly and in bonam partem, indicates that the
    first part of the period under scrutiny had  a  duration  of  some  two
    months viz from early/mid-October to early/mid-December 2016,  with  an
    interruption of several days duration at the end  of  October/beginning
    of November on  account  of  the  "Jungle"  demolition  and  associated
    dispersal of the circa 2,000 unaccompanied children.  It is also  clear
    from the same evidence that the second period, which  was  occupied  by
    the "review" exercise, added close to two further months to the overall
    timeframe.


    The Respondent's Duties of Candour and Disclosure


  91) In a context where there have been repeated requests  for  disclosure,
      in both this case and the others, the evidence does  not  include  any
      case notes, file notes, emails or other contemporaneous records.   Nor
      is there any material documenting the training  and  instructions,  if
      any,  given  to  interviewers  and  interpreters,  with  one   limited
      exception which seems directed more to decision makers.   Furthermore,
      the evidential  gaps  thereby  created  have  not,  in  many  material
      instances, been rectified through the medium  of  witness  statements.
      Given the major procedural dimension of this judicial review challenge
      and the absence of any agreement or  concession  on  various  material
      factual issues, this is one of those cases where, it becomes necessary
      for the Tribunal to find certain material facts, as was recognised  by
      Lord Brown in Tweed v Parades Commission [2006] UKHL 53 at  [52]-[57].
      This exercise will extend to considering  whether  inferences  arising
      from the absence of the kind of  materials  noted  may  reasonably  be
      made.  Linked to this is the Secretary of State's duty of candour.



92) It is appropriate to recall the decision of the Court of  Appeal  in  R
    (Das) v SSHD [2014]  EWCA  Civ  45.   In  that  case,  the  Court  drew
    attention to a striking gap  in  the  evidential  matrix,  namely  "the
    absence of any evidence on behalf of the Secretary of State before  the
    Court below or before this Court to explain her decision making in this
    case": see [79].  The Appellate Court approved the principal formulated
    by the first instance Court, namely inferences adverse to the Secretary
    of State's case may properly  be  drawn  in  such  circumstances.   The
    following  passage  in  the  first  instance  judgment,  at  [21],   is
    especially noteworthy:


           "The basis for drawing adverse inferences of  fact  against  the
           Secretary of  State  in  judicial  review  proceedings  will  be
           particularly strong, because in such proceedings  the  Secretary
           of State is subject to the stringent and well  known  obligation
           owed to the Court by a public authority facing  a  challenge  to
           its decision ...."


    The obligation to which the Judge was referring is the duty of candour.
     This duty was considered in extenso in the decision of  this  Tribunal
    in R (Mahmood) v SSHD [2014] UKUT 00439 at [15] ff. The duty of candour
    was reviewed more recently by the Court of Appeal in R  (Khan)  v  SSHD
    [2016] EWCA Civ 416: see especially [35] - [45] per Beatson  LJ.   Lord
    Walker's succinct formulation of the duty leaves nothing unsaid.  Every
    respondent public authority has a duty:


           "....  to co-operate and to make candid  disclosure  by  way  of
           affidavit of the relevant facts and (so  far  as  they  are  not
           apparent  from  contemporaneous  documents   which   have   been
           disclosed) the reasoning behind the decision challenged  in  the
           judicial review proceedings ..."



    See Belize Alliance  of  Conservation  Non-Government  Organisations  v
    Department of the Environment [2004] UKPC 6 at [86].


    Did the Dublin Regulation apply?


  93) The main question of law which has emerged is:  what  is  the  correct
      analysis and characterisation of the "expedited process" within  which
      the case of this Applicant and  the  other  four  related  cases  were
      considered and rejected?


  94) We consider that the answer to the question posed above is not  to  be
      found in the various labels and descriptions of Home Office  officials
      employed from time to time, mainly in  pre-proceedings  communications
      and   post-proceedings   witness   statements.    This   is,   rather,
      fundamentally a question of law.   It  is  not  devoid  of  a  factual
      element for the simple reason that, in common with any legal  measure,
      the Dublin Regulation applies only  in  certain  factual  contexts  or
      situations.  Thus the underlying facts must be established.   In  this
      sense and to  this  extent  the  characterisation  issue  is  a  mixed
      question of fact and law.   However,  the  factual  dimension  of  the
      question does not in our  judgement  include  the  subjective  claims,
      assertions, descriptions and labels of government officials.


95) There are repeated claims in the Secretary of State's evidence that the
    United Kingdom, via the expedited  process,  exceeded  its  obligations
    under the Dublin Regulation.  We readily accept that one of the aims of
    the process was to accelerate the time limits and periods specified  in
    the Dublin Regulation.  There is nothing incongruous or  unusual  about
    this.  These are outer, or backstop, time limits which do  not  prevent
    Member States from producing quicker outcomes.  Furthermore, expedition
    is a core principle of the Dublin Regulation. More important,  this  is
    perfectly lawful and it does not somehow disapply some or  all  of  the
    surrounding provisions of the Regulation or its sister measure.


96) If a Member State chooses to accelerate any of the time limits or waive
    or relax any  of  the  formal  requirements  enshrined  in  the  Dublin
    Regulation we consider that this will generally not involve any  breach
    of EU law. The question which arises is whether a  Member  State  which
    adopts a process of this kind can thereby claim to be  exonerated  from
    giving effect to, and can opt out of,  a  series  of  requirements  and
    duties enshrined in other provisions of the Regulation and  its  sister
    measure.  The burden of the Secretary of State's case is that  this  is
    an option lawfully available to a Member State.  This is  the  crux  of
    the question of law which we must examine and determine.

97) At this juncture it is instructive to strip the  Secretary  of  State's
    argument to its core essentials.  The  argument,  shorn  of  gloss  and
    embellishment, is that in the situation  prevailing  the  Secretary  of
    State was legally entitled to ignore much of the Dublin Regulation  and
    its sister measure and, as a  matter  of  choice  and  convenience,  to
    consciously give effect to its provisions only in  a  highly  selective
    and limited fashion, with the cooperative participation of  another  EU
    Member State, France.  The case made is that  the  Secretary  of  State
    could lawfully devise an alternative model which, at  heart,  borrowed,
    and purported to give effect to, only one of  the  Dublin  "responsible
    Member State" provisions viz Article  8  while  wilfully  ignoring  the
    others, in particular Article 17, together with a series of  procedural
    safeguards. This analysis, in our judgement, flows inexorably from  the
    Secretary of State's evidence, in particular the witness statements  of
    Miss Farman and Mr Cook in the Citizens UK litigation, in  tandem  with
    the detailed grounds of defence and the submissions of Ms Walker.

98) The Dublin Regulation being a measure of  EU  law,  the  latter  regime
    provides the prism through which we must examine the factual matrix  of
    the expedited process.  For the purposes of this exercise the essential
    factual elements of this process, ascertainable from our summary of the
    evidence  in  [15]  -  [35]  are  in  substance  uncontroversial.    We
    acknowledge that this assessment does not apply to some of  the  detail
    of the process.  But that does not  matter  for  the  purposes  of  the
    present exercise.

99) Thus, factually and in brief compass, the cornerstone of  the  exercise
    was a recognition by the Secretary of State that  all  members  of  the
    cohort  in  question,  consisting  of  some  2,000   children,   could,
    potentially, satisfy the responsible Member State criteria enshrined in
    Article 8  of  Dublin.   In  simple  terms  the  Secretary  of  State's
    officials then set about the task of endeavouring  to  determine  which
    members of the cohort qualified for  transfer  to  the  United  Kingdom
    under Article 8.  Simultaneously, they sought to identify those members
    of the  cohort  who  were  adjudged  to  satisfy  the  so-called  "Dubs
    amendment" criteria under section 67 of the Immigration  Act  2017.Thus
    there were two transfer  streams  and,  in  this  way,  three  possible
    outcomes for the members of the cohort:

      a) Transfer to the United Kingdom under the criteria of Article  8  of
         Dublin.


      b) Transfer to the United Kingdom under section 67.


      c) Non-transfer to the United Kingdom.


100) We now focus our attention on legal characterisation of  the  expedited
    process.  We take as our  starting  point  the  status  of  the  Dublin
    Regulation as a measure of supreme EU law. To  this  we  add  the  well
    established principle that the  Community  institutions  can  legislate
    only in areas within their  exclusive  competence.  Where  this  occurs
    intrusion, legislative or otherwise, by Member States is impermissible.
    They must refrain from trespassing on  EU  occupied  fields.  Next,  we
    consider Article 10 TEU which provides:


         "Member States shall take all appropriate measures, whether general
         or particular, to ensure fulfilment of the obligations arising  out
         of this treaty or resulting from acts taken by the institutions  of
         the Community.   They  shall  facilitate  the  achievement  of  the
         Community's tasks."



101) The above rules and principles of EU law belong to the  realm  of  core
    juristic dogma, traceable to the landmark decisions in Van Gend en Loos
    [1963] ECR 1 and Costa v Enel [1964] ECR 585.  The enduring  impact  of
    these decisions in the field of EU law requires no elaboration.  As the
    authors of European Union Law (Dashwood et al, 6th ed) state,  at  page
    237:

         "... Law created by or under the Treaty of Rome had [by Van Gend En
         Loos] in principle been emancipated into the legal order  of  every
         single Member State, becoming an independent source of  rights  and
         obligations ... ".


    And at page 238:


         "It would be incompatible with attaining the Community's  objective
         of creating a common market  with  common  rules  applying  in  all
         Member States to tolerate a situation  in  which  countries  decide
         which rules they want to respect and which rules they do  not;  the
         existence of the common market, and therefore the existence of  the
         Community  itself,  depends  upon  Treaty   rules   being   applied
         effectively and uniformly across the Member States and this implies
         the automatic and unconditional  supremacy  of  directly  effective
         Community law over conflicting provisions of national law."


    This latter  passage  resonates  strongly  in  the  present  litigation
    context. Viewed through this elementary prism,  the  expedited  process
    was a national measure to which two Members States subscribed and which
    attempted to devise and operate a Dublin Regulation  surrogate,  giving
    selective  and  partial  effect  to  the  dominant   EU   law   measure
    overshadowing and enveloping the whole of this exercise.


102) Logically, the next question focuses on the scope of operation  of  the
    Dublin Regulation.  This is proclaimed in its  long  title.   It  is  a
    measure "... establishing the criteria and mechanisms  for  determining
    the Member State responsible for examining an asylum application lodged
    in one of the Member States by a third-country national". The essential
    underpinnings of the successive Dublin measures include  the  principle
    of mutual confidence among EU Member States,  the  full  and  inclusive
    application of the Refugee Convention and Protocol  within  the  Common
    European Asylum System ("CEAS"), the need for a system  which  will  be
    practicable  and  efficacious,  the  imperative  of   inter-state   co-
    operation, the overarching importance of  expeditious  decision  making
    and the presumption (rebuttable) that Member States  will  comply  with
    their  international  obligations,   in   particular   observance   and
    protection of fundamental rights. It may be said that the principle  of
    mutual confidence, which dates from the original  Dublin  measure  some
    two decades ago, is of dominant force.
.
103) The Dublin Regulation is  properly  viewed  as  a  measure  of  EU  law
    whereby one of the fundamental aims of the Union, namely  the  creation
    of an area of freedom, security and justice, is extended to a  body  of
    persons beyond that of EU citizens.  Furthermore, Dublin is  linked  to
    the founding values of the Union: respect for human  dignity,  freedom,
    democracy, equality, human rights and the rule of law  (per  Article  2
    TEU).  Thus,  non-EU  citizens  who  successfully  claim  international
    protection via the Dublin Regulation access, for the purpose of  living
    their lives and forging their futures, both a geographical area  and  a
    system of governance regulated by these core values.  This  is  another
    dimension of the legal characterisation prism.


104) The words  "asylum  application"  and  "application  for  international
    protection" feature repeatedly in the  recitals  and  text  of  Dublin.
    Unsurprisingly, "asylum application" is given a very  broad  definition
    in EU law.  While there is no definition in the  definition  clause  of
    the Dublin Regulation, by virtue of  Article  2(b)  the  definition  of
    "application for international protection" in Article 2(h) of Directive
    2011/93/EU (the  recast  Procedures  Directive)  applies.  Taking  into
    account that the  United  Kingdom  Government  is  not  bound  by  this
    instrument, we refer to the  definition  in  its  predecessor,  Council
    Directive 2005/85/EC, which, in Article 2(b) provides:


         "'Application' or 'application for  asylum'  means  an  application
         made by a third country national or stateless person which  can  be
         understood as a request for international protection from a  Member
         State under the Geneva convention."

    By Article 6(1):


         "Member States may require that applications for asylum be made  in
         person and/or at a  designated place."


    The  remainder  of  Article  6  contains  certain  kindred   provisions
    envisaging the potential for national  legislation  of  the  procedural
    kind.


105) At this juncture we turn to assess the substance  and  reality  of  the
    activities and conduct of the Secretary of  State's  agents  throughout
    the period under scrutiny.  In short, they were involved in identifying
    third country children present in France who qualified for transfer  to
    the United Kingdom under Article 8 of the  Dublin  Regulation  for  the
    purpose of having their asylum applications  determined.   Pausing,  if
    this were the only  perspective  in  play  the  suggestion  that  these
    activities and the decisions which they generated were not  subject  to
    or governed by the Dublin Regulation  would  be  positively  startling.
    However, as our exposition  of  the  broader  EU  law  framework  above
    demonstrates there is a broader perspective of substantial  importance,
    going to the roots of EU law and the raison d'etre of the Community (to
    borrow the NS phraseology).

106) It was open to the Secretary of State to devise and operate a  decision
    making  framework  exceeding  the  respective  rights  and  obligations
    conferred by the Dublin Regulation. We consider that  EU  law  did  not
    preclude this course. This  is  illustrated  by  two  features  of  the
    expedited process in particular, both of which required the cooperation
    of the French authorities. The first was to (evidently)  dispense  with
    the formal requirement of registering an asylum claim in  France.   The
    second was to dispense with the requirement of France  directing  "take
    charge"  requests  to  the  United  Kingdom.   Each  of  these   Dublin
    Regulation relaxations was designed to  accelerate  the  backstop  time
    limits prescribed by Dublin.  All  of  this  was  laudable  and  pre  -
    eminently reasonable.


107) However, giving effect to our analysis above, EU  law  in  general  and
    the Dublin Regulation in particular  establishes  minimum  rules  which
    must be observed.  The duty of observance is unyielding. Member  States
    who exceed  the  requirements  of  such  rules  do  not  generally  act
    incompatibly with EU law. More precisely, neither of the aforementioned
    features of the expedited process was incompatible with the philosophy,
    rationale,  aims  and  objectives  of  Dublin:  in  particular   mutual
    confidence,   inter-state   cooperation,   expedition,   the   enhanced
    protection of minors and the promotion of family reunification.


108)  But we are unable  to  identify  any  rule  or  principle  of  EU  law
    legitimising the Secretary of State's exclusion of  key  provisions  of
    the Dublin Regulation and its  sister  instrument  from  the  expedited
    process - and none featured in  the  arguments  presented.  Substantial
    swathes of these measures  of  EU  law  were  simply  airbrushed.   The
    difficulty for the  Secretary  of  State  is  that  this  superior  and
    dominant system of law does not operate in this way.  In all situations
    to which it applies, it  is  omnipresent  and  unremitting.   Thus  the
    expedited process was, in EU law terms, constitutionally impermissible.
    It was an act of unlawful Member State disobedience on the part of  the
    United Kingdom.

109)  If, contrary to our view expressed in [94] above, it is  necessary  to
    answer the "Dublin  Regulation  question"  by  reference  also  to  the
    evidence the conclusion that the Secretary of State  was  acting  under
    the regime of the Dublin Regulation would be  nigh  irresistible.   The
    evidence  in  our  judgement  admits  of  no  other  conclusion.    The
    imprimatur  of  the  Dublin  Regulation  is  stamped  clearly  in   the
    evidentiary materials and pleading considered in  [15]  -  [35]  above.
    Furthermore, the Secretary  of  State's  attempted  retreat  from  this
    position is both belated and unconvincing. This analysis is  of  course
    entirely consistent with the unequivocal policy  of  the  Secretary  of
    State, witnessed repeatedly in litigation in this Tribunal,  to  insist
    upon full adherence to the  Dublin  Regulation  in  all  but  the  most
    exceptional cases.


110) A further tool of analysis is provided by the  concept  of  derogation.
    In substance, the Secretary of State was,  throughout  the  period  and
    activities in question, derogating  from  substantial  swathes  of  the
    Dublin Regulation and its sister measure.  As a  matter  of  principle,
    derogation by a Member State from any rule or regime of EU law  is,  in
    general, lawful only where this is authorised by the some other EU  law
    provision, whether within or outwith the discrete code, or  regime,  in
    question. Neither  the  Dublin  Regulation  nor  any  other  identified
    provision of EU law permitted the Secretary of State to  derogate  from
    any of the rules enshrined in the  Dublin  Regulation  and  its  sister
    measure in the context under scrutiny. No argument to the contrary  was
    presented.

111) It was submitted by Ms Walker that the Secretary of  State's  expedited
    process and, in particular, the  exclusion  of  Article  17  of  Dublin
    therefrom was a time  limited  expedient  which  did  not  prevent  any
    unsuccessful  child  from  making  and  pursuing  an  Article  17  case
    thereafter.   We consider that this argument provides no answer to  the
    EU Law analysis and  conclusions  above.   Fundamentally  it  fails  to
    identify any legal rule or principle  permitting  wholesale  derogation
    from Dublin and its sister measure and the effective suspension of  the
    bulk of their combined provisions. The humanitarian considerations  and
    the desirability of speed, central planks  in  both  the  Secretary  of
    State's evidence and counsel's argument, do not provide the  answer  or
    legal justification.  Nor does one find  engagement  with  these  legal
    issues in the detailed grounds of  defence.  Ultimately,  the  solitary
    argument advanced was  that  by  reason  of  the  absence  of  formally
    registered asylum claims and formal take charge requests,  both  waived
    by France, Dublin III did not apply  to  the  expedited  process.  This
    argument fails for want of a legitimising legal rule or principle.


112) Based on our assessment of both the Dublin Regulation and  the  broader
    rules and principles of EU law above, duly buttressed by the  decisions
    in CK, K and ZT (Syria) at [85], we conclude that the Dublin Regulation
    and its sister measure applied to the expedited process.


113)  While a matter of less magnitude given  the  central  thrust  of  AM's
    challenge and the context generally, we make  the  same  conclusion  in
    respect of the review mechanism, irrespective of whether this is to  be
    considered as part and parcel of the expedited process  or  a  separate
    procedure. While mindful of Ms  Walker's  submission  that  the  review
    process was free standing of the expedited process, it was not  argued,
    correctly in our estimation, that the review process was somehow exempt
    from the full panoply of legal standards  and  requirements  identified
    above viz those to be  found  in  the  Dublin  Regulation,  its  sister
    implementing measure, Article 8 ECHR and the common law. The  issue  of
    principle examined in [119] below was not canvassed  in  this  context:
    the Secretary of State,  inconsistently  and  incongruously,  does  not
    plead urgency and its offshoots in this context. The  proposition  that
    the review process had to be both substantively and procedurally lawful
    seems to us unassailable and the contrary was not argued.


114) Our conclusion on the correct legal characterisation of  the  Secretary
    of  State's  expedited  process  has  the  following  consequences   in
    particular:


    (i)    By failing to give full effect to the Dublin Regulation and  its
         sister measure, the Secretary of State acted unlawfully.


    (ii)   AM was  in  consequence  unlawfully  deprived  of  a  series  of
         procedural safeguards and protections.


    (iii)  AM's subsequent quest for admission to the United Kingdom  under
         Article 8 ECHR cannot be defeated on the  basis  that  he  did  not
         first attempt to secure the same outcome under the formal processes
         of the Dublin regime.


    It follows that the Applicant has established the foundations  for  the
    grant of a remedy in these proceedings.

 115) As we shall explain infra, if we are wrong in our conclusion  relating
      to the Dublin Regulation, the decision that the Secretary of State was
      acting in a procedurally  irregular  and  unfair  manner  and,  hence,
      unlawfully and the assessment that AM thereby  has  a  basis  for  the
      grant of a remedy is made by either or both of two  alternative  legal
      routes, namely the procedural dimension of  Article  8  ECHR  and  the
      common law. Thus if this aspect of the decision of the Court of Appeal
      in  ZT  (Syria)  is  to  be  construed  narrowly,  confined   to   the
      straightjacket of the Dublin Regulation regime, AM can have resort  to
      either or both of two alternative routes to the grant of a remedy.




      Procedural Fairness: Issues and Conclusions


116) Having regard to the presentation of the  Secretary  of  State's  case,
    there are few contentious issues to be  resolved.  While  many  of  the
    procedural deficiencies  advanced  on  behalf  of  the  Applicant  were
    uncontentious, two in particular were  controversial.   The  first  was
    whether the children were adequately  informed  about  the  process  in
    which they were participating, in particular the  criteria  which  they
    would have to satisfy  in  order  to  secure  transfer  to  the  United
    Kingdom.  The second was whether, in the unsuccessful cases, the effect
    of the expedited process was to  delay  and  prejudice  the  children's
    prospects  of  being  transferred  to  the  United  Kingdom   for   the
    determination of their asylum claims.


117) The first of these contentious  issues  would  have  been  more  easily
    resolved if it had  been  addressed  adequately  in  the  Secretary  of
    State's evidence. However, we have found the evidential contribution to
    this issue sparse and unsatisfactory.  While, in argument,  substantial
    reliance was placed on the  witness  statement  of  Mr  Gallagher,  his
    averments are confined to just 10 of the 73 reception centres in  which
    circa 2,000 children were interviewed.  There is no  evidence  relating
    to what occurred in any of the  others.   Furthermore,  Mr  Gallagher's
    witness  statement  does  not  spell  out  the  communication  of   the
    qualifying criteria to the children concerned. Nor does it exhibit  any
    relevant leaflet.  This is particularly significant in the  context  of
    both the issue which he was addressing and the failure on the  part  of
    the Secretary of State to address this issue  satisfactorily  elsewhere
    in the evidence. There is clear  and  uncompromising  evidence  from  a
    director  in  one  of  the  other  the  reception  centres  (M.  Rigau)
    supporting the complaint of a failure to provide  adequate  information
    relating to the process and in particular the qualifying  criteria:  he
    asserts  unequivocally  that  the  latter  were  "unknown".  The   same
    complaint was made by staff in the centre in  which  AM  was  residing.
    None of this evidence is  countered,  adequately  or  at  all,  in  the
    Secretary of State's response and we are disposed to accept it.




118)  The Secretary of  State's  evidence  on  the  discrete  issue  of  the
    distribution  of  an  information   leaflet   is   unsatisfactory   and
    demonstrably incomplete. This is not remedied by  the  superficial  and
    unparticularised references in the witness statement of  M.  Sodini  in
    the Citizens' UK case. These contain nothing of sufficient  clarity  or
    substance to dissuade us from our assessment above. Thus we  accept  Ms
    Kilroy's submission on this discrete  issue.  Her  submissions  on  the
    second of these discrete  issues  are  equally  cogent:  the  expedited
    process, realistically, placed all members of the cohort in limbo while
    all, understandably and inevitably, focussed exclusively on  the  "only
    show in town". No detailed forensic analysis is necessary in  order  to
    reach this obvious conclusion.  It  belongs  to  the  real  world  then
    prevailing. Logically and realistically the same analysis must apply to
    the second phase of the overall exercise namely the review process.

119) We turn to examine the broader question of principle raised.  This  can
    be related to  the  following  passages  in  the  detailed  grounds  of
    defence:


         "The expedited process was an exceptional short-term measure ...  a
         reasonable and rational measure for the SSHD to adopt ...


         The expedited process,  involving  an  assessment  of  the  claimed
         family link, was designed to enable the  expedited  processing  and
         transfer of children who would otherwise be eligible to have  their
         asylum claims transferred to the UK under Dublin III, Article 8  in
         the exceptional circumstances pertaining to the  Camp  closure  and
         the dispersal of the children  to  73  [reception  centres]  across
         France."


    It was not disputed by  the  Secretary  of  State  that  the  expedited
    process  had  to  be  procedurally  fair.  Furthermore,  many  of   the
    procedural deficiencies asserted on behalf of this Applicant  (and  the
    others) were not challenged.  We add parenthetically  that  they  could
    not conceivably have been challenged, the  conduct  of  the  interviews
    being a paradigm illustration.  The  argument  advanced  was  that  the
    procedure was fair in the  context  to  which  it  belonged.  The  twin
    pillars of this argument  were  inter-related,  namely  the  prevailing
    humanitarian challenge and the need for quick decision making.


 120) In every case the court or tribunal,  conducting  its  ex  post  facto
      review, is the ultimate arbiter  of  the  requirements  of  procedural
      fairness in the decision making context under scrutiny. It  forms  the
      "intuitive judgement", to borrow the memorable words of  Lord  Mustill
      in Doody.

 121) Both of these factors were, of course, prominent in the factual matrix
      prevailing and cannot be gainsaid. However, the context had  a  series
      of other significant factors.  Arguably, the stand out factor was that
      the expedited process involved the making of life changing and destiny
      shaping decisions for the children involved. For most, perhaps all, of
      the Applicants in this group of seven cases  transfer  to  the  United
      Kingdom represented their only realistic hope of  family  life.  There
      were  other  highly  significant  contextual  factors:  age,   flight,
      physical and psychological trauma  (both  recent  and  more  distant),
      separation,  isolation,   suspicion,   detachment   and   uncertainty.
      Vulnerabilities abounded. To these facts and considerations  one  adds
      the factors of unfamiliar environment, recent sudden  upheaval  in  an
      alien  country,  acute  uncertainty,  mental  fragility,  stress   and
      anxiety.   One  must  also  add  to  this  list  the  real   risk   of
      communication difficulties and linguistic misunderstandings caused  or
      exacerbated by one or more of the foregoing  factors,  notwithstanding
      the deployment of interpreters. This  latter  factor  emerges  clearly
      from the evidence assembled  in  all  of  these  cases.  Finally,  the
      interviews were a crucial element of the decision making process. Onto
      the above we graft our analysis of  the  operation  of  the  expedited
      process in [36] - [45] above.


122)  The expedited process in  the  group  of  five  cases  to  which  this
    challenge  belongs  was  beset   with   procedural   deficiencies   and
    shortcomings and egregious unfairness.  These contaminants  are  either
    not contested or incontestable.  The  conduct  of  the  two  interviews
    alone warrants a conclusion of procedural unfairness.  The  materiality
    of these procedural frailties is beyond plausible argument.   The  acid
    question is whether these procedural irregularities can be  excused  on
    the basis of the humanitarian challenge and the  need  for  expedition.
    These are the two factors on which the Secretary of State relies. These
    must  be  recognised  as  important  considerations  and   we   readily
    acknowledge the major challenge the two  Governments  concerned  faced.
    However, we consider that the exercise of balancing them with  all  the
    other factors summarised below results in a resounding negative  answer
    to the question posed.  Fundamentally, there was far too much at  stake
    for these isolated and vulnerable children to warrant any other answer.

123)  Applying the second of the separate ZT (Syria) tests,  the  conclusion
    that the process in which the Applicant participated was  "not  capable
    of responding adequately to [his]  needs"  and  failed  to  provide  an
    "effective way of proceeding" is irresistible.  The  reasons  for  this
    fundamentally are that the process  devised  and  operated  lacked  the
    structures, depth, penetration and flexibility necessary to ensure  the
    indispensable elements  of  elementary  procedural  fairness,  adequate
    enquiry, sufficient evidence gathering, conscientious consideration and
    proper  fact  finding.  The  expedited  process  involved  mechanistic,
    arbitrary and rushed decision making. Depth and quality were sacrificed
    on the altar of haste and resource saving. Fundamentally, there was far
    too much at stake for these isolated  and  vulnerable  to  justify  the
    corners cut and shortcuts taken. These conclusions  apply  irrespective
    of the correctness of our legal characterisation of the  process  as  a
    Dublin one.

124) It is unnecessary for the Tribunal to embark upon an  erudite  analysis
    of the respects (if any)  in  which  the   requirements  of  procedural
    fairness and regularity  imposed  by  the  three  legal  regimes  under
    consideration - the Dublin Regulation and its sister measure in tandem,
    Article 8 ECHR and the common law  -  differed  in  the  context  under
    scrutiny. While the common law, through its adoption and development of
    the principles of natural justice and their modern incarnation, is  the
    champion of procedural fairness, it is unlikely  that  an  exercise  of
    this kind would throw up any significant distinctions. However, we have
    not received detailed argument on this issue and,  furthermore,  it  is
    not necessary to determine it. It suffices to  note  that  Ms  Walker's
    submissions did not, in  substance,  seek  to  establish  any  material
    distinctions differentiating the three regimes.


125) This brings us to the alternative conclusion that if we  are  wrong  to
    decide that the Dublin Regulation and its  sister  instrument  governed
    the expedited process, the centrepiece of  the  Applicants'  challenge,
    namely the complaint of procedural unfairness and irregularity, is made
    good via either or both of the other legal routes identified. We accept
    Ms Kilroy's submission to this effect.

126) We would add the absence of any evidence that AM's quest for  a  remedy
    is complicated by the fact of any uncompleted administrative  or  legal
    process in France.  Furthermore, unlike the other  four  related  cases
    the Secretary of State did not make a fresh decision in AM's  case.  As
    is clear from [5] of this Tribunal's earlier ruling [Appendix 2 hereto]
    any lingering suggestion that Ms Farman's litigation  specific  witness
    statement constitutes a fresh decision, much less a properly made  one,
    is unsustainable.


 127) At this juncture it is convenient to note Ms Walker's submission  that
      there were two separate exercises namely the expedited process and the
      review process.  While we do not readily discern  any  dividing  line,
      luminous or otherwise, from  the  Secretary  of  State's  evidence  in
      particular, we consider this a matter of limited moment mainly for the
      reason that the proposition that the Secretary of State was obliged to
      act lawfully, both substantively and  procedurally,  at  all  material
      times is of the most elementary kind.


 128) In this context we address one specific issue. While we are  alert  to
      the faint suggestion  in  the  Secretary  of  State's  case  that  any
      children who successfully achieved transfer/admission  in  consequence
      of the review exercise did so only via a formal "take charge"  request
      from France and the acceptance  thereof  by  the  United  Kingdom,  we
      cannot avoid the following observation.  The  absence  of  documentary
      evidence bearing directly on this issue is startling.  Any  reasonable
      court or tribunal would expect such evidence to include, as a minimum,
      copies of take charge requests and take charge  acceptances,  suitably
      redacted if considered appropriate. Furthermore, in the  span  of  the
      five judicial review challenges  belonging  to  this  discrete  group,
      there is not a shred of evidence of  this  kind.   Nor  is  there  any
      evidence  of  review  decision  making  or,  most  basically,   review
      decisions.  The  principles  considered  in  [91]  -  92)  above  have
      particular resonance in this context.



      The Outworkings of the Above Conclusions


129) To summarise, AM can lay claim  to  a  series  of  procedural,  or  due
    process, protections and safeguards enshrined in three  separate  legal
    regimes: EU law, the Human Rights Act 1998 and the common  law.   Based
    on the analysis, findings and conclusions set forth above he  has  been
    denied  the  safeguards  identified.   The  decision   making   process
    resulting in the Secretary of State's original and continued refusal to
    admit him to the United Kingdom for the purpose of family reunification
    with AO was, for the reasons explained, irredeemably flawed.   It  has,
    without legal justification,  breached  AM's  procedural  rights.  This
    applies irrespective of whether  the  Dublin  Regulation  governed  the
    expedited process. AM's challenge must succeed in consequence.

      Remedy


130) By the route charted above we reach the important question  of  remedy.
    In ZT (Syria) this Tribunal concluded that a breach of the  substantive
    dimension of Article 8 ECHR had been  established,  giving  rise  to  a
    remedy entitling the Applicants to admission  to  the  United  Kingdom.
    The Court of Appeal  did  not  disagree  with  the  remedy  granted  in
    principle.


131) In the present litigation context we are bound  to  take  into  account
    that the "Calais expedited process" is done and dusted.   The  Tribunal
    could, in theory, formulate a remedy requiring the Secretary of State's
    officials to seek the permission of  the  French  authorities  for  the
    purpose of travelling to the reception centre in  France  where  AM  is
    accommodated and conducting a procedurally fair and regular inquisition
    followed by all  appropriate  subsequent  steps,  which  would  include
    thorough enquiries of OA and his  family  circumstances.  However  this
    would entail delay and uncertainty, coupled with  the  imponderable  of
    the necessary co-operation of the French authorities.  It would also be
    cumbersome and expensive.


132) We take into account simultaneously the desirability  of  any  remedial
    order not interfering with appropriate further best interests and child
    safeguarding checks and enquiries.  Given the inadequacies  of  enquiry
    and procedural defects which we have diagnosed,  the  outcome  of  such
    steps  could,  in  principle,  frustrate   the   family   reunification
    aspirations of AM and OA.  While we attribute substantial weight to the
    evidence of the two protagonists, which we consider plausible, we  must
    recognise that this  will  not  necessarily  be  determinative  of  the
    ultimate outcome for both.


133)   The  considerable  delays  to  date  must  further  be  weighed.   In
    addition, each segment of continuing delay is plainly inimical  to  the
    Applicant's best  interests.   We  also  take  into  account  that  the
    immediate practical effect of AM's admission to the United Kingdom will
    be his absorption within the statutory care system,  without  prejudice
    to a final decision.  Thus while on the one hand it would  not  achieve
    immediately his goal of family reunification, on the other  this  would
    protect his  best  interests  while  final  checks  and  enquiries  are
    completed. Furthermore, this step will enhance the prospects of a fresh
    decision making process which will  respect  his  right  to  procedural
    fairness  and  other  due  process  safeguards  and   guarantees   and,
    simultaneously, facilitate the Secretary of State's corresponding legal
    obligation. AM's swift transfer to the United Kingdom would also  be  a
    positive step from the perspective of his mental health.


134) Thus there is a delicate and intensely fact  sensitive  balance  to  be
    struck.  Having   considered   the   submissions   of   both   parties'
    representatives, we have concluded, in the exercise of our  discretion,
    that the appropriate remedy is the following:


    (i)    An Order quashing the  Secretary  of  State's  initial  decision
         whereby the transfer of AM from France to  the  United  Kingdom  in
         November/December 2016 was refused.


    (ii)   A declaration that the aforementioned decision and the Secretary
         of State's continuing refusal to admit AM to the United Kingdom are
         unlawful being in breach of the Dublin Regulation  and  its  sister
         measure and/or the procedural dimension of Article  8  ECHR  and/or
         the common law requirements of procedural fairness.


    (iii)  An Order requiring the Secretary of State:


   a) to forthwith make all necessary and  immediate  arrangements  for  the
      transfer  of  AM  from  France  to  the  United  Kingdom,  using  best
      endeavours at all times and not later than midnight on  22  May  2017;
      and
   b) to begin forthwith a fresh decision making process in AM's case, to be
      completed by the same deadline.


    (iv)   There shall be liberty to apply.


Costs

135)  The Secretary of State shall  pay  the  Applicants'  reasonable  legal
    costs and outlays which, in default of agreement, will be  the  subject
    of detailed assessment.


136) There shall be detailed assessment of the Applicants'  publicly  funded
    costs.


    Permission To appeal


 137) This will be addressed separately.



138)  Both  the  Applicant  and  OA  have  the  continuing  and   indefinite
    protection of anonymity.





       Signed:
                    The Honourable Mr Justice McCloskey
                    President of the Upper Tribunal
                    Immigration and Asylum Chamber


       Dated:     19 May 2017











































                                 APPENDIX 1







                                  Upper Tribunal
                          Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                               Judicial Review



                     Notice of Decision/Order/Directions






                  The Queen on the application of AO and AM
                                                                  Applicants
                                      v

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent




            Before the Honourable Mr Justice McCloskey, President


Having heard Mr  P  Reynolds,  of  counsel,  instructed  on  behalf  of  the
Respondent, the moving party, by the Government Legal Department  and  Mr  M
Fordham QC and Miss C Kilroy and Miss M Knorr, both of  counsel,  instructed
by Bhatt Murphy Solicitors on behalf of the Applicants


                       DECISION ON STAY

McCLOSKEY J

Introduction

 1) This decision determines the applications made by the  Respondent,  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department (the "Secretary of  State"),
    for a stay of both sets of proceedings.  The relief pursued  is  framed
    in the following terms:


         "An order that this claim be stayed along with  all  other  related
         proceedings behind the Administrative Court case of Citizens  UK  v
         SSHD (CO/5255/2016) as the issues in dispute are the same ...."




    The following order is sought in the alternative:


         "...  as an alternative that the Tribunal transfer this  claim  and
         all other claims raising the same issue to the Administrative Court
         so that all related claims can be case managed  appropriately  with
         reference to the overriding objective."


    It may be observed that this alternative form of  relief  rather  faded
    away in both the oral and written submissions of Mr Reynolds.

 2) The background to the  lodging  of  these  stay  applications  included
    certain inter-partes correspondence which was brought to the  attention
    of the Tribunal.  This was prompted by the awareness of  the  Secretary
    of State's legal representatives  that  the  initiation  of  these  two
    claims in the Tribunal,  together  with  others,  was  imminent.   This
    correspondence became the initial vehicle for the Secretary of  State's
    contention that all proceedings of a  certain  kind  commenced  in  the
    Upper Tribunal should be stayed pending determination of  the  Citizens
    UK v SSHD (hereinafter "CUK") litigation in the Administrative Court.


 3) By letter dated 17th March 2017, written under my direction, the  Upper
    Tribunal wrote to the lawyers concerned to the following effect:


      a)  UTIAC  is  a  creature  of  statute  and  exercises  no   inherent
         jurisdiction.  Its powers are contained in a combination of primary
         and secondary legislation.  UTIAC is unaware of any power to  order
         a stay in respect of any claim which has not been  issued  in  this
         Chamber.


      b) The parties' representatives were invited to identify the two cases
         most suitable for the determination of  stay  applications  by  the
         Secretary of State, "suitability" in  this  context  embodying  the
         various ingredients in the overriding objective.


      c) A timetable was directed.




    These twin applications have materialised in consequence.


Citizens UK  v  SSHD


 4) This is a judicial review claim brought by a registered charity in  the
    Administrative  Court.   Procedurally,  these  proceedings   have   the
    following landmarks:


      a) The claim was initiated on 14 October 2016.


      b) On 28th October 2016 permission to apply for  judicial  review  was
         refused by a paper decision.


      c) The Claimant's  grounds were amended on 18 January 2017.


      d) On 28 February 2017 an oral permission  hearing  was  held,  giving
         rise to an order granting permission to apply for  judicial  review
         and directing that an expedited  substantive  hearing  be  held  on
         23/24 May 2017.


 5) The favour and essence of this judicial review claim is captured in the
    following passages extracted from the amended grounds:


         "1.      This anxious, urgent and compelling case arises out of the
             British/French partnership in dealing with asylum seekers at a
             notorious refugee settlement in Calais known as  the  'Jungle'
             ....


         2. The ....   destruction of the jungle camp and dispersal  of  its
             inhabitants  ....  have  very  serious  implications  for  the
             welfare and safety of particularly vulnerable  asylum  seeking
             children, many of  them  with  rights  of  speedy  facilitated
             passage to the United Kingdom ....


         4. ....  A large number of children wishing to come to  the  United
             Kingdom (the 'dispersed children') were  eventually  dispersed
             on coaches to centres (CAOMIEs) across France with the promise
             that their requests to enter the United Kingdom  either  under
             Section 67 of the Immigration Act ....  or under  ...   Dublin
             III would be considered by the Defendant's officials ....


         The expedited process which was implemented  by  the  Defendant  in
         accordance with that promise has drawn to a close and yet  hundreds
         of dispersed children remain in the  CAOMIEs,  many  of  whom  have
         outstanding  family  reunification  claims  which  have  not   been
         properly considered by the Defendant."




 6) Continuing, the grounds draw particular attention  to  a  joint  United
    Kingdom/French policy, namely  "Managing  Migratory  Flows  in  Calais:
    joint declaration on UK/French co-operation", dated 20 August 2016 (the
    "Joint Declaration").  The Claimant's case is that arising out  of  the
    Joint Declaration  the Secretary of State is subject  to  a  series  of
    legal obligations ("the Obligations"), namely:


      i) To identify all children in the camp, in  particular  unaccompanied
         children and to assess their eligibility for transfer to the United
         Kingdom;


     ii) To provide the children with full and  accurate  information  about
         the  Dublin  III  regime,  including   the   family   reunification
         provisions and the associated available arrangements.


    iii) To ensure that the children have safe accommodation  allowing  easy
         access to the arrangements.


     iv) To ensure that safe accommodation  does  not  remove  the  children
         further away  from  the  support  network  of  those  agencies  and
         representatives who have been facilitating family reunification.




         The grounds canvass also the duty of investigation and the duty  of
         providing adequate and intelligible reasons for decisions.   It  is
         contended that these duties fall to be calibrated and discharged in
         the context of Dublin III, the EU Charter  of  Fundamental  Rights,
         the Human Rights Act 1998 and the Convention on the Rights  of  the
         Child 1989.  There  is  also  a  discernible  orthodox  public  law
         overlay.




 7) CUK contends that there is powerful evidence demonstrating a failure by
    the Secretary of State to discharge the aforementioned duties.  In this
    context  I highlight  certain further passages in the grounds:


         "25.     The Claimant's   position is that any act of disregard and
             default of the Obligations would not only be  unlawful  but  a
             matter of grave concern.  Judicial review is  a  last  resort.
             But it serves to secure accountability for relevant  acts  and
             omissions of the Defendant having had the Obligations squarely
             brought to her attention ...


             These obligations, which  arise  in  the  context  of  a  long
             standing  failure by the Defendant and the French  authorities
             to identify and protect children  in  the  Jungle  in  Calais,
             provide them with information about their rights and set up  a
             functioning system to allow them to access  rights  to  family
             reunification in the United Kingdom


              ...


             The dispersed children  now  face  a  further  disruption  and
             dispersal from CAOMIEs due to close their doors, in some cases
             before the expedited process has concluded and  in  all  cases
             before the dispersed children have completed Dublin III family
             reunification procedures.  Having  established  the  expedited
             process on French soil with the support  and  co-operation  of
             the  French  authorities,  the  Defendant  has  an  additional
             obligation arising out of  common  law  principles  concerning
             access to justice .....   and  rights  to  procedure  fairness
             under Article 8 ECHR .....     to take all steps open  to  her
             to ensure that further dispersal from  the  CAOMIEs  does  not
             interrupt access to that process  and  in  particular  to  any
             remedies available to dispersed children  in  respect  of  the
             operation of that process.  Access to legal remedies  includes
             access to NGOs and other representatives who may  be  able  to
             facilitate the provision of UK based legal advice to dispersed
             children and their families ...."




    CUK is, therefore, challenging a series of acts and  omissions  on  the
    part of the Secretary of State.  This is reflected in  the  formulation
    of the "decision to be judicially reviewed" in the Claim Form:


         "The failure and refusal to recognise and  comply  with  the  legal
         obligations identified in the  letter  before  claim  ....   (which
         required a response by 11 October 2016)".




    Finally, I draw attention to the remedies  claimed:  these  are  purely
    declaratory, seeking confirmation  that  the  Secretary  of  State  was
    subject to the "Obligations"  and  that  there  has  been  an  unlawful
    failure to discharge same.



These Two Claims


 8) These two claims, together with five others, were lodged in  the  Upper
    Tribunal during week commencing 13 March 2017.  Factually they  are  of
    course quite different.  However, in substance they share  much  common
    ground.  The Applicant AO challenges the following:


         "Failure to transfer  [him]  to  the  UK  in  accordance  with  his
         substantive Dublin  III  rights  and  his  Article  8  rights  ....
         refusal/failure to act since  16  December  2016  and  ongoing  and
         including decision of 09 March 2017."




    The relief pursued is:


      i) A mandatory order requiring the Secretary of  State  to  admit  the
         Applicant to the UK forthwith.


     ii) An Order quashing the Secretary of State's decision  to  refuse  to
         transfer the Applicant to the UK under  her  expedited  Dublin  III
         process.


    iii) A declaration that the Secretary of State has failed in her  duties
         to  properly  investigate  the  Applicants'  claim  and  has  acted
         unlawfully.




    Both the focus of the legal challenge and the remedies pursued are  the
    same in the two cases.  Furthermore, both Applicants have  applied  for
    anonymity, interim relief and expedition.




 9) Based on what is pleaded, the Applicant AO was an  unaccompanied  minor
    during the greater part of the events forming  the  background  to  his
    claim.  His 18th birthday occurred on 08 March 2017. He is of  Eritrean
    nationality, fled his country of origin some two years ago and has been
    seeking to join his brother, AMO, who has refugee status and resides in
    the United Kingdom.  His case is  described  as  "very  compelling  and
    extremely urgent".   Evidentially, it is supported by, inter alia,  the
    report of a  consultant  psychiatrist  which  diagnoses  post-traumatic
    stress disorder, contains the assessment that  the  Applicant  is  "...
    close to the limit of what  he  could  bear  in  terms  of  flashbacks,
    anxiety, feeling unsafe and sleep deprivation" and advises that:


           ".... further delay due to legal processes is therefore  not  at
           all in [the Applicant's] best interests and may lead to  further
           re-traumatisation and irreversible damage to his mental health."


    Within this expert testimony one  also  finds  the  phrases  "extremely
    distressing" and "detrimentally affecting his mental state".




10) It is averred that this Applicant was identified as  a  child  eligible
    for consideration under the Secretary of State's expedited  Dublin  III
    Process, was interviewed accordingly and provided  evidence  about  his
    brother in the United Kingdom, culminating in the notification  to  him
    from French officials that, in common with the other children remaining
    in the CAOMI in question, the Secretary of State had  refused  transfer
    to the United Kingdom, without  adequate  particulars,  elaboration  or
    reasons.  This appears to have been followed by an unsuccessful  review
    application.




  11) Most recently, a response to the pre-action letter dated 09 March 2017
      indicates the following: the Applicant was assessed in  the  expedited
      Dublin  process;  he  was  not  accepted  initially  because   further
      investigations regard his brother were necessary; this issue  has  now
      been resolved; the Secretary of State has asked the French authorities
      to submit a take charge request under  Dublin  III;  and  any  further
      evidence supporting the Applicant's  asserted  relationship  with  his
      brother should be provided to the French authorities.  The most recent
      evidence indicates that a stalemate continues.


  12) The case of the other Applicant, AM, has certain similarities.  AM  is
      an unaccompanied and orphaned national of Eritrea, aged 16 years,  who
      aspires to join his uncle, a recognised refugee living in  the  United
      Kingdom.  He has been diagnosed as suffering from a  major  depressive
      disorder and post-traumatic stress disorder symptoms.  The  expert  in
      his case advises that he -

         "...  is severely struggling with the delay in being reunited  with
         his uncle ....


         He  is  suffering  from  psychiatric  disorder,  which   is   being
         exacerbated by his current situation where  he  feels  subjectively
         unsafe ...


         I do no believe that  psychiatric  or  psychological  treatment  in
         France will improve his state, in fact I would not  recommend  this
         at all as it would be likely to destabilise him further.  He is  at
         risk of becoming increasingly suicidal if prompt reunification does
         no occur as his mental state will deteriorate further."

    In common with the other Applicant, AM was admitted  to  the  expedited
    Dublin Regulation process, he was  escorted  from  the  now  demolished
    "jungle" in Calais to a "CAOMIE" and was interviewed,  following  which
    he was informed that he had been refused transfer to the United Kingdom
    on  the  ground  of  "family  link  not  accepted".   This  phrase  is,
    evidently, a pro-forma or ("boilerplate") belonging  to  a  spreadsheet
    mechanism.




The Stay Applications


13) The kernel of these stay applications is ascertainable from the witness
    statement of the GLD senior lawyer grounding these  applications.  This
    contains the following material averments:


         "4.      The SSHD considers  it  would  be  appropriate  for  these
             claims to be stayed  behind the  Citizen's  UK  Claim  as  the
             issues raised in both these claims  (and  indeed  the  various
             other related claims issued in  the  Upper  Tribunal)  are  in
             essence identical ....




         15.      ....  As  the  Tribunal  is  aware,  seven    [individual]
             claims have been issued ....


         21.      While  ....    the  Citizens  UK  claim  is  a  systematic
             [systemic?] challenge  and  these  proceedings  in  the  Upper
             Tribunal and related matters are all  brought  in  respect  of
             individuals .....


            all of the points they raise in this claim are also in issue  in
             the Citizens UK Claim ....




         24.      I acknowledge and appreciate that the  Applicant  in  this
             claim and indeed all the other claims will point to  the  fact
             that the Applicants are unaccompanied  asylum  seeking  minors
             who wish to be reunited with their family  after  a  difficult
             and traumatic journey to Europe.  I also  recognise  that  the
             Applicants have  adduced  psychiatric  evidence  as  to  their
             condition.  The SSHD does appreciate that it is important that
             the Applicants' position  is  resolved  quickly,  however  she
             would suggest that this factor while important cannot outweigh
             other equally as pressing consideration such as the  need  for
             appropriate case management.  Further while the  legal  claims
             may be stayed this does not mean of course that the Applicants
             cannot proceed with claiming asylum in France and pressing for
             a take charge request to be made.


         25.      Further these individuals have recourse to  assistance  in
             France if they are willing to accept it  including  presumably
             to medical care .....   AM is being supported  by  the  French
             authorities .... and he  is  being  assisted  to  register  an
             asylum claim in France .....


         26.      In the case of AO, he has elected not to claim  asylum  in
             France which is why he may become homeless.  The SSHD has made
             clear that she will very likely accept a take  charge  request
             ....


         The Applicants contend that the children put through the  expedited
         process were selected precisely because  they  were  considered  to
         require expedition.  This is not correct .....   They were selected
         simply because they had been formerly resident in  Calais  and  the
         camp had now closed and  the  SSHD  was  trying  to  process  large
         numbers of children quickly."




      Continuing,  the  deponent  advances  "two  important  reasons   which
      militate very heavily in favour of a stay" namely:


        a) the need for judicial certainty; and


        b) the conservation of limited judicial resources.



      It is further suggested that a stay  is  "the  most  sensible  way  of
      proceeding".  Finally, the witness statement ends with  the  following
      plea:


         "36.     The SSHD is complying with  the  procedural  timetable  in
             both these claims.  She is due to file  her  detailed  grounds
             and any evidence by 12 April 2017 in the Help Refugees  claim.
             In addition she faces these claims in the  Tribunal  and  also
             will likely be commencing appeal proceedings in the  Court  of
             Appeal in the  RSM  case  with  which  the  Tribunal  is  very
             familiar".


         39.      The SSHD recognises that for these claims to  be  properly
             considered the Tribunal requires her  to  fully  particularise
             her defence and to submit evidence  substantiating  her  case.
             It will however simply be impossible for the SSHD  to  provide
             the Tribunal with this level of assistance in  this  case  and
             other related Upper Tribunal  matters  at  the  same  time  as
             defending the Help Refugees and Citizens UK claims."




14) The submissions of Mr Reynolds on behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State
    developed the main passages in the solicitor's witness statement.  They
    had, inevitably, a heavy focus  on  the  CUK  litigation  and  entailed
    drawing to my attention the nine "case studies" which  formed  part  of
    the evidence in those proceedings.  One of these (No. 9) relates to the
    Applicant AM.  The thrust of Mr Reynolds' argument was that  these  two
    cases "raise fundamentally the same points of law" as CUK "in the  same
    material factual  circumstances".   Mr  Reynolds  also  questioned  the
    asserted urgency of these cases.  Finally, in response  to  a  question
    from the Bench, he confirmed that in the CUK litigation  the  Secretary
    of State is on schedule to comply with  the  requirement  to  file  all
    evidence by 04 April 2017  and,  further,  that  this  is  expected  to
    include witness statements from the officials who  interacted  directly
    with some of the "case study" children.


The Applicants' Riposte

15) The interlocking elements of the arguments canvassed on behalf  of  the
    Applicants included the following in particular:   the  submissions  on
    behalf of the Secretary of State acknowledged that  the  CUK  challenge
    will not delve into the facts of individual cases;  whereas  CUK  is  a
    systemic challenge, these two challenges are individualised;  there  is
    nothing unprecedented about parallel  human  rights  cases  proceeding;
    reliance on the ZS decision provides no reliable guide  to  the  proper
    determination of these applications; and, ultimately, the challenges of
    these two Applicants will be determined by  reference  to  the  various
    touchstones  identified  in  ZAT  and   Others,   in   particular   the
    implications  of  the  Applicants  having  pursued  unsuccessfully  the
    expedited process in France, the consequential inapplicability  of  the
    "exceptional circumstances" test, the  factor  of  intense  review  and
    reliance on many of the proportionality factors endorsed in [37] of the
    Court of Appeal's judgment.  Mr Fordham QC also reminded  the  Tribunal
    of the decisions in MK at [26] and [36] (duty of enquiry) and  RSM,  at
    [43]  (the  interaction  between  Articles  8  and  17  of  the  Dublin
    Regulation).

16) I have also considered in full the informal "pleading" on behalf of the
    Applicants which was compiled and provided to the Tribunal  during  the
    pre-litigation phase outlined in [2] -  [3]  above.   This  emphasises,
    inter alia, the Tribunal's duty under Section 6 of the Human Rights Act
    1998, the need to treat the best interests of the younger Applicant  as
    a primary consideration, the impact of Article 8 ECHR  on  the  factual
    frameworks advanced and the compelling  necessity  for  swift  judicial
    adjudication.  In this context Mr Fordham drew attention to  the  irony
    that a stay order precipitated by a generic claim brought by a  charity
    seeking clarification  of  the  law  in  this  sphere  could  stimulate
    substantial delays in determining  these  two  claims  and  the  others
    belonging to the cohort.


17)  Finally, my attention was drawn to United Nations General Comment  No,
    14 (2013), paragraphs 25-29 especially,  which  contain  the  following
    salient passage:

         "The courts must provide for the best interests of the child to  be
         considered in all such  situations  and  decisions,  whether  of  a
         procedural or substantive nature, and must  demonstrate  that  they
         have effectively done so."




    In this context I was invited to consider the interesting  analysis  in
    "Using International Law In Domestic Courts (Fatima), paragraph 11.12:


         "The exercise  of  discretion  by  courts  is  characterised  by  a
         consistent recognition of, and respect for,  upholding  the  United
         Kingdom's treaty obligations, including those that are incorporated
         as a matter of domestic law.  This  is  seen  particularly  clearly
         where judicial discretion  is  exercised  regarding  the  grant  or
         maintenance of injunctions and interim injunctions."


The Governing Principles

18) I begin with two propositions which I consider uncontroversial.  First,
    the decision whether to stay proceedings in any forum and,  if  so,  on
    what terms involves the exercise of a relatively broad - though not  of
    course unfettered - judicial discretion. Second,  the   most  important
    factors influencing the exercise of this  discretion  will  normally  -
    though not invariably  -  be  found  in  the  multi-faceted  overriding
    objective.

19) The issue of  jurisdiction  is  uncomplicated.  Section  49(3)  of  the
    Supreme Court Act 1981 provides:


         "Nothing in   this Act shall affect  the  power  of  the  Court  of
         Appeal or the High Court to stay any proceedings before  it,  where
         it thinks fit to do  so,  either  of  its  own  motion  or  on  the
         application of  any  person,  whether  or  not    a  party  to  the
         proceedings."


         [My emphasis.]






    By section 25(1)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007:


         "In relation to the matters mentioned in (2),  the  Upper  Tribunal
         ....  has ....  the same powers, rights, privileges  and  authority
         as the High Court .


         The matters are:


          a)     The attendance and examination of witnesses,


          b)     The production and inspection of documents and


          c)     All other  matters  incidental  to  the  Upper  Tribunal's
             functions."




    Section 25(3) provides:


         "Subsection (1) shall not be taken -


          a) To limit any power to make Tribunal procedure rules,


          b) To be limited by anything in Tribunal  procedure  rules  other
             than an express limitation."




    Rule 5 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, under the
    rubric "Case Management Powers", provides:


         "Subject to the provisions of the 2007 Act and any other enactment,
         the Upper Tribunal may regular its own procedure."




    By Rule 5(2):


         "The Upper Tribunal may give a direction in relation to the conduct
         or disposal of proceedings  at  any  time,  including  a  direction
         amending, suspending or setting aside an earlier direction."




    This is followed by Rule 5(3):


         "In particular, and  without  restricting  the  general  powers  in
         paragraphs (1) and (2), the Upper Tribunal may .....


         (j)      Stay .....  proceedings ....."


    [My emphasis]


    By the route charted above, the power of the Upper Tribunal to order  a
    stay of proceedings is not in doubt.




  20)  Section  49(3)  of  the  Supreme  Court  Act  1981  is   an   express
      acknowledgement of the judge made nature of both  the  power  to  stay
      proceedings and the principles  to  be  applied.   It  has  been  long
      recognised that the power of the High Court  to  stay  proceedings  is
      inherent in nature: Re Wickham [1887] 35 CH D 272 at 280,  per  Cotton
      LJ.  In an earlier era, a stay had the Draconian  effect  of  bringing
      proceedings to a conclusion, unless it was of the conditional variety.
       This has, however, been superseded  by  contemporary  practice:  Rofa
      Sport  Management  v  DHL  International  UK  [1989]  2  All  ER  743.
      Accordingly, in modern litigation a stay does  not  have  the  drastic
      consequences of  its  19th  and  early  20th  century  ancestors.  The
      conditional stay sought in these proceedings is  not  to  be  confused
      with one of its ancestors namely the permanent stay.




21)  The  issue  of  staying  proceedings  was  the  subject  of   detailed
    consideration by the Court of Appeal in AB (Sudan) v Secretary of State
    for the Home Department [2013]  EWCA  Civ  921.   The  Court,  firstly,
    contrasted a stay of proceedings  with  a  stay  of  enforcement  of  a
    judicial decision or order.  It emphasised that stay issue involve case
    management decisions.  It added, at [25]:

         "Such decisions will rarely be challenged and even more  rarely  be
         reversed on appeal."


    The appeal in question sought to challenge  a  decision  of  the  Vice-
    President of UTIAC to refuse to grant  a  stay  of  a  judicial  review
    application pending the possible appeal to  the  Supreme  Court  in  EM
    (Eritrea).  The Court, at [26] cited with approval the Vice-President's
    formulation of the governing principles:

         "27.     A stay on proceedings may be associated with the grant  of
             interim  relief,  but  it   is   essentially   different.   In
             determining whether proceedings should be stayed, the concerns
             of the court  itself  have  to  be  taken  into  the  balance.
             Decisions as to listing, and decisions as to which  cases  are
             to be heard at any particular time are matters for  the  court
             itself and no party to a claim can demand  that  it  be  heard
             before or after any other claim. The court will want  to  deal
             with claims before it as expeditiously as is  consistent  with
             justice. But, on the other hand, it is  unlikely  to  want  to
             waste time and other valuable resources on  an  exercise  that
             may well be pointless if conducted too  soon.  If,  therefore,
             the court is shown that there will be, or there is  likely  to
             be, some event in the foreseeable  future  that  may  have  an
             impact on the way a claim is decided, it may  decide  to  stay
             proceedings in the claim until after that  event.  It  may  be
             more inclined to grant a stay if there  is  agreement  between
             the parties. It may not need to grant a stay if the pattern of
             work shows that the matter will not come on for  trial  before
             the event in question. The starting point  must,  however,  be
             that a claimant seeks expeditious determination of  his  claim
             and that delay will be ordered only if good reason is shown.


         28.      In cases where a request for  a  stay  on  proceedings  is
             coupled, expressly or by necessary implication, with a request
             for interim relief, the court will need to take   into account
             the factors relevant to both types of decision, and  may  need
             to take into account a third: that by securing interim  relief
             and a stay, the applicant may be asking the court to  use  its
             powers to give him, for as long as he can secure it, a benefit
             that he may not obtain at the trial."

    As these passages make clear, the overriding objective looms  large  in
    the determination of every stay application.

22) The Court added the following observations of  specified  relevance  in
    immigration cases:


         "28.     Immigration law has a tendency to develop rapidly,  indeed
             sometimes  at  bewildering  speed.  The   constant   flow   of
             developments arises from the industry  of  legislators,  rule-
             makers, judges and practitioners. Not only  does  the  law  in
             this area change fast. So also  do  the  political,  military,
             social and economic circumstances in  the  numerous  countries
             from which asylum seekers or other migrants may come.


         29.      Both the tribunals and the courts have to  keep pace  with
             these constant changes.  When  a  new  appellate  decision  is
             awaited it is not unusual for parties in pending similar cases
             to seek a stay of their proceedings.


         30.      Sometimes it is obviously necessary to grant such a  stay,
             because  the  anticipated  appellate  decision  will  have   a
             critical impact upon the proceedings in hand. There  is  also,
             however, a need for realism. In the world of immigration    it
             is a fact of life that the law  which  the  judge  applies  is
             liable to change in the future, quite  possibly  in  the  near
             future.  This  cannot  usually  be  a   reason   for   staying
             proceedings. I started dealing  with  immigration  cases  some
             fourteen years ago. I cannot remember any occasion during that
             period when important decisions on  one  or  more  aspects  of
             immigration law were not eagerly awaited  from  the  appellate
             courts.


         31.      As Pill LJ observed in R (Bahta) v SSHD  [2011]  EWCA  Civ
             895 at [70], what the Court of Appeal says is the law, is  the
             law, unless and until overruled by  a  superior  court  or  by
             Parliament.  Likewise  country   guidance   decisions   should
             generally be applied unless and until  they  are  reversed  or
             superseded.


         32 In my view the power to stay immigration cases pending a future
             appellate decision in other litigation is a power which must
             be exercised cautiously and only when, in the interests of
             justice, it is necessary to do so. It may be necessary to
             grant a stay if the impending appellate decision is likely to
             have a critical impact on the current litigation. If courts or
             tribunals exercise their power to stay cases too freely, the
             immigration system (which is already


23) I distil from AB (Sudan) the following principles in particular:

      a)  Every  claimant  is  entitled  to  expect   expeditious   judicial
         adjudication.  The strength of this expectation will be  calibrated
         according to the individual litigation equation.

      b) The judicially imposed delay flowing from  a  stay  order  requires
         good reason.

      c) Judicial choreography whereby  one  case  is  frozen  awaiting  the
         outcome of another is justified for example where the assessment is
         that the latter will have a critical impact upon the former.

      d) Great caution is to  be  exercised  where  a  stay  application  is
         founded on the contention that the outcome  of  another  case  will
         significantly influence the outcome of the instant case.

24) To these principles I would add the following:  a stay application will
    require especially compelling justification in a  case  qualifying  for
    urgent  judicial  decision.  The  cases  of   unaccompanied,   isolated
    teenagers marooned in a foreign land suffering from major psychological
    trauma and seeking, via litigation, the swiftest reunion possible  with
    a separated family member will always, in principle,  have  a  powerful
    claim to judicial prioritisation.

Conclusions

25) Ultimately, the determination of these stay  applications  requires  an
    exercise  of  balancing  many  of  the  ingredients  enshrined  in  the
    overriding objective: the avoidance of excessive cost, the  unnecessary
    expenditure of finite public resources, the right of every litigant  to
    expeditious justice, the minimising of litigation delays, managing  the
    interface  and  overlap  between  two   judicial   organisations,   the
    allocation of limited judicial resources and, broadly, the  convenience
    of all concerned.  I must also weigh carefully the ages,  vulnerability
    and plight of the two litigants.  Furthermore, alertness to  a  broader
    panorama is essential since the determination of these two applications
    will clearly be influential in, though not automatically  determinative
    of, the progress and case management of the five other   live new cases
    which  have  been   initiated   in   tandem   with   these.   Fairness,
    reasonableness and proportionality loom large in an  exercise  of  this
    kind.


26) I consider the impact of the  range  of  considerations  which  I  have
    identified to be the following:


      a) These are two individual rights cases.  This is the feature which
         distinguishes them most clearly from the CUK Challenge.


      b) In the CUK Challenge, the Secretary of State's evidential  response
         will probably not be directed to individual cases except insofar as
         relevant and as required by the  duty  of  candour.   Much  of  the
         Secretary of State's evidence is likely to be  generic  in  nature.
         The facts of the nine "case studies" may prove to be uncontentious.


      c) All such generic  evidence  will  form  a  necessary  part  of  the
         Secretary of State's evidence in the seven  Upper  Tribunal  cases.
         The exercise of  preparing  such  evidence  will  not  have  to  be
         repeated.  It will, rather, be a single,  self-contained  exercise.
         Furthermore,  it  is  reasonably  predictable  that  much  of  this
         evidence will take the form of extant documents: official  reports,
         memoranda,   email   communications,   letters    and,    possibly,
         communications of a diplomatic character. Whatever form  it  takes,
         this exercise is now at a highly advanced stage.


      d) The additional  evidence  required  in  the  Secretary  of  State's
         response to the individual  claims  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  will,
         predictably, be case specific and fact sensitive.  It is likely  to
         require witness statements from Government  officials  with  direct
         involvement in and knowledge of each of the individual  cases.   It
         is represented on behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State  that  some
         evidence of this  kind  is  expected  to  materialise  in  the  CUK
         Challenge. This will be harmonious with good husbandry in  resource
         expenditure.


      e) My evaluative assessment is that a  reasonable  proportion  of  the
         ground work required for the preparation and  presentation  of  the
         Secretary of State's evidence in these two  cases  will  have  been
         completed in the context of the CUK litigation by  04  April  2017.
         No aspect of this investment of human and financial resources  will
         fall to be repeated.  There will be no duplication.




27) Next I turn my  attention  to  the  timetable  pertaining  to  the  CUK
    Challenge.  This is contained in the Order of the Administrative  Court
    dated 04 March 2017.  It makes provision  for  a  series  of  bilateral
    steps to be undertaken and completed during a period  of  approximately
    ten weeks, all of this on an expedited basis. I take into account  that
    this Order represents  the  outcome  of  the  considered  judgment  and
    planning  of  both  parties'  legal  representatives  and   the   Judge
    concerned. It has been composed and finalised on  the  basis  that  all
    of the time limits are achievable.

28) I accept that it will be  more  convenient,  less  expensive  and  more
    comfortable for the Secretary of State and her  lawyers  if  these  two
    cases were to be stayed in the manner proposed.   However,  this  would
    impose a limitation impacting seriously on the two Applicants' right of
    access to a court, in circumstances where they have a compelling  claim
    to speedy judicial adjudication.  If they are entitled to a  remedy  it
    must  be  swift,  practical  and  effective.  Furthermore,  given   the
    distinction between the  Administrative  Court  proceedings  and  these
    cases  I  reject  the  argument  of   substantial   judicial   overlap.
    Ultimately, I consider the aforementioned  rights of the Applicants  to
    be determinative.  The factors advanced on behalf of the  Secretary  of
    State do not, singly or in combination, suffice to displace,  limit  or
    delay the full enjoyment of these rights in the fact sensitive  context
    of these two cases.


Order and Directions

29) I refuse the Secretary of State's applications accordingly.

30) The Secretary of State's written representations on the  issue  of  the
    further timetabling and management of these two cases will be  provided
    by close of business on 29 March 2017.

31) The Applicants' riposte will be provided by close  of  business  on  30
    March 2017.

32) The parties' representatives will file an agreed draft case  management
    order, or their competing case management orders, by 12  midday  on  31
    March 2017. The Upper Tribunal will aspire  to,  but  cannot  guarantee
    absolutely, appropriate further directions/ by late 31 March 2017 - and
    in any event by 08.00 on 03 April 2017.

33) I shall continue to hold in reserve for as  long   as  is  possible  04
    April  2017  to  deal  with  interim   release   and/or   "rolled   up"
    applications.

34) I recognise the possibility that a slightly later date for the  hearing
    of any such application may be required in fairness to the Secretary of
    State.  Beyond this I do not venture.  The parties' representatives are
    aware of the practical outworkings of this.

35) There shall be liberty to apply.

36) Costs are reserved.

                                                                       [pic]


                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                                                        Date:  29 March 2017



Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------
 Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

A party may appeal against such a decision to  the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was sent (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3).
                                 APPENDIX 2







                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                               Judicial Review



                            Ruling and Directions





      The Queen on the application of AO, AM, SASA, MHA, YS, KIA and SS

                                                                  Applicants
                                      v

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent




               The Honourable Mr Justice McCloskey, President




Having considered all documents lodged by the parties and having  heard  the
parties' respective representatives, Ms C Kilroy and Ms M Knorr  (together),
of counsel, instructed  by  Bhatt  Murphy  Solicitors  and  Mr  R  Toal,  of
counsel, Islington Law Solicitors on behalf  of  the  Applicants  and  Ms  A
Walker, of counsel, instructed by the Government Legal Department on  behalf
of the Respondent, at a hearing at Field House, London  on 11 April 2017.


INTERIM RELIEF ORDER AND DIRECTIONS: ALL CASES EXCEPT AO AND YS


   1) These are applications for interim relief at this embryonic  stage  of
      the proceedings. Expedition  is  also  sought.  Each  of  these  cases
      belongs to a group which may be  loosely  described  as  'post-Calais'
      cases.  They all involve unaccompanied  teenagers  each  of  whom  has
      pressing needs and circumstances.  It is necessary to bear in mind the
      remedy which is sought in each of these cases namely a mandatory order
      requiring the Respondent to admit each of the Applicants to the United
      Kingdom forthwith.  That is the primary relief sought in  every  case.
      The applications for interim relief also seek the same remedy.  Of the
      group  of  seven  cases  two  have  been  the  subject  of   voluntary
      reconsideration by the Secretary of State namely the cases of  AO  and
      YS. As a result of this reconsideration the  Secretary  of  State  has
      reached a diametrically different decision  and  is  now  prepared  to
      admit these Applicants to the United Kingdom.

   2) I accept the submission of Ms Kilroy that if the Secretary of  State's
      earlier application to stay  these  cases  had  been  successful  then
      realistically these two cases would not  have  been  reconsidered  and
      this outcome would not have eventuated with the result that all  seven
      Applicants would remain in precisely the  same  position.  As  it  is,
      according to my arithmetic there are now five Applicants who  continue
      to litigate in this Tribunal.  In  the  case  of  AO  I  have  already
      conducted a preliminary hearing ad have made an order  of  an  interim
      species

   3) One of the features of all of these cases is that the  decisions  made
      on behalf of the Secretary of State in the somewhat mysterious process
      which was devised during late 2016 were  made  on  the  basis  of  the
      evidence then available.  That was around December 2016 and in all  of
      these five cases the Secretary of State concluded  that  admission  to
      the United Kingdom under a process which remains somewhat  obscure  in
      many  respects  would  be   refused.    Proceedings   were   initiated
      subsequently by these seven unsuccessful applicants.

   4)  This Tribunal's  first  detailed  consideration  of  these  cases  is
      recorded in its decision dated 29  March  2017  in  AO  and  AM  which
      refused the Secretary of State's applications for a stay.  Since  that
      date these proceedings have evolved permission to apply  for  judicial
      review has been granted in one case only ( the case of AM) and in that
      case the Tribunal has adjourned the interim relief application.

   5) All of the cases have one feature in common namely that fresh evidence
      has been generated.  Broadly the fresh evidence takes the  form  of  a
      series of witness statements and expert reports.  None of  this  fresh
      evidence has been considered by the Secretary of State other  than  in
      the somewhat cursory fashion disclosed in  witness  statements  of  Ms
      Farman on behalf of the Secretary of State.  It is  common  case  that
      those witness statements do not purport to contain or amount to a  new
      decision, a reviewed decision or a  reconsidered  decision.   This  is
      based on the position adopted by the Secretary of State which is  that
      the Secretary of State will not voluntarily make  fresh  decisions  in
      any of these cases.  This position is justified  on the basis  of  the
      contention that all of the new evidence  belongs  exclusively  to  the
      framework of the Dublin Regulation process and, accordingly, can  only
      be deployed within that process. Thus, it is argued, all new  evidence
      belongs solely to a Dublin Regulation application for  asylum  to  the
      French authorities.

   6) This brings me to the current state of play in  all  of  these  extant
      cases.  The Upper Tribunal finds itself in an unsatisfactory position.
       It  is  the  first  recipient  of  all  of  the  new  evidence.   The
      undesirability of  that  state  of  affairs  was  emphasised  in  this
      Tribunal's decision in  HN  (Afghanistan)  that  was  the  subject  of
      consideration on appeal by the Court  of  Appeal  which  expressed  no
      disapproval of anything said in this Tribunal's decision.  In short in
      any public law context  there  is  a  strong  general  rule  that  all
      evidence bearing on the relief sought by the litigant should first  be
      considered by a public authority decision maker  rather  than  in  the
      context of legal proceedings. This may be viewed as an aspect  of  the
      exhaustion of alternative remedies principle.  It  also  reflects  the
      supervisory character of judicial review.

   7) This brings me to an issue of case management.  The Tribunal  has  two
      basic choices.  One is to determine the interim relief applications on
      the basis of all the available evidence.  If that option  were  to  be
      exercised the Tribunal would reject the  Respondent's  objection  that
      the newly produced evidence should not be admitted.  There are several
      reasons for this.  They  include,  inexhaustively,  the  human  rights
      dimension,  the  children's  rights  dimension  and  the  public   law
      character of the proceedings.  They  also  include  the  consideration
      that the new evidence has been produced at a stage when permission has
      not yet been determined.  Furthermore, it has not involved any  breach
      of any procedural rule, any practice direction  or  any  special  case
      management direction formulated to date.

   8) The second main option involves not adjudicating upon the  application
      for interim relief as formulated but adjourning that  application  for
      the purpose of the Secretary   of State, who is the  primary  decision
      maker, considering all of  the  new  evidence  and  making  decisions.
      Without determining this particular issue finally at this stage I  add
      the following with caution.  The correct analysis may well be that any
      decisions arising out of the exercise mooted  would  not  be  properly
      characterised a review or reconsideration  of  the  earlier  decisions
      made in each of these cases around December 2016 within the  ambit  of
      the somewhat obscure process which  was  devised  between  the  United
      Kingdom  and  French  governments.  Accordingly  it    would   in   my
      provisional view  be  wrong  to  apply  the  prism  of  those  earlier
      decisions and that earlier process to all of the new evidence that  is
      now available.

   9) The following analysis arises irresistibly  from  the  nature  of  the
      challenge  that  is  brought  in  each  of  these  cases.   These  are
      individual rights  challenges.   They  are  founded  fundamentally  on
      Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.  They base themselves on the
      principles which were espoused by this Tribunal in ZAT And Others  and
      approved by the Court of Appeal in ZAT and developed.  The decision in
      ZAT makes clear that in certain circumstances Article 8  provides  the
      appropriate legal vehicle for securing admission to the United Kingdom
      and it does so outwith  and  apart  from  the  regime  of  the  Dublin
      Regulation.  Whether any of these Applicants  ultimately  succeeds  in
      making good their claim in this fashion does not arise at this  stage.



  10) Once one applies that analysis the unsustainability of  the  Secretary
      of State's position becomes clear.  The decision which  the  Secretary
      of State is obliged to make must be viewed through that lens.   It  is
      based on duty.  First of all it is the ordinary public law duty  of  a
      public authority invested with relevant  decision  making  powers  and
      discretions to make a decision when required to do so.  Second, it  is
      based on section 6 of the Human Rights Act, which applies directly  to
      the Secretary of State  in  this  Article  8  context.   It  would  be
      manifestly incompatible with the Convention rights of  the  Applicants
      if the Secretary of State were simply to refuse to assess  the  merits
      of a human rights claim at all.

  11) In light of the position which the Secretary of State has adopted I am
      proposing to take  the  less  desirable  of  two  courses.   The  more
      desirable course would be for the Secretary of  State  to  acknowledge
      for the reasons which I have just articulated that there is a duty  of
      decision making of the  kind  which  I  have  outlined.  However  such
      acknowledgment is not forthcoming.  As I am satisfied that such a duty
      exists in law and given the intrinsic desirability of the Secretary of
      State's considered assessment of and decision in respect  of  all  the
      new material preceding  this  Tribunal's  evaluation  of  the  primary
      interim relief sought by  the  Applicants  and,  in  due  course,  the
      substantive remedies pursued I propose by way  of  interim  relief  to
      order the Secretary of State to  consider  all  of  the  new  evidence
      together with such written representations as the Applicants may  wish
      to make and to make decisions  accordingly.   This  will  be  entirely
      without prejudice to the  determination  of  any  of  the  substantive
      issues which arise at  any  stage  of  these  proceedings  namely  the
      interim relief stage, the permission stage or the substantive stage.

  12) Proceeding  in  this  way  means  with  reference  once  again  to  HN
      (Afghanistan) that the correct  sequence  is  re-established.   It  so
      happens in HN (Afghanistan)  that  there  was  a  dimension  involving
      paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules.  But that makes no  difference
      at all to the analysis which I have espoused.  Furthermore, the  right
      to make fresh representations in the context  of  any  immigration  or
      asylum or human rights decision is not based on paragraph 353  of  the
      Rules.  It is a common law,  or  public  law,  right.   Paragraph  353
      empowers the Secretary of State to treat the  further  representations
      in a certain way but it does not speak to the right to make  them  and
      accordingly the paragraph 353 dimension of HN (Afghanistan)  does  not
      provide a point of distinction with the present cases.

  13) The duty which I have identified will involve the following.  It  will
      involve conscientious consideration of all of the new evidence and any
      accompanying   representations.  It will require an open mind  on  the
      part of the decision maker.  It  will have to take  into  account  the
      plight of the Applicants and the need  for  conscientious  expedition.
      It will not involve some kind of  preordained  outcome  based  on  the
      December 2016 decisions: first, for the reasons that I have given  and
      second, because the landscape of each of the cases has developed  very
      significantly since then.  The decision maker will  have  to  confront
      what the Court of Appeal decided in ZAT and  what  this  Tribunal  has
      decided in a series of cases which have not been either challenged  in
      or reversed by the Court of Appeal namely the  potential  potency  and
      reach of Article 8 of the Human Rights  Convention  in  this  kind  of
      context.  These are all factors which must be brought  to  account  in
      the decision making which will follow.

  14) The  final  question  is  that  of  time  limit.   In  both  the  stay
      application and the ruling in  AO  and  AM  last  week  I  have  drawn
      attention to the expedition which has been accorded  to  these  cases.
      That expedition will have to be  applied  also  by  the  Secretary  of
      State.  I am ordering the Secretary of State to make decisions in  all
      of the cases not later than 19 April 2017.  If that time limit  cannot
      be achieved in one or more of the cases so be it.   The  Tribunal  may
      then well have to grasp the nettle of proceeding in  the  considerably
      less satisfactory fashion which I have identified but this option must
      first be exhausted to the  extent  possible.   The  Tribunal  will  be
      available with or without decisions from the  Secretary  of  State  to
      reconvene at extremely short notice for the purpose, if necessary,  of
      focusing on the primary interim relief sought by  the  Applicants  and
      determining those applications as they are currently framed.  While  I
      grant interim relief in these terms today I do not  determine  finally
      the interim relief applications.  They are, rather, adjourned on those
      terms.

  15) Amendment of the Applicants' challenges may also foreseeably arise.

  16) I reserve costs and grant liberty to apply.












       Signed:
                    The Honourable Mr Justice McCloskey
                    President of the Upper Tribunal
                    Immigration and Asylum Chamber


       Dated:     12 April 2017








____________________________________________________________________________
           ____


Sent  to  the  Applicant,  Respondent  and  any  interested  party   /   the
Applicant's, Respondent's and any interested party's solicitors on (date):
Home Office Ref:

