
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

AB (preserved FtT findings; Wisniewski principles) Iraq [2020] UKUT 00268
(IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House (Court 5) via Skype for  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Business                                      |                              |
|On 16 July 2020                               |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                                     AB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr H Blaxland,  QC  and  Mr  R  Toal,  instructed  by
                  Wilson Solicitors LLP
For the respondent:    Mr R Dunlop QC, instructed by the Government Legal
                  Department


Preserving findings of fact
(1) Whether and, if so, when the Upper Tribunal should preserve findings  of
fact in a decision of the First-tier Tribunal that has been  set  aside  has
been considered by the Higher Courts in Sarkar v Secretary of State for  the
Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 195, TA (Sri Lanka)  v  Secretary  of  State
for the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ 260 and MS and  YZ  v  Secretary  of
State for the Home Department [2017] CSIH 41.

(2) What this case law demonstrates is that, whilst it  is  relatively  easy
to articulate the principle that the findings of fact  made  by  the  First-
tier Tribunal should be preserved, so far as those findings  have  not  been
"undermined" or "infected" by any "error or errors  of  law",  there  is  no
hard-edged answer to what this means in practice, in any particular case.

(3) At one end of the spectrum lies the protection and human rights  appeal,
where a fact-finding failure by the First-tier Tribunal in respect  of  risk
of serious harm on return to an  individual's  country  of  nationality  may
have nothing to do with  the  Tribunal's  fact-finding  in  respect  of  the
individual's Article 8 ECHR private and family life in  the  United  Kingdom
(or vice versa).  By contrast, a legal error in the  task  of  assessing  an
individual's overall credibility  is,  in  general,  likely  to  infect  the
conclusions as to credibility reached by the First-tier Tribunal.

(4) The judgment of Lord Carnwath in HMRC v Pendragon  plc  [2015]  UKSC  37
emphasises both the difficulty,  in  certain  circumstances,  of  drawing  a
bright line around what a finding of fact actually is, and the  position  of
the Upper Tribunal, as an expert body,  in  determining  the  scope  of  its
functions under section 12 of the  Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007 in re-making a decision, following a set aside.

The "Wisniewski" Principles
(5) In Wisniewski v Central Manchester Health Authority [1998]  LI  Rep  Med
223, Brooke LJ set out a number of principles on the issue  of  when  it  is
appropriate in the civil context to draw adverse inferences from  a  party's
absence or silence. These  principles  are  not  to  be  confused  with  the
situation where a party who bears the  legal  burden  of  proving  something
adduces sufficient evidence, so as to place  an  evidential  burden  on  the
other party. The invocation of the principles depends  upon  there  being  a
prima facie case; but what this means will depend on the nature of the  case
the party in question has to meet.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

A.  THE ISSUE

 1. The issue in this case is whether the appellant, a doctor and a citizen
    of Iraq, is entitled to be recognised as a refugee for the purposes  of
    the 1951 Convention.  It is common ground that the appellant  would  be
    so entitled but for the operation of Article 1F(a), which  provides  as
    follows:-

         "F.  The provisions of this  Convention  shall  not  apply  to  any
             person with respect to whom  there  are  serious  reasons  for
             considering that:

               a) he has committed a crime against peace, a war crime, or  a
                  crime against humanity, as defined  in  the  international
                  instruments drawn up to make provision in respect of  such
                  crimes ..."

B.  THE APPELLANT'S ACTIVITIES AND THE UK'S REACTIONS TO THEM

 2. It is common ground that, between 1992 and 1994, the  appellant  worked
    at the headquarters of Saddam Hussein's military  intelligence  agency,
    Al-Istikhbarat, in Iraq.  The appellant was performing  his  compulsory
    military service there, as a doctor.  He worked  at  a  clinic  in  the
    headquarters, treating both military intelligence  officers  and  their
    prisoners.  On occasion, the appellant was also taken to  visit  camps,
    where he treated prisoners.  The appellant did not seek to leave the Al-
    Istikhbarat HQ during the term of his military service.

 3. The appellant left Iraq in December 1995, travelling to Libya, where he
    worked as a doctor for some four  years.   He  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom in January  2000,  having  been  given  entry  clearance  as  a
    visitor.  His leave was subsequently extended.  In February  2007,  the
    appellant claimed asylum.

 4. In  January  2011,  the  respondent's  War  Crimes  Unit  informed  the
    appellant that he had been excluded from the Convention  by  reason  of
    article 1F(a).

 5. In March 2013, proceedings were initiated before a panel of the Medical
    Practitioner Tribunal ("MPT").  The  MPT  found  that  the  appellant's
    fitness to practise as a doctor was impaired by reason of  having  been
    an accessory to torture in Iraq.  The appellant was suspended from such
    practice for one year.

 6. In March 2014, the MPT found that the appellant's fitness  to  practise
    was no longer impaired and his practicing certificate  was  reinstated.
    In August of that year, the appellant again applied for leave to remain
    on the basis of asylum.  That application was refused by the respondent
    in April 2014, with the respondent again concluding that the  appellant
    was excluded from the Refugee Convention by reason  of  Article  1F(a).
    The specific basis given for the respondent's decision was  that  there
    were "serious reasons for considering that you  have  committed  crimes
    against humanity".

 7. The respondent, however, granted the appellant limited leave to remain,
    which led to the appellant being able to appeal against the April  2014
    refusal under section 83 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
    2002, as it then stood.

C.  THE APPEAL PROCEEDINGS

 8. The appeal  proceedings  have  been  protracted.   This  is  the  third
    occasion on which the appellant's case has been considered by the Upper
    Tribunal.

 9. In April 2015, the First-tier Tribunal found  that  the  appellant  was
    complicit in  a  crime  against  humanity  (namely,  the  torturing  of
    prisoners by Al-Istikhbarat), but that the appellant had a  defence  of
    duress.  The First-tier Tribunal, accordingly, allowed the  appellant's
    appeal.

10. The respondent appealed to the Upper Tribunal against that decision and
    in April 2016, the Upper Tribunal allowed the respondent's  appeal  and
    remitted the matter to the First-tier Tribunal.

11. A further hearing took place before a  differently  constituted  First-
    tier Tribunal ("the 2017 First-tier Tribunal") in February 2017.   That
    Tribunal found there were serious  reasons  for  considering  that  the
    appellant had committed crimes against humanity, in that, although  the
    appellant had not tortured anyone, he had provided medical aid  to  the
    perpetrators of torture and  had  treated  prisoners  in  circumstances
    where, if he not done so, the torture of  those  prisoners  might  have
    ceased.  Once again, however, the First-tier Tribunal  found  that  the
    appellant had a defence of duress and so allowed his appeal.

12. The respondent appealed to the Upper Tribunal  against  that  decision.
    Meanwhile, the appellant brought a cross-appeal.  In December 2017, the
    Upper Tribunal allowed the respondent's appeal because the  defence  of
    duress was not available to the appellant.   The  Upper  Tribunal  also
    found that the appellant's cross-appeal failed.

13. The appellant appealed to the Court of  Appeal.   He  did  so  on  four
    grounds.  The judgment of the Court was given by Hamblen LJ (as he then
    was): MAB (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2019]
    EWCA Civ 1253.

14. The Court dismissed the appellant's challenge on grounds 1 to  3.   The
    appellant was, however,  successful  on  ground  4,  which  Hamblen  LJ
    articulated as follows:-

         "(4) Ground 4: The facts found by the 2017 FTT were not capable  of
             establishing A's liability for crimes  against  humanity:  (i)
             they did not  show  that  he  had  aided,  abetted,  otherwise
             assisted in or contributed to crimes against humanity; or (ii)
             in any event, A's contribution was not  of  a  kind  that  the
             drafters  of  the  applicable  instruments  of   international
             criminal law intended should be criminalised."

15. At paragraph 53 of his judgment, Hamblen LJ noted the evidence that was
    before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   This  comprised  the   appellant's
    screening interview of 2 February 2007;  a  statement  of  22  February
    2007; a full asylum interview of 23 March 2007; a further interview  of
    31 March 2010; a statement of 20 July  2013;  and  a  statement  of  15
    January 2017 prepared for the appeal hearing.  The appellant gave  oral
    evidence at that hearing.

16. At paragraph 54, Hamblen LJ recorded the  self-direction  of  the  2017
    First-tier Tribunal:-

         "54. In relation to the law,  the  FTT  referred  to  [R  (JS  (Sri
             Lanka)) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2010]
             UKSC 15] and [Al-Sirri v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
             Department [2012] UKSC 54].  The FTT  directed  themselves  in
             accordance with the principles set out in the headnote  in  Al
             Sirri (Asylum - Exclusion - Article  1F(c))  [2016]  UKUT  448
             (IAC), namely:


                  "In every case involving  exclusion  of  protection  under
                  Article 1F of the Refugee Convention, the onus of proof is
                  on the Secretary of State, a detailed  and  individualised
                  examination of the facts is required, there must be  clear
                  and credible evidence of the offending  conduct,  and  the
                  overall evaluative judgment involves the application of  a
                  standard higher than suspicion or belief.""

17. Beginning at paragraph 56, Hamblen LJ described the main findings  made
    by the 2017 First-tier Tribunal.  The panel  had  serious  reasons  for
    considering that, as part of  his  duties,  the  appellant  encountered
    prisoners whom he suspected had  been  tortured.   There  were  serious
    reasons for considering the  appellant  was  aware  that  some  of  the
    prisoners  he  treated  had  suffered  torture.   He  was   a   medical
    professional and would have the specialist  knowledge  needed  to  make
    such an assessment.  The appellant had admitted he knew it  was  likely
    that some of the prisoners he treated  would  suffer  further  torture.
    The appellant consistently claimed he never  tortured  anyone  and  the
    respondent had produced  no  evidence  to  the  contrary.   There  were
    serious reasons  for  considering  the  appellant  saw  the  bodies  of
    prisoners who had been hanged.

18. At paragraph 57, Hamblen LJ recorded  the  2017  First-tier  Tribunal's
    findings on the issue of  complicity.   The  Tribunal  found  that  the
    appellant worked for Al-Istikhbarat and knew that it committed torture.
     The appellant suspected some of the prisoners he  treated  would  face
    further torture.

19. The 2017 First-tier Tribunal  found  that  there  were,  as  a  result,
    serious reasons for considering the appellant was involved in  torture.
    He assisted those who committed such torture, by providing medical  aid
    to them.  He also provided medical aid to victims in the knowledge that
    in the ordinary course of events some  of  them  would  suffer  further
    torture.  This led the  2017  First-tier  Tribunal  to  find  that  the
    appellant intended to treat the prisoners irrespective of what happened
    to them and what might happen to them.

20. Paragraph 44 of  the  2017  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  reads  as
    follows:-

         "44. We find there is nothing in the law that enables the appellant
             to distance himself from his involvement in these  atrocities.
             It  is  irrelevant  whether  he  intended  only  to  make  the
             prisoners he treated better and did not think about what might
             happen to them afterwards.  In simple terms,  if  he  had  not
             treated the prisoners, their torture  may  have  ceased.   The
             fact he treated the prisoners knowing  what  the  organisation
             did and would do means he is linked to the  torture  of  those
             prisoners.

          45.  Having  reached  this  conclusion  on  the  evidence  of  the
             appellant that remains unchanged, we need not  spell  out  our
             findings on all the issues identified by the  Upper  Tribunal.
             But since there are matters that have caused  concern  in  the
             past, for the sake of clarity we confirm that we do not accept
             any other part of the appellant's evidence as  being  reliable
             because of the inconsistent accounts he has  given,  which  we
             discuss in more detail in paragraphs 51 to 54 below.  We  find
             the respondent has failed to show there  are  serious  reasons
             for considering the appellant would have been able to  consult
             with prisoner-patients or to provide pain relief  or  that  he
             signed death certificates."

21. In the light of its conclusions, the  2017  First-tier  Tribunal  found
    that the appellant "will have committed a crime against humanity unless
    he can raise a ground for excluding criminal  responsibility,  such  as
    duress" (paragraph 46).  As we have seen, the Tribunal  held  that  the
    appellant had made good the defence of duress; but, before the Court of
    Appeal, that issue fell away.  Instead, the sole issue, under ground 4,
    was whether the findings  of  fact  of  the  2017  First-tier  Tribunal
    justified its conclusion that the  appellant  had  made  a  significant
    contribution to the crime of torture (paragraph 58).

D.  THE APPELLANT'S POSITION AS A DOCTOR

22. Beginning at paragraph 59, Hamblen LJ addressed the  submission  of  Mr
    Blaxland QC, on behalf of the appellant, that the issue of whether  the
    appellant had made a significant contribution to the crime  of  torture
    had to be considered against the background of the appellant's duty  of
    care as a medical professional.  As a doctor involved in the  treatment
    of prisoners, the appellant was bound  by  the  Principles  of  Medical
    Ethics  relevant  to  the  Role  of  Health   Personnel,   particularly
    Physicians, in  the  Protection  of  Prisoners  and  Detainees  against
    Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or  Punishment,
    UN General Assembly Resolution 37/194 (18 December 1982).

23. The Preamble to these Principles includes the following:-

         "Convinced that under no circumstances a person shall  be  punished
         for carrying out medical activities compatible with medical  ethics
         regardless  of  the  person  benefitting  therefrom,  or  shall  be
         compelled to perform acts or to carry out work in contravention  of
         the medical ethics, but that at the  same  time,  contravention  of
         medical ethics for which health personnel, particularly physicians,
         can be held responsible should entail accountability."

24. Principle 1 reads as follows:-

         "Principle 1:


         Health personnel, particularly physicians, charged with the medical
         care of prisoners and detainees, have a duty to provide  them  with
         protection of their physical and mental  health  and  treatment  of
         disease of the same quality and standard as is  afforded  to  those
         who are not imprisoned or detained."

25. The underlining in Principle 1 reflects the emphasis  placed  on  those
    closing words by Mr Dunlop QC in his written and oral submissions to us
    (of which more later).

26. Principle 2 reads as follows:-

         "Principle 2:

         It is a gross contravention  of  medical  ethics,  as  well  as  an
         offence under  applicable  international  instruments,  for  health
         personnel,  particularly  physicians,  to   engage,   actively   or
         passively, in acts which constitute  participation  in,  complicity
         in, incitement to or attempts to commit  torture  or  other  cruel,
         inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment."

27. In MH (Syria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009]  EWCA
    Civ 226, the Court of Appeal was concerned with Article  1F(c)  of  the
    Refugee Convention, which mandates exclusion from refugee status  of  a
    person who "has been guilty  of  acts  contrary  to  the  purposes  and
    principles of the United Nations".  MH was a Kurdish nurse in Syria who
    joined the PKK.  That organisation required her to become an  assistant
    nurse in a hospital in a PKK camp.  Richards LJ, with  whom  the  other
    members of the Court agreed, said that:-

         "In the ordinary course I would not expect the provision of medical
         or nursing services to bring a person within Article 1F(c)  on  the
         basis that they form part of the infrastructure of  support  for  a
         terrorist organisation; but in each case the point will have to  be
         taken into account with  other  relevant  factors  in  reaching  an
         overall  assessment  as  to  the  application  of  Article  1F(c)."
         (paragraph 31)

28. Richards LJ concluded that  MH's  case  fell  well  short  of  engaging
    Article 1F(c), having regard to her young age when she joined the  PKK;
    the fact that the PKK was not at the "extreme" end of the continuum  of
    terrorist organisations; and what MH did for them was "relatively minor
    in nature" albeit that she gave first aid  assistance  to  injured  PKK
    combatants.

29. At paragraph 39 of his judgment, Richards LJ stated that:-

         "My view is reinforced if regard is had to the special position  of
         nursing under international humanitarian  law.   MH's  role  as  an
         assistant nurse in the refugee  camp  is  in  one  sense  the  most
         significant of her  activities,  since  it  included  the  care  of
         injured guerrillas; but it seems to me that the humanitarian nature
         of the work she was doing, and the context in which she  was  doing
         it, weigh against rather than in favour of a finding of  complicity
         in the terrorist acts of the PKK."

30. In the present case, Hamblen LJ noted the submissions of Mr Blaxland QC
    that the humanitarian nature of the work the appellant was  doing,  and
    the context in which he was doing it, weighed against rather in  favour
    of a finding of complicity in the Iraqi regime's crimes of torture.  He
    also recorded the acceptance of Mr Dunlop QC, for the respondent,  that
    humanitarian law considerations provide the relevant context; and  that
    when addressing the issue of significant contribution, regard should be
    had to medical ethics and what these require.



E. THE OUTCOME IN THE COURT OF APPEAL

31. At paragraph 66, Hamblen LJ stated that, ultimately,  "the  outcome  of
    this appeal depends on the more granular question of whether the  FTT's
    findings are sufficient to support  their  conclusion  of  complicity".
    The following paragraphs of the judgment need to be set out in full:-

         "67. Mr Blaxland QC did not seek to  challenge  or  go  behind  the
             findings made by the FTT, save in relation to para. 45 and the
             statement that "if he had not  treated  the  prisoners,  their
             torture may have ceased".  It was submitted that this  was  an
             inferential conclusion rather than a  finding  of  fact,  that
             there was no proper basis for such an inference  to  be  drawn
             and that it was a perverse conclusion.


         68.  It was submitted that the only instances in which it is  self-
             evident that refraining from  treating  prisoners  would  have
             resulted in their not being tortured would have been those  in
             which the  want  of  treatment  would  have  resulted  in  the
             prisoners' deaths since there was nothing to indicate that the
             torturers would have been unable and unwilling  to  torture  a
             living but sick or wounded prisoner.  It  would,  however,  be
             perverse to conclude that a doctor was complicit in torture by
             performing his duty as a  medical  professional  of  saving  a
             patient from death. Moreover, that  the  logic  of  the  FTT's
             conclusion is that A should have deprived all  those  whom  he
             suspected  were  the  victims  of  torture  of   any   medical
             assistance.


         69.  If this finding or conclusion falls away then it was submitted
             that there were no or no  sufficient  findings  to  support  a
             conclusion of significant contribution to torture.   This  was
             the only "finding" which  went  to  the  consequences  of  the
             medical treatment given by A and  how  it  may  have  assisted
             torture.  Without such a "finding"  there  was  no  basis  for
             concluding that A's acts had contributed to the torture, still
             less significantly so.


         70.  Mr Dunlop QC for the SSHD accepted  that  this  "finding"  was
             critical to the sustainability of the conclusion of the FTT on
             significant  contribution  and   consequent   complicity   and
             therefore to the outcome of the appeal.


         71.  The first point to be made about this "finding" is that, in my
             judgment, it is not a finding of fact.  The FTT have not found
             that the prisoners' torture would have ceased but merely  that
             it "may" have done.  That is a speculative  conclusion  rather
             than a determinative finding of fact.


         72.  Secondly, it is at most an inferential conclusion but there is
             no explanation of the factual basis and reasoning  to  support
             the inference  drawn.   Mr  Dunlop  QC  suggested  a  line  of
             reasoning which could have supported that  conclusion,  namely
             that it may properly be inferred that the reason that a regime
             that tortures its prisoners  would  take  a  sick  or  injured
             prisoner, that it has tortured in  the  past  and  intends  to
             torture again, to see a doctor, is that his sickness or injury
             is getting in the way of the regime's aims: e.g. by preventing
             them from torturing the prisoner further and/or preventing the
             prisoner from speaking to them. In other words, the reason for
             asking A to  treat  such  prisoners  was  that,  without  such
             treatment, the torture could not continue.  I agree that  this
             is a possible line of  reasoning,  but  it  is  not  the  only
             possible one and it does not take account of the findings that
             A was not being asked to treat only those prisoners  who  were
             to be tortured again and that he did not know which  prisoners
             were to be subject to further torture.  In any event, there is
             no means of knowing whether the FTT adopted  such  a  line  of
             reasoning.  They did  not  address  the  facts  in  sufficient
             detail for it to be known what their underlying reasoning was,
             and, without such detail, Mr Dunlop QC's argument is  no  more
             than speculation.


         73.  Thirdly, if it is sufficient to be complicit in  torture  that
             the torture of some patients "may" have  ceased  if  treatment
             had not been given then the logical  consequence  is  that  no
             patients should have been treated.  On the  FTT's  findings  A
             did not know whether the torture  of  any  particular  patient
             would cease but simply that it "may"  do  so.   On  the  FTT's
             approach  the  only  way   to   avoid   complicity   in   such
             circumstances would be to refuse all treatment.  That would be
             a perverse conclusion and in clear contravention of a doctor's
             duty of care.


         74.  For any or all of these reasons in my judgment this  "finding"
             cannot be relied upon to support a conclusion  of  significant
             contribution to torture  and,  without  that  finding,  it  is
             common ground that the appeal must be allowed.


         75.  The FTT recognised the importance of carrying out a  "detailed
             and individualised examination of the facts" but did not do so
             sufficiently to support the conclusion that they reached.  The
             requirements of medical ethics made it all the more  important
             that such an examination was carried out, as  the  MH  (Syria)
             case illustrates.


         76.  For completeness, I should record that Mr Dunlop  QC  did  not
             seek to support that part of the FTT's reasoning which  relied
             on A's medical aid to those who  committed  torture.   It  was
             accepted that this was too remote from the crime  to  found  a
             significant contribution on the facts of the present case.




         Conclusion
         77.  Article 1F of the Convention has to be applied  with  caution.
             It  requires  "a  close  examination  of  the  facts"  and  "a
             carefully reasoned decision as to precisely why the person  is
             excluded from  protection  under  the  Convention".   For  the
             reasons  outlined  above,  the  FTT  did  not  carry   out   a
             sufficiently "detailed and individualised examination  of  the
             facts" to support the  conclusion  of  complicity  which  they
             reached. I would accordingly allow the appeal."

F.  THE EXERCISE FOR THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

32. Our first task is to determine the scope of the exercise that the Court
    of Appeal envisaged the Upper Tribunal undertaking.   Although  Hamblen
    LJ's judgment does not say so, the appellant's  appeal  was,  in  fact,
    allowed only to the extent that it was "remitted to the Upper  Tribunal
    to re-make the First-tier Tribunal's  decision"  (paragraph  2  of  the
    order of 17  July  2019).   For  that  purpose,  the  Court  of  Appeal
    considered "that the documentary evidence should be the  same  as  that
    put before the First-tier Tribunal" (paragraph 3).

33. Upon the handing down by the Court of the embargoed draft  judgment,  a
    dispute arose between the parties as to what the order should  contain.
    The appellant submitted that the appellant's appeal should, in  effect,
    be allowed outright, rather than by remitting  it.   According  to  the
    note submitted to the Court on 11 July 2019 by Mr Blaxland  QC  and  Mr
    Toal, this was "because the Court of Appeal's decision is to the effect
    that the evidence before the tribunal is incapable of establishing that
    the exclusion  clause  applies".   The  note  said  that  it  would  be
    "appropriate to remit the case ... only if there were  evidence  before
    the tribunal on the basis on which it might find facts warranting"  the
    conclusion  that  there  were  serious  reasons  for  considering   the
    appellant to be complicit in crimes against humanity.  According to the
    appellant's counsel, there "is no such evidence".

34. By contrast, Mr Dunlop QC pointed out that the Court did not hold  that
    the evidence before the  2017  First-tier  Tribunal  was  incapable  of
    establishing that the exclusion clause applied.  On  the  contrary,  it
    allowed the appeal on the basis that the Tribunal "did not address  the
    facts in sufficient detail for it to be  known  what  their  underlying
    reasoning was" and did not  carry  out  a  sufficiently  "detailed  and
    individualised examination of the facts" (paragraphs 72 and 75  of  the
    judgment).  According to Mr Dunlop QC, the Court accepted at  paragraph
    72 that there was a line of reasoning which might  have  supported  the
    conclusion that the appellant contributed significantly to the  use  of
    torture, but it was not satisfied that this was, in fact, the  line  of
    reasoning of the Tribunal.  Thus, the implication of the  judgment  was
    that the appeal should be remitted for another tribunal  to  carry  out
    the necessary fact-finding in the necessary detail, with more  explicit
    reasoning.

35. We agree with Mr Dunlop that the subsequent order, remitting the matter
    to the Upper Tribunal, means that the Court of Appeal  agreed  with  Mr
    Dunlop QC's submissions, as recorded in his  note.   We  are  expressly
    required to consider the documentary evidence  in  order  to  determine
    whether there are serious reasons for concluding that the appellant was
    complicit in crimes against humanity,  consisting  in  the  torture  of
    prisoners by the Iraqi regime.

36. In our view,  the  Court  of  Appeal  intended  to  require  the  Upper
    Tribunal, on remittal, to analyse, and reach its  own  conclusions  on,
    the documentary  evidence  bearing  upon  that  overall  question.   Mr
    Blaxland QC, however, submitted that the fact-finding exercise for  the
    Upper Tribunal was, in fact, more circumscribed, being limited  to  the
    finding articulated by the 2017 First-tier Tribunal at paragraph 44  of
    its decision; that is to say, whether, if the appellant had not treated
    the prisoners, their torture may have ceased.  We  are  not,  he  says,
    entitled to make our own finding of fact on the Tribunal's  conclusion,
    at paragraph 45, that the respondent  had  failed  to  show  there  are
    serious reasons for considering the appellant would have been  able  to
    consult with prisoner-patients.

37. In Sarkar v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA  Civ
    195, the Court of Appeal was faced with the submission  that,  once  it
    had embarked upon the task under section 12(2)(b)(ii) of the Tribunals,
    Courts and Enforcement Act 2007, the Upper Tribunal had, in effect,  to
    start again and should, therefore, make its own findings on all matters
    that had been before the First-tier  Tribunal,  whether  or  not  those
    matters had been infected by legal error.  Giving the judgment  of  the
    Court, Moore-Bick LJ regarded that submission as going too far:-

         "14. ... Of course, the Upper Tribunal may hear the appeal  afresh,
             if it considers that appropriate, and  for  that  purpose  may
             hear such evidence and argument as it considers necessary, but
             it is not bound to do so and can (and often does)  decide  the
             disputed question of law on the basis of the findings of  fact
             made by the First-tier Tribunal."

         15.  If it finds that the First-tier Tribunal has made  a  material
             error of law the Upper Tribunal may (but need not)  set  aside
             its decision.  If it  decides  to  do  so,  it  has  only  two
             options:  to  remit  the  case   with   directions   for   its
             reconsideration or to re-make the decision itself.  Remission,
             however, does not necessarily require the First-tier  Tribunal
             to start all over again; the Upper Tribunal has power to  give
             directions which limit the scope of the  reconsideration.   It
             would  be  surprising,  therefore,  if,  when  re-making   the
             decision itself, the Upper Tribunal  were  required  in  every
             case to carry  out  a  complete  re-hearing  of  the  original
             appeal. In my view that is not what  Parliament  intended.  In
             this  context  re-making  the  decision,  by   contrast   with
             remitting the case to the  First-tier  Tribunal,  involves  no
             more than substituting the tribunal's own decision for that of
             the tribunal below. It is for the Upper Tribunal to decide the
             nature and scope of the hearing  that  is  required  for  that
             purpose.  The purpose of section 12(4)(a) is simply to  ensure
             that, when re-making the decision, the Upper Tribunal  has  at
             its disposal the full range of powers available to the  First-
             Tier Tribunal.  Nor do I think that the appellants obtain  any
             assistance from the decision  in  Kizhakudan  v  Secretary  of
             State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ  566,  to  which
             Mr. Malik drew our attention.  That case decided no more  than
             that one error of law on the part of the  First-tier  Tribunal
             is sufficient to give the Upper Tribunal jurisdiction  to  re-
             make the decision and deal with all live issues.  The court in
             that case held that the Upper Tribunal  had  a  discretion  to
             consider an article 8 claim, even though  it  might  not  have
             been properly raised before the First-tier Tribunal.   It  did
             not decide, however, that the Upper Tribunal,  having  refused
             permission to appeal on a particular  ground,  is  obliged  to
             consider that ground if it decides to re-make the decision."

38. In TA (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2018]
    EWCA Civ 260, the Court of  Appeal  articulated  the  circumstances  in
    which the Upper Tribunal, when re-making a decision pursuant to section
    12, should do so by reference to findings of fact made  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, notwithstanding that the  latter's  decision  was  being
    disturbed:-

         "7.  Where the Upper Tribunal finds an error of  law  then  it  may
             (but need not)  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
             Tribunal. If it does set aside the decision of the  First-tier
             Tribunal then it must either remit the case to the  First-tier
             Tribunal with directions for its  reconsideration  or  re-make
             the  decision:  see  s.12  of  the   Tribunals,   Courts   and
             Enforcement Act 2007.  When permission to appeal to the  Upper
             Tribunal has been granted, the parties should assume that  the
             Upper Tribunal will, if it identifies an error on a  point  of
             law and is satisfied that the original decision should be  set
             aside, proceed to remake the decision.   In  that  event,  the
             Upper Tribunal will consider whether to remake the decision by
             reference to the First-tier Tribunal's findings of  fact,  and
             it will generally do so save and in so far as  those  findings
             have been infected by any identified error or errors of  law."
             (Kitchin LJ)

39. Also of relevance is the judgment of the Inner House of  the  Court  of
    Session (Lord Glennie) in MS and YZ v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department [2017] CSIH 41:-

         "42. Mr Webster accepted before us that the UT was only entitled to
             interfere with findings in fact  made  by  the  FTT  if  those
             findings were infected by some error of law or where  the  FTT
             made an error of law in reaching those findings in  fact.   He
             was correct to make this concession.  An appeal from  the  FTT
             to the UT lies on a point of law: section 11(1)  of  the  2007
             Act.  There is no appeal against the FTT's findings  in  fact.
             It is important to understand this point.  Of course,  it  may
             not always be possible to identify where the  line  is  to  be
             drawn between findings of "pure"  fact,  where  the  appellate
             body cannot usually intervene, and findings which are in truth
             findings of mixed fact and law or are what is sometimes called
             "evaluative" findings, where the approach to the fact  finding
             task is determined by the legal framework within which factual
             assessments have to be made.  Thus, there will be cases where,
             before making its findings in  fact,  the  FTT  has  first  to
             identify the legal test it is seeking to apply.  It  may,  for
             example, be required to make a finding as to  whether  certain
             conduct is reasonable or proportionate, a question  which  may
             depend on the context in which or the purposes for which  such
             an assessment is relevant or  necessary;  and  in  approaching
             these questions it may have to identify what, as a  matter  of
             law, requires to be taken into  account.   In  such  cases  an
             error of law in  identifying  what  factors  are  or  are  not
             relevant  may  open  up  the  whole  of   its   decision   for
             reconsideration, including  what  appear  to  be  findings  of
             "pure" fact, though it will not always do so.  If the FTT  has
             erred in law by failing to take relevant matters into  account
             in reaching its decision on  the  facts,  or  in  taking  into
             account irrelevant matters, or has reached a decision which no
             reasonable tribunal presented with the evidence and  correctly
             applying the law could have arrived at, that too  may  entitle
             the UT to interfere.  Another  situation,  perhaps  closer  to
             this case, is where the FTT has erred in law, and the UT takes
             it upon itself to re-make the decision, as it is  entitled  to
             do under section 12(2)(b)(ii) of the 2007 Act.  It may  in  so
             doing  "make  such  findings   of   fact   as   it   considers
             appropriate": section 12(4)(b).  But while in  that  situation
             the  UT  has  the  power  to  make  additional   supplementary
             findings, it does not have the power to overturn  findings  of
             "pure" fact made by  the  FTT  which  are  not  undermined  or
             otherwise infected by that or any other error of law.  Nothing
             in the cases cited to us, in  particular  Kizhakudan  and  EK,
             suggests otherwise.  Our conclusion on this point is,  in  our
             opinion, consistent with the remarks of Lord Carnwath in  HMRC
             v Pendragon plc [2015] 1 WLR 2838 at paragraphs 49-51."

40. In HMRC v Pendragon plc  [2015]  UKSC  37;  [2015]  1  WLR  2838,  Lord
    Carnwath said this:-

         "49. In  R  (Jones)  v  First  Tier  Tribunal  (Social  Entitlement
             Chamber) [2013] UKSC 19; [2013] 2 AC 48 (in a judgment  agreed
             by the majority of the court), I spoke  of  the  role  of  the
             Upper Tribunal in the new system:


                  "Where, as here, the interpretation and application  of  a
                  specialised  statutory  scheme  has  been   entrusted   by
                  Parliament  to  the  new  tribunal  system,  an  important
                  function of the Upper Tribunal is  to  develop  structured
                  guidance on the use of expressions which  are  central  to
                  the scheme, and so as to reduce the risk  of  inconsistent
                  results by different panels  at  the  First  Tier  level."
                  (para 41)
             This was consistent with the approach of the  preceding  White
             Paper (paras 7.14-21), which had spoken of the  intended  role
             of the new appellate tier  in  achieving  consistency  in  the
             application of the law, "law" for this  purpose  being  widely
             interpreted to include issues of general  principle  affecting
             the jurisdiction in question.  Such a  flexible  approach  was
             supported also by recent statements in the House of Lords,  in
             cases such as Moyna v Secretary of State for Work and Pensions
             [2003] 1 WLR 1929 and Lawson v Serco [2006] ICR 250.   In  the
             latter case (para 34), Lord Hoffmann had  contrasted  findings
             of primary facts with the "an evaluation of  those  facts"  to
             decide  a  question  posed  by  the  interpretation   of   the
             legislation in question:
                  "Whether one characterises this  as  a  question  of  fact
                  depends ... upon whether as a matter of policy one  thinks
                  that it  is  a  decision  which  an  appellate  body  with
                  jurisdiction limited to errors of law should  be  able  to
                  review."


         50.  The difficult concept of "abuse of law" as  developed  by  the
             European  court,  though  not  strictly   one   of   statutory
             construction, is a general principle of central importance  to
             the operation of the VAT scheme.  It matters little whether it
             is described as involving an issue of mixed law and  fact,  or
             of the evaluation of facts in accordance with legal principle.
              However it  is  described,  it  was  clearly  one  which  was
             particularly well suited  to  detailed  consideration  by  the
             Upper Tribunal, with a view  to  giving  guidance  for  future
             cases.  Having found errors of approach in  the  consideration
             by the First Tier Tribunal, it was  appropriate  for  them  to
             exercise their power  to  remake  the  decision,  making  such
             factual and legal judgments as were necessary for the purpose,
             thereby giving full  scope  for  detailed  discussion  of  the
             principle and its practical application.   Although  no  doubt
             paying respect to the  factual  findings  of  the  First  Tier
             Tribunal, they were not bound  by  them.   They  had  all  the
             documentation  before  the  First  Tier  Tribunal,   including
             witness  statements,  and  transcripts  of  the  evidence  and
             submissions, and detailed written and oral submissions.  It is
             clear that they undertook  a  thorough  exercise  involving  a
             hearing lasting six days.


         51.  Against this background, it was unhelpful, in my view for  the
             Court of Appeal to identify the main issue as to  whether  the
             Upper Tribunal went beyond its  proper  appellate  role.   The
             appeal to the Court of Appeal (under section 13) was from  the
             decision of the Upper Tribunal, not from the First  Tier,  and
             their function was to determine whether the Upper Tribunal had
             erred in law.  That was best approached by  looking  primarily
             at the merits of the Upper Tribunal's  reasoning  in  its  own
             terms, rather than by reference to  their  evaluation  of  the
             First Tier's decision.  True it is that the  Upper  Tribunal's
             jurisdiction to intervene had to begin from a  finding  of  an
             error of "law".   But that was  not  the  main  issue  in  the
             appeal, which was one of more general principle. Indeed, given
             the difficulties of drawing a clear division between fact  and
             law, discussed by Lord Hoffmann, it may not be productive  for
             the higher courts to spend time inquiring whether a difference
             between the two tribunals was one of law or fact, or a mixture
             of the two.  There may in theory be a case, where  it  can  be
             shown that the sole disagreement  between  the  two  tribunals
             related to an issue of pure fact, but such a case is likely to
             be exceptional. In the present  case,  as  Lord  Sumption  has
             shown, there were no significant issues of primary fact.   The
             differences  between  the  two  tribunals   related   to   the
             understanding of the  "abuse  of  law"  principle,  and  their
             evaluation of the facts in the light  of  that  understanding.
             The Upper Tribunal reached a carefully reasoned conclusion  on
             law and fact. The task of the Court of Appeal was to determine
             whether that conclusion disclosed any error of law."

41. What the case law demonstrates is that, whilst it is relatively easy to
    articulate the principle that the findings of fact made by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal should be preserved, so far as those  findings  have  not
    been "undermined" or "infected" by any "error or errors of law",  there
    is no hard-edged  answer  to  what  that  means  in  practice,  in  any
    particular case.  At one end of the spectrum lies  the  protection  and
    human rights appeal, where a fact-finding  failure  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  in  respect  of  risk  of  serious  harm  on  return  to   an
    individual's country of nationality may have nothing  to  do  with  the
    Tribunal's fact-finding in respect of the individual's Article  8  ECHR
    private and family life in the United  Kingdom  (or  vice  versa).   By
    contrast, a legal error  in  the  task  of  assessing  an  individual's
    overall credibility is, in general, likely to infect the conclusions as
    to credibility reached by the First-tier Tribunal.

42. The  judgment  of  Lord  Carnwath  in  Pendragon  emphasises  both  the
    difficulty, in certain circumstances, of drawing a bright  line  around
    what a finding of fact actually is;  and  the  position  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal, as an expert body, in determining the scope of its  re-making
    functions.

43. In the light of these observations, the judgment of Hamblen LJ  appears
    to us to recognise the indivisibility of the 2017 First-tier Tribunal's
    findings  of  fact.   At  paragraph   66,   Hamblen   LJ   specifically
    acknowledged that the outcome of the appeal  depended  on  whether  the
    Tribunal's "findings are sufficient  to  support  their  conclusion  of
    complicity".  By the same token, paragraph 75 describes the 2017 First-
    tier  Tribunal  as  not  carrying  out  a  sufficient   "detailed   and
    individualised examination of the  facts",  such  as  "to  support  the
    conclusion they reached".

44. We also agree with Mr Dunlop  QC  that  the  2017  First-tier  Tribunal
    allowed itself to be led astray by its repeated comparisons between, on
    the one hand, the task facing it in deciding  if  an  exclusion  clause
    applies and, on the other hand, what the Tribunal's task would  be,  if
    it were assessing the credibility of the appellant where the burden  of
    proof is on him to show he is at real risk of serious harm, if returned
    to Iraq.

45. Accordingly, we shall examine the  documentary  evidence  in  order  to
    reach our own conclusion  on  whether  the  respondent  has  shown,  by
    reference to a detailed and individualised examination  of  the  facts,
    that there is clear and credible evidence  of  the  relevant  offending
    conduct; here, complicity in the torture of those in detention  by  the
    military intelligence agency known as Al-Istikhbarat.

G.  THE EVIDENCE

(a) First interview

46. In his 2007 asylum interview, the appellant stated that he was required
    to work at a clinic at the Al-Istikhbarat headquarters where he treated
    military intelligence officers and  prisoners.   On  occasion,  he  was
    taken to visit camps, where he treated people he believed to be  Kurds.
    He never sought to leave the headquarters through his military service.



47. In this interview he said his work was as follows:-

         "Treating all the officers and soldiers who belong to  that  agency
         ... only emergency treatment for prisoners held inside the  HQ  and
         the agency prisons.  This included the emergency treatment and also
         treatment after torture.  Sometimes they would take me to camps  to
         treat people who had skin problems, scabies, etc.   The  camps  not
         always at the same place, we would have a special car  to  take  us
         with a guard."

48. In answer to the question "Who  were  the  prisoners?",  the  appellant
    said:-

         "To be honest we can't identify  them,  we  only  know  the  faces,
         sometimes faces.  They were mostly Shia people in the camps it  was
         mostly Kurdish, I know this as I would require  an  interpreter  to
         speak to them."

49. Asked if he ever witnessed any of the torture, the appellant said:-

         "No, it was not going to happen in front of us.  We would only pick
         up the loose ends.  We would only apply first aid, we  didn't  want
         to loose [sic] anyone.  They would be taken to military hospital."

50. The appellant was asked, once he  had  provided  first  aid,  "Did  the
    patients go back for more torture?".  He replied:-

         "Yes, I ... witnessed 2 or 3 hangings.   Just  to  make  sure  they
         dead."

51. The appellant was asked "Were you aware at the time that people you had
    treated would go back for more torture?", to which he responded:-

         "Yes, but I couldn't do anything about it."

52. The appellant confirmed that the people in the camps  he  visited  were
    also tortured.  He had  not  tried  to  get  posted  elsewhere  because
    "Nobody can argue with the military".  The appellant said that  he  was
    not asked to torture anyone himself.

(b) Second interview

53. The  appellant  underwent  a  second  interview  in  March  2010.  This
    interview,  like  its  predecessor,  was  very  detailed.  For  present
    purposes, it is necessary to note that the appellant said there were no
    surgical facilities at the clinic. Any  patient  that  needed  surgical
    intervention, such  as  for  appendicitis,  was  given  analgesics  and
    transferred to Rashid Hospital. Asked whether any of the prisoners told
    the appellant they had been tortured, the appellant replied  that  they
    could not; the guards would keep them  quiet,  although  the  prisoners
    were normally quiet. Asked about why he needed an interpreter if he did
    not speak to the Kurdish patients, the  appellant  said  there  was  no
    dialogue, just "examine and treat".

(c) MPT proceedings

54. Before the MPT, the  appellant  gave  extensive  oral  testimony  about
    treating prisoners that he believed to have been victims of torture, as
    follows:-

         "So when they come to you, give  you  the  order,  "Come  with  us,
         Doctor, to see a patient" so we go with them without arguing.   You
         cannot even say "Where I am going; what I am going to  do",  escort
         you,  which  somebody  is  imposing.   I  think  they   send   them
         deliberately like this, somebody with tall  guy,  muscle,  just  to
         intimidate you and then we will go to the prison.  This is  a  room
         there with a couch and we have to bring with us the stethoscope and
         the aurascope with us and the tongue depressor.  That is  the  only
         thing we get with us.  Then they will put the  patient  on.   These
         prisoner patient they do not even look to your eyes.  They  do  not
         do eye communication.  They always look to the ground and  whenever
         you ask them "What is your complaint?" they have  -  I  cannot  see
         from my observation.  They have all  bruises.  They have  some  cut
         wounds.  There is a possibility of fracture.  I am not saying it is
         a fracture because  I  cannot  say  without  having  an  X-ray  and
         everybody knows, without X-ray, without clear proof  but  it  is  a
         swelling and obviously the hand he  cannot  move  with  the  wrist,
         wherever the place is, or even the nose, nobody told us about these
         things, mainly was something else like "I have got a chest - cough.
          I have got sore throat.  I  have  got  abdominal  pain".   Nothing
         mentioned about the thing I observed.  It is from my honesty I have
         said that in the interview.  Whenever you see that,  with  all  the
         background we have we always assume this only could be torture.  It
         is nothing - I mean, if it is civil hospital, I have seen  this,  I
         said probably it might be from  fight,  from  accident,  from  many
         things, including even patient  with  diabetic,  severe  diarrhoea,
         hypertension, they can trip, they can fall over, they have a lot of
         injuries, but in my mind it is only one thing, that this is from  -
         nobody told us these been tortured at all, nobody  at  all,  and  I
         swear to God on that, at all.

         So we are assuming you know, and we cannot ask too  much,  that  is
         the problem.  He did not complain, the  patient  did  not  complain
         about that arm, that nose, that bruise.  We try to  ask  them  once
         "What was that?"  If the patient tried to answer the escort  always
         shush him.  He does not want - and that shush I know for myself  it
         is for me as well to respect myself, but they do not do it with me,
         that is, they do it with the patient because they are in power  for
         them and in power on me  as  well  but  they  are  just  giving  me
         warning, "Don't do it again".  I simply, whenever I see something I-
          the complaint, whatever the patient complain, I will try to, if  I
         cannot do it I recommend the thing,  only  recommend  it  to  them.
         They will write the comment, do that and that and  that,  including
         suspicion fracture, I said, "Possibly they need to go  to  hospital
         for  X-ray  and  further  treatment,  further  assessment".   Nose,
         bruises, even the cut wounds when I say  "we  stitch  them",  we  I
         mention - it is not I did not do, I recommend to do the  stitching,
         it is as simple as that.

         After I leave, I finish my patient, after I leave  I  do  not  know
         where they going to go; is my recommendation going to be  done?   I
         do not - I have no idea so they put me back again to the clinic  to
         go to the same thing.  Sometime as well mentioned here is certified
         death.  I never certified or issued a death certificate for anybody
         because if - I am sorry to say that - if anybody thinks that Saddam
         Hussein needs me to certify  death  it  is  completely  wrong,  and
         everybody knows about the mass graves; he does not need  me  to  do
         that, but they ask somebody, which can happen to any hospital,  any
         hospital, "This person is dead or not?"  "Yes, he is dead, from the
         vital signs he is dead", and again from my honestly,  I  have  seen
         marking which possibly all my mind is whenever there is a place  is
         going to be hanging, but - and in the witness statement here and  I
         can mention it later.  I have never seen  torture.   I  have  never
         seen somebody hanged at all; never did that or never been asked  to
         do anything like that.  I have  not  see  something  with  a  fresh
         injury.  There is all bruises - yes, there is cut wounds, there  is
         possible, as I said fractures of wrist, arms, yes, but I cannot - I
         am house officer, what can I do more than possible there, refer  to
         the hospital?  And, you know, I tried to do  that.   I  went  there
         only five or six times to the prisons, two times to the camps, each
         time probably I see two or three, it depend on  whether  -  two  or
         three, not more.  Each time I usually refer them to  the  hospital.
         I want to just to probably leave me.   Do  not  come  to  me  to  -
         because I am terrified.  When I go there with that  environment,  I
         have been gong through mental torture as well,  because  I  do  not
         know if I am going to leave the place or not; as simple as that.

         I have no power to do anything.  If they decide to do  anything  to
         me, and there is no complaint also from the patient themselves that
         "Can you help us?"  Nothing  like  that.,   "I've  been  tortured".
         Nothing been said to me.

         ...

         That is what I did simply in all the thing.   All  the  period  was
         like this.  I mentioned that about the certificate I mentioned.  As
         I said, we do not know the outcome of what is going to  happen  for
         the patient after we leave.  Are thy going to go  back?   Are  they
         going to ... I can only assume, I said when they ask  me,  "Do  you
         know if they are going to go back ..." I said, "Yes" because I know
         for sure if they torture them once who is  going  to  prevent  them
         from doing once, twice, three times, again until they die  probably
         or they release them.  Nobody knows the outcome.   I  do  not  know
         definitely what the outcome ...  So, again is all in my assumption,
         that is the only possible assumption I know.  It  is  not  knowing,
         the fact know.  It is my assumption.  Nobody told me that,  but  it
         is a prison with Saddam regime that is what  you  expect,  that  is
         from our culture and the culture extend not to Saddam  Hussein,  if
         anybody of the respect Panel here know what is  happening  in  Iraq
         now, even after toppling Saddam Hussein, until  now  the  sectarian
         problem, people can kill because they do not  like  your  name;  as
         simple as that."

(d) UKBA's Special Cases War Crimes Case Research Analysis Report

55. The evidence from the appellant requires to be considered by  reference
    to the UK Border  Agency's  Special  Cases  War  Crimes  Case  Research
    Analysis Report on the appellant, dated January 2011.   This  describes
    in detail the brutal practices of the regime over which Saddam  Hussein
    presided at the time the appellant was undertaking his military service
    as a doctor. It also describes mass executions  of  those  regarded  as
    hostile to the regime.

56. A survey of junior doctors in Southern Iraq undertaken in 2003 revealed
    levels of participation by doctors in amputations on hands and ears  of
    those regarded as  deserters.   There  was  also  evidence  of  doctors
    falsifying medical reports and death certificates, removing organs from
    patients whether alive or dead without their consent, participation  in
    torture by doctors and mercy killing of tortured victims.

57. Mr Blaxland QC and Mr Toal, in their  written  submissions,  point  out
    that, despite the detailed nature of this report, there is no reference
    in it to an individual having to have some minimum  level  of  physical
    health in order to  be  tortured;  and  no  reference  to  evidence  of
    torturers requiring or even preferring their victims to receive medical
    treatment before they could continue to torture them.  On behalf of the
    appellant, counsel submit that if there was  any  evidence  to  support
    what is described as the central premise upon  which  the  respondent's
    case depends, then her  own  Specialist  War  Crimes  Unit  would  have
    produced it.

H.  THE RESPONDENT'S CASE

58. The respondent's case, as advanced  before  us,  is  as  follows.   The
    evidence is sufficient to establish at least a prima  facie  case  that
    there  are  serious  reasons  for  considering   that   the   appellant
    significantly contributed  to  Al-Istikhbarat's  commission  of  crimes
    against humanity.  Either the appellant was telling the  truth  in  the
    first part of his second SEF interview, when he claimed not to have had
    any dialogue with prisoners and to treat them in silence or, at  least,
    without any discussion of the circumstances that led to their injuries;
    or he was lying about that because he wished to conceal the  fact  that
    some prisoners had, in fact, told him enough about their  circumstances
    for him to know that he was  being  asked  to  treat  them,  so  as  to
    facilitate their further torture.

59. On the first alternative, Mr  Dunlop  QC  submits  that  the  appellant
    failed to take an  adequate  medical  history  from  the  prisoners  he
    treated.  That was a breach of Principle 1  of  the  UN  Principles  of
    Medical Ethics, to which we have earlier referred and,  in  particular,
    of the duty (marked by underlining in the above  passage),  to  provide
    treatment of the same quality and standard as is afforded to those  who
    are not imprisoned or detained.  By failing to take an adequate history
    of prisoners' injuries, the appellant  provided  those  prisoners  with
    treatment of a lower quality and standard, compared with  what  he  did
    for non-prisoners.  Taking a patient's history  is  a  prerequisite  of
    providing adequate care and there is, according to the  respondent,  no
    reason to doubt that the appellant would have asked such  questions  of
    his non-prisoner patients.

60. Furthermore,  if  the  appellant  failed  to  have  any  dialogue  with
    prisoners, such as about what caused their injuries  and  whether  they
    actually wanted treatment from him, then  he  knowingly  made  it  more
    difficult for him to identify  those  prisoners,  in  whose  cases  any
    treatment he did provide would facilitate their further torture.

61. On the first alternative, the appellant would have been aware that,  in
    the ordinary course of events, treating  every  prisoner  that  he  was
    taken to, without making any attempt to find out how they came by their
    injuries or why the authorities wanted to treat  them,  would,  in  the
    ordinary course of events, lead to at least some of the prisoners being
    tortured further.

62. If, however, the view is reached that  the  appellant  has  lied  about
    conversations that he did, in  fact,  have  with  prisoners,  then,  Mr
    Dunlop QC submits, the most likely reason for his lying was to  conceal
    the fact that some prisoners  had  in  fact  told  him  they  had  been
    tortured and would be tortured again  if  he  treated  them.   On  this
    alternative, the appellant significantly contributed to the  commission
    of torture by facilitating further torture of the relevant prisoners.

63. On either alternative, there must,  according  to  the  respondent,  be
    serious reasons for considering that the appellant was aware  that  "in
    the ordinary course of events" torture would be the consequence of  his
    actions.  In  either  event,  there  were  no  orders  upon  which  the
    appellant could rely to excuse his commission of war crimes.

64. If the Upper Tribunal were to conclude that this evidence did  not,  of
    itself,  constitute  the  requisite  serious  grounds  to  justify  the
    application of the exclusion in Article 1F(a), the respondent's case is
    that it would, at least, amount to  a  prima  facie  case  for  such  a
    finding.  In that eventuality, the respondent submits that the fact the
    appellant has chosen not to give oral evidence to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    means that we should  draw  adverse  inferences  from  the  appellant's
    decision.  The effect of those adverse inferences would, Mr  Dunlop  QC
    submits, be such as to require the Upper Tribunal to make a finding  in
    the respondent's favour.

I. DRAWING ADVERSE INFERENCES FROM ABSENCE OR SILENCE

65. The leading authority in the drawing of adverse inferences in the civil
    context is Wisniewski v Central Manchester Health Authority  [1998]  LI
    Rep Med 223; [1998] PIQR P324.  Having considered  the  authorities  on
    the question, Brooke LJ set out the following principles in the context
    of the present case:-

         "(1) In certain circumstances a  court  may  be  entitled  to  draw
             adverse inferences from the absence or silence  of  a  witness
             who might be expected to have material evidence to give on  an
             issue in an action.


          2) If a court is willing to draw such inferences they may  go  to
             strengthen the evidence adduced on that  issue  by  the  other
             party or to weaken the evidence, if any, adduced by the  party
             who might reasonably have been expected to call the witness.


          3) There must, however, have been some  evidence,  however  weak,
             adduced by the former on the matter  in  question  before  the
             court is entitled to draw  the  desired  inference:  in  other
             words, there must be a case to answer on that issue.

          4) If the reason for the witness's absence or  silence  satisfies
             the court then no such adverse inference may be drawn. If,  on
             the other hand, there is some credible explanation given, even
             if it is not wholly satisfactory, the potentially  detrimental
             effect of  his/her  absence  or  silence  may  be  reduced  or
             nullified."


66. Although Brooke LJ's Principle (3) does not refer to the need for there
    to be a prima facie case, that was the expression used by the Court  in
    McQueen v Great Western Railway Company (1875) L.R. 10 Q.B. 569, one of
    the authorities considered by him in arriving at his  five  principles.
    Similarly, in O'Donnell  v  Reichard  [1975]  V.R.  916,  another  such
    authority, Gillard J,  conducting  a  review  of  earlier  English  and
    Australian cases, spoke of "any party upon whom the burden of proof  on
    any issue is imposed must always adduce a  prima  facie  case  on  such
    issue to go to the jury".  Furthermore, in Wisniewski itself, Brooke LJ
    found that the plaintiff "had  established  a  prima  facie,  if  weak,
    case".

67. Applying Wisniewski, the Court of Appeal in Jaffray v Society of Lloyds
    [2002] EWCA Civ 1101 said:-

         "It seems to us that on aspects where  the  evidence  points  in  a
         direction against Lloyd's in an area which could  have  been  dealt
         with by Mr Randall the judge should have drawn an adverse inference
         from Lloyd's failure to call Mr Randall to deal with it.  This does
         not mean that any allegation that the names make against Mr Randall
         must be accepted because he did not give evidence.  It simply means
         that where the evidence points in a certain  direction  an  adverse
         inference can be drawn from a failure to call the witness  to  deal
         with it."  (paragraph 406) - Waller LJ

    The requirement that "the evidence points in a certain  direction"  is,
    we consider, another way of saying that there needs to be a prima facie
    case.

68. In Magdeev v Tsvetkov [2020] EWHC 887 (Comm), Cockerill  J  dealt  with
    the matter as follows:-

         "151.    ... it was suggested  for  Mr  Magdeev  in  reliance  upon
                Jaffray v Society of Lloyd's [2002] EWCA Civ 1101 that I was
                effectively bound to draw such inferences, at  the  risk  of
                perpetrating a legal wrong.
         152. As I noted in the course of legal submissions,  this  line  of
                argument neglects to take account of  the  recent  Court  of
                Appeal decision in  Manzi  v  King's  College  Hospital  NHS
                Foundation Trust [2018] EWCA  Civ  1882,  where  Sir  Ernest
                Ryder SPT said:
                  "Wisniewski is not  authority  for  the  proposition  that
                  there is an obligation to draw an adverse inference  where
                  the four principles are engaged.  As the  first  principle
                  adequately makes plain, there is a  discretion  i.e.  "the
                  court  is  entitled  [emphasis  added]  to  draw   adverse
                  inferences"
         153. He also made clear that such matters  as  proportionality  may
                give rise to a valid reason for a witness's absence.
         154. In my judgment the point can be dealt with relatively  briefly
                thus:
                  i)   This evidential "rule" is, as I have indicated above,
                      a fairly narrow  one.  As  I  have  noted  previously
                      ([2018] EWHC 1768 (Comm) at [115]),  the  drawing  of
                      such  inferences  is  not  something  to  be  lightly
                      undertaken.
                  ii)  Where a party relies on it, it is necessary for it to
                      set out clearly (i) the point on which the  inference
                      is sought (ii) the reason why it  is  said  that  the
                      "missing" witness would  have  material  evidence  to
                      give on that issue and (iii) why it is said that  the
                      party seeking to have the inference drawn has  itself
                      adduced relevant evidence on that issue.
                  iii) The Court then has a discretion and will exercise  it
                      not just in the light of those principles,  but  also
                      in the light of:
                      a)   the overriding objective; and
                      b)   an understanding  that  it  arises  against  the
                           background of an evidential world which shifts  -
                           both as to burden and as to  the  development  of
                           the case - during trial.
                  iv)  In this case, save as to one very narrow  issue  with
                      which I will deal at the appropriate point below, the
                      exercise required of  the  parties  relying  on  this
                      principle has not really been done.
                  ..."
69. There are several points to make about the Wisniewski  principles.  The
    first is the obvious but nonetheless important fact that they  are  not
    to be confused with the situation where a party  who  bears  the  legal
    burden of proving something adduces sufficient evidence, so as to place
    an evidential burden on the other party. In such a situation, the other
    party has to adduce some evidence; otherwise, he will lose.

70. The second point is that the question of what amounts to a prima  facie
    case sufficient to bring the principles  into  play  depends  upon  the
    nature of the case that the party in question has to meet.  The present
    proceedings are not analogous to an "ordinary"  civil  claim,  where  a
    matter needs to be established on the balance of probabilities.  We are
    concerned with an evaluative assessment of whether there  are  "serious
    reasons for considering that" the appellant is  complicit  in  a  crime
    against  humanity,  falling  within  Article  1F(a)  of   the   Refugee
    Convention.  As the Supreme Court held in Al-Sirri v Secretary of State
    for  the  Home  Department  [2012]   UKSC   54,   this   "requires   an
    individualised consideration of the  facts  of  the  case,  which  will
    include an assessment of the person's involvement in the act concerned,
    his  mental  state  and  possible  grounds  for  rejecting   individual
    responsibility".  Article 1F requires "clear and credible  evidence  of
    the offending conduct and the overall evaluative judgement involved the
    application of a standard higher than suspicion  or  belief"  (Al-Sirri
    [2016] UKUT 00448 (IAC). Whether a prima facie case is  established  in
    Article 1F proceedings needs to be considered with these statements  in
    mind.

71. Third, even where a prima facie case exists, it does not  automatically
    follow that the failure of a person to give  evidence  will  result  in
    material weight being given to that failure, in  favour  of  the  other
    party: see Brooke  LJ's  Principle  (4)  at  paragraph  65  above.   As
    Hickinbottom LJ held more recently in R (Kuzmin) v GMC [2019] EWHC 2129
    (Admin), there may be a reasonable explanation for the  fact  that  the
    individual has not given evidence; and there may be other circumstances
    which would  make  it  unfair  to  draw  such  an  inference.  Although
    Cockerill J in Magdeev expressed the  court's  role  in  terms  of  its
    discretion, it is perhaps more a matter of the court  having  to  apply
    the "rule" unless it is satisfied there is a reason not to do so.

J.  DISCUSSION

72. We can now return to the appellant's case. We find that the  respondent
    is wrong to invite us  to  adopt  a  binary  view  of  the  appellant's
    evidence as to whether he did or did not have  any  dialogue  with  the
    prisoners that he was treating.  In  the  light  of  the  circumstances
    under which the appellant was  required  to  operate,  which  are  well
    documented,  we  find  the  appellant  has  not,  in  fact,  given  two
    contrasting scenarios, in one of which he was free to ask the  clinical
    questions that, in ordinary  circumstances,  would  be  required  of  a
    doctor; and in the other of which he was completely unable to have  any
    communication with  the  prisoners.   On  the  contrary,  we  find  the
    evidence points overwhelmingly to  the  appellant  being  compelled  to
    operate in an  extremely  constrained  environment,  in  which  he  was
    allowed by the  guards  to  ask  basic  diagnostic  questions  but  not
    anything that would come close to enabling him to ascertain whether the
    person being treated wanted to receive  treatment  and/or  whether  the
    treatment was being provided by those in charge in order to  facilitate
    further torture.

73. In this regard, we agree with the submissions made  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant that the respondent has  not  put  forward  any  evidence  to
    suggest the Iraqi regime considered someone had to  have  some  minimum
    level of physical health in order for them  to  be  tortured;  or  that
    Saddam Hussein's torturers  required  or  preferred  their  victims  to
    receive medical treatment before continuing to torture them.  It  is  a
    commonplace of repressive regimes that they tend to  act  irrationally.
    The respondent's case presupposes an approach by  those  torturing  the
    prisoners that cannot, in all  the  circumstances,  be  categorised  as
    anything more than speculation.  There is, furthermore, no sound reason
    to assume that, even if such considerations were the motivation for the
    appellant being allowed to treat some of the  prisoners,  he  could  or
    should have acted differently than he did, by treating them.

74. Having considered the evidence on this matter for ourselves,  we  have,
    therefore, independently reached the point articulated by Hamblen LJ at
    paragraph 73 of his judgment;  namely,  that  the  only  way  to  avoid
    complicity in torture in such circumstances would  have  been  for  the
    appellant to have refused to treat any and all of the prisoners.   That
    would have been a clear contravention of his professional duty of care.



75. There is, therefore,  no  prima  facie  case  on  this  aspect  of  the
    respondent's submissions. There is also no prima facie  case  that  the
    appellant breached Principle 1 by failing to treat the prisoners to the
    same standard as those who were not imprisoned  or  detained.   On  the
    evidence, he was simply not given the opportunity of taking an adequate
    medical history, or of  enquiring  whether  the  prisoners  in  reality
    wished to be treated.

76. Even if a prima facie case could be established, we do not  find  that,
    in all the  circumstances,  it  would  be  appropriate  to  accord  any
    material weight to the appellant's failure to give  evidence.   He  has
    already given a great deal of evidence, both written and oral.   Having
    regard to that evidence and to the questions he has been asked, both on
    behalf of the respondent and  at  the  MPT  hearings,  it  is  entirely
    unrealistic to think that he would be likely to say anything -  whether
    in cross-examination or otherwise - that would throw any fresh light on
    a matter that has been the subject of forensic inquiry for well over  a
    decade.  This is particularly so,  given  that  the  respondent's  case
    depends upon aspects of the regime of Saddam Hussein, about  which  the
    appellant is unlikely to be able to give relevant evidence.

77. Thus, even if there were a prima facie case,  the  evidence  before  us
    falls short of the requirements described in  paragraph  70  above  for
    excluding the appellant from the protection of the Refugee  Convention.
    The respondent has not shown serious grounds for considering  that  the
    provisions of the Refugee Convention should not apply to the appellant,
    by reason of his having committed a crime within the scope  of  Article
    1F(a) of that Convention.

78. The appellant's appeal is, accordingly, allowed.




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



                      Signed
                      Mr Justice Lane                 Date: 3 August 2020






                      The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                      President of the Upper Tribunal
                      Immigration and Asylum Chamber



