
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

        Hameed (Appendix FM - financial year) [2014] UKUT 00266 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination issued         |
|on 7 March 2014                               |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                 UMAIR HAMEED
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, Pakistan
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:       Mr Shoaib, of Shoaib Associates
For the Respondent:      Mr Parkinson, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

No anonymity order requested or made

The financial year for purposes of Appendix FM is the tax year, not the
year selected for accounting purposes.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1)  The  appellant  appeals  against  a  determination  by  Judge   McGavin,
   promulgated on 21 October 2013, dismissing his appeal against refusal  of
   entry clearance as the partner of a British citizen.

2) The point at issue is whether the judge was right to  base  her  decision
   on the sponsor's income as shown in her last two tax returns, or  whether
   she should have allowed the appeal by reference to the  sponsor's  income
   averaged over the last two accounting years of her business.

3) This depends on the following part of the Immigration Rules:

        Evidence of Financial Requirements under Appendix FM


        ...


        7. In respect of self-employment in the UK as a partner, as a sole
        trader or in a franchise all of the following must be provided:
        (a) Evidence of the amount of tax payable, paid and unpaid for the
        last financial year.
        (b) The latest:
        (i) annual self-assessment tax return to HMRC (a copy or print-
        out);
        (ii) Statement of Account (SA300 or SA302); and,
        (iii) the same for the previous financial year if the latest return
        does not show the necessary level of gross income, but the average
        of the last 2 financial years does.


4) Mr Shoaib said that businesses may choose their own financial  accounting
   year (which is correct), and that he had relied on information  from  the
   sponsor's accountants of her income for two such years.   She  could  not
   show the necessary income by averaging over two tax  years,  because  her
   business did not begin until the first half of the  first  tax  year  had
   already gone by.

5) The Rules do not bear the construction which  Mr  Shoaib  sought  to  put
   upon them.  The financial year for these purposes is  the  tax  year  (in
   this case, the years to 5 April 2011 and 5 April 2012) not the year which
   the sponsor selected for accounting  purposes.   It  is  the  latest  tax
   return which must show the necessary level  of  gross  income,  with  the
   alternative of averaging the two most recent such returns.

6) We have reservations over the reasons given by the judge for her  Article
   8 decision at paragraph 22.  We do not think  that  section  113  of  the
   Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 excludes human rights issues
   when an appellant is outside the UK.  That section  has  other  purposes.
   However, there is no need for further analysis. The grounds do not  raise
   that point.  Although they do refer generally to Article 8 of  the  ECHR,
   Mr Shoaib advisedly did not make any submissions thereon.  The effect  of
   the adverse decision is simply that the appellant has to re-apply if  and
   when the requirements of  the  Rules  can  be  met.   That  cannot  be  a
   disproportionate interference.

7) The determination of the First-tier Tribunal does not err in law  in  any
   respect which requires it to be set aside, and it shall stand.

                                             Hugh Macleman
                                             3 April 2014
                                             Judge of the Upper Tribunal
