
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

          Kop (dishonesty alleged - HC 510) [2012] UKUT 00264(IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice      |Determination Promulgated  |
|on 22 May 2012                        |                           |
|                                      |...........................|
|                                      |............               |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SPENCER

                                   Between

                                ali kemal kop
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Layne, Counsel, instructed by Oakfield
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms C Gough, Home Office Presenting Officer


While HC 510 does contain provisions for general grounds of refusal,  unlike
more recent immigration rules, those general grounds do not specify  refusal
on current paragraph 320(7A) or 322(1A) grounds.




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Turkey, born on 17th October  1984.   His
    appeal against the decision of the respondent, made on 26th April 2010,
    refusing his application for leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  in
    order  to  establish  himself  in  business  under  the  EEC  -  Turkey
    Association Agreement ("the  ECAA"),  was  dismissed  after  a  hearing
    before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   Scobbie,   in   a   determination
    promulgated on 12th December 2011.

 2. It appears that on  10th  March  2009  the  respondent  granted  twelve
    months' leave to the appellant, who had previously entered  the  United
    Kingdom  as  a  visitor,  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom   as   a
    businessperson under HC 510 by virtue of the terms of the EEC -  Turkey
    Association Agreement.  The appellant applied for an extension of  stay
    for three years on 12 February 2010.  His application  was  refused  by
    the respondent on the grounds that the entry clearance  visa  contained
    in his passport was not genuine and that  he  had  entered  the  United
    Kingdom illegally.  It was said that he had employed fraudulent/abusive
    activity in order to make his  application  and  establish  himself  in
    business.  Taking all the circumstances of his case  into  account,  it
    had been decided  to  exclude  him  from  taking  the  benefit  of  the
    standstill clause contained in the ECAA  which  gave  effect  to  those
    provisions.  It was further said that in order to qualify for leave  to
    remain he needed to meet the requirements of paragraph 245L of HC  395,
    as amended, but his application was refused under paragraph 322(1A)  on
    the basis of false representations having been made or false  documents
    or information having been submitted in relation to the application.

 3. In paragraph 14 of his determination the First-tier Tribunal judge said
    that the background was that the appellant,  on  trying  to  make  some
    headway with regard to his application in February 2010, was eventually
    arrested at an appointment  and  a  criminal  prosecution  was  brought
    against him.  The basis  of  the  criminal  prosecution  was  that  the
    appellant had false ID, entered the United  Kingdom  by  deception  and
    obtained leave by deception.  The  information  which  the  judge  had,
    which was in less than perfect form, showed that when  the  case  first
    went to trial the jury were unable to reach a verdict and a retrial was
    arranged but when the retrial was due to commence, the Crown offered no
    evidence (and a verdict of not guilty was entered).  The note  prepared
    by counsel who represented the appellant was not signed, but the First-
    tier Tribunal judge was inclined to accept that that was what happened.
     In paragraph 15 of his determination  he  said  the  position  of  the
    appellant was that he accepted that the visa on his passport was  false
    but the appellant knew nothing about it.  His  position  was  that  the
    matter was in the hands of an agent who produced it to him and  he  had
    used it successfully in the past.  Only when he  was  arrested  did  it
    come to his attention that the visa was false.

 4. In paragraph 16 of his determination the First-tier Tribunal judge said
    he had looked  at  the  wording  of  paragraph  322(1A)  carefully  and
    believed it was not helpful to the  appellant.   The  paragraph  stated
    that an application was to be refused, in other words it was mandatory,
    where false  representations  had  been  made  or  false  documents  or
    information  had  been  submitted  (whether  or  not  material  to  the
    application and  whether  or  not  to  the  applicant's  knowledge)  or
    material facts had not been disclosed in relation to  the  application.
    In paragraph 17 he said there was little doubt that  a  false  document
    was  submitted.   Although  a  criminal  prosecution  was  unsuccessful
    against the appellant, the appellant accepted  that  the  visa  on  his
    passport was false.  It was his clear position at  the  hearing  before
    him.  The First-tier Tribunal judge said that  accordingly  the  phrase
    "whether or not  to  the  applicant's  knowledge"  was  relevant.   The
    appellant's position was clearly that he left the matter in  the  hands
    of an agent and he had no knowledge that the visa was  false.   It  did
    not appear to matter whether or not he knew that the  visa  was  false.
    What mattered was that it was false.  In paragraph 18 he said the  fact
    that the appellant submitted a document which he  now  accepted  to  be
    false did seem  to  defeat  him  in  accordance  with  the  wording  of
    paragraph 322(1A).  Accordingly the appeal must fail.  He felt that the
    comments in paragraph 67 of the case of AA  (Nigeria)  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2010] EWCA Civ 773 supported his view on
    that matter.

 5. On 13th January 2012 First-tier Tribunal Judge Davey granted permission
    to appeal on the following grounds:

         "1.      Grounds numbered  1-3  raise  an  arguable  error  of  law
             concerning  the  application  of  paragraph  322(1A)  of   the
             Immigration Rules  HC  395  as  amended,  given  the  accepted
             factual context that at a retrial of the Appellant  the  Crown
             offered no evidence in respect of  the  fraudulent  use  of  a
             document.

         2. Ground 4 raises the issue of the need for a visa but there  will
             need to be the relevant case  law  and  skeleton  argument  to
             demonstrate any substance in the point.

         3. Ground 5 refers to Article 8 ECHR but the matter does not appear
             to have  been  raised  as  an  issue  at  the  hearing  before
             Immigration Judge Scobbie.  This ground does not disclose  any
             arguable error of law."

 6. In relation to the refusal of the application, treated as  having  been
    made under the current immigration rules under paragraph 322(1A) of  HC
    395, as amended, in my view the appeal had no chance of success in  the
    light of the decision of the Court  of  Appeal  in  AA  (Nigeria).   In
    paragraph 68 of his judgment Rix LJ, with whom the remaining members of
    the Court agreed, said:

         "Secondly, however, a false representation stated in all  innocence
         may be simply a matter of mistake, or an error short of dishonesty.
         It does not necessarily tell a lie about itself.  In  such  a  case
         there is little reason for  a  requirement  of  mandatory  refusal,
         although a power, even  a  presumption,  of  discretionary  refusal
         would be understandable. It is noticeable that paragraphs  320  and
         322 also contain grounds on which entry clearance, leave to  enter,
         or leave to remain,  as  the  case  may  be,  "should  normally  be
         refused". If on the other hand a dishonest representation has  been
         promoted by another party, as happened with the sponsor husband  in
         Akhtar, then it is entirely understandable  that  the  rule  should
         require mandatory refusal, irrespective of the  personal  innocence
         of the applicant herself. Therefore, the reason of  the  thing,  as
         well  as  the  natural  inference  that  "false"  in  relation   to
         "representations" should have the same connotation  as  "false"  in
         relation to "documents",  together  argue  for  a  conclusion  that
         "false" requires dishonesty - although not necessarily that of  the
         applicant himself."

 7. In paragraph 76 of his judgment Rix LJ said, whether as a matter of the
    interpretation solely of the  relevant  rules  in  paragraphs  320(7A),
    320(7B) and 322(1A), but in any event when consideration was also given
    to the assurances given in the Lords' debate  as  supplemented  by  the
    Minister's letter to ILPA  dated  4  April  2008,  and  to  the  public
    guidance issued on behalf of the executive, the  answer  became  plain,
    and in essence was all of a piece. Dishonesty or deception was  needed,
    albeit not necessarily that of  the  applicant  himself,  to  render  a
    "false representation" a ground for mandatory refusal.

 8. Paragraph 322 provided grounds on which leave to remain in  the  United
    Kingdom was to be refused.  Sub-paragraph (1A) provided that  this  was
    to be the case:

         "where false representations have been made or false  documents  or
         information have been submitted (whether or  not  material  to  the
         application, and whether or not to the applicant's  knowledge),  or
         material  facts  have  not  been  disclosed,  in  relation  to  the
         application."

    The conclusion of the Court of Appeal was that although  the  applicant
    had not been guilty of personal  dishonesty,  he  was  caught  by  this
    provision. It was based on the wording of the sub-paragraph "...whether
    or not to the applicant's knowledge".

 9. It is common ground that in terms of Article 41(1)  of  the  Additional
    Protocol to the EEC  -  Turkey  Association  Agreement,  known  as  the
    "standstill clause" the United Kingdom was and is barred from  imposing
    conditions for business applicants less  favourable  than  those  which
    were in force when the United Kingdom became bound by the agreement  in
    1973.  Ms Gough conceded that  the  appellant  had  been  acquitted  of
    dishonesty in relation to the use of the false stamp  in  his  passport
    but nevertheless asserted that fraud or dishonesty could be imputed  to
    him under paragraph 322(1A). The difficulty  about  that  assertion  is
    that HC 510 did not contain a paragraph which in any way related to the
    terms of paragraph 322(1A) of HC 395, as amended.

10. Paragraph 2.1.1 of Chapter 6, Section 6 IDI, May 2011, which deals with
    business applications under the  Turkish  -  EC  Association  Agreement
    (ECAA) where it  can  be  shown  that  an  applicant  has  created  the
    opportunity to apply to establish in business only by virtue of  having
    sought  or  obtained  leave  by   deception   i.e.   has   made   false
    representations,  has  presented  false  documentation  or  failed   to
    disclose material facts, the applicant is considered to have engaged in
    abuse. This includes applications to which paragraph 321(i) and  322(2)
    of the current rules apply e.g. if entry clearance has been obtained by
    deception, particularly in light of the availability of entry clearance
    under the On Entry 1973  business  provisions.  Paragraph  3.2.1  which
    deals with those in possession of  Turkish  ECAA  businessperson  entry
    clearance says that:


         "Where it becomes apparent that  a  passenger  has  obtained  their
         businessperson  entry  clearance  by  deliberately   making   false
         representations,  presenting   false   documents   or   withholding
         information this is considered to amount to fraudulent  or  abusive
         conduct (refer to 2.1)  with  the  result  that  the  passenger  is
         excluded from taking the  benefit  of  the  standstill  clause  and
         assessed under the current rules. Their entry clearance  should  be
         cancelled under paragraph 321(i) and entry should be refused.

         Where it becomes apparent that a passenger in possession of an ECAA
         businessperson  entry  clearance  has  either  obtained  the  entry
         clearance as the result of false  representations  or  the  use  of
         false documentation, but without the passenger's knowledge or where
         there has been a change in circumstances since the entry  clearance
         was issued the passenger should be assessed under the 1973 On Entry
         rules and be refused if applicable in accordance with paragraph  12
         of HC509."

11. The terms of the IDI are in themselves conflicting.   Nevertheless  the
    IDI did not exist in 1973. In LE (Turkey) v Secretary of State for  the
    Home Department [2010] (CSOH 153)  Lord  Emslie  had  to  deal  with  a
    situation  where  it  was  said  that   the   Immigration   Directorate
    Instructions current from June 2009 onwards which must be taken to have
    informed the refusal complained of, were materially less favourable  to
    an "overstayer" in the petitioner's position than had  previously  been
    the case.  Lord Emslie reached the conclusion, ultimately without  much
    hesitation, that the petitioner's  contentions  were  well-founded  and
    must be sustained.  On the  authority  of  Savas  (external  relations)
    [2000] EUECJ C-37/98, a standstill clause conferred direct rights which
    might be enforced by an individual against an  affected  State.   Savas
    again appeared to him to vouch the proposition  that  new  restrictions
    must not be allowed to affect  applications  in  any  form  or  to  any
    material degree.  Comparing the June 2009 instructions  with  what  had
    gone before, it was to his mind impossible not  to  hold  that  a  more
    restrictive approach was introduced at that time.

12. It is significant in my view that in the  immigration  rules  in  force
    from 1st May 2007, paragraph 322(1A)  provided  for  refusal  of  leave
    without the addition of the words "whether or not  to  the  applicant's
    knowledge".  There is nothing in HC 510 or any other material that  has
    been drawn to my attention which shows that in 1973 an applicant was to
    be imputed with the dishonesty of another person where he  himself  was
    without blame.

13. In any event it can be seen that the approach  of  the  respondent  was
    without question unlawful in the light of the decision of the Court  of
    Justice of the European Communities in Oguz (external relations) [2011]
    EUECJ Case C-186/10. In paragraph 28 of its  judgment  the  Court  said
    that a standstill clause, such as that embodied in Article 41(1) of the
    Additional Protocol, did not operate in the same way as  a  substantive
    rule by rendering inapplicable the relevant substantive  law  which  it
    replaced, but as  a  quasi-procedural  rule  which  specified,  ratione
    temporis, the provisions of a Member State's legislation that  must  be
    referred to for the purposes of assessing the  position  of  a  Turkish
    national who wished to exercise freedom of establishment  in  a  Member
    State.  In paragraph 31 of its judgment the Court said  the  standstill
    clause did not therefore preclude Member States from penalising  within
    the framework of national  law,  abuse  relating  to  immigration.   In
    paragraph 32 the Court said the standstill clause must  accordingly  be
    understood as applying to a stage before the merits of  the  case  were
    assessed and before an assessment was made as to whether there was  any
    abuse of rights which might be imputed to the party concerned.  In that
    regard the Court had held that the issue of whether or  not  a  Turkish
    national was legally resident in the territory of a Member State at the
    time of  his  application  to  establish  himself  in  that  State  was
    irrelevant  for  the  purpose  of  applying  the   standstill   clause.
    Consequently, in accordance with the case-law, which was  the  decision
    in Tum & Dari (external relations) [2007] EUECJ Case C-16/05, the  fact
    that an individual,  such  as  Mr  Oguz,  had  not  complied  with  the
    conditions attaching to his leave to  remain  was  irrelevant  for  the
    purpose of applying Article 41(1) of the Additional Protocol.

14. The decision went on to differentiate the position in  that  case  from
    the position of the applicant in Kondova [2001] ECR  1-6427.   In  that
    case the applicant had knowingly misled the entry clearance officer  to
    gain entry to the United Kingdom but also Article 45(1)  of  the  EC  -
    Bulgaria Association Agreement was the rule of substantive law  on  the
    basis of which the merits of application for establishment fell  to  be
    assessed and which was allegedly  infringed  in  Miss  Kondova's  case.
    There was no standstill clause contained in that Article.

15. There is a passage in point in the judgment of Sedley LJ  in  Sonmez  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 582  dealing
    with the argument that the ex turpi causa  principle  applied  when  he
    said:
         "22.     Here, correspondingly,  it  is  common  ground  that  such
             controls as  public  policy  requires  are  contained  in  the
             Immigration Rules themselves. This seems to us to be a proper,
             indeed a compelling, approach to what is at root an  issue  of
             policy rather than of law. One looks first to see whether  the
             applicable code anticipates claims based  in  any  measure  on
             illegal conduct. If it does, there is no need  for  a  default
             rule   which,   among    other    things,    constitutes    an
             unsatisfactorily blunt instrument -  for  example  in  a  case
             where an overseas student with a limitation of 20 hours'  work
             a week on his visa has averaged less than this but has  worked
             sometimes a few hours more.
           23.    Here, as the Home  Secretary  and  the  appellants  agree,
             rules 4 and  21  of  HC  510  recognise  that  there  will  be
             differing degrees of merit among  applicants.  In  particular,
             rule 4 spells  out  that,  in  deciding  whether  to  grant  a
             variation of leave,  "account  is  to  be  taken  of  all  the
             relevant facts". This alone will bring into account any breach
             by the applicant of his or her visa conditions; but, every bit
             as importantly, it will do so in a fashion which is  sensitive
             to degree and circumstance and does not equiparate the  casual
             transgressor with the systematic cheat. "

16. The position is that while HC 510 does contain provisions  for  general
    grounds of refusal, unlike more recent immigration rules, those general
    grounds do not specify refusal on current paragraph 320(7A) or  322(1A)
    grounds.

17. In these circumstances I am  satisfied  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    judge made an error on a point of  law  in  his  determination  of  the
    appeal which I set aside.  I  re-make  the  decision  by  allowing  the
    appeal to the limited  extent  that  the  decision  of  the  respondent
    whereby she excluded the appellant from the benefit of  the  standstill
    clause and refused to consider the application under HC 510 was not  in
    accordance with the law so that the  application  remained  outstanding
    before her to be determined under HC 510 in accordance with my findings
    and those of the First-tier Tribunal judge in relation to the  lack  of
    personal dishonesty on the part of the appellant.




Signed

P A Spencer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
Immigration and Asylum Chamber
