




R (on the application of Salah Ali Eisa) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
Department (Dublin; Articles 27 and 17) [2017] UKUT 00261 (IAC)


                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber




                       The Queen on the application of
                               Salah Ali Eisa
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

                         THE HON. MR JUSTICE COLLINS


                               - - - - - - - -

Mr R Pennington-Benton, instructed by Lawrence Lupin Solicitors appeared on
behalf of the Applicant.

Mr B Tankel, instructed by the Government Legal Department appeared on
behalf of the Respondent.


(1)  Judicial review is a remedy of sufficient flexibility  to  comply  with
      Article 27(1) of Regulation 604/2013 (Dublin III).

(2)  Since an applicant is allowed to remain  while  this  review  is  being
      dealt with, there is  a  suspension  of  the  6  months  within  which
      transfer must be effected in accordance with Article 27(3)  of  Dublin
      III.

(3)  There is no obligation on the Secretary of State to exercise the  power
      under Article 17 to deal  with  a  claim  and,  albeit  a  refusal  to
      exercise the discretion under Article 17 is judicially reviewable,  it
      would require wholly exceptional circumstances to justify  any  relief
      being granted if otherwise there was no bar to transfer.



                    - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                    ON AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                              APPROVED JUDGMENT
                     - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -



MR JUSTICE COLLINS:


1.   This application has an unfortunate lengthy  history  because  the  two
    decisions which are  essentially  challenged,  namely  the  refusal  to
    consider the asylum claim made by the applicant which was on  9  August
    2015, and a subsequent  decision  to  refuse  and  certify  as  clearly
    unfounded, his application under Article 3.  This all  stems  from  the
    use made of the Dublin III Regulation  that  the  applicant  should  be
    returned to Italy because Italy is responsible  under  that  Regulation
    for dealing with his asylum claim.


2.   He is a Sudanese national.  He left Sudan in December  2014,  travelled
    to Libya, then on a boat arriving in Italy at the end  of  March  2015.
    He was arrested in Italy, fingerprinted, kept for a night at  a  police
    station and then released.  He only stayed in Italy for five  days,  he
    says, having nowhere to sleep and he was not provided with any food  or
    other sorts of relief.  He was apparently told by  the  agent  who  had
    presumably been responsible for getting him into  Italy  in  the  first
    place that asylum seekers did not receive help or support in Italy.  He
    then travelled by train to France and  stayed  for  some  time  in  the
    jungle in Calais.  He managed to conceal himself in the back of a lorry
    and arrived in this country  on  9  July  2015,  whereupon  he  claimed
    asylum. It is not necessary for the purposes of  this  judgment  to  go
    into any detail in relation to the merits  of  his  claim  for  asylum.
    Suffice it to say that it includes as it now transpires  an  indication
    that he was tortured for some time when he was in Sudan  and  there  is
    evidence that the scars that he has on his body are consistent with his
    account of torture that he underwent.

3.   The reason why it is not necessary to go  into  that  is  because  this
    application before me is limited.  There has been a lengthy history  of
    various orders that have been made.  Originally, Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Hanson decided on 16 November 2015 that his application for  permission
    was to be refused.  There was a renewal application made which  in  the
    end succeeded and a decision was made eventually by Judge Freeman  that
    the permission should be limited to an argument that Article  27(1)  of
    the Dublin III Regulation extended to enable material to be put  before
    the court to challenge the transfer on the basis that it should be  for
    the United Kingdom to determine the matter under Article 17.  That  was
    not  specifically  spelt  out  by  Judge  Freeman,  but  that  is  what
    essentially this application before me  is  all  about.   The  question
    raised was  whether  judicial  review  was  capable  of  providing  the
    applicant with an effective remedy in the form of a review in fact  and
    in law against a transfer decision before a court or  Tribunal.   Those
    are the words in Article 27(1) of the Regulation.

4.   That is not, as far as  I  can  see,  at  issue  between  the  parties.
    Judicial review is flexible enough, as will become apparent, to  enable
    factual issues if they go directly to the lawfulness of a transfer,  or
    if they go to whether a transfer would  breach  Article  3  rights,  in
    particular, of an individual, to be determined. If there is an issue of
    fact which needs to be  determined  in  order  to  decide  whether  the
    criteria required to enable transfer to take place under the Regulation
    were met, then such cross-examination as was needed could  take  place.
    There is no question, and there never has been, that judicial review is
    flexible enough to meet the needs of justice  in  an  individual  case.
    That has never been a problem in relation to human rights cases because
    it has always been recognised that whether there is a breach  of  human
    rights and whether, in a given case, if the right is not absolute,  the
    action is proportionate is a matter for the  court  to  decide,  not  a
    question as to whether the decision of the decision maker was one which
    could only be challenged on Wednesbury grounds.  That  is  the  general
    approach to human rights.  Equally, if,  as  I  say,  the  decision  in
    question that is impugned goes directly to whether a particular  course
    of action would be lawful, there may be a factual issue to  be  decided
    and if there is, that can be decided even on judicial review.  What  is
    not normally permitted  in  judicial  review  is  to  allow  subsequent
    factual issues sought to be raised to be entertained, apart from  human
    rights issues, and there is a general  rule  in  judicial  review  that
    factual matters that were not put to the decision maker at the time are
    not normally able to be relied on.

5.   So, as I say, the issue essentially before me that has been  raised  is
    the contention that even  if  it  is  not  possible  to  say  that  the
    applicant's human rights in terms of Article 3 would be breached if  he
    were returned to Italy, nonetheless, it is open  to  the  Secretary  of
    State to consider and the court can consider the issue  as  to  whether
    she  ought  to  exercise  her  power  to  entertain  the   application,
    notwithstanding that she  would  not  be  required  to  if  the  Dublin
    criteria were met.

6.   It is necessary therefore first to look at the relevant  provisions  of
    the Dublin Regulation, which is Regulation EU No 604/2013, known  as  I
    have said as Dublin III which superseded the previous Regulation Dublin
    II. One important difference between Dublin II and Dublin III  is  that
    under Dublin III an individual is entitled to put before  the  domestic
    court arguments as to whether there has been a proper carrying  out  of
    the provisions which enable transfer. There is now an appeal or  review
    which can be made against a transfer decision.

7.   The preamble to  the  Regulation  contains,  as  always,  a  number  of
    provisions which can be used to consider the correct interpretation  of
    any of the Articles.  The purpose behind the Dublin III  Regulation  is
    clear enough.  It is that there should be a  system  which  establishes
    which state is responsible for deciding an asylum claim and the  normal
    provision would be that the state which is  responsible  is  the  first
    state into which the asylum seeker comes.  In 2013 that may  well  have
    created no apparent difficulties, but as we all know, in the  light  of
    what has been happening in Syria and the extent  of  would-be  refugees
    coming from Africa via usually Libya on boats to again  usually  Italy,
    has meant enormous pressure on countries  such  as  Italy,  Greece  and
    other states which border the Mediterranean. It is not for  the  court,
    nor is it a material consideration in construing the Regulation that it
    may be argued that the whole basis of Dublin is in  doubt.  That  is  a
    political matter and it is not a matter which is material  in  deciding
    the approach of the court.  What it does mean though and has  meant  is
    that the pressure on the frontline countries, if I may call them  such,
    has meant that they in some instances have not been able to provide for
    would-be  asylum  seekers  sufficient  by  way  of   accommodation   or
    assistance so that that there has not been compliance with the dictates
    of Article 3 of the ECHR or Article 4 of the Charter of the EU which is
    effectively the same as Article 3, and those arguments have been raised
    in relation to some of the frontline states.

8.   Paragraph 19 of the preamble provides, and I quote:-

     "In order to guarantee  effective  protection  of  the  rights  of  the
         persons concerned, legal safeguards and the right to  an  effective
         remedy in respect of decisions regarding transfers  to  the  Member
         State  responsible  should  be  established,  in   accordance,   in
         particular, with Article 47 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of
         the European Union. In order to ensure that  international  law  is
         respected, an effective remedy against such decisions should  cover
         both the examination of the application of this Regulation  and  of
         the legal and factual situation in the Member State  to  which  the
         applicant is transferred."

    That makes clear that there must be an examination  of  the  manner  in
    which the Regulation has been applied in an individual case, that is to
    say whether the hierarchical criteria as they are called have  properly
    been applied; and secondly, whether there  are  such  problems  in  the
    Member State to which the applicant is to be transferred as  mean  that
    it is not appropriate in all the circumstances because there would be a
    breach of his human rights were he to be transferred.

9.   Equally, it is clear that one of the purposes of Dublin is to  try,  so
    far as possible, to ensure that there is a speedy  process  leading  to
    the transfer, if transfer is appropriate, so that there can be a speedy
    consideration of an application for asylum.  That of course is not only
    in the interests of an applicant, but also in the interests of ensuring
    that those who are not entitled to asylum are not to remain within  the
    European Union.

10.  Article 3 deals with what are described  as  under  Chapter  2  general
    principles and safeguards and access to  the  procedure  question,  but
    Article 4 provides for a right of  information  and  that  is  of  some
    importance because it requires by paragraph 1 as soon as an application
    for international protection is lodged in a Member State, its competent
    authority should inform  the  applicant  of  the  application  of  this
    Regulation and in particular of:-

    (a)  the objectives of the Regulation and the  consequences  of  making
         another application in a different Member  State  as  well  as  the
         consequences of moving from one Member State to another and so on;

    (b)  the criteria for determining the  Member  State  responsible,  the
         hierarchy of such criteria in the different steps of the  procedure
         and their duration, including the  fact  that  an  application  for
         international protection lodged in one Member State can  result  in
         that Member State becoming responsible in this Regulation, even  if
         such responsibility is not based on those criteria;

    (c)  deals with personal interview;

    (d)  with the possibility to challenge and to apply  for  a  suspension
         where applicable;

    (e)  the fact that there is data exchange between Member States; and

    (f)  the right of access to data.

11.  The purpose behind the giving of that  information  is  to  enable  the
    individual to put forward any matters that may be relevant  to  whether
    there should be a transfer under Dublin III.  There is  also,  as  will
    become clear, an obligation to provide that there be a  right  to  have
    recourse to legal representation  in  order  that  the  rights  of  the
    individual can be protected.

12.  Article 17 is headed "Discretionary Clauses" and it provides:-

         "1.  By way of derogation from Article 3(1), each Member State  may
         decide to  examine  an  application  for  international  protection
         lodged with it by a third-country national or a  stateless  person,
         even if such  examination  is  not  its  responsibility  under  the
         criteria laid down in this Regulation"

    and if the  Member  State  in  question  does  decide  it  becomes  the
    responsible Member State.

13.  Paragraph 2 of Article 17 provides:

         "2.  The Member State in which  an  application  for  international
         protection is made  and  which  is  carrying  out  the  process  of
         determining the Member  State  responsible,  or  the  Member  State
         responsible, may, at any time before a first decision regarding the
         substance is taken, request another Member State to take charge  of
         an applicant in order to bring together any  family  relations,  on
         humanitarian grounds based in  particular  on  family  or  cultural
         considerations,  even  where  that  other  Member  State   is   not
         responsible ...".

14.  Albeit that does not  directly  apply,  it  is  important  in  my  view
    because it indicates the sort of matters that are material in  deciding
    whether Article 17 should be applied. That  is  equally  recognised  by
    paragraph 17 of the preamble which provides:-

         "Any  Member  State  should  be   able   to   derogate   from   the
         responsibility  criteria,  in  particular   on   humanitarian   and
         compassionate grounds, in order to bring together  family  members,
         relatives or any other family relations and examine an  application
         for international protection lodged with it or with another  Member
         State, even if such examination is not its responsibility under the
         binding criteria laid down in this Regulation."

15.  The important aspect, apart from humanitarian,  is  to  bring  together
    family members, relatives  or  other  family  relations.  That  is  not
    exclusive because paragraph 17 of  the  preamble  uses  the  words  "in
    particular".  'Humanitarian' would tend to cover Articles of the  Human
    Rights Convention, although it  is  not  necessarily  so  limited,  and
    "compassionate" clearly has the possibly of a wider consideration,  but
    the purpose behind Article 17 as has been made clear by the  Luxembourg
    Court is to enable Member States to exercise  their  right  to  make  a
    decision to deal with a particular case, notwithstanding that there  is
    no obligation under the Regulation to do so.  The basis upon which they
    act is entirely  a  matter  for  their  discretion.   That  is,  in  my
    judgement, of very considerable importance because it is  difficult  to
    imagine that there is likely  to  be  any  case  other  than  the  most
    exceptional circumstances  where  if  the  transfer  decision  was  not
    subject to any bar on the basis of a failure to activate  properly  the
    hierarchical criteria or because of a breach of human rights,  where  a
    failure  to  exercise  the  Article  17  power  would  be  regarded  as
    reviewable.  I put it that way, although it is always reviewable  in  a
    sense that there is jurisdiction to entertain a claim for a failure  to
    apply Article 17. So much is clear from the case of  ZT  [2016]  1  WLR
    4894 but it seems to me that it would be  difficult  absent  some  very
    strong compassionate  circumstances  or  the  family  aspect  which  is
    specifically referred to in the preamble that a court  would  entertain
    such a claim.

16.  In relation to a challenge to that exercise of  discretion  the  matter
    falls, it seems to me, clearly within the Wednesbury umbrella,  and  it
    is only if it can be said that the decision of the Secretary  of  State
    not to apply Article 17 was unlawful within the  Wednesbury  test  that
    such a claim could succeed.

17.  I turn now to Article 27.  This provides under the heading "Remedies":-



         "1.  The applicant or another person  as  referred  to  in  Article
         18(1)(c) or (d) shall have the right to an effective remedy, in the
         form of an appeal or a review,  in  fact  and  in  law,  against  a
         transfer decision, before a court or tribunal."

18.  In this country the right is a right of review, there is  no  right  of
    appeal, and the question as I say that was raised by Judge  Freeman  is
    one that is, with respect, easily answered, and I have already answered
    it. It is to be noted that the information given  to  those  who  claim
    asylum and whose cases are under Dublin III consideration include  this
    under the heading "How is the country responsible  for  my  application
    decided?"  It goes on:-

         "The law sets out various reasons why a country may be  responsible
         for examining your request.  For these reasons it is considered  in
         the order of importance by the law starting from whether you have a
         family member present in that Dublin country, whether you now or in
         the past have had a visa or a residence permit issued by  a  Dublin
         country, or whether you have travelled to or through another Dublin
         country, either legally or irregularly.  It is important  that  you
         inform us as soon as possible if you have family members in another
         Dublin country.  If your husband, wife or child is an applicant for
         asylum or has been  granted  international  protection  in  another
         Dublin country, that country could  be  responsible  for  examining
         your asylum application.  We may decide to examine your application
         in this country, even if such examination is not our responsibility
         under the criteria laid down in the Dublin Regulation.  We will not
         send you to a country where  it  is  established  that  your  human
         rights could be violated."

19.  It  is  clear  in  my  judgement  from  that,  that  those  responsible
    recognise the power under Article 17, recognise the importance  of  the
    family member point, which again is highlighted in the passages which I
    have just cited, and a recognition that no-one would be sent back to  a
    country where it is established that human rights could be violated.

20.  So far  as  rights  of  appeal  are  concerned,  or  rights  rather  to
    challenge are concerned, the document provided  to  the  individual  in
    question has a page which is  headed  "What  if  I  disagree  with  the
    decision to send me to another country?"  It says:-

     "You have the possibility to say that you disagree  with  the  decision
         to send you to another governing country.  This is called an appeal
         or review. You will also ask for a suspension of the  transfer  for
         the duration of the appeal or review.  You can find information  on
         which authority to contact in order to challenge a decision in this
         country at the end of this leaflet.  When you received the official
         transfer decision from the authorities you had x days  to  make  an
         appeal (and then the words to the name of the appeal authority  are
         crossed out.  Of course, there is no such right of appeal).  It  is
         very important that you challenge the appeal  or  view  within  the
         indicated time ..."

    and then there is a reference to suspension  provisions  under  Article
    17(3).

21.  I questioned whether there had been a  suspension  because  the  normal
    limit for return absent a  provision  which  enables  further  time  to
    elapse is six months and that of course is long gone.

22.  Article 29 deals with questions of timing and that provides, as I  have
    said, that return must be within six months  of  the  acceptance  of  a
    request by another Member State to take back the person  concerned,  or
    the final decision on an appeal or review where there is  a  suspensive
    effect in accordance with Article 27(3).  27(3) is not entirely easy to
    construe.  It states for the purposes of appeals against or reviews  of
    a transfer decision Member States shall provide in their  national  law
    that:-

    (a)  the appeal or review confers upon the person concerned  the  right
         to remain in the Member State concerned pending the outcome of  the
         appeal or review; or

    (b)  the transfer is automatically suspended and such suspension lapses
         after a certain reasonable period of time (that is  the  period  of
         appeal or review); or

    (c)  the person concerned has  the  opportunity  to  request  within  a
         reasonable period of time suspension.

23.  The way that is drafted in my view makes it plain that  if  the  Member
    State provides the right to remain,  that  operates  as  a  suspension,
    because otherwise there would be no need  for  the  alternatives  which
    deal specifically with a power to suspend. It is the practice  in  this
    country, as I understand it, that those who challenge by way of  review
    a Dublin transfer decision do have the right to remain, and it seems to
    me that that, in the circumstances, properly operates as a suspension.

24.  The European Court of Justice has had to  consider  aspects  of  Dublin
    III  recently.   One  of  the  most  recent  cases  is   Ghezelbash   v
    Staatssecretaris van Veiligheid en Justitie (a Dutch authority)  [2016]
    1 WLR 3969.  The question before the court was whether the challenge to
    the hierarchical criteria could be made before the domestic  court  and
    the decision was clearly that it could, and what the court decided  was
    helpfully indicated by this approach in paragraph 53 where it said:-

     "A restrictive interpretation of the scope of the  remedy  provided  in
         Article 27(1) of Regulation No 604/2013 might, inter alia, thwart
         the attainment of that objective  by  depriving  the  other  rights
         conferred on asylum seekers by that  Regulation  of  any  practical
         effect. Thus, the requirements  laid  down  in  Article 5  of  the
         Regulation to  give  asylum  seekers  the  opportunity  to  provide
         information to facilitate the correct application of  the  criteria
         for determining responsibility laid down by the Regulation  and  to
         ensure that such persons are given access to written  summaries  of
         interviews prepared for that purpose would be in  danger  of  being
         deprived of any practical effect if it were  not  possible  for  an
         incorrect application of those criteria - failing, for example, to
         take account of the information provided by the asylum seeker - to
         be subject to judicial scrutiny."

25.  And then the question of delay was referred to and in paragraph  57  it
    was said that there was no intention that  judicial  protection  to  be
    enjoyed by an asylum seeker should be sacrificed to the requirement  of
    expedition, but it went on in 58:-

         "58.It should be observed in that regard that  the  risk  that  the
             conclusion of the  procedure  for  the  determination  of  the
             Member State responsible  may  be  excessively  delayed  as  a
             result of the scrutiny  of  the  correct  application  of  the
             criteria for determining responsibility is limited by the fact
             that such scrutiny must be carried out  within  the  framework
             established  by  Regulation   No 604/2013,   in   particular
             Article 22(4) and (5), which provides (i) that the requirement
             of proof should not exceed what is necessary  for  the  proper
             application of the regulation and (ii) that  if  there  is  no
             formal proof, the responsibility of the requested Member State
             should be  acknowledged  if  the  circumstantial  evidence  is
             coherent, verifiable and sufficiently  detailed  to  establish
             its responsibility.

         59.  Moreover,  as  regards  the  risk  of  delay  in  implementing
             transfer decisions, it is apparent from  Article 27(3)(c)  of
             Regulation No 604/2013 that, by specifying  that  the  Member
             States are to  provide  that  the  person  concerned  has  the
             opportunity to request, within a reasonable period of time,  a
             court  or  tribunal  to  suspend  the  implementation  of  the
             transfer decision pending the outcome of his  or  her  appeal,
             the EU legislature acknowledges that  the  Member  States  may
             decide that the  lodging  of  an  appeal  against  a  transfer
             decision does not, of  itself,  have  suspensory  effect  with
             regard to the transfer, which may therefore go  ahead  without
             waiting for the  examination  of  the  appeal,  provided  that
             suspension  has  not  been  requested  or  the   request   for
             suspension has been refused."

    That can apply if there is no right to remain which itself, as  I  have
    said, must in accordance with what seems to me the  clear  language  of
    27(3) provide for an automatic suspension.

26.  It is also to be noted that in the case CK v The Republic  of  Slovenia
    the court decided, the case being KC/578/16, that  the  application  of
    Article 17(1)  was  a  question  which  concerned  the  application  of
    European law, but it  could  mean  that  there  was  a  requirement  to
    exercise it in any particular circumstances, even if the  circumstances
    meant in a given case that there was going to be  a  problem  on  human
    rights grounds of return.  The case in question was a medical case.

27.  It seems to me in those circumstances that it is clear that Article  17
    is not a matter which is directly material in the right of review to be
    exercised under Article 27.  If there  is  a  lawful,  proper  transfer
    decision made because there is no reason  against  under  either  human
    rights grounds or a failure to comply properly with the  provisions  of
    the Regulation, then it is of course open to the Secretary of State  to
    decide nonetheless to deal with the matter, but she  is  well-aware  of
    that, as the document that I referred to makes clear, and  the  failure
    to do so if there is no breach of any of the procedures does  not  mean
    that it is appropriate to consider that issue on an Article 27  review.
    It is of course open, as I have said, for an  application  to  be  made
    specifically for that to be considered, but I suspect that if otherwise
    the return was a proper one and  there  are  no  family  considerations
    against it, it would be rare to say the least, that a court would grant
    permission.

28.  Accordingly, so far as the matter  directly  before  me  is  concerned,
    what I have just said will be the decision that I make for the  reasons
    that I have given.

29.  I refuse permission on the remaining issues.

Costs

30.  No order for costs save for the usual Legal Aid order.~~~~0~~~~
