

                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


       SG (child of polygamous marriage) Nepal [2012] UKUT 00265(IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at  Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 3 July 2012                                |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                         MR JUSTICE BLAKE, PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

                                ECO NEW DELHI

                                  Appellant
                                     and

                                     SG
                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:     Ms B Asanovic, instructed by Howe and Co
For the Respondent:    Miss C Gough, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


     i) Educational advantages and  economic  betterment,  which  might  be
        enjoyed by a child, if admitted to  the  United  Kingdom,  are  not
        compelling  considerations   to   make   that   child's   exclusion
        undesirable, where the biological mother has cared for  the  child,
        and will continue to do so, in the country of origin.


    ii) There is a legitimate aim in excluding from admission to the United
        Kingdom a woman who is a party to an actually  polygamous  marriage
        and that aim justifies the indirect effect of that exclusion on the
        child of such a marriage, in that it will be more difficult for the
        child  to  satisfy  the  immigration   rules   relating   to   sole
        responsibility and circumstances  making  exclusion  of  the  child
        undesirable.

   iii) The policies adopted  by  the  Secretary  of  State  to  facilitate
        admission of Ghurkha former soldiers and their dependants were  not
        intended to give more favourable treatment to children born  of  an
        actually polygamous marriage.

    iv) Paragraph 296 of HC 395, as presently applied, does not prevent the
        admission of such  children  and  would  probably  be  contrary  to
        Articles 8 and 14 ECHR if it did.

     v) In these circumstances it is not unreasonable to expect  a  sponsor
        to choose between coming to the United Kingdom  with  part  of  his
        family or remaining in Nepal with all its members, where there  has
        been no previous residence and establishing of family life  in  the
        United Kingdom.

    vi)  The  wishes  of  the  child  and  both  parents  are  relevant  to
        ascertaining what her best interests  are  in  the  context  of  an
        application for  admission  to  the  United  Kingdom  but  are  not
        decisive of the proportionality balance.

   vii) The proportionality balance in such cases is a fact  sensitive  one
        rather than determined by the rules.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
Introduction

    1. SG is a child born on 9 January 2003 in Nepal. She was the appellant
       below and the respondent before us. We shall refer  to  her  as  the
       claimant. Her father is SB Gurung and her mother is his third wife P
       Gurung.  Her father's first marriage was terminated by divorce.  His
       second marriage to S Gurung is still subsisting and there is  a  son
       born to that marriage. At the time  of  the  determination  of  this
       appeal the father, both wives, the claimant and her step sibling are
       all residing together in the father's house in Nepal.


    2. The father served in the Brigade of Ghurkhas from 1969 to  1985.  At
       the time he completed his military service there was no  opportunity
       for him to settle in the United Kingdom.  As  a  result  of  various
       changes in policy in recent years, there are now  immigration  rules
       providing for a right  of  settlement  in  the  United  Kingdom  for
       members of the Brigade of Ghurkhas  who  were  decommissioned  after
       1997 and various policies that make provision  for  those  who  were
       decommissioned before that date.


    3. In 2009 the father applied for entry clearance to come to the United
       Kingdom. The application was successful and he subsequently came  to
       the United Kingdom briefly in July 2010. His wife S Gurung and their
       son have also been granted  entry  clearance,  in  the  latter  case
       following an appeal against an earlier refusal.


    4. The claimant's application was refused on 29 October  2010,  in  the
       following terms:

           "You are living with both of your parents under the same roof in
           Nepal.  In considering your application I am not satisfied  that
           your sponsoring parent has been able to show that  he  has  been
           solely responsible for exercising parental care  of  you  for  a
           substantial period.  Therefore I  am  not  satisfied  that  your
           father has sole responsibility for you  or  that  you  meet  the
           requirements of the (Rules).  Your mother has  not  applied  for
           settlement. Your decision to  apply  to  settle  in  the  United
           Kingdom was one of choice, not necessity.  You live with both of
           your parents and your step mother and step brother.  You  attend
           school and there is no evidence to suggest that you do not  have
           a reasonable standard of living.  You have (?) cited or provided
           evidence of any medical condition.  You  have  not  demonstrated
           serious and compelling  family  or  other  considerations  which
           would make your exclusion from the United  Kingdom  undesirable.
           ... I have also taken account of the provisions of Article 8  of
           the Human Rights Act I consider that refusing  this  application
           is  justified  and  proportionate  in  the   exercise   of   the
           immigration control.  I note that refusing this application will
           not interfere with family life for the purposes of  Article  8.1
           which you can enjoy in Nepal."


         It would appear that the word  "not"  should  be  inserted  between
         "have" and "cited" as no such evidence was submitted.


    5. The claimant appealed against this decision. On 22 June  2011  Judge
       Radcliffe allowed her appeal with considerable misgivings because he
       concluded that on the facts the father did have sole  responsibility
       for the child for the following reasons:


           "The fact is that he is the only person who has an income.   His
           two wives and two children ... are entirely  dependant  on  him.
           He is the person who makes all the important  decisions  in  the
           household.  He  decides  what  schools  they  go  to  and  which
           religious beliefs are appropriate for them.  He guides them,  no
           doubt, in a number of ways and he is his daughter's mentor until
           she gets married... The sponsor says that he  cannot  leave  his
           daughter behind because the emotional and  financial  dependency
           on him by his daughter has created a tie between them that  goes
           beyond that of a normal adult child and parent relationship."


    6. The entry clearance officer appealed to the Upper  Tribunal  against
       this decision on the basis that the judge had failed  to  apply  the
       decided case law on the meaning of sole responsibility summarised in
       the decision of GD (Paragraph 297 (i)  (e):  "Sole  responsibility")
       Yemen [2006] UKAIT 49.


    7. On the 23 October, 2011 a  differently  constituted  panel  of  this
       Tribunal concluded that there was indeed an error of law because the
       judge had  recognised  that  the  claimant's  mother  must  "play  a
       significant and loving part in the upbringing of her daughter,  even
       though the sponsor may made the strategic  decisions  effecting  the
       life style of his daughter." That being so there was clearly  shared
       responsibility between the parents even though the  sponsor  is  the
       sole bread winner and takes all the major decisions in  the  child's
       life.  However,  it  also  concluded  that  a  further  hearing  was
       necessary to examine whether Article 8 required  the  appeal  to  be
       allowed having regard in particular to the  best  interests  of  the
       child and the impact on Article 8 decision making of section  55  of
       the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 and  the  decision
       of the Supreme Court in ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4.

    8. Supplementary witness statements were signed  in  January  2012  the
       effect of which may be summarised as follows:-

          i.  The claimant regards S Gurung  as  her  "big  mother"  and  P
             Gurung as her "little   mother".
          ii. The claimant wishes to live in the United  Kingdom  with  her
              father and big mother.
         iii. P Gurung understands that she is not eligible for  settlement
              in the United Kingdom as the second wife is the one chosen by
              her husband for settlement.
          iv. P Gurung agrees and approves her husband's decision to settle
              in the United Kingdom. She says:


                  "It is in the appellant's best interest  to  continue  her
                  education in the United Kingdom. She is a bright child and
                  would benefit from a better standard of education such  as
                  in the United Kingdom. I want the best for my daughter".


           v. It would be detrimental  to  the  claimant's  development  to
              remain  in  Nepal  with  her  mother  because  education  and
              employment  opportunities  are  extremely  limited  and   the
              options for her education and standard of living in Nepal are
              not as good.
          vi. P Gurung envisages that her contact would be maintained  with
              the claimant by visits by her to the United  Kingdom  and  by
              the appellant to Nepal during the school holidays.
         vii. The claimant's father stresses that  the  cultural  norms  in
              Nepal mean that it is perfectly acceptable for one husband to
              have two wives.  Fathers  take  the  important  decisions  in
              daughters' lives and he sincerely wishes his daughter  to  be
              raised in the United Kingdom where she would  have  a  better
              standard of living.
        viii. There is supporting evidence from the local school teacher at
              the claimant's school in Kathmandu  that  she  would  benefit
              from receiving a better education and quality of life in  the
              United Kingdom.


    9. Before us Ms Asanovic submitted in summary:-


           i. Even where a non-sponsoring mother was caring  for  her  child
              there  could  be  exceptional  circumstances  justifying   the
              conclusion that responsibility for the child's welfare was the
              sole prerogative of the father.
          ii. Having regard to the cultural context which  the  family  had
              lived since the  claimant's  birth  and  the  fact  that  the
              majority of those she  enjoyed  her  family  life  with  were
              entitled and intending to come to the United  Kingdom,  there
              were compelling reasons why her  exclusion  from  the  United
              Kingdom was undesirable within the meaning of the Immigration
              Rules.
         iii. The wishes of both parents reflected the  best  interests  of
              the child.
          iv.  The  decision  was  a   disproportionate   and   unjustified
              interference with the right to respect for that families life
              and therefore contrary to Article 8 ECHR.

Sole Responsibility

   10. There is no substance to the claimant's first  submission,  for  the
       reasons given by the Upper Tribunal in  setting  aside  decision  of
       Judge Radcliffe. Where a child's natural parent has  cared  for  and
       continues to care for the child, responsibility must  be  considered
       joint between the parents.  The exceptional  circumstances  referred
       to in the authorities would normally be  where  such  responsibility
       can no longer be satisfactorily provided for by  the  non-sponsoring
       parent through sickness, remarriage or other circumstances.  That is
       not this case here.

Exclusion undesirable

   11. We further consider that  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  was  fully
       entitled to conclude that  there  are  "no  serious  and  compelling
       family or other considerations which make  exclusion  of  the  child
       undesirable". It is plain from  the  case  presented  to  the  Entry
       Clearance Officer and on appeal to us that the factors  relied  upon
       are the economic and educational betterment  of  the  child  in  the
       United Kingdom.  Such betterment is not  the  kind  of  factor  that
       makes exclusion undesirable or within the meaning of the rule.


   12. We agree with the Secretary of State's statement of  policy  in  SET
       7.9 which provides:

             "The ECO should consider all the evidence as a whole, deciding
             each application on its merits:


               . Are the circumstances surrounding the child exceptional  in
                 relation to those of other children  living  in  that  same
                 country?
               .  Are  there  emotional/physical  factors  relating  to  the
                 sponsoring parent in the United Kingdom?
               . Are there mental/physical  factors  relating  to  the  non-
                 sponsoring parent? Where the  physical/mental  incapability
                 of the non-sponsoring parent has been established, an entry
                 clearance should normally be granted.


             But not considered acceptable  as  a  serious  and  compelling
             reason under this provision:
               . that the UK offered a higher standard of living than in the
                 child's own country".


   13. Nor does it follow, as Ms Asanovic submitted, that the child's  best
       interests required her admission because the majority of the  family
       members that she was living with were coming to the United  Kingdom.
       Of course,  we  recognise  that  the  consequence  of  her  father's
       migration is that the claimant will grow  up  in  a  household  with
       fewer family members than at present and recognise that would be  an
       unwelcome change in her life. The wishes  of  the  parents  and  the
       child herself are a factor in the assessment  of  what  the  child's
       best interests but  will  rarely  be  decisive  in  the  immigration
       context.  We are not persuaded that her best interests  require  her
       to be separated from her biological mother who is well able to  care
       for her.  This is an aspect we consider in further detail below.


   14. If her father were to come to the United  Kingdom  with  his  second
       wife and son, he would still support the  claimant  and  her  mother
       financially in the home that they continue to live in and the father
       would continue to be able to make the  important  decisions  in  his
       daughter's life albeit from abroad. There are no medical factors  in
       the case.  The claimant would continue to have her mother to turn to
       for support and guidance as she grew up.  She is  attending  a  good
       school by local standards and would have a good standard  of  living
       based upon remittances from  the  United  Kingdom  and  the  Ghurkha
       pension to which her father is entitled. She has never been  to  the
       United Kingdom nor established links here.

   15. Whilst the claimant would lose the presence of her  father  and  the
       extended family in which she has grown up, this is a consequence  of
       the father's decision to come to the United Kingdom with his  second
       wife and son, a factor that we give further consideration to when we
       consider Article 8.

   16. We reject the proposition  that  the  "exclusion  undesirable"  rule
       requires the UK to admit a young child simply because  the  head  of
       the household wants  her  to  join  him  irrespective  of  her  care
       arrangements in the country of origin.


   17. We, therefore, conclude that the claimant has not made  out  a  case
       for admission to join her father under the Immigration Rules.

   Ghurkha policies


   18. Nor indeed is there any case for her to be admitted under the  terms
       of the various policies supplementing the rules for the admission of
       Ghurkha soldiers.


   19. The claimant's skeleton argument and submissions refer to appendix A
       to the March 2010 policy statement:

         "That discretion will normally be exercised and settlement  granted
         in  line  with  the  main  applicants,  spouses,  civil   partners,
         unmarried and same sex partners, dependant children under  the  age
         of 18 years".


       However that statement has to be seen in context of the earlier part
       of section 13 of the policy explaining that where a  child's  parent
       is not joining the sponsor in the United Kingdom a child can only be
       admitted if there is either sole responsibility in  the  sponsor  or
       compelling circumstances making the child's  admission  undesirable.
       We also conclude that the  provisions  of  the  polygamous  children
       policy that we examine below make it clear that  these  requirements
       must be met before a child is admitted.


   20. We do not find that considerations of  historic  injustice  done  to
       Ghurkhas and remedied by the various policies have  any  application
       to this case. There is nothing  in  the  policies  to  suggest  that
       Ghurkha  soldiers  and  their  dependents  were  being  given   more
       favourable treatment than others with respect to  the  admission  of
       the parties to and the product of polygamous marriages.


   21. In any event, as her father  had  already  been  granted  indefinite
       leave to enter at the time of the  claimant's  application  and  the
       decision on it, this is a straight forward rules case rather than  a
       case  resting  upon  policy  and  requiring  a  decision  to  be  in
       accordance with the law by fairly applying that policy.


   Article 8 claim to admission


   22. This therefore brings us to the substantive argument deployed before
       us which was based upon the assumption that if neither the rules nor
       the  policy  could  assist  her  nevertheless  in  the    particular
       circumstances of this case,  the  refusal  of  entry  clearance  was
       unlawful and contrary to Article 8 ECHR.

   23. Ms Asanovic's  submissions proceeded along the following lines:

        i) Polygamous marriages are lawful marriages under the law of Nepal
           that is the law of the parents' domicile and consequently  gives
           rise to family life within the meaning of Article 8 (1).
       ii) Regard should be had to the local  cultural  norms  in  deciding
           that respect should be accorded to such family life and also  to
           the historic wrong that prevented Ghurkha soldiers  settling  in
           the UK on completion of their military service by contrast  with
           Commonwealth soldiers recruited abroad.
      iii) The refusal of entry clearance  is  an  interference  with  that
           family life because it requires the father to either give up the
           residence with his child or give up his right  to  live  in  the
           United Kingdom.
       iv) There is no legitimate aim promoted by  such  interference.  The
           economic interests of the United Kingdom cannot be  promoted  by
           excluding the appellant as her father can support her,  and  the
           Ghurkha policy demonstrates that  maintenance  requirements  are
           waived in terms of  admitting  under-age  dependants  of  former
           Ghurkha solders.
        v)  In  any  event  the   interference   is   not   justified   and
           proportionate. It discriminates against children  of  polygamous
           marriages. Even if there is a legitimate  aim  in  preventing  a
           party to an actually polygamous  marriage  from  coming  to  the
           United Kingdom to form a polygamous household, there is no  such
           aim with respect to the  children  of  such  marriages.  Further
           children of a polygamous marriage to which a British citizen  is
           a party will  normally  be  British  nationals  whose  admission
           cannot be prevented despite their status as the product of  such
           an union.
       vi) The above points  cumulatively  demonstrate  that  there  is  no
           pressing need to exclude the children  of  polygamous  marriages
           who are not such citizens and again the difference in  treatment
           between such children who have or do not have the right of abode
           is discriminatory and unjustified.

   24. We  observe  at  the  outset  that  although  there  has  been  much
       litigation about admission of  former  Ghurkha  soldiers  and  their
       families, most concern the circumstances in which an over-age  child
       will be admitted. This case does not turn upon such matters. We  are
       not aware of  any  litigation  concerned  with  the  children  of  a
       polygamous marriage and the  present  case  accordingly  breaks  new
       ground.


   Discrimination


   25. The claimant puts in the forefront of her Article  8  challenge  the
       proposition that she is being discriminated against on  the  grounds
       of her social status because  she  is  the  child  of  a  polygamous
       marriage.

   26.  However,  the  claimant  does  not  mount  a   challenge   to   the
       proportionality of the policy excluding  the  second  or  subsequent
       wives of such marriages. These amendments to the rules date from  as
       long ago as 1988 whereby actually polygamous second wives cannot  be
       admitted for settlement save in the circumstances that do not  apply
       here. They were not amendments specific to  Nepal  or  Ghurkhas  and
       must have excluded without challenge considerable  numbers  of  such
       wives from across the world.

   27. The legitimate aim here is not limited to considerations of  numbers
       alone, but to deter the formation of polygamous  households  in  the
       United  Kingdom.   Such  a  policy  is  well  within   the   state's
       discretionary  area  of  judgment.  Both  SB  Gurung  and  P  Gurung
       acknowledge it and have made their decisions in the light of it.  No
       application has been made to bring in the claimant's mother  despite
       the policy.

   28. The primary reason why the claimant failed to  secure  admission  is
       that  she  did  not  qualify  under  "the  sole  responsibility"  or
       "exclusion undesirable" heads of the Immigration Rules, not  because
       she is the child of a polygamous marriage.

   29. It may be the case that the rules excluding foreign spouses who  are
       party to  polygamous  marriages  have  an  indirect  impact  on  the
       admission of a child of such a marriage because it  is  more  likely
       that the requirement of the Rules will not be met where the excluded
       wife is available to care for and take responsibility for the child.
       Nevertheless, if the exclusion of such a parent is justified  as  an
       expression of United Kingdom public policy,  we  conclude  that  the
       indirect effect on a child who is being  and  will  continue  to  be
       cared for by such a wife is also justified.

   30. Perhaps the high point of this  aspect  of  the  case  was  when  Ms
       Asanovic pointed out the terms  of  paragraph  296  of  the  present
       Immigration Rules which are to the following effect:-

         "Nothing in these rules shall be construed as permitting a child to
         be granted entry clearance, leave to enter or remain  or  variation
         of leave where his parent is party  to  a  polygamous  marriage  or
         civil partnership and any application by that parent for  admission
         or leave to remain for settlement or  with  a  view  to  settlement
         would be refused pursuant to paragraph 7.8 or 278A."


   31. This paragraph was not relied upon by the Entry Clearance Officer to
       refuse the claimant's admission. Its meaning is not entirely  clear:
       is this provision designed to  prevent  such  a  child  entering  in
       accordance with any of the rules relating to children or only  those
       rules that give the child a contingent right if being joined by both
       parents?


   32. In Ms Asanovic's skeleton argument she cites part of another  policy
       instruction    (Immigration  Directorate  Instructions,  Chapter  8,
       Annex C of November 2009):

         "6.2 Children of polygamous marriages


         Where the application for leave to enter or remain  in  the  United
         Kingdom by a wife,  who  is  party  to  a  polygamous  marriage  is
         refused, any children that she may have by  her  husband  will  not
         qualify for entry either  (paragraph  296  of  HC  296  of  HC  395
         refers). It will rarely be appropriate  to  grant  entry  clearance
         where their natural mother is still alive and still in  a  position
         to care for them.

         The above paragraph would not apply to a child who has the right of
         abode, even if he is the offspring of a polygamous marriage. Such a
         child would be admitted on this basis in his own right."


   33. This instruction does  not  suggest  that  the  Secretary  of  State
       regards  paragraph  296  to  be  an  absolute  bar  on  the  child's
       admission. It indicates that the mother's presence in the country of
       origin and her ability to  care  for  the  child  mean  that  it  is
       unlikely that the child will be eligible for admission to the United
       Kingdom.  The policy also accurately notes that  children  with  the
       right of abode  (such  as  children  who  are  British  citizens  by
       descent) will be unaffected by the rule.


   34. Such a construction  of  the  rule  would  be  consistent  with  the
       Secretary of State's policy on which  Ms  Gough  relied  before  us,
       namely SET 7.17 with the heading  "What is the position for children
       of polygamous marriages?" It states:

         "Unless sole responsibility can be  demonstrated  by  the  sponsor,
         paragraph 296 overrides all other provisions in the rules  relating
         to children including:


               . the now withdrawn under 12 concession; and exceptional
                          . consideration given outside the Rules.

        The child will not normally qualify under paragraph 297  (f)  while
        the natural mother is   alive and still  able  to  look  after  the
        child, unless there are factors in the child's circumstances  which
        are  serious  and  compelling  in  comparison  with  the   ordinary
        circumstances of children in that country and which  indicate  that
        the child would not receive adequate care and attention there."


   35. Apart from the approach adopted in present policy  statements  noted
       above, we doubt the rule could be used  to  refuse  admission  to  a
       child where the father has sole responsibility or whose exclusion is
       considered undesirable, let alone cases where the Article 8  balance
       favours the admission of the  child.  Whilst  the  exercise  of  the
       balance can be informed by the terms of the rules or other  relevant
       policy, the outcome cannot be driven by it.  We  wonder,  therefore,
       what purposes the rule serves in its present form.

   36. Use of the rule to deny admission to a child whose welfare and  best
       interests suggest  should otherwise be admitted  would  be  directly
       contrary to the principle that the  welfare  of  the  child  is  the
       primary consideration  in  any  administrative  decision.  It  would
       therefore be contrary to the assessment of Article 8  cases  in  the
       light of the guidance in  ZH  (Tanzania)  [2011]  UKSC  4.  Further,
       reliance on the rule would constitute direct discrimination  on  the
       grounds of social status contrary to Article 8 taken  together  with
       Article 14: see for example the recent finding  of  a  violation  of
       Article 14 in the context of denial of nationality  to  illegitimate
       children in Genovese v Malta (Application no. 53124/09), 11  January
       2012. Whilst such discrimination might be capable of  justification,
       it is difficult to see why any different approach should be taken to
       such children by comparison with illegitimate children.

   37. However, none of these observations assists the  claimant.  We  have
       already concluded that she does not qualify for admission under  the
       exclusion undesirable limb of the  rules.  She  is  therefore  being
       denied admission  not  because  of  her  status  as  a  child  of  a
       polygamous marriage but because she is neither being joined by  both
       her parents nor does she meets the general criteria  for  joining  a
       sole parent. Her position would be akin to a child of a divorcee who
       is not admissible because the sponsor does not intend to  live  with
       his former spouse and the child is excluded because neither the sole
       responsibility nor exclusion undesirable test can be satisfied.


   38. Much of the claimant's argument was directed at  the  difference  in
       treatment between the claimant and a child of a polygamous  marriage
       who is a British citizen by descent from a parent who  is  party  to
       such marriage. However,  the  difference  in  treatment  is  not  an
       illogical and unjustified difference, but simply  a  consequence  of
       the principle in international and domestic law that  the  entry  to
       and residence in the United Kingdom of any British national  with  a
       right of  abode  is  not  subject  to  immigration  control  or  the
       permission of the Secretary of State. The claimant is not  comparing
       like with like. We  recognise  that  in  certain  circumstances  the
       British citizen and the foreigner may be analogously  situated,  but
       this is not the case when comparing the  right  of  entry  into  the
       United Kingdom.

   39. Equally the fact that anyone who is lawfully resident in the  United
       Kingdom, whether a British national  or  otherwise  can  live  in  a
       relationship akin to a  polygamous  household  with  more  than  one
       partner, does not mean that it is illogical and inconsistent to deny
       aliens the right to come to the United Kingdom for  the  purpose  of
       establishing such a household.

Balance of the Article 8 assessment

   40. Once the discrimination element of the Article  8  case  is  removed
       from the assessment, the rest of the Article 8 analysis can  proceed
       along familiar lines. We apply the structured approach  enjoined  in
       the guidance given in the well known sequence of House of Lords  and
       Supreme Court cases ending most recently in Quila [2011] UKSC 45.

   41. We accept that there is a family life enjoyed between  the  claimant
       and her father. This  is  where  respect  for  diversity  and  local
       cultural practice comes into play.  We  note  the  information  that
       entering a polygamous marriage is actually illegal in  Nepal  albeit
       that the practice is quite widespread and the breach of the criminal
       law does not nullify the marriage.

   42. We accept that denial of entry clearance  to  the  claimant  has  an
       impact on the family life presently enjoyed but  we  do  not  accept
       that the degree of impact is such as can be said to  interfere  with
       it or to impose a positive obligation on the state to admit her.

   43. We conclude that it would be reasonable  to  expect  the  claimant's
       father to continue to live in Nepal and there are  no  obstacles  at
       all to his doing so:-
         i. He has no house, home, employment or existing family ties to the
            United Kingdom;
          ii. He has never resided here other than for a brief stay in 2010
              and has remained in Nepal since then.


       We note the significance of the answer to  this  question  in  entry
       clearance cases: see Muse v Entry Clearance Officer [2012] EWCA  Civ
       10 at [21- 23] and [34].


   44. By contrast to the position in the Strasbourg decisions in  Tuquabo-
       Tekle v Netherlands (Application no. 60665/00), 1 December 2005  and
       Sen v Netherlands (Application no. 31465/96), 21 December  2001  the
       father is not being required to make  an  invidious  choice  between
       continued residence in the United Kingdom with a spouse  and  family
       who have grown up there and leaving  another  child  of  the  family
       behind in the country of origin: see Tuquabo-Tekle at [47] and [48].




   45. Further, we conclude that there is a legitimate aim being pursued in
       denying admission to a child in  the  claimant's  circumstances  who
       does not comply with the rules on admission. We  disagree  with  the
       submission that  there  is  only  a  rational  connection  with  the
       legitimate aim of the economic well-being  of  the  country  if  the
       applicant is likely to be a charge  on  public  funds  or  otherwise
       cause cost to the tax-payer. It is perfectly possible for a state to
       conclude that economic circumstances and good social  order  require
       that admission of aliens who have no right of residence is generally
       restricted to circumstances where they are both self sufficient  and
       meet other qualifying conditions such as both parents be present  or
       exclusion  be  otherwise  undesirable.  Thus  having  a  scheme   of
       immigration control and criteria for admission is part of the  means
       of promoting this legitimate aim.

   46. Whilst promoting a scheme of control is a response to  a  legitimate
       aim, that does not mean that maintaining the  rules  is  an  aim  in
       itself or that the  rules  themselves  strike  the  balance  between
       individual cases and the state. The  application  of  the  rules  is
       subject to the next step in the process. There will be always  cases
       where the rules are not comprehensive and do  not  cater  for  every
       eventuality and where admission is required despite the terms of the
       rules, but those cases are ones where the  proportionality  analysis
       yields a different outcome, particularly where the child's  interest
       requires admission, rather than because there is no  legitimate  aim
       promoted by maintaining a tight system of immigration control.


   47. Further, in this case to the extent that the exclusion of the  child
       is the indirect consequence of denying admission to the mother as  a
       party to an actually polygamous marriage, the modest contribution to
       the discouragement of such marriages in  Nepal  or  elsewhere  is  a
       legitimate aim in  pursuit  of  morals  and  the  rights  of  others
       particularly the pursuit of gender equality.

   48. We now turn to proportionality. We conclude that the interference is
       justified, proportionate  and  represents  a  fair  balance  of  the
       competing interests. For the same  reasons  we  have  identified  in
       dismissing the case under the  exclusion  undesirable  limb  of  the
       rules, the economic and educational betterment of the child is not a
       sufficient factor to require her  admission.   The  welfare  of  the
       child as identified in ZH (Tanzania)  is  not  simply  the  material
       improvement in a new country with  which  the  child  has  no  prior
       connection. A much more significant factor is that  admission  would
       take her out of the continuity of the daily care of her  mother  who
       has cared for her and whose care is satisfactory and appropriate.

   49. We agree with the ECO that if the father decides to come to  the  UK
       with the  family  members  who  have  been  granted  admission,  the
       resulting separation of father and the claimant is a consequence  of
       the father's choice of place of residence rather than the imposition
       on him of an invidious and intolerable choice. This is because there
       is no reason why the father needs to live in the UK albeit  that  he
       is entitled to do so.  It is  not  unreasonable  in  his  particular
       circumstances to have to decide whether to stay in  Nepal  with  his
       family intact or bring part here.

   50. In any event, the claimant's mother envisaged such visits as a means
       of her maintaining contact with her daughter but  the  position  can
       apply in reverse as well. This observation is not inconsistent  with
       the conclusions of the Tribunal in LD (Article 8 - best interest  of
       child) Zimbabwe [2010] UKUT  278  (IAC)  that  family  life  between
       parents and minor child is not normally conducted  by  the  internet
       and Skype and occasional visits. In that case the  Home  Office  was
       proposing to separate a well established family unit when  it  would
       not have been reasonable to expect mother and children to  relocate.
       Here, it is the claimant's father who proposes to separate her  from
       her mother because he chooses to take up the facility  of  residence
       in the United Kingdom when it would be reasonable to expect  him  to
       continue to reside in Nepal. If this is the course that he  proposes
       to take, then visits home to his third wife, and home, are all  part
       of the mode of life he must have envisaged.

   51. There is no reliable evidence that either mother or child  would  be
       socially ostracised if they remained in  Nepal  and  this  would  be
       detrimental to their interest. They would continue to  be  supported
       by the father. The history of Gurkha migration  suggests  that  many
       such families grow up without a constant presence of  a  father  who
       may be on active service or otherwise engaged in employment  abroad.
       By comparison with their neighbours the claimant and her mother will
       have  a  considerably  higher  standard  of  living  from   overseas
       remittances.

   52. We do not accept the  submission  that  the  fact  that  the  father
       normally makes the key decisions in a child's life  means  that  the
       state should respect his decision to bring in his child despite  the
       failure to comply with the immigration rules.  Ms.  Asanovic  relied
       in support of this submission on the observations  of  the  European
       Court  of  Human  Rights  in  its  decision  in  Osman   v   Denmark
       (Application no. 38058/09), 14 June 2011 at [73]. However, there the
       Court was explaining  why  the  child's  admission  to  Denmark  was
       necessary despite the father's decision that the daughter be removed
       from Denmark where she had grown up and sent  to  Kenya.  The  point
       being made is that although parents are entitled to  make  decisions
       for  their  children,  parental  wishes  cannot  outweigh  the  best
       interests of the child objectively construed. In our  judgment  they
       cannot by themselves impose a positive obligation on  the  state  to
       admit a child because the father wants the child to  be  brought  up
       here.

   53. For reasons given in the decision of T  (s.55  BCIA  2009)  -  entry
       clearance) Jamaica [2011] UKUT  483 (IAC),  the  statutory  duty  to
       have regard to guidance to promote  the  child's  welfare  does  not
       apply to children who are located outside the  United  Kingdom,  but
       the exclusion undesirable rule, the  principles  of  the  Article  8
       case law and the direction in the Secretary of State's guidance that
       the spirit should be applied  in  entry  clearance  cases   are  all
       relevant. We have had regard to this authority and the principles of
       the Code of Guidance but  we  are  not  persuaded  they  assist  the
       claimant in the particular circumstances of her case.

   54. In consequence, without addressing further each of  the  contentions
       in the skeleton argument we are quite satisfied that on the facts of
       this  case  and  the  evidence  relied  on,  the  claimant  has  not
       established that the denial of entry clearance was  an  interference
       with family life and  even  it  were,  it  is  a  proportionate  and
       justified  interference  in  pursuit  of  legitimate  aims  and  not
       arbitrary or discriminatory. In the circumstances the Article 8 case
       fails also.

Conclusion

   55. Accordingly we re-make the decision in this case by  dismissing  the
       claimant's appeal on all grounds: the decision is in accordance with
       the rules; it is in accordance with the  law  and  it  is  does  not
       infringe the human rights of the claimant and her family.








       Signed


       Mr Justice Blake
       President, Immigration and Asylum Chamber of the Upper Tribunal






       Date
       6 July 2012









