
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

MG (EU deportation - Article 28(3) - imprisonment) Portugal [2012] UKUT
00268(IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 8 August, 7 October 2011,                  |                             |
|21 May 2012                                   |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     MG

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant/SSHD:      Mr Parkinson (8 August 2011) and Mr P Deller,
(7 October 2011, 21 May 2012), Home Office Presenting Officers

For the Respondent/Claimant: Miss L Hirst, Counsel, instructed by The Aire
Centre


This decision refers to the Court of  Justice  of  the  European  Union  the
questions set out at the end of it.


      ORDER FOR REFERENCE TO THE COURT OF JUSTICE OF THE EUROPEAN UNION

1. This order arises in the context of an  appeal  by  a  Union  citizen/EEA
national against a decision by the Secretary of State to deport her  in  the
light of a criminal conviction for which she received a custodial  sentence.
Directive 2004/38/EC has introduced a new hierarchy of levels of  protection
against expulsion based on criteria  of  increasing  stringency,  depending,
inter alia, on the extent  of  residence  (see  recital  23):  (i)  a  Union
citizen/ EEA national or their family member who has not acquired  permanent
residence in the UK may be deported on grounds of public  policy  or  public
security or public health (the "basic" level  of  protection  under  Article
27(1) and Article 28(1)/ regulation  21(1))  of  the  Immigration  (European
Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (hereafter "the 2006 Regulations")); (ii)  a
Union citizen/EEA national or their family member with a permanent right  of
residence may only be deported on  "serious  grounds  of  public  policy  or
public  security"  (the  second-highest   level   of   protection;   Article
28(2)/regulation 21(3));  (iii)  a  Union  citizen/  EEA  national  who  has
resided in the  UK  for  (at  least)  a  10  year  period  previous  to  the
deportation decision may only be deported on "imperative grounds  of  public
security" (the highest level of  protection;  Article  28(3)(a)/  regulation
21(4)(a)). The questions addressed to the Court are to be found at  the  end
of this document: see para 44.

2. Article 28 and regulation 21 respectively provide as follows:

           Article 28
    Protection against expulsion
    1. Before taking an expulsion decision on the grounds of public  policy
    or public security,  the  host  Member  State  shall  take  account  of
    considerations such as how long the individual concerned has resided on
    its territory, his/her  age,  state  of  health,  family  and  economic
    situation, social and cultural integration into the host  Member  State
    and the extent of his/her links with the country of origin.
    2. The host Member State may not take  an  expulsion  decision  against
    Union citizens or their family members,  irrespective  of  nationality,
    who have the right of permanent residence on its territory,  except  on
    serious grounds of public policy or public security.
    3. An expulsion decision may  not  be  taken  against  Union  citizens,
    except if the  decision  is  based  on  imperative  grounds  of  public
    security, as defined by Member States, if they:
              (a) have resided in the host Member State  for  the  previous
              ten years; or
               (b) are a minor, except if the expulsion  is  necessary  for
              the best interests of the  child,  as  provided  for  in  the
              United Nations Convention on the Rights of the  Child  of  20
              November 1989.


    Regulation 21
    Decisions taken on public policy, public  security  and  public  health
    grounds
    (1) In this regulation a "relevant  decision"  means  an  EEA  decision
    taken on the grounds  of  public  policy,  public  security  or  public
    health.
    (2) A relevant decision may not be taken to serve economic ends.
    (3) A relevant decision may not be taken in respect of a person with  a
    permanent right of residence under  regulation  15  except  on  serious
    grounds of public policy or public security.
    (4) A relevant decision may not be taken except on  imperative  grounds
    of public
          (a) has resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous period  of
          at least ten years prior to the relevant decision; or
          (b) is under the age of  18,  unless  the  relevant  decision  is
          necessary  in  his  best  interests,  as  provided  for  in   the
          Convention on the Rights of the  Child  adopted  by  the  General
          Assembly of the United Nations on 20th November 1989.
    (5) Where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of public  policy  or
    public security it shall, in addition to complying with  the  preceding
    paragraphs  of  this  regulation,  be  taken  in  accordance  with  the
    following principles-
                 (a)  the  decision  must  comply  with  the  principle   of
      proportionality;
          (b) the decision  must  be  based  exclusively  on  the  personal
          conduct of the person concerned;
          (c) the personal conduct of the person concerned must represent a
          genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of
          the fundamental interests of society;
          (d) matters isolated from the particulars of the  case  or  which
          relate to considerations of general prevention do not justify the
          decision;
                (e) a person's  previous  criminal  convictions  do  not  in
      themselves justify the decision.
    (6) Before taking a relevant decision on the grounds of  public  policy
    or public security in relation to a  person  who  is  resident  in  the
    United Kingdom the decision maker must take account  of  considerations
    such as the age, state of health, family and economic situation of  the
    person, the person's length of residence in  the  United  Kingdom,  the
    person's social and cultural integration into the  United  Kingdom  and
    the extent of the person's links with his country of origin.


3.  The  respondent's  (hereafter  the  claimant's)  status   as   a   Union
citizen/EEA national derives  from  the  fact  that  she  is  a  citizen  of
Portugal. On 28 March 1998 she married JG, another  Portuguese  citizen.  On
12 April 1998 they travelled together to the UK. Between May 1998 and  March
1999 the claimant was employed in the hotel  industry.  In  March  1999  she
gave up work to have her first child, M (born 19 June 1999). The couple  had
two further children, J (born 28 October 2001) and L (born  1  March  2004).
Mr JG supported the claimant from March 1999 until their relationship  broke
down in 2006. Despite separating in December 2006, they remain married.

4. Their children  have  faced  serious  difficulties.  In  April  2008  the
claimant's three sons were placed in  foster  care  following  a  report  by
hospital staff that injuries to L were non-accidental. The  local  authority
initiated care proceedings. On 21 November 2008 a family  court  judge,  HHJ
Morgan, determined that the claimant had been responsible  for  causing  the
injuries to L. On 17 July 2009 the claimant was convicted on  one  count  of
cruelty and three counts of assault by beating to a person  under  16  years
(L) and was sentenced to 21 months'  imprisonment  on  27  August  2009.  In
October 2009 the family court made  a  12  month  supervision  order  and  a
residence order in favour of Mr JG.

5. When the local authority first became  involved  the  claimant  had  been
allowed supervised contact with her children whilst  in  the  community.  In
October 2009, by which time she was in  prison,  the  family  court  made  a
contact order which provided for supervised  contact  between  the  claimant
and the children during school holidays and for such further contact as  the
parents could agree. However, in April  2010  the  local  authority  stopped
contact visits and in August 2010 made an  application  for  contact  to  be
suspended. With the move of  the  father  to  a  different  local  authority
(Manchester) there were no longer any ongoing family court proceedings:  the
proceedings were ended by consent on or around 26  September  2011.  Despite
having completed her custodial sentence the  claimant  remained  in  custody
under Immigration Act powers.

6. What gives rise to this appeal is that on 11 May 2010  the  claimant  had
applied for a certificate of permanent residence in the UK. On  8  July  the
appellant (hereafter the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department  or
SSHD) refused that application and  decided  to  make  a  deportation  order
under s.5 of the Immigration Act 1971 on the grounds of  public  policy  and
public security pursuant to  regulation  21  of  the  Immigration  (European
Economic Area) Regulations 2006. The SSHD acknowledged that by the  date  of
the decision to deport in 2010 the claimant had  been  in  the  UK  over  10
years, but considered that the continuity of that residence had been  broken
by her imprisonment. Noting that the rationale  for  the  highest  level  of
protection was the degree of integration of Union citizens/EEA citizens  and
their family members into a host Member State (recital 23), the SSHD  stated
that: "A person does not become integrated into a host Member  State  whilst
held in one of its prisons." Nor in the view of the SSHD could the  claimant
benefit from the second-highest level of  protection  because  she  had  not
shown she had acquired permanent residence;  and,  even  if  she  had  shown
that,  there  were  serious  grounds  of  public  policy  and  security  for
deporting her. A fortiori the claimant could  not  benefit  from  the  basic
level of protection.

7. The claimant appealed. Her appeal was heard by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
(FtT) (Judge Monro and  Mrs  Greenwood).  In  a  determination  sent  on  10
January 2011 the FTT found that the claimant had  worked  between  May  1998
and March 1999 and had not left the UK since her arrival.  In  the  absence,
however, of evidence to show her husband  had  been  employed  or  otherwise
exercising Treaty rights, the FtT found that she was not the  family  member
of a qualified person under regulation 7 for the period required  so  as  to
entitle her to a permanent right of residence. The FtT  concluded  that  she
was   nevertheless entitled to succeed in  her  appeal  against  deportation
because, prior to the decision to deport her, she had been resident  in  the
UK for a period of over 10 years and so she could  not  be  deported  unless
there existed "imperative grounds of public security".  The  FtT  considered
the SSHD had failed to show that such  imperative  grounds  existed  in  her
case.

8. The respondent was successful in  obtaining  a  grant  of  permission  to
appeal. In a decision notified on 13 August 2011 the Upper Tribunal  decided
that the FtT had materially erred in law, principally because  its  reliance
on the claimant having accrued over 10 years continuous residence in the  UK
so as to be able to rely on the  highest  level  of  EU  protection  against
expulsion  ("imperative  grounds  of  public  security")  was  contrary   to
domestic authority, the case of LG and CC [2009] UKAIT 00024 in  particular.
The Upper  Tribunal  further  considered  that  it  could  not  re-make  the
decision itself  without  help  from  the  parties  with  obtaining  further
information relating to the claimant's husband's  working  history  and  the
dates the children had commenced schooling. It is  unnecessary  to  document
further stages of case management save to note that in response to  Tribunal
directions the SSHD confirmed that, as a result of enquiries made  with  Her
Majesty's  Revenue  and  Customs  (HMRC),  it  was  now  accepted  that  the
claimant's husband had been employed for most of the time since  arrival  in
the UK and hence that the claimant had qualified for permanent residence  in
May 2003 on the basis of a combination of her own period in  employment  and
as the family member of an  EEA  national/Union  citizen  exercising  Treaty
rights over the further requisite period. (The SSHD also accepted  that  for
this purpose, as a  result  of  the  Court  of  Justice  rulings  in  Lassal
(European citizenship) Case C-162/09; [2011] Imm AR 134  and  Maria  Dias  v
SSWP [2011] EUECJ C-325/09, the claimant was entitled to  count  periods  of
residence prior to the coming into force of 2004/38/EC (implemented into  UK
law by the 2006 Regulations on 30 April 2006.) It was also  conceded  by  Mr
Deller on behalf of the Secretary of State that as  regards  the  claimant's
permanent residence there was nothing to show she had lost  this  by  virtue
of absence exceeding two  consecutive  years  (Article  16(4)).  During  the
period whilst awaiting a response from  the  SSHD  regarding  the  husband's
employment  history,  the  Tribunal  also  directed  the  claimant's   legal
representatives to produce an up-to-date  medical  report  on  the  claimant
(this resulted in the production of a report dated 23 January 2012  from  Dr
D Coffey).   In  response  to  the  Tribunal's  earlier  directions  seeking
confirmation of the dates on which the claimant's three  children  commenced
education, Miss Hirst asked us to accept the dates identified by  the   AIRE
Centre in recent correspondence, namely  September  2004  for   the  eldest,
January 2007 for the second eldest and summer 2009 for the youngest.

9. We note two further matters that have happened during the course  of  the
proceedings. Although (as already noted)  on  completion  of  her  custodial
sentence on 11 July 2010 the claimant remained in detention  under  separate
Immigration Act powers, on 20 March 2012 she was successful in  obtaining  a
grant  of  bail,  which  continues.  The  other  matter   relates   to   the
constitution of the Upper Tribunal panel. With the consent  of  the  parties
UTJJ Storey and Jarvis were joined for the hearing on 7 October 2011 by  UTJ
Allen. By the time of the hearing in May 2012  the  hearing  continued  with
UTJJ Storey and Allen presiding, UTJ Jarvis  being  unable  to  sit  due  to
illness; again this was with the consent of the parties.

The claimant's personal and family circumstances

10. Whilst there is no dispute about  the  basic  facts  of  the  claimant's
case, the various reports carried out in respect  of  her  criminal  conduct
and her attempts to have contact with her children have  expressed  somewhat
differing views. In her refusal letter the SSHD placed heavy reliance  on  a
NOMS (National  Offender  Management  Service)  OASys  (Offender  Assistance
System)  report completed on 5 July 2010  noting  that  on  arrest  she  was
addicted to  heroin  and  had  admitted  associating  with  other  substance
misusers. The author  noted  that  on  18  April  2010,  Bronzefield  prison
reported that the claimant had threatened to  strangle  any  child  she  saw
either in prison or outside as she could not stand being near children.  The
author assessed the level of risk of her harming both her own  children  and
children in general as "high" noting  that  she  "continues  to  deny  index
offence" and "has made threats against other children in general".  It  also
noted her history of substance  misuse.  Other  reports  expressing  similar
concerns include a psychiatric report by Dr C McEvedy of 24  April  2009,  a
report by Dr P Yates (Child, Adolescent and Family Psychiatrist),  24  April
2009, a social work report by Mr J Ruddick, 27 August 2010 and a  report  by
Dr J Smith, 9 December 2010. On the other hand, the report by social  worker
Mr C Flatman, February 2009 took a more sanguine view  and  considered  that
rehabilitation  of  the  claimant's  relationship  with  her  children   was
possible. The family court judge's findings in  July  2011  noted  that  the
claimant had yet to demonstrate that she could maintain a stable,  drug-free
lifestyle upon her release from prison and limited any contact  to  indirect
contact. However, he did not rule out direct contact in the  future  if  the
claimant made improvements. Although accepting  that the children  would  be
devastated if their mother were to be removed from the UK  permanently,  the
judge said that nevertheless "the risk of emotional harm  to  them  is...too
great to allow direct supervised contact to  take  place  in  the  immediate
future and can only be contemplated once [the claimant] has  worked  on  her
problems ....".The most recent report, by Dr Coffey, dated 23  January  2012
records an improvement in her mental state but  states  that  the  prognosis
for her future rehabilitation in the community  would  largely  depend  upon
her engagement with various support agencies  and  her  ability  to  abstain
from illicit drugs and abusive relationships.

11. Whilst some observations in the above body of evidence have indicated  a
continuing risk of re-offending, others have not. Even the NOMs report of  5
July 2010 (which had identified a high level of risk of her harming her  own
or other children) had  concluded  (albeit  with  questionable  consistency)
that her likelihood of re-conviction was "low".

12. In order to follow the submissions and our subsequent analysis, it  will
assist if we set out the following chronology:

Chronology
28.3.98:  C (Claimant) marries JG, another Portuguese citizen
12.4.98:  couple travel together to UK
May 1998 - March 1999:  C is employed in hotel industry
March 1999: C gives up work as pregnant
19.6.1999:  first child, M, born
28.10.2001:  second child, J, born
1.3.2004:  third child, L, born
December 2006: couple separate
March 2008: C arrested for offences of child cruelty
April 2008: concerns having been raised about injuries to child L, the
children are placed in foster care and local authority initiates care
proceedings
21.11.2008:  family court judge finds C responsible for causing injuries to
child L
17.7.2009:  C convicted on 1 count of cruelty and 3 counts of assault by
beating to child L
17.7.2009: C remanded in custody pending sentence
27.8. 2009: C sentenced to 21 months imprisonment
16.10. 2009: family court makes supervision and residence order in favour
of Mr JG. It allows C supervised contact with children
April 2010: local authority stops children's contact visits with C and
makes an application for contact to be suspended
11.5.2010: C applies for permanent residence
8.7.2010: SSHD refuses that application
 11.7.2010: C completes her custodial sentence but is redetained under
Immigration Act powers
19.1.2011: First tier Tribunal finds C not entitled to permanent residence
but allows her appeal against expulsion on basis she had accrued over 10
years residence and there were no "imperative grounds of pubic security" to
support expulsion. SSHD appeals
5.7.2011 family court maintains supervision order and also makes a
prohibited steps order
8.8.2011: hearing before Upper Tribunal
13.8.2011: Upper Tribunal issues decision setting aside decision of First-
tier Tribunal for error of law
26.9.2011: family court proceedings ended by consent
7.10.2011: hearing before Upper Tribunal (part-heard)
20.3.2012: C granted bail
21.5.2012: hearing before Upper Tribunal

Submissions

13.  At  each  of  the  hearings  before  the  Upper  Tribunal,   the   SSHD
(represented by Mr Parkinson at the  first  hearing  and  thereafter  by  Mr
Deller) has accepted that if the claimant could  benefit  from  the  highest
level of EU protection against expulsion, she was  entitled  to  succeed  in
her appeal, as her criminal conviction did  not  give  rise  to  "imperative
grounds of public security". However, the SSHD  does  not  accept  that  she
could benefit from that level of protection,  because  (counting  back  from
the decision to deport in July 2010) her period of custodial sentence  which
began on 27 August 2009 caused a break in the continuity  of  her  residence
so as to mean she could not show the necessary 10 years. That was  the  only
analysis consistent with UK case law, LG and CC in particular.   Miss  Hirst
for the claimant conceded that if  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal's
analysis in LG and CC was correct, then the claimant could not  succeed  for
the reasons given by Mr Parkinson and Mr  Deller.  She  submitted,  however,
that we should consider that  existing  UK  Tribunal  and  Court  of  Appeal
authority - (HR (Portugal) [2009] EWCA Civ 371 in  particular  -   had  been
overset by the Court of Justice ruling in Tsakouridis [2010] EUECJ  C-145/09
[2011] Imm AR 276. The further point was made that it may be  incorrect  for
regulation 21(4)(a) of the 2006 Regulations to impose a  requirement  of  10
years "continuous"  residence,  since  Article  28(3)(a)  does  not  specify
anything about continuity.

14. As regards whether the claimant was entitled to succeed  in  her  appeal
on the basis  of  the  second-highest  level  of  EU  protection  concerning
"serious grounds of public policy or  security"  (Article  28(2)),  we  have
already noted that the SSHD has modified her original position so  that  she
now  accepts  that  the  claimant  had  acquired  and  not  lost   permanent
residence. However,  she  maintains  her  stance  that  there  were  serious
grounds for deporting the  claimant  pursuant  to  Article  28(2)/regulation
21(3). Miss Hirst for the claimant submitted that the  SSHD  had  not  shown
that.

15. Mr Parkinson and Mr Deller also submitted that there  were  very  strong
reasons to find that the claimant could not benefit from the basic level  of
protection. Given the findings of the NOMs report  and  subsequent  concerns
expressed by Dr Smith in December 2010, it was clear, they  submitted,  that
the claimant posed a continuing threat to her  own  if  not  other  children
also. Reports by professionals also indicated that  she  continued  to  deny
the offences and that she was likely to relapse back into  substance  abuse.
Opposed to this, Miss Hirst submitted that for  the  respondent  to  justify
deportation of the appellant even under  the  lowest  or  "basic"  level  of
protection, she would have to show she posed a present and immediate  threat
to public security and she could not rely on  there  being  general  reasons
for prevention or deterrence. The  appellant's  offence  was  not  an  index
offence that met this test.  In June 2010  the  appellant  was  assessed  as
being at a low risk of reoffending. She had  no  previous  convictions.  Her
drugs problem was described as a thing of the past. There was no finding  of
a general risk to children.  As a matter of law denial of guilt  was  not  a
factor impacting on risk of re-offending. This was a very different type  of
offence from the prolific criminal offending involved in HR  (Portugal),  LG
(Italy) [2008] EWCA Civ 190 and LG and CC.

16. Both parties  accepted  that  the  Tribunal's  eventual  proportionality
assessment under Article 28 would  have  to  be  informed  by  human  rights
norms, the Article 8 ECHR right to respect for family life and  its  Charter
equivalent being of particular importance. But even if that  assessment  was
unfavourable to the claimant, it would still be necessary  under  the  Human
Rights Act 1998 to consider the  claimant's  position  in  relation  to  her
right to respect for private and family life under Article  8  of  the  ECHR
separately. Mr Parkinson and Mr Deller contended that her deportation  would
not be a disproportionate  step,  particularly  bearing  in  mind  that  the
family court had awarded  residence  to  the  father  and  clearly  did  not
consider that it was in the children's best interests for her to  live  with
them or have direct contact with them. There were also  valid  interests  of
the  UK  served  by  the  deportation  decision  in  maintaining   effective
immigration control and preventing crime.  The  crime  being  one  of  child
cruelty made it serious in nature. Miss Hirst, contrariwise, contended  that
even if the Tribunal were to find that the decision to  deport  met  EU  law
requirements,  we  should  find  the  decision  to  deport  amounted  to   a
disproportionate interference with her Article 8(1)  ECHR  rights.  In  this
context, she  submitted,  we  could  take  account  of  evidence  since  the
deportation decision, which included the fact that the claimant was now  out
on bail and that the latest medical  report  of  Dr  Coffey  was  much  more
sanguine about her prospects of becoming in the future a suitable parent.

Analysis

17. As a result of the SSHD's concession in the course of  proceedings  that
the claimant had acquired permanent residence by May 2003,  the  start-point
of our analysis must be that she is entitled either to the highest-level  or
to the second-highest level of EU protection against  expulsion.  Mr  Deller
also conceded that as regards the claimant's permanent residence  there  was
nothing to show she had  lost  this  by  virtue  of  absence  exceeding  two
consecutive years (Article 16(4)).

18. It is submitted by both parties that our initial task  is  to  determine
the duration of the claimant's residence in the UK  so  as  to  decide  what
level of protection against deportation she was entitled to in  the  UK  for
Article 28 (regulation 21)  purposes.  As  regards  the  wider  question  of
whether the decision to deport was  considered  to  be  proportionate  under
Article 28 (regulation 21) - and  the  same  would  apply  to  free-standing
Article 8 grounds of appeal  - Miss Hirst submitted that  we  were  entitled
to have regard to more recent evidence.

19. It appears to be the position of both parties that for the  purposes  of
Article 28 and regulation 21, reference to a  period  of  imprisonment  must
mean the period commencing from the date  of  the  lawful  sentence  imposed
following a criminal conviction (in the claimant's case, that date being  27
August 2009).  One argument in favour of that view is that  it  would  avoid
potentially counting against a person time in prison  even  when  they  have
subsequently been acquitted or charges have been dropped. (In HR  (Portugal)
[2009] EWCA Civ 317 at paras 39 (Elias LJ) and 45 (Sedley  LJ)  stated  that
it may be necessary to make adjustments to deal with  an  imprisoned  person
who successfully appeals his conviction). At the same time, it  is  a  point
that their Lordships considered not to be  wholly  settled  and  it  is  not
clear how the above basis of calculation  addresses  the  frequent  scenario
when a person is remanded in custody and  then  has  time  spent  on  remand
counted  towards  the  period  of  sentence  (pending  trial   and/or   upon
conviction and pending sentence being passed).

20. Both parties submit that , on the basis of LG and CC,  for the  purposes
of calculating 10 years under Article 28(3)(a) and regulation 21(4)(a),  the
exercise is one of counting back from the date of  decision.  (Whether  that
is correct in law, however, is something we return to below).

21. As already noted, the SSHD accepts  that  if,  counting  back  from  the
decision to deport, the claimant's period of imprisonment did not break  the
continuity of her residence for  Article  28(3)  purposes,   the  claimant's
appeal  must  succeed  because  there  are  not  "imperative  grounds"   for
deporting her.  The SSHD also accepts that the  claimant  has  completed  10
years' residence (comprised of 5  years  of  permanent  residence  and  five
further years) prior to being  sentenced  on  27  August  2009.  So  far  as
concerns her permanent residence, she acquired this, as Article  16  of  the
Directive  and  regulation  15(1)(b)  of  the  2006   Regulations,  provide,
through a combination of her own employment in 2008/9  and   as  the  family
member of a Union  citizen's/EEA  national's  (her  husband's)  exercise  of
Treaty rights. So far as  concerns  her  putative  10  years  residence  for
Article 28(3) purposes, she possesses this, if  at  all,  on  the  basis  of
herself being a Union citizen/EEA national (unlike Article 16, the  personal
scope of  Article 28(3) is confined to Union citizens).

Article 28(3)
22. Bearing the above in mind, it seems to us that we should  first  of  all
seek to resolve this appeal  in  the  context  of  Article  28(3)/regulation
21(4): if the claimant's period of 10 years residence was not broken by  her
imprisonment, then it is conceded her appeal should be allowed.

23. But in seeking to do that we encounter a very real  difficulty.  As  the
Upper Tribunal has observed in two reported cases, Jarusevicius (EEA Reg  21
-  effect  of   imprisonment)   [2012]   UKUT   00120(IAC)   and   Onuekwere
(imprisonment - residence) Nigeria [2012] UKUT 269 (IAC) (03  August  2012),
the law on whether imprisonment breaks continuity of residence  for  Article
28(2) or Article 28(3) purposes - or indeed for the  purposes  of  acquiring
permanent residence under Article 16 - is in a state of uncertainty.

24. On the one hand, UK case law has up until very recently taken  the  view
that imprisonment breaks continuity of  residence:  see,  in  the  Court  of
Appeal,  Bulale [2008] EWCA Civ 806; Valentine Batista [2010] EWCA Civ  896;
HR (Portugal); Carvalho [2010] EWCA Civ 1406; and in the Tribunal,  Ogunyemi
(imprisonment breaks continuity of residence) [2010]  UKUT  164  (IAC).  The
Upper Tribunal, of course, is bound by  Court  of  Appeal  authority  unless
there is supervening Court of Justice authority to the contrary.

25. On the other hand, in the Court of Justice in Nazli  [2000]  ECR  I-957,
Orfanopolous and Oliveri [2004] ECR-I;  and  Dogan  [2005]  ECR  I-6237  and
5257, periods of imprisonment on remand or serving a sentence were held  not
to break the continuity of status as a worker  long  resident  in  the  host
Member State. In addition, there have now been two Court of Justice  rulings
which appear to proceed on the basis that a recent  period  of  imprisonment
does  not  break  continuity  of  residence  for  Article  28(3)   purposes:
Tsakouridis  [2010]  EUECJ  C-145/09  [2011]  Imm  AR  276  and  P.   I.   v
Oberburgermeisterin der Stadt Remscheid (Freedom of  movement  for  persons)
[2012] EUECJ C-348/09 (22 May 2012).

26. At the same time,  in neither Tsakouridis nor PI was the Court asked  to
rule on the effect of imprisonment as such and there is now  the  additional
fact  that  Advocate  General  Bot  in  his  earlier  opinion   in    PI   v
Oberburgermeisterin der Stadt Remescheid  (Case  C-348/09),  6  March  2012,
considered that although the integration of a Union citizen  was,  in  fact,
based on territorial and time factors, it was  also  based  on  "qualitative
elements" (he referred to Case C-285/95 Kol [1997] ECR I-3069)  and  in  the
instant case reasoned that if acts committed by a person showed  he  or  she
was not actually integrated, then to acknowledge that such  a  person  might
derive from his criminal conduct the  right  to  enhanced  protection  under
Article 28(3) (Mr I  had committed acts of coercion  and  rape  of  a  minor
daughter of his former partner between 1990 and 2001), would  conflict  with
the values on which citizenship of the Union was based (see  paras  49,  53-
62). In its subsequent ruling the Court neither rejected nor  approved  this
aspect of the Advocate General's opinion.

27. In Jarusevicius (EEA Reg 21 - effect of imprisonment) [2012] UKUT
00120(IAC), the Upper Tribunal chaired by the President, Mr Justice Blake
stated at para 60:

         "... it is difficult to reconcile the conclusion of the AIT  in  LG
    and CC that service of a sentence  of  imprisonment  in  the  10  years
    before the decision  to  deport  prevents  the  greater  protection  of
    "imperative grounds" arising,  with  the  conclusion  of  the  CJEU  in
    Tsakouridis reached on the basis that it could. In a  case  where  this
    issue is central to the  outcome,  it  may  be  necessary  to  consider
    whether the UT is able to reach its own conclusion on  the  matter,  or
    should make a reference to the CJEU  or  is  bound  by  a  CA  decision
    pending any reference that is made by that court."

28. In Onuekwere (imprisonment - residence) Nigeria [2012]  UKUT  269  (IAC)
(03 August 2012) another constitution of the Upper  Tribunal,  conscious  of
the above  observation  in  Jarusevicius,  decided  to  make  an  order  for
reference in a case concerning an appellant who had never spent a period  of
five years legal residence in the host Member State (UK) if his  periods  of
imprisonment were excluded.

Article 28(2)

29. Given the uncertain state of the law regarding  Article  28(3)  we  gave
consideration to whether we could resolve the appeal  by  reference  to  the
second-highest level of protection, under Article  28(2),  "serious  grounds
of public policy or security". The SSHD takes the view that  deportation  of
the claimant is not precluded by  application  of  this  test  whereas  Miss
Hirst for the claimant takes the view that it is. We consider this  question
as being finely balanced. On the one  hand,  there  were  positive  comments
made in some of the various reports by  professionals  tending  to  indicate
that even in July 2010 the claimant could not be seen as  a  present  threat
to society and that the risk of her re-offending was low. A year later,  the
family court judge in July 2011 did not rule out  that  the  claimant  could
rehabilitate and that, if she did, direct contact with  her  children  might
become appropriate.  The  latest  medical  report  of  Dr  Coffey  notes  an
improvement in her mental state and expresses similar hopes in  relation  to
rehabilitation. On the other hand, in the various reports there are  serious
concerns expressed as to whether the claimant has faced up to her crimes  or
has demonstrated that she  is  free  of  her  involvement  with  heroin  and
association with substance-abusers; and the risk of her causing harm to  her
own children and others was assessed in the July 2010 NOMS report  as  high.
In a psychiatric report of 9 December 2010 Dr Smith's opinion was  that  she
posed a risk to her own children were she to have unsupervised contact  with
them.  In July 2011 the family court judge found the claimant posed  a  high
risk of emotional harm to her children and stated that "there is  clearly  a
risk of direct physical harm to the children as well but  this  is  not  the
highest risk as it could be addressed  by  adequate  supervision  of  direct
contact to secure the physical safety of the children". When  considering  a
criminal conviction involving violence inflicted on a minor and a case  with
a history of family court proceedings in which the court has taken the  view
that there should only be  indirect  contact  with  the  children  by  their
mother (the claimant), the Tribunal is also obliged  to  attach  significant
weight to the rights of children to the protection and  care  necessary  for
their well-being, as provided for by the United Nations  Convention  on  the
Rights of the Child of 20 November  1989  and  the  Charter  of  Fundamental
Rights of the European Union (and  in  the  UK,  by  s.55  of  the  Borders,
Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009). Further, as  already  noted,  we  are
aware that as a result of another panel  of  this  Tribunal  having  already
made an order for reference  raising,  inter  alia,  the  issue  of  whether
imprisonment breaks continuity of residence for  Article  16  purposes  (see
Onuekwere) the answers given by the Court of Justice to  its  questions  may
well have implications for how the proportionality assessment is to be  made
under Article 28.

Article 27(1)/Article 28(1)

30. We also gave consideration to Miss Hirst's submission that we  could  in
any event resolve this  appeal  by  reference  to  the  basic  level  of  EU
protection against expulsion (the basic level). We are not  able  to  accept
that submission as we are presently persuaded that the SSHD has  established
that there were grounds of public policy and public  security  for  deciding
to deport the claimant.

31. We also raised with the parties the possible relevance  to  this  appeal
of the fact that  the  claimant's  children  are  now  in  education  (since
September 2004 and June 2007 in the case of the oldest two and  summer  2009
in the case of L) and that the claimant is able to  pray  in  aid  the  fact
that up to April  2008  she  was  the  children's  primary  carer  and  thus
entitled to a right of residence under Article  12  of  Regulation  1612/68.
Having heard their submissions on  this  matter,  we  think  it  clear  that
whilst this may well be  a  relevant  factor  in  conducting  the  balancing
exercise required under Article 28 of the Directive  and  regulation  21  of
the 2006 Regulations (and also Article 8 ECHR), it cannot be  conclusive  of
the issues we have to decide.

32. Accordingly, in our judgment, it is essential that we first resolve  the
Article 28(3) issue.

33. The test for whether it is appropriate to make a reference  as  set  out
in R v Stock Exchange ex parte Else [1993] QB 534 is  whether  we  are  able
with complete confidence to decide the matter ourselves. We  have  also  had
regard to the guidance given by a panel chaired  by  the  President  of  the
Upper Tribunal in MR and ors (EEA  -  extended  family  members)  Bangladesh
[2010] UKUT 449 (IAC).

34. In deciding whether to make such a  reference  we  have  also  benefited
from  the  Information  Note  on  references  from  national  courts  for  a
preliminary ruling (2011/C 160/01, 28 May 2011).  We  note  in  this  regard
that in this case: the facts are not in  dispute;  the  EU  law  issues  are
likely to be determinative of the outcome of these appeals; the claimant  is
no longer in detention; the appeal  has been pending for some time and if  a
reference needs to be made the sooner it is  made  the  better;  during  the
course of the appeal proceedings the parties  were  asked  to  consider  the
issue of whether to make a reference; and both parties  were  also  afforded
the opportunity to comment on  a draft of our proposed questions.

35. It seems to us that the facts of this case raise the  issue  of  whether
imprisonment breaks continuity  of  residence  in  acute  form  because  the
claimant in this case is  someone  who  had  accrued  10  years'  continuous
residence in a  Member  State  (the  UK)  prior  to  imprisonment  following
conviction. Her case can be contrasted, therefore, with  a  person  who  can
only show he or she has accrued  ten  years'  continuous  residence  if  for
Article  28(3)(a)  purposes  the  period  in  prison  is   counted   towards
assessment of that period of residence (to take an extreme example,  similar
to that discussed in HR (Portugal)), consider a Union  citizen/EEA  national
who arrives in a Member State and straightaway commits a crime for which  he
or she is sentenced to a period of imprisonment in excess of ten  years  and
who, immediately after completing ten years  in  prison,  is  subject  to  a
decision to deport).

36. It also seems to us that there is  in  fact  a  logically  prior  issue,
whose resolution is also lacking in clarity. In our deliberations  thus  far
we have proceeded on the basis that in deciding whether a  claimant  has  10
years continuous residence so as to be  able  to  benefit  from  an  Article
28(3)/regulation 21(4) level of protection against expulsion we  must  count
back from the date of the decision to deport. We have done so  because  that
would appear to be  the  literal  meaning  of  the  words  used  in  Article
28(3)(a) which prohibits an "expulsion decision" being  made  against  Union
citizens who "have resided in the host Member State  for  the  previous  ten
years" and the similar wording in regulation 21(4), which affords  the  same
safeguard to an EEA national who "has resided in the United  Kingdom  for  a
continuous period of at least ten years  prior  to  the  relevant  decision"
(our emphasis). However, it is arguable  that  such  a  literal  reading  is
contrary to the purposes of the Directive. Other materials would  appear  to
suggest that calculation of whether a person  has  sufficient  residence  to
qualify for either of the two higher  levels  of  protection  under  Article
28(2) or (3) is done by counting forward from commencement of that  person's
residence in the host  Member  State.  Recital  23  requires  the  scope  of
expulsion measures to  be  limited  in  accordance  with  the  principle  of
proportionality to take  account,  inter  alia,  of  "the  length  of  their
residence in the host Member State" and recital 24 states  that  "[o]nly  in
exceptional circumstances, where there  are  imperative  grounds  of  public
security, should an expulsion measure be taken against  Union  citizens  who
have resided for many years in the territory  of  the  host  Member  State".
Further, in the  Common Position (EC) No 6/2004 adopted by the Council on  5
December 2003, which preceded the introduction of Directive 2004/38/EC,   it
was stated at Article 8 that:

     "The Council is almost unanimously  against  the  absolute  protection
    against expulsion, although it has accepted an increased protection for
    Union citizens who have been residing for a long  period  in  the  host
    Member  State.  After  the  acquisition  of  the  right  of   permanent
    residence, Union citizens may be expelled only on  serious  grounds  of
    public policy or public security."
37. In LG and CC the Tribunal noted that the background to Article 8 was
explained by the Commission in its communication to the European Parliament
of 30 December 2003:-
      "Article 28(2): The Member States were almost unanimously  opposed  to
      absolute protection against  expulsion  for  Union  citizens  and  the
      members of their families who have acquired  the  right  of  permanent
      residence in the  host  Member  State.  However,  they  did  agree  to
      increased protection for Union citizens who have lived for a number of
      years in the host Member State. Consequently the  compromise  included
      in  the  common  position  takes  the  form  of  increased  protection
      depending on the length of residence in  the  territory  of  the  host
      Member State.
      Once they have acquired the right of permanent residence, citizens  of
      the Union and the members of their families may be expelled  only  for
      particularly serious reasons of public policy or public security.
      After ten years of residence in the host Member State, Union  citizens
      can be expelled only for overriding public security reasons...."
38. In Tsakouridis, whilst appearing to describe  the  relevant  period  for
the purpose of engaging Article 28(3) as being "the 10 years  preceding  the
expulsion decision" (see e.g. paras 31, 32), the  CJEU  stated  at  para  30
that it  started  from  the  premise  that  "like  the  right  of  permanent
residence, enhanced protection acquired after a certain length of  residence
in the host Member State is acquired after a certain length of residence  in
the host Member State...".

39. Another consideration is that, as noted by the Tribunal in LG and CC  at
para 78, there does not appear  to  be  a  similar  requirement  imposed  in
respect of accruing the  5  year  period  of  residence  for  Article  28(2)
purposes and:

    " It is not clear from the contemporary materials or the  Preamble  why
    this difference was made between the two tests. The Commission's report
    treats the two tests as differing only in length of time. The  Preamble
    to the Directive refers simply to "Union citizens who have resided  for
    many years  in  the  territory  of  the  host  Member  State",  without
    mentioning an end-date."

40. Clearly in deciding whether the claimant can benefit  from  the  highest
level of protection by virtue of having 10  years'  residence,  it  makes  a
significant difference which approach is taken. If one counts  forward  from
when she first exercised Treaty rights in April 1998 (and  continued  to  do
so after she ceased work as the family member  of  her  husband  because  he
continued to work), she acquired permanent residence in May 2003 and by  the
time she was sentenced to immediate imprisonment  in  August  2009  she  had
already accrued ten years' continuous residence.  If,  however,  one  counts
back from the decision to deport of 8 July 2010,  she can only benefit  from
the highest level of protection if as a matter of law imprisonment  (in  her
case from 27 August  2009  to 11 July 2010) does not  break  the  continuity
of her residence during the period 8 July 2000- 8 July 2010.

41. There are also two matters relating to  the  nature  of  the  10  years'
residence necessary to qualify for the highest level of  protection  against
expulsion.  One  concerns  the  issue  of  its  continuity.  The  claimant's
representatives have argued that whereas regulation  21(4)(a)  of  the  2006
Regulations  imposes  a  requirement  that  the  10  year  period  must   be
"continuous", Article 28(3)(a) (which it  is  supposed  to  implement)  does
not.  It seems to us that resolution of this issue may  have  a  bearing  on
the proceedings before us.

42. The other matter relates to the  issue  of  its  legality.  Whereas  the
claimant's representatives accept that  for  the  purposes  of  establishing
permanent  residence  under  Article  16,  residence  must  be  legal  (i.e.
residence in accordance with Article 7(1) of the Directive: see Cases  C-424
and 425/11 Ziolkowski,  para  46),  they  argue  that  it  remains  an  open
question as to whether a Union citizen's residence would have  to  be  legal
for Article 28(3)(a) purposes either for the full 10  years  or  indeed  for
any portion thereof. They point out that  in  Tsakouridis  at  para  31  the
Court stated that  Article  28(3)(a)  "[makes]  the  enjoyment  of  enhanced
protection subject to the person's presence in the  Member  State  concerned
for 10 years preceding the expulsion measure" and refers  to  the  "decisive
criterion" being "whether the Union citizen has lived in that  Member  State
for the 10 years preceding the expulsion measure". They also point out  that
in future cases the Tribunal  may  have  to  decide  cases  involving  Union
citizens who have been present in the UK for 10 years but who may  not  have
exercised residence rights under the Directive during  that  time.  However,
as we understand it there is no  dispute  that  (through  a  combination  of
working in her own right and remaining married to a Union  citizen  who  has
continued to exercise Treaty rights) the  claimant's  residence  has  always
been "legal" in any event, and so for  the  purposes  of  these  proceedings
this issue is purely hypothetical. Whilst  we  do  not  therefore  think  it
right to raise it as a question, we are  conscious  that  in  a  significant
number of cases involving the application of Article 28(3)(a) this may be  a
material matter.

43. Returning to the matter noted at para 19 and perusing the case  law,  we
also observe a lack of clarity as to  precisely  how,  if  imprisonment   is
considered to break continuity of the  requisite  period  of  residence  for
either Article 16, Article 28(2) or Article  28(3)  purposes,  the  relevant
period of imprisonment is to be calculated. If it  is  calculated  from  the
date on which a person is sentenced  to  immediate  imprisonment,  that  may
ignore time spent in prison on remand.  Certainly  in  the  UK  usually  the
sentencing judge  will  permit  time  spent  on  remand  (pending  trial  or
following conviction  and  pending  sentence)  to  be  counted  towards  the
sentence of imprisonment. If the period is calculated from  commencement  of
physical detention, that might mean  including  a  period  of  detention  on
remand pending  trial  even  when  a  person's  conviction  is  subsequently
quashed on appeal. Whilst, in view of the fact that the claimant  was  never
remanded in custody (she remained on  bail  until  she  was  sentenced),  we
think the issue too hypothetical to make the subject of a question  in  this
case, we are conscious that if the Court does not address it at all, it  may
reduce the utility of its guidance in  a  significant  number  of  cases  in
which  there  has  been  a  period  of  remand  in  custody  (either  before
conviction or after conviction and before sentence).

44. There are therefore the following questions that need resolution:

     1) Does a period in prison following  sentence  for  commission  of  a
    criminal offence by a Union citizen break the residence period  in  the
    host Member State required for that person to benefit from the  highest
    level  of  protection  against  expulsion  under  Article  28(3)(a)  of
    Directive 2004/38/EC or otherwise preclude the person relying  on  this
    level of protection?

    2) Does reference to "previous ten years" in Article 28(3)(a) mean that
    the residence has to be continuous in order for a Union citizen  to  be
    able to benefit from the highest level of protection against expulsion?



    3) For the purposes of Article 28(3)(a), is the requisite period of  10
    years during which a Union citizen must have resided in the host Member
    State calculated (a) by counting back from the expulsion  decision;  or
    (b) by  counting  forward  from  the  commencement  of  that  citizen's
    residence in the host Member State?

    4) If the answer to Question  3(a)  is  that  the  10  year  period  is
    calculated by counting backwards, does it  make  a  difference  if  the
    person has accrued ten years residence prior to such imprisonment?

45. Bearing in mind that the recent order  for  reference  made  by  another
constitution of the Immigration and Asylum Chamber  in  Nnamdi  Onuekwere  v
Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  (C-378/12,  lodged  at  Court
Registry on 3 August 2012) has posed questions on the different but  related
issue of whether acquisition of a permanent right of residence is  prevented
if the period of 5 years relied on is broken by  a  period  of  imprisonment
following a conviction, it will be a matter for the Court to decide  whether
to join this case to it or take some other action.

46. In light of the effect which this order for reference is likely to  have
on other cases involving the  expulsion/deportation  of  Union  citizens  or
their family members, the Tribunal would also respectfully request that  the
CJEU consider  it  pursuant  to  its  accelerated  procedure.  Although  the
claimant in the present case is not any longer  in  detention,  there  is  a
clear risk that Union citizens or their family members in other cases  which
turn on the answer to the questions raised (both in  the  UK  and  in  other
Member  States)  will  face  detention  and  that  their  detention  may  be
prolonged as a result of these proceedings. The EU-wide interest  in  speedy
resolution may be thought to be akin to that acknowledged by  the  Court  in
Metock & Others (Area of Freedom, Security  and  Justice)  [2008]  EUECJ  C-
127/08.There is accordingly a strong public interest in application  of  the
CJEU's  accelerated  procedure  under  Article  104(a)  of  the   Rules   of
Procedure.

47. We have made an anonymity order as we consider that to be  in  the  best
interests of the claimant's children.



Signed                                             Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Storey


