

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


     LD (Article 8 - best interests of child) Zimbabwe [2010] UKUT 278 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at  Field House                   |                        |
|On 15 July 2010                         |                        |
|                                        |                        |


                                   Before

                         MR JUSTICE BLAKE, PRESIDENT
                        SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE WARD


                                   Between


                                     LD
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:         G Ward, instructed by Howe & Co.
For the Respondent:      Mr J Gulvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


   1. Consistent  application  of  the  Immigration  Rules  to  promote  the
      economic and social policy of the UK is a relevant factor in  carrying
      out the balancing exercise under Article 8(2) but the weight  attached
      to it depends on the context of the case, whether there was  ever  any
      claim under the rules for indefinite leave to  remain,  and  why  such
      claim was not accepted.

   2. In the particular circumstances of this case the weight to be attached
      to enforcement of immigration control was small  in the light  of  the
      misdirection as to Paragraph 320 (7A), and the fact that the paragraph
      applies to all cases whether there is family life deserving respect or
      not.


   3. The interests of minor  children  and  their  welfare  are  a  primary
      consideration. A failure to treat them as such  will  violate  Article
      8(2).


   4. Weighty reasons would be required to justify separating a parent  from
      a lawfully settled minor child or child from a community in  which  he
      or she had grown up and lived for most of his or her life. The general
      situation in the relevant home country is also relevant, especially if
      it is known that the conditions there  are  dire  (as  they  are,  for
      example, in Zimbabwe at present).


   5. In this particular case, no useful purpose would have been  served  if
      the appellant is required to depart the UK in order to make  an  entry
      clearance from abroad.  All the issues are to be  determined  in  this
      appeal rather than in the course  of  an  investigation  abroad  where
      there would in any event be an interference.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

     1. This is an appeal against a decision of the Secretary of State taken
        on 17 December  2009  refusing  the  appellant  refugee  status  and
        rejecting his human rights claim based upon Article 8 of  the  ECHR.
        The appellant appealed to the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal but by
        the  time  the  Immigration  Judge  had  written  his  determination
        dismissing his appeal on 28 February 2010 the  AIT  had  disappeared
        and this is an appeal from the First-tier Tribunal  Immigration  and
        Asylum Chamber to the Upper Tribunal Immigration and Asylum Chamber.




     2. Although the grounds of appeal took issue with the refugee aspect of
        the claim, asylum has not been pursued as an issue  before  us.  SIJ
        Jordan granted permission to appeal on the Article  8  issue  as  he
        considered that the IJ had not made  a  rounded  assessment  of  the
        family life claim on 1 March 2010.


     3. The appellant is a national of Zimbabwe, born  in  1965.   He  first
        came to the United Kingdom in October 1999 to  visit  his  wife  who
        arrived here in  March  of  that  same  year.   His  wife  has  been
        ordinarily resident with leave to  remain  ever  since  first  as  a
        student and then as a nurse and was given indefinite leave to remain
        in June 2009.  There are three children of  the  marriage:   Bessie,
        born April 1990 now aged 20; Tatenda born  March  1996  and  now  14
        years of age, and Michelle born December 1998  now  11.   They  also
        obtained ILR at the same time as their mother.

     4. The appellant has made a number of visits back to Zimbabwe since  he
        first came to the UK.  However, it appears that for the substance of
        the period from his arrival in the UK to date he has lived with  his
        wife and children with immigration leave to remain to do so.

     5. The appellant also applied for indefinite leave to  remain  but  his
        application was refused  on  17  June  2008  because  he  failed  to
        disclose the existence of a number of drink driving convictions.  As
        a consequence it was considered that his claim to remain was  to  be
        refused mandatorily applying paragraph 320 (7A) of  the  Immigration
        Rules:  making use of a false representation whether or not material
        to the application or whether or not to the applicant's knowledge.

     6. He made representations against that refusal but it  was  maintained
        on 11 September 2008 and a human rights claim to remain was rejected
        at the same time.  That prompted his application for asylum that  in
        turn led to the human rights appeal in  the  case.   In  the  asylum
        interview and at the appeal the appellant explained that his failure
        to disclose his convictions for  driving  with  excess  alcohol  was
        because he had thought those convictions were spent.

     7. The Home Office explained its Article 8 decision in December 2009 in
        the following terms:

           "[59] While it is accepted that you currently have a family life
           in the UK, it is not accepted  that  your  removal  to  Zimbabwe
           would interfere with your family life as it is  considered  that
           there are no insurmountable obstacles to your  family  returning
           to Zimbabwe to live with you.  It is  well  established  in  the
           jurisprudence of the AIT and the ECtHR that Article 8 ECHR  does
           not impose on a State any  general  obligation  to  respect  the
           choice of residence of a married couple.  In the case of Mahmood
           R (on Application of) v SSHD [2000] EWCA Civ  315,  (8  December
           2000), the Court of Appeal held that removal or exclusion of one
           family member form (sic) a State  where  other  members  of  the
           family are  lawfully  resident  will  not  necessarily  infringe
           Article 8 provided that there are no insurmountable obstacles to
           the family living together in the  country  of  origin  and  the
           family members excluded, even where this involves  a  degree  of
           hardship... There is  a  seriousness  test  which  requires  the
           obstacles or difficulties to go  beyond  matters  of  choice  or
           inconvenience.


           [60]... Furthermore in SS (Sri Lanka)  [2004]  UKIAT  00126  the
           Tribunal held that a grant of indefinite leave to remain to  the
           partner  of  a  claimant  did  not  amount   to   an   automatic
           insurmountable hurdle to the partner's return to the country  of
           origin.


           [61] In conclusion, for the  reasons  given  above,  it  is  not
           accepted that your family  life  would  be  interfered  with  by
           removing you to Zimbabwe.  Therefore, it is  not  accepted  that
           your removal would lead to a breach of Article 8 ECHR."


     8. The Immigration Judge first dealt with the asylum appeal then turned
        to the Article 8 claim.  He reminded himself of the five stages  for
        consideration under Lord Bingham's guidance in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27
        [2004] 2 AC 368 and then at paragraph [48] said this:

           "In considering this appeal I have taken account of  Beoku-Betts
           v SSHD [2008] UKHL 39 and I accept that removal would  interfere
           with the appellant's private and family life and the life of his
           family.  I have little  or  no  evidence  to  suggest  that  the
           appellant  had  any  significant  mental  or   physical   health
           problems. Similarly I have no evidence to suggest  that  members
           of the appellant's family have any significant health  problems.
           Whilst I have no doubt that the appellant would rather remain in
           the UK, I have little reason to doubt that he maintains  contact
           with his family in the normal manner.  Arrangements can be  made
           for visits.  Some members of the appellant's wife's family still
           live in Zimbabwe.  They can no doubt assist the appellant on his
           return. On the evidence before me I find that  the  interference
           complained of is proportionate to the legitimate  aim  which  is
           sought to be achieved.  The appellant was well aware that he had
           no right to remain permanently in the UK but in spite of this he
           made no efforts to claim asylum in spite  of  claiming  to  have
           been in fear of returning to Zimbabwe."




      9.    Article 8 ECHR provides:

                  "(1) Everyone has the right to  respect  for  his  private
and family life, his                home and his correspondence.
                           (2) There shall be no interference  by  a  public
authority with the                         exercise  of  this  right  except
such as in accordance with the law                   and is necessary  in  a
democratic society in the  interests  of                            national
security,   public   safety,   of   the   economic   well-being    of    the
country,   for   the   prevention   of   disorder   or   crime,   for    the
        protection of health or morals, or for the protection of the  rights
                    and freedoms of others."


Did the IJ make an error of law?



   10.  Mr  Gulvin  helpfully  and  realistically  conceded  that  both  the
       consideration by the Home Office of the claim  and  the  Immigration
       Judge were flawed and inadequate.  We entirely agree.   We  did  not
       need to call on Ms Ward to argue  this  appeal  for  the  appellant,
       although we are grateful for  her  skeleton  argument  exposing  the
       weaknesses of the IJ's assessment.


   11.  We turn first to the Home Office decision.  It will be seen from the
       passages quoted above that it is entirely based upon the proposition
       that removal will not amount to an interference with family life. No
       justification for interference was attempted, although there  is  no
       doubt that it intended to remove the  appellant  to  Zimbabwe.   The
       Home Office concluded that this did not amount  to  interference  of
       the family life he enjoyed with his wife  and  children  in  the  UK
       because there were no 'insurmountable obstacles' to  them  returning
       to Zimbabwe.


   12.   This was a plain misdirection. It is somewhat unfortunate  to  find
       such a glaring error being made in a decision dating  from  December
       2009 by which time there had  been  an  abundance  of  jurisprudence
       making it plain that the issue whether a removal of a family  member
       interferes with the family life of others lawfully settled here  for
       many years is judged by whether it is reasonable to expect the other
       family members to relocate: see Huang [2007] UKHL 11 [2007] 2 AC 167
        at [35];  AB (Jamaica) [2007] EWCA Civ 1302  at  [33];  Beoku-Betts
       [2008] UKHL 39 at [48];  EB (Kosovo) [2008] UKHL at [41];  LM  (DRC)
       [2008] EWCA Civ 325; AF (Jamaica) [2009] EWCA Civ [2009] 240 at [20]
       and [42] and many other decisions of the higher courts.


   13.    Whilst it is perfectly true that the ECtHR refers in Uner  to  the
       'degree of difficulty' the spouse would face in the  other  country,
       and has in other cases made reference to 'insurmountable  obstacles'
       those are observations generally made in the context of the  overall
       assessment of proportionality having regard to the strength  of  the
       public interest in removal, including cases of serious offending. It
       is clearly established that 'insurmountable obstacles',  if  it  has
       any continued relevance to the application of the Human  Rights  Act
       in immigration cases, is not a minimum requirement that  has  to  be
       met before any removal becomes disproportionate; it is certainly not
       the test for whether a proposed  removal  of  a  spouse  and  father
       interferes with the family life of the family unit as a whole.


   14.   Here if the Home Office decision maker had addressed the sequential
       questions posed by Lord Bingham in Razgar he or she would  have been
       bound to conclude: (i) there was an actually existing family life in
       the UK  that deserved respect having regard to the lawful  entry  of
       the Appellant and the settled status of wife and children  and  (ii)
       removal would amount to a serious interference with that family life
       as it would be destroyed if the family was separated and it was  not
       reasonable to expect the wife and children to  abandon  their  jobs,
       lives, education and residence here.


   15.   At this point in the analysis the Tribunal must be satisfied that:


           (iii) the interference was in accordance with the law
           (iv) it was in support of a reason recognised by Article 8
           (v) it was necessary  having  regard  to  that  reason  and  was
           justified as  proportionate  and  a  fair  balance  between  the
           competing considerations.


       The third and fourth will often not present  a  difficulty  where  a
       person is an over-stayer or subject  to  a  deportation  order  made
       pursuant to s.32 of  the  UK  Borders  Act  2007.  Nevertheless  the
       Tribunal must be satisfied of these matters.

   16. Usually the  question  is  whether  the  respondent  can  justify  an
       interference with the right to respect for family life as  necessary
       and proportionate either to prevent crime  and  protect  the  public
       from harm or to maintain economic order and the rights of others  by
       applying a consistent immigration control.


   17.  We now turn  to  the  decision  of  the  Immigration  Judge  on  the
       question. He did not comment on any of the failures of the  decision
       maker but he did accept that removal was an interference with family
       life. He had been given no assistance in the decision letter  as  to
       what the legitimate aim was to be served by a removal. He failed  to
       identify the aim before going on to consider proportionality.  There
       is a distinction  between  interferences  designed  to  protect  the
       public from harm, disorder or crime and those directed  at  economic
       well being of the country and the rights and freedoms of others, see
       JO (Uganda) and  JT  (Ivory  Coast)  v  SSHD  [2010]  EWCA  Civ  10.
       Immigration control is not a legitimate end in itself, though it  is
       a well established means of protecting the economic  well  being  of
       the country and rights of  others  by  regulating  borders  in  such
       manner as the general immigration policy of the country approved  by
       Parliament considers fit.


   18.   We are grateful to Mr Gulvin who identified the aim in this case as
       being economic well being through  the  maintenance  of  immigration
       control because the Appellant did not fulfil the conditions  of  the
       Immigration Rules to entitle him to indefinite leave to remain.   No
       argument was developed before us that by reason  of  a  sequence  of
       drink-driving  convictions  the  Appellant  was  a  danger  to   the
       community that required his removal.   This  is  not  a  deportation
       case.


   19.   We pointed out to Mr Gulvin that even this part of the  case  would
       now call for re-examination in the light  of  the  decision  by  the
       Court of Appeal in the  case  of  A  v  SSHD  [2010]  EWCA  Civ  773
       delivered on 6 July 2010 where in very similar circumstances to  the
       present  the  Court  held  that  mere  non-disclosure   of   driving
       convictions in the mistaken belief that  they  were  spent  did  not
       amount to a breach of Rule 320(7A) as  false  representation  within
       the meaning of that Rule is confined to deception and  with  it  the
       necessary  element  of  deliberate  dishonesty.    The   Appellant's
       consistent  claim,  that  he  failed  to  declare  his   drink-drive
       convictions because he thought they were spent and spent convictions
       do not have to be declared in the form, has never been challenged by
       the Home Office or anyone else in the  decision  making  process  to
       date.  The decision to refuse indefinite leave  to  remain  did  not
       therefore appear to be in compliance with the immigration rules  and
       accordingly was probably not in compliance with the  law  regulating
       the justification of interferences within  the  meaning  of  Article
       8(2).


   20.  We accept, of course, that neither  the  SSHD  nor  the  Immigration
       Judge could have expected to have anticipated the  decision  of  the
       Court of Appeal, but in legal theory the law is always speaking  and
       the Court has merely served to declare what the rules always meant.


   21.  We therefore turn to consider the Immigration Judge's  reasoning  on
       the question of proportionality. We confess we  find  it  is  wholly
       absent.  This is not a case about  physical  or  mental  illness  of
       anybody, but whether the family life  that  had  been  enjoyed  over
       eleven years with authority afforded to each member  of  the  family
       should now be interfered with.  The  Immigration  Judge  has  wholly
       failed to grapple with this.  We  find  his  reference  to  maintain
       contact with his family 'in the  normal  manner'  is  extraordinary.
       Families normally live together. Family life consists of the  inter-
       dependent bonds between  spouses  or  stable  partners  and  between
       parents and children with particular strength being placed upon  the
       interests and welfare of minor children. It is not normal for family
       life to be enjoyed by correspondence  and  occasional  visits  (even
       assuming that there were no obstacles to such visits following  this
       immigration decision). Although the Immigration Judge has cited  the
       case as Beoku-Betts he appears singularly to have misunderstood  the
       core  principles  to  be  applied  in  this  area  of  the  law,  as
       exemplified by the other important House of Lords  cases  Huang,  EB
       (Kosovo) and numerous decisions in the Court of Appeal  noted  above
       as well as the decision in Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40.


   22.   We therefore agree with both the  SIJ  in  granting  permission  to
       appeal and Mr Gulvin in conceding there was an error in law that the
       Immigration Judge's decision on this issue cannot stand.  We set  it
       aside and remake the decision for ourselves.

   The relevant context

   23.   We observe that the context of this assessment is lawful  admission
       to the UK by every member of the family, indefinite leave to  remain
       having been granted to the wife and children, an expectation of such
       indefinite leave being granted to the Appellant in  the  absence  of
       countervailing factors, and the absence of any conduct  relied  upon
       as justifying removal in the public good.


   24.   As Miss Ward identified in her skeleton Lord Bingham's observations
       in EB (Kosovo) v SSHD [2008] UKHL 41 at [12]:


        "... it will rarely be proportionate to uphold an order for removal
      of the      spouse if there is a close and genuine bond with the other
      spouse and       that spouse cannot reasonably be expected  to  follow
      the removal      spouse to the    country of removal, or if the effect
      of the order is to     sever a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
      between parent and     child."


   25. The guidance from the European  Count  of  Human  Rights  is  to  the
   same effect.  In Uner v Netherlands [2006] ECHR 873 the Grand     Chamber
   has  identified  the  following  issues  (in  the  context  of   criminal
   offending):


                   "(a)   the applicant's  family  situation,  such  as  the
   length of the                    marriage, and other  factors  expressing
   the effectiveness of a                             couple's family life;
            (b)  whether the spouse knew about the offence at the time  when
                          he or she entered into the family relationship;
                   (c) whether there are children of the  marriage,  and  if
   so, their                               age; and
                  (d) the seriousness of the difficulties which  the  spouse
   is likely                              to encounter in   the  country  to
   which the applicant is to be                            expelled."
      and continued:
                " The Court would wish to make explicit two criteria which
      may   already be explicit in those identified in the Boultif judgment:


            (e)  the best interests and well-being of the children, in
      particular the          seriousness of the difficulties which any
      children of the applicant           are likely to encounter in the
      country to which the applicant is to           be  expelled; and
            (f)  the solidity of social, cultural and family ties with the
      host country           and with the country of destination."
   26.   Very weighty reasons are needed to justify separating a parent from
       a minor child or a child from a community in which  he  or  she  had
       grown up and lived for  most  of  her  life.   Both  principles  are
       engaged in this case.


   27.  The two younger children of the  appellant  have  lived  in  the  UK
       continuously  for  eleven  years  and  for  most  of  their   lives.
       Previously Home Office policy tended  to  identify  seven  years  of
       residence of  a  child  as  one  that  would  presumptively  require
       regularisation of immigration status of child  and  parents  in  the
       absence of compelling countervailing factors.  That  was  really  an
       administrative way of giving effect to the principle of the  welfare
       of the child as a primary consideration in such cases  and  when  it
       was considered that those interests normally required regularisation
       of the immigration position of the family as a whole. The policy may
       have been withdrawn but substantial residence as a child is a strong
       indication the judicial assessment of what the best interests of the
       child requires.  The UN Convention on the Rights of the  Child  1989
       Art 3 makes such interests a primary consideration.


   28.   Although questions exist about the status of the UN  Convention  on
       the Rights of the Child in domestic law, we take the view that there
       can be little reason to doubt that the interests of the child should
       be a primary consideration in immigration cases.  A failure to treat
       them as such will violate Article 8(2) as incorporated directly into
       domestic law.


   29.   It is regrettable that neither the  Home  Office  reasons  for  the
       Article 8 decision nor the IJ's reasons for  dismissing  the  appeal
       begin to recognise any of the above.  We have no doubt that  removal
       would represent a significant violation of the Article 8(2) right of
       respect for the family life that the appellant  continues  to  enjoy
       with each member of his immediate family.


   30.    In summary our conclusions are as follows:


           (i)         The appellant was admitted to the UK lawfully to  be
      with        his wife and children and had the  reasonable  expectation
             of  being  allowed  to  remain  for  this  purpose  while   the
      remainder of the family was.


             ii) He applied in time  for  ILR  for  which  he  presumptively
                 qualified but his failure to achieve ILR was  entirely  due
                 to the application to him of a mandatory ground for refusal
                 based on non-disclosure of a matter which  might  not  have
                 led to refusal on discretionary  grounds  if  it  had  been
                 disclosed.


            (iv)  His conduct in incurring those  criminal  convictions  was
             not  identified  as   a   ground   that   makes   his   removal
   conducive to the public good, and it was not so relied on              in
   the hearing before us.


              v) It would not be reasonable to expect  the  wife  and  three
                 children to give up their respective careers and  prospects
                 as a  nurse, university student and school  children  doing
                 well in secondary education and relocate to Zimbabwe  where
                 even in the absence  of  direct  physical  threat  to  them
                 conditions are well known to be dire.


           (vi)  The interests of the minor children and their welfare  are
                 a  primary  consideration  in  the  balance  of   competing
                 considerations in this case and their  educational  welfare
                 as part of the UK education system point strongly to  their
                 continued residence here  as  necessary  to  promote  those
                 interests.

            vii) Weighty reasons would be required to justify  separating  a
                 father from his spouse and children, and no strong  reasons
                 for doing so have ever been identified.


           viii) Consistent application of the immigration rules to  promote
                 the economic and social policy of  the  UK  is  a  relevant
                 factor but the weight attached to it depends on the context
                 of the case, whether there was ever  any  claim  under  the
                 rules for indefinite leave to remain, and  why  such  claim
                 was not accepted.

           viii)  In the particular circumstances of this case the weight to
                 be attached to enforcement of immigration control is  small
                 in the light of the misdirection as to Paragraph 320  (7A),
                 and the fact  that  the  paragraph  applies  to  all  cases
                 whether there is family life deserving respect or not .


             ix) No useful purpose would have been served if  the  SSHD  had
                 required the Appellant to depart the UK in order to make an
                 entry clearance from abroad.  All  the  issues  are  to  be
                 determined in this appeal rather than in the course  of  an
                 investigation abroad where there would in any event  be  an
                 interference.



31.    This appeal is allowed.


Signed






Mr Justice Blake,
President of the Upper Tribunal,
Immigration and Asylum Chamber

