
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                          RR (Challenging evidence) Sri Lanka [2010] UKUT
000274 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 28 June 2010                               |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                         THE HON. MR JUSTICE BURNETT
                      SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                     rr
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Solomon, Counsel instructed by Shan & Co.,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Kiss, Home Office Presenting Officer

   1. In a case where there are obvious but  not  necessarily  determinative
      difficulties in an appellant's oral evidence the Tribunal is likely to
      be helped considerably by independent expert  evidence  that  supports
      the appellant's story.


   2. If the respondent seeks to challenge such evidence then, ideally,  the
      challenge should be supported by evidence put before the Tribunal.

   3. If the appellant or expert chooses to  give  oral  evidence  then  the
      respondent's cross examination should fearlessly and  clearly  include
      the suggesting to the appellant or expert that, for example, an injury
      was not caused in the way alleged by the appellant but by a  different
      mechanism.

   4. If the respondent does not put its case clearly it may  well  be  very
      difficult for the Tribunal to decide against an appellant who has  not
      been given an opportunity to deal with the respondent's concern.

   5. If a party has no basis for challenging evidence so that  a  challenge
      to the evidence would appear to be abusive or foolish then that  party
      must think  very  carefully  before  making  the  challenge.  It  will
      probably be fairer to abandon the point.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


Introduction to Appeal

     1. The appellant is a citizen  of  Sri  Lanka.   He  was  born  on  27
        December 1978 and so is now 31 years old.  He appeals the  decision
        of the respondent on 16 September 2009     to make him the  subject
        of a deportation order on the grounds that he is a refugee and that
        removing him is contrary to his protected human rights.


     2. His appeal was dismissed by Immigration Judge Kelsey  and  Mr  D  C
        Walker, a non-legal member, in a determination  promulgated  on  30
        December 2009.  Reconsideration was ordered by  Senior  Immigration
        Judge Freeman on 2 February 2010 and the appeal came before  Senior
        Immigration Judge Perkins on 16 April 2010.

     3. The conclusion was that the Tribunal had made an error of  law  for
        the following reasons given on 19 April 2010:

             "1.      I  am  satisfied  that  the  original  Tribunal  erred
materially in  law  by  not                 making  clear  findings  on  the
evidence supporting the appellant's claim                 that  he  breached
bail  conditions  in   Sri   Lanka   by   failing   to   report   and   that
the appellant's father       had been required to give evidence  as  to  his
                 whereabouts.

              2. If this evidence is  believed  it  could  impact  on  other
findings and, in any              event,     should be considered  expressly
in the context of the appellant's                  claim to be at   risk  on
return.

              3. As fact finding has to be made "in the round" none  of  the
existing                     findings on points of controversy can stand."

     4. Directions were given  about  the  proper  future  conduct  at  the
        hearing.


     5.  We  have  an  additional  bundle  dated  15  April  2010   and   a
        supplementary bundle dated  25  June  2010  as  well  as  a  bundle
        provided to the Immigration Judge.

   Immigration History

     6. The papers show that the appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on
        15  May  2006  using  an  Australian  passport  with  a  substitute
        photograph.  He came to the attention of the authorities on 29 June
        2006  when  he  was  encountered  by  French  police  at   Waterloo
        International  Station  when  he  presented  a  Canadian   passport
        containing a substituted photograph as he attempted to  embark  for
        France. He claimed asylum the same day.


     7. The application was not decided until 15 September 2009.

     8. On 11 August 2006 he was convicted at the Crown  Court  sitting  at
        Middlesex of an offence of possessing  a  false  identity  document
        with intent  to  deceive.   He  was  sentenced  to  twelve  months'
        imprisonment.

     9. By letter dated 22 March 2007 his solicitors  sent  a  Home  Office
        form ICD 0350 and ICD 3067 and an asylum statement and Statement of
        Additional Grounds. The additional  grounds  shown  at  G5  in  the
        bundle are very similar to additional grounds  shown  at  D3.  They
        complain that in the event of his return  the  appellant  would  be
        detained without access to a magistrate. Otherwise they are  formal
        and show an intention to rely on Articles 2, 3, 5, 9, 11 and 14  of
        the European Convention on Human Rights.  Before  us  Mr  Solomon's
        submissions were directed towards Article 3.

   Evidence sent with the application

    10. In the questionnaire the appellant identified himself as a  citizen
        of Sri Lanka who was born in Polikandy in Jaffna.  He said that  he
        arrived in the United Kingdom on 15 May 2006 to save his life.  The
        appellant claimed that he did not know the port or even the country
        from which he embarked to travel to the United  Kingdom.   He  knew
        that he had arrived by air.


    11. He travelled on an Australian passport that had been taken back  by
        his agent.  He said that he had left Sri Lanka on 16 December  2005
        and arrived in the United Kingdom on 15  May  2006.   He  had  been
        taken by his agent to "some unknown country".

    12. He supported his claim with a statement dated 22 March 2007. It  is
        at G7 and G8 in the respondent's bundle and is exactly the same  as
        a statement at E1 and E2 in the bundle except that the statement at
        G8 is dated "2006" and is not endorsed with the appellant's name in
        block capitals. He said there that he was one of five brothers  and
        two sisters.  All of his siblings had now left Sri Lanka.  They had
        gone because of political problems.  Immediately before he left Sri
        Lanka the appellant was the only child of his parents still  living
        there. He had a shop in Sri Lanka connected to his house.

    13. The shop was used both by members of the LTTE and  members  of  the
        army.

    14. On 7 January 2005 he was taken to the army camp by the  Sri  Lankan
        armed forces.  He was locked in a room.  He was interrogated.  When
        he insisted that he was not an LTTE member he was  beaten  up.   He
        claimed to have suffered a severe beating so that his  eardrum  was
        damaged and he sustained a serious head injury.

    15. On 10 November 2005 he was taken by the LTTE.   He  was  beaten  by
        them.  Just as the army quizzed him because the shop was visited by
        LTTE members the LTTE quizzed the appellant because  the  shop  was
        visited by members of the armed forces.

    16. He said that he was tortured.  He was  ordered  to  pay  Rs.700,000
        representing Rs.100,000 for every member of the family and  he  was
        required to join the LTTE.

    17. The LTTE also required him to go to Vanni.  If he did not he  would
        be shot and killed.

    18. They rejected an offer by his father to go to Vanni in  his  place.
        Somehow his father found the Rs.700,000 and handed it to the LTTE.

    19. However, according to the appellant, the army discovered  that  the
        appellant's father had paid the LTTE Rs.700,000.  The army arrested
        the appellant on 26 November 2005 and took him to Mandan camp.  His
        father was also beaten by the army. He was then taken to Malusanthi
        Camp where he was tortured.  They wanted to know why he  had  given
        the LTTE large sums of money.  He denied making any  such  payment.
        His interrogators told him to identify LTTE members which he agreed
        to do to save his life.  They made him sign papers to say  that  he
        agreed to be an army informer and he was subsequently released.

    20. The appellant went into hiding.  His parents  were  harassed.   The
        LTTE went to the family home  to  enquire  about  his  whereabouts.
        They warned his parents that they would kill him on sight.

    21. On 14 December 2005 he fled as he feared for his life.  His  father
        arranged for him to go.

   Screening Interview

    22. The appellant attended a screening interview on 11 May 2009.  There
        he confirmed his  claim  to  be  a  Sri  Lankan  national  born  in
        Polikandy in Jaffna and to have last worked in Sri Lanka as a  shop
        owner.


    23. He was asked if he had any medical conditions.  He said that he had
        a "numb head and severe headaches caused from  severe  beatings  in
        Sri Lanka" and that his "left ear ligament is  broken  due  to  the
        beatings and I had treatment in Sri Lanka".  He also said  that  he
        had the misfortune of  falling  in  snowy  weather  in  the  United
        Kingdom and he dislocated his shoulder.


    24. He repeated his claim to have been taken to an unknown  country  by
        an unknown airline where he was effectively held under house arrest
        by his agents who looked after his needs.

    25. The appellant said he did have a Sri Lankan passport but he did not
        use that to travel to the United Kingdom.  He explained that he was
        not allowed to leave the house.  His agent had  told  him  that  he
        could not claim asylum in the country in which he was  staying  and
        if he was caught there he would be returned to Sri Lanka.

   Asylum Interview

    26. The appellant was interviewed on 11 May 2009.  He began  by  saying
        that he had left Sri Lanka because of problems he experienced  with
        the LTTE and the army.  He concluded the interview by  saying  that
        after he arrived in the United Kingdom his father died of  a  heart
        attack because his father received a letter requiring him to attend
        an  inquiry  on  10  December  2007  concerning   the   appellant's
        whereabouts.  The appellant believed that his father died of  shock
        on 9 December 2007.  While he was away from Sri  Lanka  his  father
        had been reporting to the police in  his  place.   His  father  was
        threatened and beaten on several occasions.


    27. In his interview the appellant  said  his  problems  started  on  7
        January 2005 when he was arrested at his shop.  He was suspected of
        being an LTTE member and giving information to the LTTE.

    28. The appellant said that his brothers were in the  LTTE.   They  had
        left and run away.

    29. He said that when he was arrested he was beaten inside his shop and
        then dragged to a nearby army camp.  His parents saw him being ill-
        treated and followed him to the camp.  He said that he  was  beaten
        with fists in the shop and then with a  broom  used  to  clean  the
        shop.

    30. He went to the Mandan camp which was about twelve minutes away from
        his home.  He described the appearance of the camp.   He  described
        how he was interrogated.  He was taken to a room where  there  were
        blood marks on the wall.  He was questioned about the  LTTE  coming
        to his shop.  When he denied that the LTTE came to  his  shop  (his
        answer to question 34 is  best  understood  as  a  denial)  he  was
        beaten.

    31. He was beaten when he denied being a member of the LTTE.

    32. He was beaten with a small stick and a small PVC pipe.

    33. In the course of interrogation he was told that they had  heard  he
        had passed information to the LTTE.

    34. He was interrogated for about  six  hours.   He  said  that  during
        interrogation he was beaten with a large branch from a  tree  which
        had rough edges.  He was hit once very hard on the head  and  began
        to bleed and then lost consciousness.  He believed  that  his  "ear
        ligament" was broken as a result of this treatment.

    35. He was released and  warned  about  his  future  conduct.   He  was
        particularly told that he  would  be  shot  if  he  passed  on  any
        information to the LTTE.

    36. He was treated for his injuries at the Manthikai General Hospital.

    37. Stitches were put in his ear for the ear ligament damage and he was
        transferred to Jaffna General Hospital where he was admitted as  an
        inpatient and stayed there for three days.

    38. His parents looked after the shop in his absence.  He went  to  the
        clinic every week for checkups.

    39. He had further trouble on 10 November 2005 when he was arrested  by
        the LTTE.  He gave a detailed account of his experiences there.  He
        was  beaten  when  he  did  not  give  the   desired   answers   in
        interrogation.

    40. He was also asked for a donation of 7 lakh  Sri  Lanka  Rupees  and
        required him to present himself to Vanni and join the LTTE there.

    41. The appellant did not want to go to Vanni.  A  friend  of  his  had
        gone to Vanni and had not been heard of since.

    42. He was told he would be shot if he did not co-operate.

    43. The appellant's father became involved  and  they  made  a  similar
        request to  him.   His  father  offered  to  go  to  Vanni  in  the
        appellant's stead but this was not acceptable to the LTTE.

    44. His father paid the money on "Hero's Day" that is 25 November 2005.



    45. The appellant returned to his shop on 26 November 2005 and at about
        4 o'clock in the afternoon he was arrested by the army.

    46. He gave details of his arrest.   When  his  father  asked  why  the
        appellant was being arrested they hit his father.

    47. He was taken to Mandan camp and after about two hours he was  taken
        to Mallisanty.

    48. He was questioned and told his interrogators that he had  not  paid
        the LTTE any money.

    49. He was again asked about LTTE operatives coming to his shop and  he
        was asked to identify LTTE members.  When he refused  to  cooperate
        he was beaten.

    50. In answer to question 88 he said "I was repeatedly asked if  I  had
        paid money to the LTTE, when they were  questioning  me  they  were
        lighting cigarettes, with these cigarettes they stubbed them out in
        my hand (left hand) I have scars to prove this."

    51. He then explained how he was knocked to the ground and a particular
        kind of belt attached to his legs and he was suspended from a  tree
        upside down.  He was repeatedly beaten with sticks and warned  that
        if he did not tell the truth he would be killed.

    52. He said he was suspended from the tree for "two  to  three  hours".
        They then put chilli powder in a bowl of fire and brought  it  near
        to his face.  The appellant found the pain altogether too much  and
        he agreed to identify LTTE operatives.

    53. The appellant said in answer to question 89: "when I was  suspended
        upside down they also beat me badly on my legs, my  right  leg  was
        damaged and I have scars to prove this".

    54. The appellant said he had signed some papers before  he  left.   It
        was a condition of his release  that  he  reported  to  the  police
        station every week.  He did not report to the police  station.   He
        went to Paththamany and hid.

    55. He said he hid from 27 November 2005 until 14 December 2005 when he
        went to Colombo.

    56. On 14 December 2005 the LTTE and the police went to  his  house  in
        search of him.  The LTTE left a message that  they  were  going  to
        shoot him.  The police said they were going to arrest him.

    57. He believed his life was in danger.

    58. There is no need to record such details in the determination but it
        is right to note that the appellant was asked to indicate the times
        it  took  to  travel  to  the  particular  places   of   detention.
        Presumably this was because the answers could  be  checked  against
        known data and there is nothing  before  us  to  suggest  that  the
        answers, which were given freely and without difficulty, are in any
        way unreliable.

    59. It is also right to say that he explained  in  considerable  detail
        the process by which he was interrogated including  the  number  of
        people involved.  We have noted particularly his answer to question
        88 where he described how the officer interrogating  him  left  him
        when he had refused to identify LTTE members.  It  was  after  that
        that four or five people came in to question him and beat him.   It
        might be thought that the appellant was describing  rather  clearly
        an incident whereby an officer absented himself from the  scene  in
        the anticipation that people of lower rank would behave  in  a  way
        that the officer did not wish to see.

   Statement 16 November 2009

    60. The appellant also made a  statement  dated  16 November  2009  in
        response to points raised in the Reasons for Refusal Letter.


    61. He said there that he did not know if customers at  his  shop  were
        involved with the LTTE.  He said that on the occasion that  he  was
        beaten in the shop and then at Mandan camp he sustained  an  injury
        that needed seven or eight stitches on his head.

    62. He said that on 26 November when he was arrested for the third time
        (the second time by the authorities) he was "severely tortured" and
        the documents he was forced to sign were in Singhalese which he did
        not understand. He was told that the documents  were  an  agreement
        promising to pass on information about the LTTE.  He said  that  at
        the time he signed the document he was  in  no  position  to  argue
        because he was being tortured.

    63. He believed the LTTE would be still more interested in him after he
        had signed the document.

    64. He said that his father had paid for him  to  be  taken  to  Canada
        where he would be reunited with four of his siblings.

    65. He explained how his agent had given him  the  false  passport  and
        given him instructions.  He was told that if he was caught with the
        false passport he should claim asylum.  He said that that  was  the
        first time he realised he could claim asylum in the United  Kingdom
        which is why he did not claim when he entered.  He emphasised  that
        he claimed asylum after he was detained by the police in London and
        not after he was served with a notice telling him he was liable  to
        removal.

    66. He said he did not leave Sri Lanka after his first  arrest  because
        he did not realise "the gravity of what was  happening".    He  was
        arrested only a day after 7 lakh Rupees had been paid to  the  LTTE
        and it was after that treatment he decided he had to leave.

    67. He said that he did not know he had relatives in the United Kingdom
        until after he arrived in the United Kingdom.   His  uncle  in  the
        United Kingdom is maintaining him and has  taken  on  the  role  of
        parent.  He claimed to have a strong relationship  with  his  uncle
        and also his uncle's children.

    68. He was candid about his conviction at the Crown Court in Middlesex.
         He said he  had  pleaded  guilty.   He  was  worried  about  being
        returned to Sri Lanka but he knew he  should  not  have  assumed  a
        false identity.

    69. He believed he would be arrested and  ill-treated  and  maybe  even
        killed in the event of his return.

   Appellant's Oral Evidence

    70. The appellant gave evidence before us. He adopted answers given  at
        his screening interview and for the asylum interview.   He  adopted
        the witness statement dated 23 March 2007 and a witness  statement
        dated 16 November 2009.


    71. He also drew our attention to something called the "summons  notice
        from Sri Lankan police and translation" which was dated 7  December
        2007 but not produced until 25 June 2010.   The  translation  shows
        the document to be entitled "Authorised to Summon for inquiry  over
        a complaint under the provision of Section 109(06) of the  Criminal
        Act of the 1979 year."  It records that an army officer has made  a
        complaint against "(1) RRK and (2) KRR both living  in  your  Grama
        Sevaka Division" requiring the officer to inform  them  to  present
        themselves at the police station on 10 December  2007  and  warning
        them that if they did not report, a case  will  be  filed  under  a
        particular section of the Sri Lankan Criminal Law Act.

    72. The appellant produced the original of that document.  He  said  it
        had been sent by his brother in Canada who received it on  18  June
        2010.  He understood his brother  in  Canada  had  got  it  from  a
        contact of a relative of that brother's wife  in  Sri  Lanka.    He
        said  his  brother  in  Switzerland  had  informed  him  about  the
        existence of the letter.  His family in Sri Lanka  were  frightened
        to send it out of Sri Lanka.

    73. We note that the original document is very mundane.  It is  printed
        in a language we do not recognise except for the date  (07/12/2007)
        and words in English placed by a rubber stamp "M.O.  Branch  Police
        station Nrlliyady".  It appears to be torn from a larger  sheet  of
        paper and appears to be a photocopy of  a  printed  form  to  which
        words have been added in manuscript written by ballpoint pen.

    74. The appellant was cross-examined.

    75. He repeated that the document had been produced because his brother
        in Switzerland had told  him  that  his  mother  had  received  the
        letter, that his mother was too afraid to send it  from  Sri  Lanka
        and that he had contacted the  brother  in  Canada  and  asked  the
        brother in Canada to ask somebody to ask the appellant's mother  to
        forward the letter.  It arrived in the  appellant's  possession  by
        post.  He did not keep the envelope in which it had arrived because
        he did not think that important.

    76. His mother thought  it  would  be  incriminating  or  dangerous  to
        forward the letter because the appellant was still being sought.

    77. He did not know when his mother had last been approached about  the
        whereabouts of the appellant. The appellant confirmed that  he  had
        never contacted his mother directly. He was asked why he could  not
        contact his mother directly whereas his brother did.   He  believed
        that his mother would be at risk if the authorities learned that he
        had contacted her.  He said that his brother had left Sri Lanka  25
        years go.  The authorities were not interested in his  brother  but
        they were still searching for him.

    78. He was then asked about his arrests or detentions.

    79. He was asked to explain why he was arrested but his father was not.
         He said that the appellant was a businessman although  his  father
        sometimes worked in the shop.

    80. He said that when he was  first  detained  he  was  kicked  by  men
        wearing boots. He was asked to explain why this complaint  was  not
        raised in his first interview.  He just  said  that  he  could  not
        remember exactly.  It was pointed out  that  he  talked  about  his
        father being hit by someone's hand rather  than  by  a  stick.   He
        insisted his father was beaten by sticks and fell to the ground.

    81. He was asked about his detentions.  He said when  he  as  taken  to
        Malusanthi Camp there were twelve other people in the truck.

    82. He talked about chilli powder being rubbed  in  his  eyes  and  his
        being beaten over a two to three hour period.  However, when  asked
        to explain in more detail he talked about a bowl of burning  chilli
        being put close to his face when he was hung upside down.

    83. He said after he was released he went to  the  home  of  his  aunt.
        That was only about three miles away from the family home.  He  was
        asked why he thought it was safe to seek refuge in a place so close
        to the family home. He said he could not go to his parents  and  he
        thought his aunt's place would be safe.  He soon went  to  Colombo.
        He travelled to Colombo pretending to be a cleaner on a lorry.   He
        went through checkpoints  on  the  journey.   He  had  no  form  of
        identification but the driver of the lorry made  arrangements  with
        the checkpoint operators.

    84. He used an Australian passport to leave the country.

    85. He was asked what he did from arriving in the United Kingdom  on  1
        May and leaving on 21 June.  He said he was taken by an agent to  a
        place of his father's choosing.

    86. He was asked how he made contact with his mother's cousin.  He said
        that after he was arrested for using a false document he  contacted
        his family member in Switzerland who told him about the  cousin  in
        the United Kingdom.

    87. He was asked about the signing of the document.  He said it was  in
        the Singhalese language and he could not read it.

    88. He said he started living with his cousin in the United Kingdom  on
        12 February 2007.   His  cousin  runs  a  grocery  and  off-licence
        business.  His cousin was married with children. His wife helped in
        the business. He was unsure of the age of the  children.   He  said
        the first was nearly 10, the second was 8 and there was a son  aged
        about 4.

    89. He did not help in the business but he did help to look  after  the
        children.

    90. He believed his cousin left Sri Lanka in 1999  when  the  appellant
        was aged 11.

    91. The appellant was not re-examined.

    92. In answer to questions from the Tribunal he said that  his  brother
        in Switzerland did not have regular contact  with  his  mother  but
        sometimes there were phone calls to an uncle's house and the mother
        would go and speak to her  son,  the  appellant's  brother,  there.
        His brother spoke to his mother shortly after  their  father  died.
        The appellant did not.

    93. The appellant knew he had arrived in the United Kingdom by aircraft
        but claimed not to know the country from which he travelled or even
        if it were in Europe.  He did not notice  the  name  while  he  was
        waiting at the airport.  He knew he travelled from a different time
        zone and he believed he was in the air for seven or eight hours.

   VT's evidence

    94. VT gave evidence  before  us.   He  adopted  his  statement  of  19
        November 2009.


    95. He lives at an address in Ilford.  He was born in Sri Lanka  on  20
        April 1963 and arrived in the United Kingdom in 1989.  He said  the
        appellant's mother is his cousin and then, somewhat  incongruously,
        "the appellant is therefore my nephew".  He said  he  ran  his  own
        business.


    96. The appellant had been living with them since 12 February 2007  and
        had been supported by the witness.  He claimed to have  taken  over
        the role of parent and formed a strong relationship as had his wife
        and their children who were very affectionate towards him.

    97. In answer to supplementary questions he said that he would feel  he
        was losing a family member if the appellant  was  returned  to  Sri
        Lanka.

    98. The witness did not feel he could go and settle in Sri  Lanka.   He
        had three children in school and his business was sound and he  did
        not feel the situation in Sri Lanka had calmed down  to  the  point
        where he could start a new life there.

    99. He was cross-examined.  He said he came to the  United  Kingdom  in
        1989.  In Sri Lanka he lived in the  village  where  the  appellant
        lived.  He had not kept in touch with his family and  only  learned
        of the appellant's arrival in the United Kingdom when  he  received
        the telephone call from a relative.  His shop had two employees  as
        well as help from his wife.  His wife  normally  looked  after  the
        children who were aged 10, 6 and 5 and  were  all  at  school.   He
        could not explain why the appellant did not know their ages.

   Medical Evidence

   100. There is a medical report from Mr J Taghipour who  qualified  as  a
        medical practitioner in 1979.  His relevant qualifications for  the
        purposes of giving the report include his being  a  Fellow  of  the
        Royal College of Surgeons, Edinburgh, specialising in accident  and
        emergency medicine and surgery.


   101. He noticed two scars on the appellant's head, one on  the  top  the
        other on the front. There were also three "relatively  circular  in
        shape" scars on the appellant's left forearm and evidence of damage
        to his left eardrum.   Concerning  the  scars  on  the  appellant's
        forearm Dr Taghipour said they were "typical  of"  burns  with  hot
        solid objects such  as  cigarette  stubs.   He  said  "this  is  an
        appearance that is usually found with  this  type  of  trauma,  but
        there are other possible causes".

   102. Concerning the longitudinal and linear  scars  on  the  appellant's
        head, Dr Taghipour said they are "consistent with trauma from blunt
        objects such as wooden sticks as described by [the  appellant]  and
        they could be described as "highly consistent" that is "the  lesion
        could have been caused by the trauma described and  there  are  few
        other possible causes".  He continued that the  age  of  the  scars
        could also fit his description making the point that  ageing  scars
        after about a year since they were inflicted is very  difficult  to
        do.  He also picked up  "non-specific  physical  and  psychological
        symptoms which could be described as "consistent with" as they  can
        be caused by other causations and are non-specific in causation."

   RK's Evidence

   103. The appellant also produced a statement from his brother in Canada,
        RK, this shows support for the appellant but contains  no  original
        evidence to assist us.


   RKM


   104. There is a statement from RKM from an address in  Switzerland.   He
        identifies himself as the appellant's brother.  He said that he  is
        a recognised refugee in  Switzerland  and  has  lived  there  since
        claiming asylum in 1988.  He says that  he  can  confirm  that  the
        appellant suffered persecution in Sri Lanka but gives no indication
        of how he knows these things.  He also said that  he  had  been  in
        contact with their mother and the authorities had issued an  arrest
        warrant against the appellant.


   105. There is another statement from RKM dated 14 April 2010 explaining
        that he could not attend his  brother's  appeal  in  November  2009
        because of work commitments and was unable  to  attend  the  appeal
        hearing at Field House on 16 April 2010 because  he  had  booked  a
        pilgrimage with a religious group to Egypt and Israel.  At the time
        of writing he was in Israel.

   Respondent's Submissions

   106. Ms Kiss began by relying on the refusal letter dated  15  September
        2009.  The letter set out the appellant's account accurately and in
        considerable detail.  The letter included a long quotation  from  a
        Foreign Commonwealth Office Country Profile on Sri Lanka  dated  31
        March 2009 dealing with the demise of the LTTE.   It  was  accepted
        before us that the LTTE present no threat to the appellant now  and
        we  have  considered  only  in  summary  outline  the   appellant's
        complaints about his difficulties with that organisation.


   107. Paragraph 38 of the letter starts to deal with the substance of the
        appellant's claim namely his fear of the Sri Lankan army.

   108. The respondent notes that the appellant claimed that  he  had  been
        ill-treated and was required to sign papers agreeing to act  as  an
        informer.

   109. The respondent in his letter recognises that young Tamil  men  were
        targeted and many were arrested and  detained  for  short  periods.
        However the letter said  that  "those  who  may  be  of  continuing
        interest to the authorities  would  be  those  wanted  for  serious
        offences, these would normally be high profile members of the  LTTE
        more active and influential" (paragraph 47)  Of course it was never
        the appellant's case he came into such a category.

   110. The letter then said that even if the appellant is the subject of a
        warrant for his arrest by the police  in  Sri  Lanka  there  is  no
        reason to conclude that he is therefore at risk of  persecution  in
        the event of his coming to the attention of the  authorities.   The
        refusal letter then referred to  correspondence  with  the  British
        High  Commission  suggesting  that  forged  documents  are   easily
        obtainable throughout Sri Lanka but that an  accused  person  would
        find it difficult to obtain copies  of  a  genuine  arrest  warrant
        relating to them.

   111. At that time no such document had been produced but  the  Secretary
        of State indicated that it would be unlikely to impress.

   112. The letter then suggested that there would be proper mechanisms  to
        defend the appellant's interest in  Sri  Lanka.   The  letter  then
        quoted the first summary paragraph of LP (LTTE  areas  -  Tamils  -
        Colombo - risk?) Sri Lanka CG [2007 UKAIT 00076.  This states:

           "(1) Tamils are not per se at risk of serious harm from the  Sri
           Lankan authorities at Colombo.  A number of factors may increase
           the risk, including but not limited to: a previous record  as  a
           suspected or actual LTTE  member;  a  previous  criminal  record
           and/or outstanding arrest warrant; bail jumping and/or  escaping
           from custody; having signed a confession  or  similar  document;
           having been asked by the security forces to become an  informer;
           the presence of scarring; return from London or other centre  of
           LTTE fund-raising; illegal departure from Sri Lanka; lack of  an
           ID card or other documentation;  having  made  an  asylum  claim
           abroad; having relatives in the  LTTE.   In  every  case,  those
           factors and the weight to be ascribed to them, individually  and
           cumulatively, must be considered in the light of  the  facts  of
           each case but they are not intended to be a checklist."


   113. Paragraph 97 of the refusal letter is very  important.   There  the
        respondent makes it plain that she does not accept that there is an
        outstanding arrest warrant against the appellant and therefore does
        not accept the authorities would have any adverse interest  in  the
        appellant in the event of his return.


   114. It was accepted the appellant had scars but found that  these  were
        of less interest now than had previously been  thought  to  be  the
        case.

   115. The letter then  said  that  the  respondent  did  not  accept  the
        appellant would be at risk  because  of  his  brother's  activities
        because they had left some time ago.

   116. It then referred to a  letter  from  the  British  High  Commission
        showing how people can be returned uneventfully.  The  letter  then
        gave several reasons for saying that Tamils generally would not  be
        at risk on return even if they were returned  on  emergency  travel
        documents.  It reported how many such people had been  observed  at
        the airport where they were interviewed in a  relaxed  way  and  no
        reference appeared to have been made to computers.

   117. Dealing with the decision to deport  the  respondent,  it  asserted
        that the appellant was liable for  deportation  by  reason  of  his
        conviction and sentence and  indeed  there  was  a  presumption  in
        favour of deportation by reason of paragraph 364 of  HC  395.   The
        respondent did not accept that removing the appellant  would  be  a
        disproportionate interference with his private and family life.

   118. For the same reasons the respondent did not  accept  the  appellant
        was a refugee.  The respondent did not accept that the  appellant's
        rights under Article 3 of the European Convention on  Human  Rights
        would be at risk.

   119. Ms Kiss then said it was the appellant's case that he went  to  the
        United Kingdom on a false passport.   He  was  arrested  trying  to
        leave on another false passport.  Rather  than  seeking  asylum  he
        tried to get to another country.  She submitted this was simply not
        the conduct of a person seeking asylum and submitted  further  that
        we should  have  regard  to  s.8  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
        (Treatment of Claimants, etc) Act 2004.

   120. She said it was the appellant's case that he had  no  contact  with
        his mother yet he set out to prove that the  authorities  continued
        to be interested in him after he  left  Sri  Lanka.   The  document
        described as a summons was used to  support  that  claim.   It  was
        dated 7 December 2007 but not produced until  very  shortly  before
        the hearing in copy form and at the hearing in its  original  form.
        She said it made no sense that  the  appellant's  mother  would  be
        afraid to send documents to the appellant yet it  was  possible  to
        coax her to send them to somebody who sent  to  somebody  who  sent
        them to the appellant.

   121. She referred to the COIS Report dealing with warrants, rather  than
        summons, and said that forged  copies  already  available  but  the
        original was hard to obtain.

   122. She submitted the appellant had not given a consistent  account  of
        his difficulties.  It was significant for his father to  have  been
        beaten by sticks yet that was not mentioned until oral evidence.

   123. The medical report did not support the  appellant's  contention  to
        have received scarring to his right leg.

   124. However, and we find very significantly, Ms Kiss  did  not  suggest
        that the appellant sustained  three  cigarette  burns  in  any  way
        different from his account. He had  not  been  challenged  on  that
        account.

   125. She submitted that it was unbelievable  that  the  appellant  would
        manage to travel from Jaffna to Colombo 200 miles away in  December
        2005 without any identification documents.  The appellant  said  he
        had been stopped on only two occasions and it was not credible that
        he would pass through checks so easily.

   126.  Any  risk  to  the  appellant's  brother  would  have   faded   to
        insignificance by reason of the passing of time.

   127. It made no sense to suggest that  it  was  too  dangerous  for  the
        appellant to contact his mother but his brother was able to contact
        her.

   128. Ms Kiss said however that even if the case was taken at its highest
        there was no reason to think the appellant had  ever  raised  funds
        for the LTTE.  She said there was no evidence that returned  Tamils
        generally had any difficulties.

   129. Additionally she said there was no reason to think the scar on  the
        head or the burns on the arm were the  kind  of  scars  that  would
        attract  attention.   Indeed  the  scars  on  the  head  were   not
        particularly visible.

   130. Concerning the claim on Article 8 grounds she  submitted  that  the
        evidence was  exaggerated.   She  submitted  that  the  appellant's
        relationship with his relative's children was much exaggerated.  He
        was not close to them if he did not know their ages.  She  said  it
        was relevant the appellant had never even tried to  settle  in  the
        United Kingdom but wanted to go to Canada.  It really was not  hard
        to justify disturbing any private and family life the appellant had
        established in the United Kingdom.

   Appellant's Submissions

   131. Mr Solomon relied  on  his  detailed  skeleton  argument  dated  20
        November 2009.  He submitted that the essential  core  account  had
        been told consistently.

   132. He submitted that one of the inconsistencies in the account was the
        appellant's alleged ignorance of the  countries  through  which  he
        travelled and the country in which he stayed.  Such a claim  should
        not be dismissed out of hand.  He was under the control of an agent
        who no doubt had been very influential.

   133. He submitted  that  the  warrant  or  summons  could  be  explained
        credibly.  It was retained by the appellant's mother for  some  two
        or three years because it was an  important  and  official  looking
        document.  Her son in Canada knew how to persuade her to send it so
        that it could be forwarded to the United Kingdom.

   134. Dr Taghipour's evidence was pertinent.   It  was  unchallenged  and
        expert and supported the case.

   135. The fact that the appellant wanted to travel to Canada did not mean
        he was not a refugee.

   136. He submitted the appellant would be at risk.  He had left Sri Lanka
        illegally.  He did not have an ordinary travel document so would be
        returned on an emergency document.  He did have scars.

   137. He submitted the appellant had been telling  the  truth  about  his
        time in custody and was telling the truth when he said that he  was
        required to sign blank forms and required to report.

   138. He submitted that it was not unbelievable that a driver had  helped
        his passage down to Colombo from Jaffna.

   139. Neither was  it  unbelievable  the  appellant's  father  had  died,
        possibly in fear of a forthcoming visit to the authorities.

   140. Concerning Article 8 he submitted the appellant had  established  a
        protected and private family life in the years that he had been  in
        the United Kingdom.  It went beyond ordinary  social  relationships
        but included a relationship between relatives and the appellant and
        small children who would miss him.

   141. He further submitted there was a delay  of  two  years  before  any
        steps were taken.  That sat uneasily with any  claim  that  it  was
        imperative to remove him.  Finally he submitted that the  appellant
        could not reasonably be expected to relocate.

   Findings

   142. Although we have indicated our views on some of the  evidence  when
        we have outlined it above we must emphasise that we did  not  start
        writing the determination until we had decided  on  our  conclusion
        and we made no findings about anything  without  first  considering
        all of the evidence in the round and as a whole.


   143. We remind ourselves that  our  first  task  is  to  decide  if  the
        appellant is a refugee.  Here it is for him to prove his  case  but
        it is sufficient if he proves it at a low standard and shows  there
        is a real risk of his being persecuted for one of the reasons noted
        in the Convention in the event of his return to Sri Lanka.

   144. We have considered the statements from relatives who have not  come
        to give evidence.  They are of very little value.  We  accept  that
        the appellant has a brother in Canada and another  in  Switzerland.
        That they appear to have persuaded the authorities there that  they
        are refugees supports rather than handicaps  the  appellant's  case
        but we do not know what details they  gave  during  the  course  of
        their claims. They left some time ago and  their  status  does  not
        really illuminate the appellant's case.

   145. We are not impressed with  the  purported  summons.   As  indicated
        above it is an undistinguished document.  We do  not  know  how  it
        compares with an example from a known source and one of the reasons
        for this is that it was  not  disclosed  until  the  last  possible
        minute.  It may be  that  summonses  of  this  kind  are  routinely
        photocopied en masse and filled in using  ballpoint  ink  as  needs
        require.   There  is  no  reason  to  regard  such  a   system   as
        unbelievable.  However  the  "summons"  is  not  addressed  to  the
        appellant or his  father  but  to  a  police  officer.  We  do  not
        understand how such a document would come to be in  the  possession
        of the appellant's family. Further, given the evidence that genuine
        documents can easily be procured for illegal  purposes  we  do  not
        have any great confidence in the security of genuine documents held
        in the custody of the Sri  Lankan  government.  We  find  that  the
        summons represents a neutral rather than an informative  strand  of
        evidence.

   146. Dr Taghipour's evidence is more helpful.  It should be  noted  that
        it is not particularly compelling evidence.  It does not, and  does
        not purport to, prove conclusively that the appellant  was  injured
        in any particular way. However  it  does  not  bear  any  signs  of
        conspicuous exaggeration or empathy.  We have clear photographs and
        it is apparent to the untrained eye that the appellant is scarred.

   147. Whilst the fact that the appellant is scarred does not need  expert
        evidence, the causes of such scars is a matter  of  expert  opinion
        and it is clear that Dr Taghipour is of the view that the appellant
        could have sustained the scars in the way that he has described.

   148. The apparent cigarette burns particularly interest us because it is
        very hard to see how injuries  of  that  kind  could  be  sustained
        unless they were inflicted deliberately.

   149. It was never suggested to the appellant that  the  scars  were  the
        result of voluntary mutilation and there is no  reason  to  suggest
        such a thing except cynicism.  This  is  a  particularly  important
        feature in the case. Clearly the appellant is scarred. He has a row
        of three small round scars on his lower arm which he says  are  the
        result of torture. We dismiss as irrelevant any concerns  that  may
        arise from the appellant saying that  he  had  scars  on  his  hand
        rather than his arm. There scars are  there  on  his  arm.  If  the
        appellant really did say that they were on his  hand  then  it  was
        clearly the result of a slip of the tongue. They have not moved and
        we can see no reason why he would have made a mistake  about  their
        whereabouts or deliberately given a wrong answer.

   150. We have no difficulty in accepting that the appellant is Tamil  and
        that young Tamil men often were detained and ill-treated by the Sri
        Lankan authorities at the time the appellant said that he was  ill-
        treated.

   151. We do find a broad consistency in the way he had  told  his  story.
        Ms Kiss has found things where the  story  has  not  been  told  in
        entirely the same  way.   This  is  why  we  have  looked  so  very
        carefully at the interview record and it is our view that it  reads
        more sensibly as the words of someone recalling  a  bad  experience
        that he had endured rather than recalling imperfectly an untruthful
        story he had learned to tell.

   152. We are  also  satisfied  from  Dr  Taghipour's  evidence  that  the
        appellant has been knocked about.  There are areas of the  evidence
        that surprise us.  It is disturbing that the medical  report  makes
        no comment on the appellant's alleged injury to his  leg.   However
        the injuries to the head on their own, and  particularly  with  the
        symptoms picked up by Dr Taghipour, clearly support the appellant's
        claim to have been knocked about.

   153. The injuries to his arm, mainly from cigarette  burns,  are  highly
        suggestive of a person being  tortured  rather  than  simply  being
        involved in a fight.  We accept that Dr Taghipour does not  exclude
        the possibility of these scars being caused in some other  way  but
        the best explanation before us is the one given by the appellant.

   154. Once it is apparent that the appellant is scarred we  have  to  ask
        ourselves how he came to be scarred. He says that he was  tortured.
        The other possibilities are that the scars were the result of  some
        innocent but unimaginable mechanism, or that they are the result of
        torture in very different circumstances to those  advanced  by  the
        appellant. One  might  speculate  that  they  were  self-inflicted,
        presumably  to  promote  the  appellant's  case.  None   of   these
        explanations is beyond belief but they do not appear to  us  to  be
        likely.

   155. Ms Kiss was not able in her cross-examination to lay  a  foundation
        to support any suggestion that the  scars  were  self-inflicted  or
        otherwise the result of bad faith on the part of the appellant.  As
        we have already mentioned it was not put to the appellant that  the
        scars were self inflicted or otherwise caused in a way inconsistent
        with the appellant's case. That implies no criticism of Ms Kiss. On
        the contrary, it seems to us to reflect the reality of the case.

   156. In the absence of any  evidence  tending  to  suggest  a  different
        mechanism we do not see how we can fairly  reject  the  appellant's
        evidence about their cause when no alternative mechanism was put to
        him and he was not cross-examined on the basis that he  was  making
        up his entire case.

   157. We have no hesitation in saying, mindful of  the  low  standard  of
        proof, that on the totality  of  the  evidence  the  appellant  was
        telling the truth when he claimed to have been knocked about and to
        have been tortured by burning with cigarettes.

   158. Of course the appellant's claim does  not  depend  upon  his  being
        beaten but on his still being at  risk.   We  remind  ourselves  of
        paragraph 215 of LP (LTTE area - Tamils  -  Colombo  -  risk?)  Sri
        Lanka CG [2007] UKAIT 00076 where the Tribunal said:

             "We see no reason to depart from the established  guidance  set
             out in Selvaratnam that this can be a significant risk  factor.
             Confession evidence, credibly deduced, was noted  by  Professor
             Goode at paragraph 47 of his specific report and indeed we note
             the relevant and significant comments of Dr  Foster  that  many
             Tamils are released after signing statements  made  in  Sinhala
             that they often do not understand.  It is again a  factor  that
             must be considered in the totality of the risk."

   159. That this remains a risk factor was expressly endorsed at paragraph
        142 of TK (Tamils - LP updated) Sri Lanka CG [2009] UKAIT 00049.


   160. This is important for two reasons.  Firstly it  shows  that  having
        signed a blank form remains a pertinent risk  factor.  Secondly  it
        shows that it is a commonly made allegation and accepted  as  often
        being the case that Tamils were detained and made to sign documents
        that potentially incriminated them or created difficulties for them
        in exactly the way the appellant described.

   161. It follows that we have a story which is  at  its  core  inherently
        believable supported  by  real  evidence  of  the  appellant  being
        injured and medical evidence showing that the injuries  could  well
        have been caused in the way described.

   162.  There  is  much   about   the   appellant's   evidence   that   is
        unsatisfactory.  We do not believe that he  travelled  out  of  Sri
        Lanka not knowing where he was going or lived in  a  country,  even
        under something like house arrest, without realising the country in
        which he was living. He travelled through an international  airport
        in Sri Lanka presenting himself for travel. He flew in an aeroplane
        and was then transported in the third country. Then  he  left  that
        country again  by  international  air  travel.  Furthermore  it  is
        discreditable for the appellant to have delayed  making  an  asylum
        claim until confronted by the authorities.  We understand  that  he
        wanted to go to Canada to be with the rest of his family  and  this
        does make more sense of his delay but he  cannot  avoid  a  finding
        that he was deliberately deceiving the authorities  in  the  United
        Kingdom until he was caught and that does undermine his credibility
        generally.

   163. The account of the escape from Jaffna to Colombo is startling.  It,
        whilst  not  impossible,  is   improbable   given   his   lack   of
        documentation at the stage of his journey.

   164. Although we are not impressed  by  the  so-called  summons  we  are
        persuaded that the appellant did sign a false confession.  This  is
        the kind of thing that does cause problems  in  the  event  of  his
        return.

   165. We remind ourselves that the situation in  Sri  Lanka  has  changed
        since some of the Tribunal's jurisprudence was  published  and  the
        LTTE is a spent force.  We remind ourselves as  well  that  a  very
        large number of Tamils are tainted with some kind of  link  to  the
        LTTE and the evidence does not suggest they all risk persecution.

   166. However if this appellant is returned to Sri Lanka he will go  back
        as a Tamil who has been in the United Kingdom for some years  on  a
        special travel  document.   This  will  attract  attention  at  the
        airport.  We recognise immediately that a lot of people  return  to
        Sri Lanka in similar circumstances and the evidence  suggests  that
        many of them are processed  with  reasonable  efficiency  and  good
        humour and are certainly  not  persecuted.   However  there  is  no
        avoiding the finding that these features tend to attract attention.
         The days are certainly gone when any sort of scarring was regarded
        as  a  matter  of  grave  concern  and  enormous  interest  to  the
        authorities in Sri Lanka.  The marks in the  appellant's  head  are
        not immediately apparent and are  not  particularly  indicative  of
        torture to a lay person in any event.

   167. However marks on the arm  are  easily  seen  and  do  indicate  the
        appellant has been tortured.  They would not  necessarily  come  to
        the attention of the authorities but they could only be  hidden  by
        wearing long sleeved clothing, which may itself  be  suspicious  in
        the context of return to a hot country such as Sri Lanka.

   168. We accept that the appellant's family was linked to  the  LTTE  and
        that his brothers were involved as claimed.  We realise this  is  a
        long time ago.  It is not a decisive factor but it points  more  in
        the direction of the appellant being at risk than of his having  no
        difficulty.

   169. Not without some hesitation  we  do  accept  that  the  appellant's
        father was wanted by the authorities.  We do not say  that  he  was
        frightened to death but we accept that he did die at  a  time  when
        the authorities were looking for him because of his links with  the
        appellant.  We accept this evidence because it is  consistent  with
        the idea of the authorities being interested in a  person  who  was
        given instructions to attend and report and who signed a blank form
        but who disappeared.  We think the authorities would be  displeased
        with that and would  have  made  enquiries  and  that  is  how  the
        appellant's father would have been involved.

   170. For similar reasons we accept that the appellant was on  some  kind
        of bail or obligation to report when he left.

   171. The appellant has not done much to help himself but  the  objective
        evidence and the background material supports his case.  We believe
        the appellant is in a group of people  who  are  at  risk  for  the
        reasons given in TK and other cases.

   172. It follows that the appellant is a refugee.

   173. That is sufficient to dispose of this appeal  but  we  do  consider
        separately his claim for protection under Article 8 of the European
        Convention on Human Rights.  This is misconceived.  We accept  that
        in the time he has been in the United Kingdom he has established  a
        protected private and family life with his relatives with  whom  he
        now lives.  We do  not  accept  there  is  any  particularly  close
        relationship here.  We accept that he is welcome in the home and is
        being  supported  by  them.   We  do  not  find   it   particularly
        significant that  he  did  not  know  the  age  of  his  relative's
        children.  One of them he got right.  One  of  them  he  got  about
        right.  The age of the middle child, a daughter, he got wrong.   We
        accept Ms Kiss's submission  that  a  child  whose  family  enjoyed
        western European, particularly British, social norms would be  very
        aware of her age and keen to share  the  information  with  others.
        There is no evidence before us that that would be true of  a  child
        whose family came  from  Sri  Lanka  and  we  are  aware  that  the
        celebration of birthdays varies enormously between cultures.

   174.  Nevertheless  the  appellant's  evidence  fell  short  of  showing
        especially  strong  links  of  the  kind  that  would  create   the
        relationships that are hard to disrupt such as that between parents
        and minor child or husband and wife.

   175.  Removing  the  appellant  would  disrupt  relationships  that  are
        established.  He would miss the family with whom he has  lived  and
        they would miss him.  Article  8(1)  would  be  engaged.   However,
        unless he is entitled to international  protection,  the  appellant
        has no right to be in the United Kingdom.  The kind of  delay  here
        although unpraiseworthy, is not the kind of delay which  materially
        changes a person's expectations or which shows acquiescence in  his
        remaining.  Immigration control is  a  proper  purpose  and  it  is
        meaningless if it is not enforced.  Subject to the  very  important
        qualification of his being a refugee the appellant has no right  in
        the United  Kingdom  and  should  expect  to  be  removed  and  the
        comfortable  links  with  his  family  do  not  make  his   removal
        disproportionate.  The respondent has satisfied us about that.

   176. It follows that although removing the  appellant  would  contravene
        his Article 3 rights, for the same reason that he is a refugee, his
        removal but for that would not  interfere  with  his  rights  under
        Article 8.

   177. We have reminded ourselves of the guidance given in EO (Deportation
        appeals:  scope  and  process)  Turkey  [2007]  UKAIT   00062   and
        particularly paragraph 5 of the  Tribunal's  head  note  where  the
        Tribunal said:

             "In determining an appeal against a deportation  decision  made
             on 'conducive' grounds on or after 20 July  2006  the  Tribunal
             should  first  confirm  that  the  appellant   is   liable   to
             deportation (either because the  sentencing  judge  recommended
             deportation or  because  the  Secretary  of  State  has  deemed
             deportation to  be  conducive  to  the  public  good);  if  so,
             secondly  consider  whether  deportation   would   breach   the
             appellant's rights under the Refugee Convention or the ECHR; if
             not, thirdly consider paragraph 364."

   178. Mr Solomon properly and helpfully conceded that the  appellant  was
        liable to deportation.

   179. We do not consider paragraph 364 separately because we have decided
        the appellant is a refugee.

Decision


      It follows that the original Tribunal erred  in  law.   The  following
decision is      substituted.  The appeal is allowed on  Refugee  Convention
grounds and for the    same reasons on human rights grounds  with  reference
to Article 3.


Signed

Senior Immigration Judge
      (Judge of the Upper Tribunal)







