
IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

R (on the application  of  Kaienga)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department IJR [2015] UKUT 0272 (IAC)


                                                                 Field House
                                                                      London


                                                               20 April 2015

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                               ELIDIO KAIENGA

                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
                               - - - - - - - -

Mr P Nathan, Counsel, instructed by Sutovic & Hartigan Solicitors,  appeared
on behalf of the Applicant.

Ms J Anderson,  Counsel,  instructed  by  the  Government  Legal  Department
appeared on behalf of the Respondent.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                                  JUDGMENT

                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    JUDGE KOPIECZEK:  This application for judicial review comes before  me
    following a grant of permission by Upper Tribunal Judge  Rintoul  on  2
    March 2015.

 2. The decision under challenge is that dated 12 November  2014,  being  a
    decision to refuse to grant leave to remain on Article 8 grounds,  with
    reference to the Article 8 Immigration Rules and Article 8 proper.  The
    claim form expressly refers to the decision dated 12 November  2014  as
    the decision under challenge.

 3. This judgment deals principally with the issue of costs given  that  at
    the hearing before me a consent order was agreed between the parties.

 4. The only facet of the consent order which was not finalised  and  which
    was drafted  in  the  alternative  by  the  parties,  was  whether  the
    application is withdrawn or dismissed.  The parties agreed that  either
    would be acceptable in terms of the consent order, although Mr Nathan's
    preference  was  for  the  application  to  be  withdrawn  whereas   Ms
    Anderson's was for the application to be dismissed.  The  parties  were
    content for me to decide that issue, although strictly it is  a  matter
    for the parties given that it is their consent order.  Nevertheless,  I
    can deal with the matter shortly.

 5. Mr Nathan on behalf of  the  applicant  expressed  his  view  that  the
    application should be withdrawn.  That therefore, is in effect what the
    applicant had decided to do.  Very often an applicant is content for an
    application to be dismissed where there is a consent order but here the
    applicant has decided to withdraw the application,  and  to  which  the
    Tribunal consents.  The application is therefore withdrawn, and this is
    now reflected in the consent order.

 6. So far as costs are concerned,  a  brief  recital  of  the  history  is
    necessary in order to put my decision into context.   It  is  important
    that the parties understand that I express no view  on  the  merits  of
    what is now an outstanding application for leave to remain on Article 8
    grounds.

 7. Although the decision under challenge is dated 12 November 2014,  there
    was an earlier decision dated 29 April 2014, refusing to grant leave to
    remain, again on Article 8 grounds.  By the terms of  a  consent  order
    dated 8 September  2014,  the  respondent  agreed  to  reconsider  that
    decision within three months  of  the  signing  of  the  Order,  absent
    special circumstances and that the applicant had leave to withdraw  the
    claim for judicial review with  the  respondent  agreeing  to  pay  the
    applicant's reasonable costs, to be assessed if not agreed.   Following
    that consent order, there was the decision of 12 November 2014.

 8. The applicant's complaint in relation to the  second  decision  is,  in
    effect, that it is a decision which is  effectively  identical  to  the
    earlier one of 29 April 2014 and which is in itself legally flawed  for
    the additional reason that the applicant's  age  at  the  date  of  the
    decision (25) rather than at the date of  application  was  taken  into
    account, with reference to the requirements of paragraph 276ADE.

 9. Part of the applicant's claim was that he was  entitled  to  a  removal
    decision, thus giving him a right of  appeal  which  he  did  not  have
    solely on the basis  of  the  refusal  of  leave  to  remain.   It  was
    contended that the applicant fell within  the  respondent's  policy  on
    removal decisions, namely that there were "exceptional  and  compelling
    reasons" to make a removal decision.

10. The respondent  did  eventually  file  an  acknowledgement  of  service
    ("AOS") on 2 March 2015 although not including any summary  grounds  of
    defence.  The AOS stated that the respondent had agreed  to  reconsider
    her decision of 12 July 2014 (seemingly a  mistaken  reference  to  the
    decision dated 12 November 2014  as  pointed  out  by  the  applicant's
    solicitors in their letter dated 4 March 2015).

11. The  draft  consent  order  referred  to  the  respondent  agreeing  to
    reconsider her decision of "12 July 2014" within three  months  of  the
    sealed order, absent special circumstances, and that the  applicant  do
    have leave to withdraw the claim for judicial review with  there  being
    no order as to costs.  The next part of the history of the  proceedings
    can  be  seen  from  the  bundle  of  correspondence  provided  by  the
    applicant's solicitors, at page 33.  An email, dated 4 March  2015,  to
    the respondent describes the decision of 12 November 2014 as a "sterile
    repeat" of the decision withdrawn in  the  previous  proceedings.   The
    letter expresses the concern that should the  applicant  agree  to  the
    relief offered they would  inevitably  end  up  with  a  third  set  of
    "essentially repetitive proceedings". The  email  continues  that  this
    would offend against the principle of finality of litigation and  would
    "amount to  an  egregious  waste  of  judicial  and  court  resources".
    Reference  is  also  made  to  the  fact  of  the  termination  of  the
    applicant's NASS support in consequence of the  respondent's  decision.
    The challenge to the refusal to make an appealable immigration decision
    is repeated and on that basis the proposed consent order was not agreed
    to. In addition to that, there was objection to the proposed  order  as
    to costs i.e. no order as to costs.

12. On 24 March 2015 there was a further email to the respondent  referring
    to Judge Rintoul's directions  for  the  respondent  to  file  detailed
    grounds by 23 March  2015,  and  that  no  detailed  grounds  had  been
    provided. The email continues that it is  assumed  therefore  that  the
    respondent does not wish to defend the proceedings and  agrees  to  the
    relief sought as set out in the grounds.

13. By email dated 24 March 2015 the respondent agreed to  the  proceedings
    being stayed pending the reconsideration and pointing out  that  rights
    of appeal derive from immigration decisions within the context  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002,  section  82.   It  is
    suggested in the email that the only mandatory order that could now  be
    made is for the Secretary of State to make a fresh decision, which  she
    has agreed to do. It is also said that if the Tribunal were to  attempt
    to order the respondent to give the applicant  a  right  of  appeal  it
    would pre-determine the decision that is for  the  Secretary  of  State
    alone to determine, namely whether to  grant  the  applicant  leave  to
    remain.  Furthermore, it would,  it  is  suggested,  pre-determine  the
    decision against the applicant in that it  would  presuppose  that  the
    submissions would in the first instance  be  rejected.  The  respondent
    contended that the correct approach was for the applicant  to  await  a
    fresh decision he could either appeal, if unfavourable, or challenge by
    way of judicial review, depending on the circumstances.

14. The draft consent order was to the effect, amongst other  things,  that
    the judicial review should be stayed pending the outcome of the  review
    by the respondent of the decision of 12 November 2014.

15. In a response dated 27 March 2015, the applicant's solicitors suggested
    that under the terms of the respondent's removal decisions policy,  she
    is required to issue a 'criteria met'  letter  in  response  to  a  PAP
    letter whereby she would agree to reconsider the decision and then,  if
    the decision is to maintain the earlier decision, to make an appealable
    decision within three months. It is suggested that the failure to  make
    an appealable decision is a continued breach of the  second  aspect  of
    the policy.  A counter proposal is made by the  applicant's  solicitors
    as to an appropriate form of wording  in  the  consent  order.   It  is
    further suggested that given the  respondent's  conduct  following  the
    first judicial review, including that she has still not paid the  costs
    of that claim, there would ordinarily be an application for costs on an
    indemnity basis, although in the interests of prompt settlement,  costs
    on the standard basis would be agreed, if  the  terms  of  the  consent
    order suggested by the applicant's solicitors were themselves agreed.

16. Three days later, on 30 March 2015, the respondent sent a holding email
    saying that an  effort  would  be  made  to  respond  to  the  proposed
    amendments as soon as possible.  On  the  same  date,  the  applicant's
    solicitors wrote to the respondent  stating  that  the  respondent  had
    failed to provide any basis for resisting the applicant's  grounds  for
    judicial review and pointing out that the applicant is required to file
    a skeleton argument and bundle with the  Tribunal  on  30  March  2015.
    Reference is made to rule 31 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
    Rules 2008 in terms of the requirement for the  respondent  to  provide
    detailed grounds for contesting the application and suggesting that the
    Tribunal would be invited to prevent the respondent's participation  in
    the proceedings in the absence of such detailed grounds.

17. A further email from the  applicant's solicitors  dated  2  April  2015
    asks for correspondence to  be  redirected  to  a  different  solicitor
    within the firm because of the author's annual leave.  On 8 April  2015
    the respondent sent an email to the applicant's solicitors enclosing  a
    draft consent order stating  that  the  applicant  does  not  meet  the
    requirements for a removal decision.  The email sets out the  terms  of
    the removals criteria and refers to the  decision  in  Daley-Murdock  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ 161.

18. By email dated 13 April 2015 the applicant's solicitor's complain about
    the respondent's earlier email being sent to the wrong  person  at  the
    applicant's solicitors (referring to the annual leave of the  solicitor
    in question) and stating that the amended form of consent order sent by
    the respondent was not agreed. In summary, the  applicant's  solicitors
    contend  that  the  applicant's  case  demonstrates  compassionate  and
    exceptional circumstances  and  the  applicant  continues  to  seek  an
    explanation for the decision to refuse to make a removal decision.   It
    suggests that the respondent persists in refusing to give  any  reasons
    as to  why  the  applicant's  circumstances  are  not  exceptional  and
    compelling and does not provide any indication  as  to  what  threshold
    this involves or how it can be defined. Previous points are repeated.

19. Ms Anderson submitted  that  an  order  for  costs  in  favour  of  the
    applicant would be accepted by the respondent but only up  to  8  April
    2015 and perhaps  up  to,  say,  12  April  2015  in  relation  to  any
    consequential matters.  8 April 2015 was the date on  which  a  further
    consent order was offered by the respondent.  The  respondent  was  not
    seeking her costs for the hearing, albeit that there had been an  offer
    of settlement by the respondent.

20. Mr Nathan drew my attention to the chronology of events and referred me
    to the correspondence which I have set out  above.  He  submitted  that
    even on 8 April 2015 the respondent was still  maintaining  that  there
    should be no appealable decision,  although  given  that  it  was   now
    accepted  that  the  respondent's  decision  would  be  withdrawn,  the
    position was different.  Under the  'new'  immigration  rules  a  fresh
    decision on Article 8 grounds would be appealable.  Thus, the applicant
    is entitled to the costs up to and including the hearing, including the
    drawing up of any orders.

21. I was referred to the decision in Balmoral  Group  Limited  v  Borealis
    (UK) Limited [2006] EWHC 2531 (Comm) on the question of  the  award  of
    costs on an indemnity basis.

22. It was, in essence, submitted that the applicant's approach to  matters
    had been timely, whereas the respondent's had  not.   The  respondent's
    position had been to refuse to engage with the  appealable  immigration
    decision point.  The conduct of the respondent made it appropriate  for
    costs to be awarded on an indemnity basis.

23. Ms Anderson argued that the Tribunal was asked to  make  a  significant
    departure from the ordinary basis for an award of costs. The respondent
    had been willing to reconsider the case  and the respondent  could  not
    be penalised for not incurring the public expense of providing detailed
    grounds of defence. Costs on an indemnity basis  is  not  designed  for
    punitive purposes.  The applicant could not have  achieved more than he
    has from the judicial review proceedings.  It was  clear  that  it  was
    completely in the discretion of the Secretary of State if and  when  to
    take enforcement action in the form of a removal decision and there may
    be good reasons in different cases as to why no such decision had  been
    taken.

24. After the applicant's email dated 13 April 2015, rejecting the offer of
    settlement by way of the draft consent order to which I have  referred,
    nothing more was heard from the respondent.  A further email  was  sent
    on behalf of the applicant on 17  April  2015  bemoaning  the  lack  of
    action on the part of the respondent and lack of response to the  email
    dated 30 March 2015.  Also on 17 April a skeleton  argument,  albeit  a
    brief one in the circumstances, was served by the applicant.

25. The position therefore is that after the respondent's communication  of
    8 April 2015 nothing more was heard by the applicant or by the Tribunal
    from the respondent.  It seems to me that the applicant was entitled to
    be cautious about assenting to a consent order in  the  terms  proposed
    given that previous proceedings did not advance matters notwithstanding
    a consent order and an agreement to reconsider  the  decision,  because
    the new decision was virtually identical to the previous one.   So  far
    as the issue of an appealable removal decision is concerned, it is  not
    unreasonable for the applicant to have expected the  respondent  to  at
    least engage in a more detailed way with the issues  arising  from  his
    particular circumstances, as advanced in the claim.

26. Aside from that, I do consider that greater effort could have been made
    by the respondent to seek to obtain agreement as to the  terms  of  the
    consent  order  in  advance  of  the  hearing.  As  I  say,  the   last
    communication from the respondent to the applicant prior to the hearing
    was 8 April 2015 and nothing was known either by the  applicant  or  by
    the Tribunal until the very day of the hearing as to  the  respondent's
    position.

27. Although not referred to by the parties, I have considered the decision
    in Muwonge v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department  (consent
    orders: costs: guidance) IJR [2014] UKUT 00514 (IAC) in  terms  of  the
    requirement to take proactive steps to  achieve  agreement  so  far  as
    consent orders are concerned, in advance of the hearing.

28. In the circumstances, I am satisfied that  it  is  reasonable  for  the
    respondent to pay the applicant's costs up to and including the hearing
    on 20 April 2015.  It is  to  be  remembered  that  in  any  event  the
    respondent has agreed to pay the applicant's reasonable  costs,  to  be
    assessed if not agreed, up to 8 April  2015.   My  decision  therefore,
    includes the period from 8 April 2015, up to  and  including  20  April
    2015.

29. As to the applicant's contention that costs should  be  awarded  on  an
    indemnity basis, I reject that submission. The only authority cited  to
    me on the point is as previously indicated, the  decision  in  Balmoral
    Group Limited. I quote from paragraph 1 of the decision as follows:

         "Balmoral lost the action. They will have to  pay  the  costs.  The
         question I have to decide is whether they should pay the costs,  or
         some of them, on the standard or the  indemnity  basis.  The  basic
         rule is that a successful party is entitled to  his  costs  on  the
         standard basis. The factors to be taken into  account  in  deciding
         whether to order costs on the  latter  basis  have  been  helpfully
         summarised by Tomlinson, J., in Three Rivers District Council v The
         Governor and Company of the Bank of England [2006] EWGC 816 (Comm).
         The discretion is a wide one to be determined in the light  of  all
         the  circumstances  of  the  case.  To  award  costs   against   an
         unsuccessful party on an indemnity scale is a  departure  from  the
         norm. There must, therefore, be  something  -  whether  it  be  the
         conduct of the claimant or the circumstances of the  case  -  which
         takes the case outside the norm.  It  is  not  necessary  that  the
         claimant  should  be  guilty  of   dishonesty   or   moral   blame.
         Unreasonableness in the conduct of the proceedings and the  raising
         of particular allegations, or in the manner  of  raising  them  may
         suffice. So may the pursuit of a speculative claim involving a high
         risk of failure or the making of  allegations  of  dishonesty  that
         turn out to  be  misconceived,  or  the  conduct  of  an  extensive
         publicity campaign designed to drive the other party to settlement.
         The making of a grossly exaggerated claim may also be a ground  for
         indemnity costs."


30. Essentially, it is to be noted that the discretion in relation to costs
    is a wide one and it is to be borne in mind that to award costs against
    an unsuccessful party on an indemnity basis is  a  departure  from  the
    norm.  I bear in mind that it is not necessary that a party  should  be
    guilty of dishonesty or moral blame.  Nevertheless, I do  not  consider
    that the conduct of the respondent is such that this is an  appropriate
    case in which to make an award of costs  on  anything  other  than  the
    standard basis.

31. There is also something to be said for  the  argument  advanced  by  Ms
    Anderson to the effect that public law  proceedings,  involving  public
    funds, ought to be considered rather differently from commercial  cases
    such as that in Balmoral Group Limited.  I  was  not  referred  to  any
    authority on the point but in  any  event,  even  without  taking  into
    account Ms Anderson's point, I would  not  have  concluded  that  costs
    should be awarded on an indemnity basis. It is also to be borne in mind
    that, as explained in Three Rivers  District  Council  v  Governor  and
    Company of the Bank of England [2006] EWHC 816 (Comm) at paragraph  14,
    the purpose of an order for costs on  an  indemnity  basis  is  not  to
    punish the paying party but to give a more fair result for the party in
    whose favour a costs order is made.

32. In conclusion therefore, costs are awarded in favour of  the  applicant
    up to and including 20 April 2015 on the standard basis, to be assessed
    if not agreed.

33. When this judgment was handed down  on  30  April  2015  neither  party
    attended, their  attendance  not  having  been  required.  Accordingly,
    although there was no application at  the  hearing  for  permission  to
    appeal to the Court of Appeal, I am required  by  Rule  44(4B)  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 to consider  whether  to
    give or refuse permission to appeal. There being no arguable  error  of
    law in this decision, permission to appeal is refused.










