
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

   Mansur (immigration adviser's failings: Article 8) Bangladesh [2018] UKUT
                                                                 00274 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 July 2018                                |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT

                                   Between

                              abdulla al mansur
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent






Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Turner, instructed by Nova Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

(1) Poor professional immigration  advice  or  other  services  given  to  P
cannot give P a stronger form of protected private or  family  life  than  P
would otherwise have.

(2) The correct way of approaching the matter is to  ask  whether  the  poor
advice etc that P has received constitutes a reason to  qualify  the  weight
to be placed on the  public  interest  in  maintaining  firm  and  effective
immigration control.

(3) It will be  only  in  a  rare  case  that  an  adviser's  failings  will
constitute such a reason. The weight that would otherwise need to  be  given
to that interest is not to be  reduced  just  because  there  happen  to  be
immigration  advisers  who   offer   poor   advice   and   other   services.
Consequently, a person who takes such advice  will  normally  have  to  live
with the consequences.

(4) A blatant failure by an immigration adviser to follow P's  instructions,
as found by the relevant professional regulator, which led directly  to  P's
application for leave being  invalid  when  it  would  otherwise  have  been
likely to have been granted, can, however, amount to such a rare case.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


A. Introduction

 1. The appellant, a citizen of Bangladesh born in  1980,  appeals  against
    the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hunter  who,  following  a
    hearing held at  Hatton  Cross  on  16  December  2016,  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal against the decision of the respondent dated 15 July
    2015 to refuse the appellant's human rights claim.


 2. The fact that the judge considered he was deciding an appeal against  a
    decision to refuse the appellant indefinite  leave  to  remain,  though
    wrong, is immaterial for present purposes. So too is the fact that  the
    judge ended his decision by purporting to dismiss the appeal "under the
    immigration rules and on human rights grounds". This was a human rights
    appeal.  Accordingly,  the  sole  ground  of  challenge  was  that  the
    respondent's decision was unlawful under section 6 of the Human  Rights
    Act 1998 (section 84(2) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
    2002).


B. Immigration history


 3. The immigration history of the appellant is essentially as follows.  In
    April 2005 he arrived in the United  Kingdom  as  a  student.   Further
    leave in that capacity was granted to him by the respondent until 2010.
     In that year, he was granted leave to remain until March 2012 for post-
    study work.  In March 2012 he applied again as a student and leave  was
    granted for that purpose until 31 July 2013.

 4. In July 2013, the appellant applied, during the currency of his  leave,
    for leave to remain as a Tier 2 General Migrant.  That application  was
    refused by the respondent on 2 October 2013.

 5. The appellant appealed against the refusal.  His appeal  was  dismissed
    by the First-tier Tribunal on 7 August 2014.

 6. At this point, the chronology becomes crucial.

 7. Following the refusal of an application to the First-tier Tribunal  for
    permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,  the  appellant  made  an
    application to the Upper Tribunal for such permission.   As  a  result,
    the leave which the appellant had been granted in March 2012, until  31
    July 2013, continued to be extended  by  reason  of  the  operation  of
    section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971.  Section 3A(2)(c) provides that
    leave is extended during any period when an appeal  is  pending  within
    the meaning of section 104 of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002.  Section 104(2)(a) provides that an appeal is  pending  while
    an application for  permission  to  appeal  under  section  11  of  the
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 could be made or is awaiting
    determination.

 8. Thus, on 7 October  2014,  the  appellant  enjoyed  section  3C  leave.
    However, subsection (4) of section 3C contains an important restriction
    upon what a person with section 3C leave can do:

         "(4) A person may not make an  application  for  variation  of  his
             leave to enter or remain in  the  United  Kingdom  while  that
             leave is extended by virtue of this section."

 9. On 7 October 2014, the  appellant  instructed  an  organisation  called
    Immigration & Work Permit Ltd ("IWP"), which was  registered  with  the
    Office of the Immigration Services Commissioner ("OISC").

10. On 7 October 2014, the appellant made  an  online  application  to  the
    respondent for leave to remain  as  a  Tier  4  General  Student.   The
    appellant's case is that,  on  the  same  day,  he  instructed  IWP  to
    withdraw his application to the Upper Tribunal for permission to appeal
    against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  IWP, however, did not
    withdraw the application for permission until 10 October 2014.

11. For the appellant, the result of this sequence of events was  profound.
    The application for leave which he had  made  on  7  October  2014  was
    invalid because it fell foul of section 3C(4) of the 1971 Act.

12. The invalidity of the  application  was  not,  however,  drawn  to  the
    appellant's attention by the respondent until 29 March 2015.  In  fact,
    on 4 November 2014 the respondent  had  written  to  the  appellant  to
    confirm that "your application is now valid".   Had  the  appellant  be
    informed at that point of the fact that the respondent was treating the
    application as invalid because of the section 3C(4) issue, rather  than
    several months later, the appellant's contention is that he would  have
    been able to take steps to regularise his position.

13. In the event, on 21 April 2015, the appellant  applied  for  indefinite
    leave to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The  appellant  relied  on
    paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules, which reads as follows:-

         "276B.   The requirements to be met by an applicant for  indefinite
               leave to remain on the  ground  of  long  residence  in  the
               United Kingdom are that:
                (i) (a)     he has had at least 10 years  continuous  lawful
                      residence in the United Kingdom.
               (ii)   having regard to the public  interest  there  are  no
                       reasons why it would be undesirable  for  him  to  be
                       given indefinite leave to remain  on  the  ground  of
                       long residence, taking into account his:
                      (a)  age; and
                      (b)  strength of connections in the  United  Kingdom;
                           and
                      (c)  personal history, including character,  conduct,
                           associations and employment record; and
                      (d)  domestic circumstances; and
                      (e)  compassionate circumstances; and
                      (f)  any representations  received  on  the  person's
                           behalf; and
                (iii)  the applicant does not fall  for  refusal  under  the
                      general grounds for refusal.
               (iv)   the applicant has demonstrated  sufficient  knowledge
                       of the  English  language  and  sufficient  knowledge
                       about life in the United Kingdom, in accordance  with
                       Appendix KoLL.
               (v)    the applicant must not be in  the  UK  in  breach  of
                       immigration laws, except that, where paragraph 39E of
                       these  Rules   applies,   any   current   period   of
                       overstaying will be disregarded. Any previous  period
                       of overstaying between periods of leave will also  be
                       disregarded where -
                      (a)  the  further  application  was  made  before  24
                           November 2016 and within 28 days of the expiry of
                           leave; or
                      (b)  the further application was made on or after  24
                           November 2016 and paragraph 39E  of  these  Rules
                           applied."
14. In the respondent's decision of 15 July 2015, refusing the  application
    for indefinite leave and, additionally, refusing the appellant's  human
    rights claim, the respondent explained why the appellant had failed  to
    satisfy the requirements of paragraph 276B:-

         "Your immigration history above confirms that you were without  any
         valid leave from 21 October 2014 until 20 April 2015.

         Your application for indefinite leave to remain  on  the  basis  of
         having completed a period of 10 years continuous  lawful  residence
         is refused under  paragraph  276ADE  with  reference  to  Paragraph
         276B(i)(a) and 276B(v)."



C. The First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision

15. The First-tier Tribunal Judge noted that, whilst in the United Kingdom,
    the appellant had obtained an MSc in International  Marketing  Strategy
    at  the  University  of  East  London  and  a  Bachelor   of   Business
    Administration  degree  from  the  London  Commonwealth  College.   The
    appellant told the judge that if he had been permitted to stay  in  the
    United Kingdom, he planned to set up his own business.

16. The judge was informed that the appellant had complained to OISC  about
    the services he had received from IWP and  that  he  had  received  the
    outcome of his complaint in May 2015.

17. At this stage, it is necessary to set out the relevant  conclusions  of
    the OISC investigation:

         "26. In response to the Complainant's allegation that IWP  did  not
             withdraw his application  for  permission  to  appeal  on  the
             agreed date i.e. 7 October 2014,  the  organisation  explained
             that the  Complainant  did  not  contact  them  following  the
             meeting of 7 October 2014 and that he only contacted  them  on
             10 October 2014 and told them to withdraw the application.  In
             support  of  their  rebuttal  IWP   provided   a   typewritten
             attendance note dated 7 October 2010 and a client care  letter
             of the same date.  In both documents it  is  stated  that  the
             Complainant  had  told  IWP  that  he  had  made   an   online
             application  and  wanted  the  organisation  to  withdraw  his
             application for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal.
             The wording in both documents therefore appears to support the
             Complainant's allegation that he had asked IWP  on  7  October
             2014 to withdraw his application for permission.   Furthermore
             in a copy of a cover letter dated 7 October 2014 addressed  to
             the  Home  Office,  IWP  explains,  "He  (referring   to   the
             Complainant)  applied  before  under  Tier  2   General,   the
             application was refused and his appeal will be withdraw  [sic]
             on 8 October 2014".  Therefore the Commissioner  is  satisfied
             that although the Complainant instructed IWP on 7 October 2014
             to withdraw his application for permission to  appeal  to  the
             Upper Tribunal, IWP did  not  withdraw  the  appeal  until  10
             October 2014.  And in addition to failing to act as instructed
             by the Complainant, IWP attempted to mislead the  Commissioner
             by claiming that the Complainant only told the organisation on
             10 October 2014 to withdraw the appeal.  The organisation  has
             thus breached Code 4 and 13(iv) of the Commissioner's Code  of
             Standards.

         ...

         29.  The Commissioner is not satisfied that IWP provided  competent
             and diligent representation to the Complainant.  Firstly,  IWP
             advised the Complainant on  7  October  2014  to  make  a  new
             application for  leave  to  remain  notwithstanding  that  the
             Complainant's leave had been extended under Section 3C of  the
             Immigration Act 1971 and therefore he  was  not  permitted  to
             make such an application.  Secondly, the  Tier  4  application
             submitted whilst the appeal was outstanding was flawed in  law
             as section 3C and 3D  of  the  Immigration  Act  1971  clearly
             states that no fresh application may be made whilst an  appeal
             is pending.  Thirdly, although IWP claimed to have advised the
             Complainant that his appeal against the decision to refuse his
             Tier 2 application would not be successful  as  there  was  no
             valid CoS, they  have  provided  no  documentary  evidence  to
             corroborate this claim.  Therefore the Commissioner  does  not
             accept that IWP have been able to demonstrate  that  competent
             and diligent representation was provided to  the  Complainant.
             The  organisation  has  thus   breached   Code   17   of   the
             Commissioner's Code of Standards."



18. The First-tier Tribunal Judge held as follows:-

         "26. The effect of sections 3C and 3D of the Immigration  Act  1971
             is that the Appellant's leave was extended until such time  as
             his appeal rights are exhausted, however whilst while (sic)  a
             person's leave is extended in this way they  cannot  make  any
             further application for leave to remain.  In  the  Appellant's
             case he did not withdraw his  appeal  until  the  letter  from
             Immigration & Work Permit Ltd on the 10th  October  2014,  the
             effect of this is  twofold  firstly  the  Appellant's  Tier  4
             application made on  the  7th  October  2014  is  invalid  and
             secondly once his appeal  rights  were  exhausted  in  October
             2014, he no longer had valid leave,  until  he  submitted  his
             current application on  the  21st  April  2015.   He  has  not
             therefore completed a period of  10  years  continuous  lawful
             residence  in  the  UK  and  accordingly  does  not  meet  the
             requirements of paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules.

         27.  I have  gone  on  to  consider  the  Appellant's  position  in
             relation to any family or private life he may have established
             in the UK.  There is no evidence before  me  to  indicate  the
             Appellant has a partner or child in the UK and as such  he  is
             unable to satisfy the  requirements  of  Appendix  FM  of  the
             Immigration Rules.

         28.  The Appellant's private life I have considered under paragraph
             276ADE(1), he has not lived continuously  in  the  UK  for  20
             years and does not therefore satisfy paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii).
               In  relation  to  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi),   although   the
             Appellant has been in the UK since 2005, he has spent most  of
             his life in Bangladesh.  In his oral  evidence  the  Appellant
             told me his parents, brother and sister are  still  living  in
             Bangladesh and he has visited Bangladesh  in  2008  and  2011.
             The Appellant has  studied  whilst  in  the  UK  and  obtained
             qualifications, and has also had work experience,  I  was  not
             told why the skills the Appellant has acquired in the UK could
             not assist him in obtaining employment in Bangladesh.  In  all
             circumstances  I  do  not  find  that  there  would  be   very
             significant obstacles  to  the  Appellant's  integration  into
             Bangladesh.  He does not therefore meet  the  requirements  of
             paragraph 276ADE(1) of the Immigration Rules.

         29.  I have also  considered  whether  there  are  any  exceptional
             circumstances in the  Appellant's  case  in  relation  to  his
             private life which might necessitate  granting  leave  outside
             the Immigration Rules under Article 8 of the ECHR.   Whilst  I
             have considerable sympathy  with  the  Appellant's  situation,
             given the position in which he has been placed by his previous
             advisers.  I should perhaps mention at  this  stage  that  the
             OISC when determining the  Appellant's  complaint  found  that
             Immigration & Work Permit Ltd did not  provide  competent  and
             diligent representation for the Appellant.

         30.  The Appellant raises the  issue  of  fairness  and  refers  in
             particular refers (sic) to the initial indication given by the
             Respondent in an e-mail dated the 4th November 2014, that  the
             Tier 4 application submitted  on  the  7th  October  2014  was
             valid.  I accept in the context of this case  the  wording  of
             the e-mail is potentially misleading, however it appears to be
             a standard form of wording, which is simply acknowledging that
             biometric enrolment has taken place and the  application  form
             has been correctly  completed.   As  the  e-mail  goes  on  to
             indicate the file is then passed to a caseworker.  It can only
             be  when  a  caseworker  has  been  able  to  investigate   an
             applicant's immigration history that, as  in  the  Appellant's
             case, they are able to ascertain whether the  requirements  of
             the Immigration Rules have been met.

         31.  The other point the Appellant makes is that there was an undue
             delay  by  the  Respondent  in  making  a  decision   on   his
             application.  The Appellant submits if  a  decision  had  been
             taking  more  expeditiously,  he  could  have   remedied   the
             position.  The application was submitted on  the  7th  October
             2014 and determined on the  16th  July  2015,  some  8  months
             later.  Whilst I acknowledge there is  some  delay  I  do  not
             consider it to be of a magnitude  which  renders  the  process
             unfair.  The responsibility  to  ensure  the  application  was
             submitted in accordance with the Immigration Rules rests  with
             the Appellant and his advisers.  In so far  as  the  Appellant
             has suffered unfairness that has been due to his advisers  not
             providing competent  advice  rather  than  any  unfairness  or
             action taken by the Respondent.

         32.  The Appellant came to the UK to study and was granted  various
             periods of leave to enable him to complete  those  studies  he
             cannot have had the expectation that he would  necessarily  be
             allowed to remain in the UK once those studies were  complete.
             He  has  family  in  Bangladesh  and  in  so  far  as  he  has
             established friendships whilst he has been in the UK,  I  have
             been provided [sic] with any reason to suggest he would not be
             able to continue those friendships through  the  usual  modern
             means of communication.

         33   In conclusion I do  not  find  there  to  be  any  exceptional
             circumstances in this case which require me  to  consider  the
             Appellant's  position  outside  the  Immigration  Rules  under
             Article 8 of the ECHR."



D. Discussion

(a) The validity of the application for leave

19. At the hearing before me,  Mr  Duffy  stated  that,  according  to  the
    respondent's records, at the time the respondent informed the appellant
    that his application  was  valid,  the  respondent's  computer  system,
    accessible to caseworkers, recorded that the application for leave had,
    in fact, been submitted during the currency of section 3C leave.

20. Unlike the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  I  am  unpersuaded  that  the
    respondent's confirmation of the validity of the application fell to be
    read by the appellant as being specifically confined to  the  issue  of
    biometrics.  The thrust of  the  communication  was  that  validity  in
    general  had  been  accepted  and  that  the   application   would   be
    substantively considered.

21. The real issue, however, is whether in the circumstances of  this  case
    the respondent should have informed the  appellant  in  early  November
    2014 that his application was not, in fact,  valid  for  section  3C(4)
    reasons.   If  the  appellant  had  then  acted  promptly,  making  the
    respondent aware of all relevant matters, then, bearing in mind that he
    had not at that point overstayed by 28 days,  his  position  could,  in
    practice, have been regularised by the making of a new application. The
    respondent has not at any stage sought to contend that the  application
    made on 7 October 2014 fell to be refused or rejected  for  any  reason
    other than the section 3C(4) issue.

22. The First-tier Tribunal judge was wrong in law to approach  the  matter
    as if it were merely one of delay in reaching a substantive decision on
    an application. If the judge had checked with the  presenting  officer,
    he would have discovered, as I did, that when the respondent  wrote  to
    the appellant to  say  his  application  was  valid,  the  respondent's
    computer system ("CID"),  which  would  have  been  accessible  by  the
    caseworker, showed that the application had, in fact, been made  during
    the currency of section 3C leave, and was, in fact, invalid. The  judge
    ought to have realised that this was a relevant  issue,  affecting  the
    weight to be given to the importance of effective immigration controls.



23. In the particular circumstances of  this  case  (which  are  admittedly
    unusual), the  importance  to  be  given  to  immigration  control,  in
    determining the proportionality of the appellant's hypothetical removal
    in relation to his protected Article 8 private life, fell to be reduced
    by reason of the respondent's failure to tell the  appellant  that  his
    application was not, in fact, valid.



(b) The actions of the appellant's immigration advisers

24. I turn to the actions of the appellant's immigration advisers, IWP.  Mr
    Turner sought to rely upon FP (Iran) & Another v Secretary of State for
    the Home Department [2007] EWCA Civ 13.  But that case is  far  removed
    from the circumstances of the present  one.  FP  (Iran)  concerned  two
    appellants who had not attended the hearings of their respective asylum
    appeals because they had not received notice of the time and  place  of
    those hearings.  What was therefore at issue was the right  to  a  fair
    hearing.  Furthermore, the court was at pains to stress the  fact  that
    the cases before it involved international  protection.   Finally,  the
    essential mischief identified by the court was the interaction  of  two
    provisions of the Asylum and Immigration  Tribunal  Rules  2005,  which
    compelled the AIT to proceed with the  hearing  in  the  absence  of  a
    party, if satisfied that notice of hearing had been given in accordance
    with those Rules.

25. The following passage from the  judgment  of  Sedley  LJ  explains  the
    court's approach:-

         "42. In a well-known passage of his speech in Al Mehdawi v Home
             Secretary [1990] 1 AC 876, Lord Bridge said (at 898):


                  It has traditionally been thought that  a  Tribunal  which
                  denies natural justice to one of  the  parties  before  it
                  deprives itself of jurisdiction.   Whether  this  view  is
                  correct or not, a breach of the rules of  natural  justice
                  is certainly a sufficiently grave matter  to  entitle  the
                  party who complains of it to a remedy ex debito justitiae.
                   But there are many familiar situations where one party to
                  litigation will effectively lose the opportunity  to  have
                  his case heard  through  the  failure  of  his  own  legal
                  advisers, but will be left with no remedy  at  all  except
                  against  those  legal  advisers.   I  need  only  instance
                  judgments signed in default, actions dismissed for want of
                  prosecution and claims which are not made within  a  fixed
                  time limit which the Tribunal has no power to  extend.  In
                  each of these situations a litigant who wishes his case to
                  be heard and who has fully  instructed  his  solicitor  to
                  take the necessary  steps  may  never  in  fact  be  heard
                  because of his solicitor's neglect and through no fault of
                  his own.  But in any of these cases  it  would  surely  be
                  fanciful to say that there had been a breach of  the  audi
                  alteram partem rule.  Again, take the  case  of  a  county
                  court action where a  litigant  fails  to  appear  at  the
                  hearing because his solicitor has neglected to inform  him
                  of the date and consequently  judgment  is  given  against
                  him.  He can at best invite the court in its discretion to
                  set aside the judgment and it is likely to do so  only  on
                  the terms that he should pay the costs thrown away.   Yet,
                  if it can be said that he has been denied natural justice,
                  he ought in principle to be able to apply  for  certiorari
                  to  quash  the  judgment  which,  if  he   is   personally
                  blameless, should be granted as a matter of course.


                  These considerations lead me to  the  conclusions  that  a
                  party to a dispute who has lost the  opportunity  to  have
                  his case heard through the default of his own advisers  to
                  whom he has entrusted the conduct of the  dispute  on  his
                  behalf cannot complain that he has  been  a  victim  of  a
                  procedural impropriety or that natural  justice  has  been
                  denied to him, at all events when the  subject  matter  of
                  the dispute raises issues of private law between citizens.
                   Is there any principle that can be invoked to lead  to  a
                  different conclusion where the issue is one of public  law
                  and where the  decision  taken  is  of  an  administrative
                  character rather  than  the  resolution  of  a  lis  inter
                  partes?  I cannot discover any such principle and none has
                  been suggested in the course of argument."

         43.  The result in Al Mehdawi was  that  a  foreign  student  whose
             leave to remain had expired forfeited his  entitlement  to  an
             appeal hearing because of his solicitors' errors. Not only did
             the case not concern the possibility of returning somebody  to
             persecution, torture or death; it left to the Home  Secretary,
             if he thought the application had merit, a power to invite  an
             adjudicator  to  hear  the  applicant's  evidence  and  report
             whether in his opinion it would have made a difference to  the
             decision:  see  p.901.  Although  Lord  Bridge's  opinion   is
             carefully framed in terms of principle and not of  pragmatism,
             the case before the House was far distant  from  the  kind  of
             case we are concerned with. These cases do  not  only  involve
             asylum-seekers who are either making a first  appeal  or  have
             lost their first appeal and are making a second  endeavour  to
             establish their claim: they include  asylum-seekers  who  have
             won their initial appeal before an immigration judge  and  are
             seeking to hold the  decision  against  the  Home  Secretary's
             appeal. For some of these, the exercise of  the  right  to  be
             heard may literally be a matter of life and death; for all  of
             them save the bogus (and even they have to be identified by  a
             judicially made decision) it is in a different league from the
             loss of  a  student's  right  to  remain  here.  The  remedial
             discretion which afforded Mr Al Mehdawi a fallback  is  absent
             from asylum law."

26. Having reviewed a number of other cases, Sedley LJ  held  at  paragraph
    46:-

         "... that there is no general principle of law which fixes a  party
         with the procedural errors of his or her representative."

27. As can  be  seen,  none  of  this  has  any  material  bearing  on  the
    appellant's case.  The appellant is not contending that, as a result of
    his  advisers'  shortcomings,  he  was  denied  a  hearing  before   an
    independent tribunal.  His case is  (indeed,  can  only  be)  that  the
    misfeasance of IWP falls to be weighed in the  balance  in  determining
    whether his hypothetical removal from the United Kingdom  (see  section
    113 of the 2002 Act) would violate his Article 8 ECHR rights.

28. The correct way of looking at the matter is not to  ask  whether  IWP's
    failure on 7 October 2014 to withdraw the appellant's  application  for
    permission to appeal in some way gives the appellant a stronger form of
    protected private (or  family)  life  than  he  would  otherwise  have.
    Plainly, it cannot.  Rather, one needs to ask whether in the particular
    circumstances I have set out, IWP's misfeasance affects the weight that
    would  otherwise  be  given  to  the  importance  of  maintaining   the
    respondent's policy of immigration control.

29. Mr Duffy submitted that the appellant's "lack of  culpability"  reduces
    the weight to be placed on that public interest. A lack of  culpability
    is, however, a necessary but not a sufficient factor.  Even  where  the
    person concerned is not to be taken as sharing the blame  with  his  or
    her legal adviser,  it  will  still  be  necessary  to  show  that  the
    adviser's failure constitutes a reason to qualify the  public  interest
    in firm and effective immigration control.

30. Once the issue is analysed in this way, it can readily be seen  why  it
    will be only rarely that an adviser's failings will constitute  such  a
    reason.  As a general matter, poor  legal  advice  in  the  immigration
    field will have no correlation with the relevant public interest.   The
    weight that would otherwise need to be  given  to  the  maintenance  of
    effective immigration controls is not to be reduced just because  there
    happen to be immigration advisers  who  offer  poor  advice  and  other
    services.  Consequently, a person who takes advice to do X when doing Y
    might have produced a more favourable outcome  will  normally  have  to
    live with the consequences.

31. The facts of the present case are, however, strikingly different.   The
    OISC decision shows that IWP did not give the  appellant  poor  advice.
    The organisation blatantly failed to follow  the  appellant's  specific
    instructions regarding the timing of the withdrawal of the  application
    for permission to appeal.  That failure was the  sole  reason  why  the
    appellant's application for leave fell to be treated as invalid.

32. The conclusions of  the  OISC  investigation  are  highly  material  in
    determining whether this really is a rare case in which the misfeasance
    of a legal adviser can affect the weight to  be  given  to  the  public
    interest in maintaining an effective  system  of  immigration  control.
    The OISC findings are clear  and  categorical.   The  position  is  far
    removed from that which we frequently see in this  jurisdiction,  where
    legal advisers are  belatedly  blamed  but  where  there  has  been  no
    admission of  guilt  and  no  finding  of  culpability  by  a  relevant
    professional regulator.

33. Would confidence in the respondent's system of immigration controls  be
    diminished if, in the particular circumstances of this case, regard was
    to be had to the fact that, if IWP had  complied  with  their  client's
    instructions, the appellant would have made  a  valid  application  for
    leave that is likely to have been successful?  It  seems  to  me  plain
    that the answer to that question must  be  in  the  negative.   On  the
    contrary, public confidence in the system could be said to be  enhanced
    if it were known that the system is able, albeit exceptionally, to take
    account of such a matter.



(c)  Setting aside and re-making

34. Accordingly, on this issue also I find  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    judge erred in law. I set aside his decision and proceed to re-make the
    decision in the appeal.

35. I am conscious of the fact that the appellant does not assert a  family
    life  in  the  United  Kingdom.   His  private  life  is,  however,   a
    significant one, built over the  last  ten  years,  involving  academic
    achievement and prolonged lawful work.  The appellant has at all  times
    strived to maintain adherence to immigration law.

36. The combined effect of the matters discussed at  paragraphs  18  to  33
    above affects the weight to be given to the maintenance of  immigration
    controls to the point where  the  appellant's  protected  private  life
    outweighs what is on the respondent's side of the balance.  Removal  of
    the  appellant  would,  therefore,   amount   to   a   disproportionate
    interference with his Article 8 rights.




Notice of Decision

37. The First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision contains errors of law.  I set
    it aside and re-make the decision by allowing the appellant's appeal on
    human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.



                               Signed                     Date 12 July 2018






                               The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                               President of the Upper Tribunal
                               Immigration and Asylum Chamber

