
                             [pic]




Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

         CG (suspension of removals - lawfulness - proportionality) Zimbabwe
                                                       [2010] UKUT 272 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |                             |
|On 23 December 2009                           |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE LATTER



                                   Between

                                     CG

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A. Akindele, solicitor of Chipatiso & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs T. Sharland, Home Office Presenting Officer


(1)   The fact that there is a policy to suspend enforced removals does  not
    mean that a decision to remove is not in accordance with the  law  when
    there is no reason to believe that  the  respondent  will  not  act  in
    accordance with his policy.

(2)   When assessing whether removal would be in  breach  of  article  8  in
    such a case , the appellant's position in the country of  removal  must
    be considered on the hypothetical basis of him being present there  but
    it does not mean that the Tribunal is required to assess lawfulness and
    proportionality on the basis of  a  hypothetical  event,  a  compulsory
    removal contrary to a current policy, which does not and  will  not  in
    fact take place.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe born on 10  November  1945.  On
    11 November 1999 she travelled by air to the United Kingdom  where  she
    was granted leave to enter as a visitor for six months.  There  was  no
    further contact between the appellant and the respondent until 19  June
    2009 when the appellant applied for asylum.

2.    She claimed that she feared members of ZANU-PF  because  of  her  late
    husband's involvement with the MDC.  She had  lived  with  him  in  the
    Makarare village of Harare and she had been a member of the UNC  party.
    She said that in July 1999 her husband was killed by members of ZANU-PF
    because of his involvement with the MDC.  In September 1999  her  house
    was burnt down by ZANU-PF  supporters  and  she  left  Zimbabwe  on  11
    November 1999.

3.    The respondent did not find the appellant's  account  to  be  credible
    and did not consider that she had any reason to fear for her safety  on
    return  to  Zimbabwe.   He  considered  the  country  guidance  in   RN
    (Returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2008] UKAIT 00083 but it was his view that the
    situation had improved in Zimbabwe and that  ordinary  Zimbabweans  who
    were not politically active  or  in  sensitive  occupations  would  not
    generally be at continuing risk of politically  motivated  mistreatment
    or be unable to demonstrate loyalty to ZANU-PF.  The respondent was not
    satisfied that removing the appellant would lead to a  real  risk  that
    she would face treatment contrary to Article 3 and that even if,  which
    was not accepted,  the  interference  with  her  private  life  engaged
    Article 8, removal would be proportionate and in  accordance  with  the
    law.

The findings of the Immigration Judge

4.     For  the  reasons  the  judge  gave  in  paragraphs  14-17   of   his
    determination, he was not satisfied that the appellant was  a  credible
    or reliable witness.  He rejected the entire factual basis of her claim
    for asylum.  However, the judge said that if he had  to  determine  the
    appeal by reference to the guidance in RN, he  would  accept  that  the
    appellant  would  not  be  able  to  demonstrate  loyalty  to  ZANU-PF.
    However, he was satisfied that circumstances in  Zimbabwe  had  changed
    significantly since late October 2008 following the hearing in  RN  and
    that in any event there was further evidence not  before  the  Tribunal
    which showed that the circumstances  at  that  time  were  not  as  the
    Tribunal found them to be.  The  judge  concluded  that  the  appellant
    would not find herself at risk because of an inability  to  demonstrate
    loyalty to ZANU-PF for the reasons set  out  in  paragraph  21  of  his
    determination.

5.    The judge then went on to consider the position  under  Article  3  in
    the light of  the  dire  circumstances  in  Zimbabwe  but  he  was  not
    satisfied that the appellant was someone  who  had  no  family  members
    willing and able to help provide accommodation and food nor that  there
    was a reasonable likelihood that she would face such poor conditions as
    a result of a lack of food or accommodation that her removal would lead
    to a breach of Article 3.

6.    The judge then considered Article 8.  He did not accept  that  removal
    would involve an interference with the  appellant's  rights  to  family
    life but in respect of private life he said:

       "31.   Although  the  removal  of  Mrs  C  would  not   involve   any
             interference with her rights to family life, her removal would,
             of necessity, involve an interference with her right to private
             life.  I can see no escape from that conclusion.  She would  be
             compelled to board an aircraft and travel  to  Zimbabwe.   That
             cannot be other than an interference with her right to  private
             life."

      The judge then referred  the  parties  to  a  paper  entitled  "Asylum
    Seekers from Zimbabwe" prepared on 13 March 2009  for  members  of  the
    House of Commons.  This refers to a written  answer  in  the  House  of
    Lords by Lord West, the Parliamentary Under Secretary of State  at  the
    Home  Office  stating  that  although  returns  to  Zimbabwe  were  not
    currently being enforced, failed asylum seekers who were not in need of
    protection could expect to be returned.

7.    The paper noted that UKBA had  given  an  undertaking  not  to  resume
    enforced removals until the case of HS was resolved which in  turn  was
    awaiting the outcome of a case pending before the House of Lords.   The
    paper said that enforced returns of refused asylum seekers to  Zimbabwe
    would continue to be deferred pending the  outcome  of  the  Zimbabwean
    test case.  The judge concluded that what Lord  West  was  reported  to
    have  stated  remained  the  current  practice  even  though  UKBA  had
    indicated that  failed  asylum  seekers  whose  applications  had  been
    refused could expect to be removed at  some  future  unspecified  time.
    The judge went on to make it clear that but for the facts identified in
    paragraphs 39 and 40 of his determination, he  would  have  found  that
    removal was proportionate and in accordance with the law including  the
    provisions of para 395C & D of HC 395.

8.    However, the judge said that he was required  to  consider  whether  a
    hypothetical removal would involve breaches  of  the  UK's  obligations
    under the 1951 Refugee Convention and the 1950 Human Rights Convention.
     He had to consider the effect of a compulsory removal even  though  he
    might know that no such removal would in fact take place.  He  regarded
    the  current  practice  of  not  enforcing  removals  as   of   crucial
    importance.  It represented the current  practice  and  there  were  no
    facts peculiar to the appellant rendering it appropriate to depart from
    the normal practice or to enforce her removal despite the practice.

9.    In  these  circumstances  her  compulsory  removal  now  when  not  in
    accordance with the current practice would not be  in  accordance  with
    the law.  For the same  reasons  the  appellant  would  fall  within  a
    category of persons in respect of whom  it  had  been  decided  by  the
    respondent that it was not necessary for the protection of any  of  the
    rights or freedoms identified in  Article  8(2)  that  they  should  be
    compulsorily removed.  It  followed  that  the  interference  with  her
    private life which a hypothetical removal would involve  would  not  be
    necessary for the protection of all or any of those interests nor would
    it be proportionate.   The  judge  was  therefore  satisfied  that  the
    hypothetical compulsory removal of the appellant at  the  present  time
    would involve a breach of the UK in its obligations under Article 8 and
    would not be in accordance with the law.  The appeal  was  allowed  for
    these reasons.

10.   The judge considered whether  he  should  make  a  direction  for  the
    purpose of giving effect to his decision.  He noted that he was given a
    discretion but he did not consider it appropriate to give a  direction.
    He said that on the basis of his primary findings the  appellant  could
    safely return voluntarily to Zimbabwe and a direction that she be given
    leave to remain would be  a  significant  discouragement  to  her  from
    returning voluntarily.

The Grounds and Submissions

11.   In the respondent's grounds it is argued that the judge erred  in  law
    by failing to give adequate reasons for his conclusion that  Article  8
    was engaged.  The entirety of his reasoning was in  paragraph  31.   He
    had failed to consider the  extent  of  the  appellant's  private  life
    including the duration and richness of any social ties: see MM (Tier 1;
    Art 8; "private life") [2009] UKAIT 00037.  Secondly, it is argued that
    the judge misdirected himself in the way he dealt with  the  fact  that
    removals to Zimbabwe had been suspended.  The  suspension  of  removals
    was just that, whereas taking decisions on Zimbabwean asylum claims had
    not been suspended.  The judge has misdirected himself so  the  grounds
    argue on the nature of the  immigration  decision  under  appeal.   The
    respondent had not issued removal directions to Zimbabwe but had made a
    decision that she was to be removed by way of  directions,  a  decision
    falling within  s.82(2)(g)  of  the  2002  Act.    The  judge  was  not
    considering an appeal against removal directions which had not yet been
    set and in any event  that  would  not  be  an  appealable  immigration
    decision.   Whilst  the  appellant  might  have  proper   grounds   for
    contending that an actual attempt by the respondent to remove her  from
    the UK would be unlawful, the suspension provided no proper  basis  for
    the judge's conclusion that the immigration decision under  appeal  was
    not in accordance with the law.

12.   The submissions before me were brief.  Mrs Sharland  was  prepared  to
    adopt the written grounds and she referred me to KF Iran  [2005]  UKIAT
    00109 which was referred to in the grounds and also to MS  (Palestinian
    Territories) [2009] EWCA Civ 17 and in particular paragraphs  27-30  on
    the distinction between a decision to remove  and  removal  directions.
    Mr Akindele submitted that there was no error of law.   The  judge  had
    been entitled to find that removal was unlawful in  the  light  of  the
    current policy and it would inevitably follow  that  it  would  not  be
    proportionate to a legitimate aim.  He did not accept  that  the  judge
    was correct in finding that  RN  should  not  be  regarded  as  current
    country guidance. He argued that if the issue  turned  on  whether  the
    appellant had a private life in this  country,  that  issue  should  be
    reconsidered at the second stage.

The Material Error of Law

13.   The issue for me at this stage of the reconsideration is  whether  the
    immigration judge materially erred  in  law.   In  his  submissions  Mr
    Akindele sought to challenge the judge's findings in respect of RN  but
    the appellant did not apply for reconsideration on this issue nor has a
    Reply or a skeleton argument been filed to set out precisely  what  his
    challenges are and in these circumstances I am not prepared  to  permit
    that matter to be re-opened. I am not satisfied  that  it  is  arguable
    that the judge erred in law on this issue: he was entitled to  find  on
    the evidence before him for the reasons summarised in paragraph  21  of
    his determination that the appellant would  not  be  at  real  risk  of
    persecution on return.  I now  turn  to  the  challenges  made  by  the
    respondent.

14.   The first relates to the judge's finding that Article  8  is  engaged.
    The grounds rightly make the point that the judge's reasoning  on  this
    issue is set out in paragraph 31 and is based on a finding that removal
    by being compelled to board an aircraft and travel to Zimbabwe would of
    necessity involve an interference  with  her  right  to  private  life.
    Taken to its logical  conclusion  this  finding  would  mean  that  any
    compulsory removal, regardless of the length of time  that  the  person
    being  removed  had  been  in  the  UK,  would  inevitably  involve  an
    interference with the right to private life.  However, there  not  only
    has to be  an  interference  with  private  life  but  it  must  be  of
    sufficient gravity to engage Article 8.  I accept the  submission  that
    an assessment of whether the interference  with  private  life  engages
    Article 8 involves a more detailed assessment of the nature and  extent
    of the private life as set out in the determination in MM.  However,  I
    am not satisfied that any error the judge may have made in this respect
    was material to his determination. In the light of the  length  of  the
    appellant's residence and her activities in this country, it  is  clear
    that removal would be an interference with the appellant's private life
    such as to engage Article 8.

15.   The second issue relates to whether the judge erred in law in  finding
    that by reason of  the  current  suspension  of  enforced  removals  it
    necessarily followed that the decision to remove the appellant was  not
    in accordance with the law and would be a disproportionate interference
    with her private life.  He referred to the cases on this issue, DS Abdi
    v Secretary of State [1996]  IMM  AR  148,  AG  and  Others  (Policies:
    executive discretions: Tribunals' powers) Kosovo [2007] UKAIT 00082, HH
    (criminal records deportation: "war zone") Iraq [2008] UKAIT  0051  and
    to the general principle that where the Secretary of State has declared
    a policy in relation to a category into which  the  claimant  falls,  a
    decision that on its face  fails  to  apply  the  policy  may  found  a
    successful appeal  on  the  grounds  that  the  decision  "was  not  in
    accordance with the law".  The judge said that he saw no difference  in
    principle  between  a  declared  or  public  policy  and   a   practice
    particularly where that practice had been published and stated publicly
    in one or  other  of  the  Houses  of  Parliament  by  the  responsible
    minister.

16.   This may be correct as a statement of  principle  as  is  the  judge's
    comment that he was obliged to consider a hypothetical removal  but  he
    was not required to assume that there would in  fact  be  a  compulsory
    removal and that the appellant would be removed when  neither  she  nor
    anyone else was being compulsorily removed.  The  consequences  of  the
    judge's reasoning was that a decision was found to be not in accordance
    with the law and disproportionate within Article 8(2) when the  reality
    of the position was that the judge  was  in  fact  satisfied  that  the
    appellant could safely return voluntarily to Zimbabwe,  the  reason  he
    gave for not giving a direction was that this would  be  a  significant
    discouragement to her from returning voluntarily when it was  safe  for
    her to do so.

17.   I am satisfied that the judge was wrong to base his decision to  allow
    the appeal on the assumption that there would be a compulsory  removal.
    No such assumption is justified because the requirement to  consider  a
    hypothetical removal arises  independently  of  actual  practice.   The
    decision to remove the appellant was not unlawful simply by  reason  of
    the fact that at the date of decision and hearing there was  a  current
    policy or practice of suspending removals.  The  appellant  would  have
    cause for complaint if removal  directions  were  issued  and  enforced
    contrary to a current practice or policy but that has not happened  nor
    was there any suggestion that there  was  any  real  likelihood  of  it
    happening.  I am satisfied that the judge erred in law by equating  the
    suspension of removals with a failure to follow a published policy.

18.   In summary the fact that the consequences  of  a  decision  to  remove
    must be assessed on the basis of what the appellant's position would be
    in the country of removal and to this  extent  assumes  a  hypothetical
    compulsory removal does not mean that the judge is required  to  assess
    lawfulness and proportionality on the basis of an event which does  not
    in fact take place.  By doing so and by basing  his  findings  on  that
    assumption, I am satisfied that the judge materially erred in law.

19.   The judge made it clear that,  but  for  his  findings  based  on  the
    hypothesis that removal would be compulsory, he would have  found  that
    the interference with the appellant's right to respect for her  private
    and family life was for a legitimate purpose and not  disproportionate.
    His findings on the substance of the Article  8  appeal  were  properly
    open to him not least in the light of his findings that  the  appellant
    could make a voluntary return in safety.  The extent of the appellant's
    private life was clear and was taken into account by the  judge.  There
    is no basis for a successful challenge to these findings or any purpose
    in adjourning the hearing to a second stage. It follows that the proper
    course is to substitute a decision dismissing the appeal.

Decision

20.   I  am  satisfied  that  the  judge  materially  erred  in  law  and  I
    substitute a decision dismissing the  appeal  on  asylum,  humanitarian
    protection and human rights grounds.



Signed



Senior Immigration Judge Latter



