

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

  Rose (Automatic deportation - Exception 3) Jamaica [2011] UKUT 00276(IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Determination Promulgated |
|On 17 February 2011                    |                          |
|                                       |4 July 2011               |


                                   Before

                                LADY DORRIAN
                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE STOREY


                                   Between

 MR BANCROFT CONSTANTINE ROSE (aka Adrian Alan Morris, Kevin Bancroft Rose,
                                 Quinn Adam)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation

For the appellant:      Dr D Samuels, Solicitor, JDS Solicitors
For the respondent:   Mr A Skeikh, Home Office Presenting Officer

1. The personal scope of the safeguards against expulsion which  Article  27
of 2004/38/EC (the "Citizens Directive") affords to  "family  members"  does
not include "other family members"(OFMs).


2. Hence Exception 3 to s.32(4) and (5) of the UK Borders  Act  2007  (which
arises where the removal of a foreign criminal from the  United  Kingdom  in
pursuance of a deportation order would breach  the  rights  of  the  foreign
criminal under the EU treaties [previously "Community treaties"]  cannot  be
invoked by OFMs.

3. However, a person who has been found to be an OFM/extended family  member
under the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 needs to  be
considered by the Secretary of State as a person  in  respect  of  whom  the
discretion to issue a residence card under regulation 17 may be exercised.

4. The result of the exercise of that discretion may be that regulations 20-
21 apply to the appellant's removal, and the decision would  not  be  lawful
without regard to them.

5.  So  if  consideration  has  not  been  given  to  the  exercise  of  the
discretion, the assessment of  criteria  going  to  deportation  or  removal
cannot be completed.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1. The appellant is a Jamaican national born on 12 October 1961. He came  to
the UK on 23 August 2002 using a British  passport  issued  on  27  February
2002 to Adrian Alan Morris. On 2 October 2007 a fresh  passport  was  issued
to Mr. Morris who had reported the loss  of  his  original  passport.  On  8
September 2009 the appellant was arrested at Gatwick  airport  on  suspicion
of possession of  an  improperly  obtained  identity  document  with  intent
contrary to section 25(1) of the Identity Cards Act 2006.  On  26  September
he pleaded guilty to such a  charge  and  was  sentenced  to  twelve  months
imprisonment.

2. The respondent made two separate decisions in respect of  the  appellant,
both dated 1 April 2010. He had applied for a UK  residence  card  based  on
his relationship in the UK with an  EEA  national,  Claudette  Ashley.  That
application was refused on the basis that  it  was  not  accepted  that,  in
terms of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 ("the 2006 Regulations")  he
had established that he was in a durable relationship with Miss  Ashley  and
thus qualified as an "extended family member" under  those  Regulations.  It
was accepted that he had established family life in the UK but  it  was  not
accepted that refusal of  his  application  would  amount  to  a  breach  of
Article 8. On the same date, the respondent  concluded  that  the  appellant
did not come  within  any  of  the  exceptions  from  automatic  deportation
provided for under section 33 of the UK Borders Act 2007  ("the  2007  Act")
and that to deport him would equally not constitute a breach of Article 8.

3. The decision letter relating  to  deportation  does  not  make  it  clear
whether the respondent's acceptance of  family  life  for  the  purposes  of
article 8 related to life with Ms Ashley only or also with  her  son  Giani,
but from the references made therein to the appellant seeming  to  play  the
role of "de facto" father, we are satisfied that the acceptance  relates  to
family life with both of them.

4. An appeal under section 82 of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
Act 2002 was refused by the First-tier  Tribunal  (hereafter  "FTT")  on  29
June 2010. A hearing in the appeal from  that  decision  was  heard  in  the
Upper Tribunal before SIJ Ward on 8 December 2010.  It is obvious  that  the
SIJ was not assisted at that hearing either by the  terms  of  the  skeleton
argument on behalf of the appellant or by the submissions  made  in  support
of them (factors which we regret to say were repeated  before  us).  We  are
very conscious of the likelihood that the  relevant  legislative  provisions
were not placed before the SIJ.  Moreover, the issues which  were  canvassed
at that hearing do not seem to bear any true relationship  to  the  way  the
matter was argued before the FTT. At the hearing before the  FTT  the  focus
was on the question  of  whether  the  appellant  came  within  one  of  the
exceptions to automatic deportation raised under section 32  of  the  United
Kingdom Borders Act 2007 and on the effect deportation  might  have  on  the
Article 8 rights of the appellant. Some consideration was also given to  the
effect on Article 8 of the rights of others  with  whom  the  appellant  was
enjoying family life. In the skeleton  before  the  SIJ,  the  point  raised
related not to  the  deportation  decision  but  to  an  argument  that  the
appellant was the "extended family member" of Ms Ashley for the  purpose  of
the 2006 Regulations and so could not be  removed  because  of  reg.  21  of
those Regulations. Doing her best with the unpromising material before  her,
the SIJ decided that  there  had  been  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
determination of  the  FTT.  Fundamentally  that  was  in  relation  to  its
assessment under Article 8. She concluded that the tribunal had not  made  a
considered  assessment  of  the  nature  of  the  relationship  between  the
appellant and Ms Ashley and that, insofar as it had considered  the  matter,
it was as an afterthought.  SIJ Ward concluded that the FTT  in  making  its
assessment under Article 8 had not given sufficient  regard  to  the  Treaty
rights of Ms. Ashley or of her son and had  not  considered  the  impact  on
that assessment of her status as  a  worker  in  the  UK  exercising  Treaty
rights. We consider that SIJ Ward was fundamentally right in both  respects.
The SIJ made an order for a resumed hearing to enable  the  decision  to  be
remade and concluded that, in light of the fact that two bundles,  including
witness statements had already been  lodged,  a  decision  could  be  remade
without hearing further evidence. It is to the remaking of that decision  we
now turn.

5. SIJ Ward did not specifically preserve any  findings  of  the  FTT.  That
said, some of the findings of fact made by  the  FTT  were  not  in  dispute
before us, although there was dispute about the conclusions which  it  might
be legitimate to draw from those  findings  insofar  as  they  bore  on  the
nature of the relationship between Ms Ashley, her son and the appellant.  We
regard it as accepted that, in the words of the  FTT,  "private  and  family
life exists between the appellant and Claudette Ashley and her  son,  Giani"
(para 35). The tribunal did go on to say that the relationship in each  case
was "limited" which is a somewhat cryptic descriptor. However,  whatever  it
precisely meant, it plainly did not mean that family life did not  exist  at
all. In expressing itself so we think it  had  in  mind  that  the  evidence
before it showed  there  to  be  only  a  limited  factual  content  to  the
appellant's family life ties. It was on that  somewhat  confused  background
that the case came before us for submissions.

6. We should record that during the submissions  to  us,  no  reference  was
made to any of the provisions in the 2007 Act. Reference  was  made  to  the
terms of the 2006 Regulations and arguments were advanced as to the  Article
8 rights, in terms of family life, of the appellant, Ms Ashley and her  son.
It is therefore worth setting out the basis on which it seemed  to  us  that
the matter has to be approached.

Legal framework
7. Sections 32 and 33 of the 2007 Act read as follows:
      "32 Automatic Deportation
      (1) In this section 'foreign criminal' means a person -
      (a) who is not a British Citizen,
      (b) who is convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence, and
      (c) to whom Condition 1 or 2 applies.
      (2) Condition 1 is that the person is sentenced to a period of
      imprisonment of at least 12 months.
      (3) Condition 2 is that -
      (a) the offence is specified by order of the Secretary of State under
      s. 72(4)(a) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (c41)
      (serious criminal), and
      (b) the person is sentenced to a period of imprisonment.
      (4) For the purposes of s.3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971 (c77),
      the deportation of a foreign criminal is conducive to the public good.
      (5) The Secretary of State must make a deportation order in respect of
      a foreign criminal (subject to s.33).
      (6) The Secretary of State may not revoke a deportation order made in
      accordance with subsection (5) unless -
      (a) he thinks that an exception under s.33 applies,
      (b) the application for revocation is made while the foreign criminal
      is outside the United Kingdom, or
      (c) s.34(4) applies.
      (7) Subsection (5) does not create a private right of action in
      respect of consequences of non-compliance by the Secretary of State.
      33 Exceptions
      (1) Sections 32(4) and (5) -
      (a) do not apply where an exception in this section applies (subject
      to subsection (7) below), and
      (b) are subject to sections 7 and 8 of the Immigration Act 1971
      (Commonwealth citizens, Irish citizens, crew and other exemptions).
      (2) Exception 1 is where removal of a foreign criminal in pursuance of
      the deportation order would breach -
      (a) a person's Convention rights, or
      (b) the United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention.
      (3) Exception 2 is where the Secretary of State thinks that the
      foreign criminal was under the age of 18 on the date of decision.
      (4) Exception 3 is where the removal of a foreign criminal from the
      United Kingdom in pursuance of a deportation order would breach the
      rights of the foreign criminal under the Community treaties.
      (5) Exception 4 ... [concerns extradition]
      (6) Exception 5 ... [concerns people subject to various orders under
      the Mental Health Act 1983 or their equivalents in Scotland or
      Northern Ireland]
      (6A) Exception 6 is where the Secretary of State thinks that the
      application of section 32(4) and (5) would contravene the United
      Kingdom's obligations under the Council of Europe Convention on Action
      against Trafficking in Human Beings (done at Warsaw on 16th May 2005).
      (7) The application of an exception -
      (a) does not prevent the making of a deportation order;
      (b) results in it being assumed neither that deportation of the person
      concerned is conducive to the public good nor that it is not conducive
      to the public good;
      but s.32(4) applies despite the application of Exception 1 or 4."

8. It is also necessary to set out the provisions of the Directive  and  the
2006 EEA Regulations dealing with family members, mentioning  first  of  all
those dealing with close family members:
    "Article 2.
    Definitions
    For the purposes of this Directive:
    (1) 'Union citizen' means any person having the nationality of a Member
    State;
    (2):        'Family member' means:
                (a) the spouse;
                (b) the partner with whom the Union citizen has contracted a
                registered partnership, on the basis of the legislation of a
                Member State, if the legislation of the  host  Member  State
                treats registered partnerships as equivalent to marriage ...
                ;
                (c) the direct descendants who are under the age  of  21  or
                are dependants and those of the spouse or partner as defined
                in point (b);
                (d) the dependant direct relatives in the ascending line and
                those of the spouse or partner as defined in point (b).
    ..."
9. Regulation 7 of the 2006 Regulations specifies that:
      "7 (1) ...for the purposes of these Regulations the following  persons
      shall be treated as the family members of another person -
   a) his spouse or his civil partner;
   b) direct descendants of his, his spouse or his civil partner who are -
   i) under 21; or
  ii) dependants of his, his spouse or his civil partner;
   c) dependent direct relatives in his ascending line or that of his spouse
      or his civil partner;
   d) a person who is to be treated as  the  family  member  of  that  other
      person under paragraph (3).
   2) ...
   3) Subject to paragraph (4), a person who is an  extended  family  member
      and has  been  issued  with  an  EEA  family  permit,  a  registration
      certificate or a residence card shall be treated as the family  member
      of the relevant EEA national for as long as he  continues  to  satisfy
      the conditions in regulation 8(2),(3),(4) or (5) in relation  to  that
      EEA national and the permit, certificate or card has not ceased to  be
      valid or been revoked.
   4) Where the relevant EEA national is  a  student,  the  extended  family
      member shall only be treated as the family  member  of  that  national
      under paragraph (3) if either the EEA family permit was  issued  under
      regulation 12(2), the registration card was  issued  under  regulation
      16(5) or the residence card was issued under regulation 17(4)."


10. For OFMs/extended family members, the relevant provisions are Article  3
and regulation 8 respectively. Article 3 provides:
    "1. This Directive shall apply to all Union citizens  who  move  to  or
    reside in a Member State other than that of which they are a  national,
    and to their family members as defined in point  2  of  Article  2  who
    accompany or join them.
    2. Without prejudice to any right to free movement  and  residence  the
    persons concerned may have in their own right, the  host  Member  State
    shall, in accordance with its national  legislation,  facilitate  entry
    and residence for the following persons:
          (a) any other family members, irrespective of their  nationality,
          not falling under the definition in point 2 of Article 2 who,  in
          the country from which they have come, are dependants or  members
          of the household of the Union citizen having the primary right of
          residence, or where serious health grounds strictly  require  the
          personal care of the family members by the Union citizen;
          (b) the partner  with  whom  the  Union  citizen  has  a  durable
          relationship, duly attested.
     The host Member State shall undertake an extensive examination of  the
    personal circumstances  and  shall  justify  any  denial  of  entry  or
    residence to these people.
11. Prior to 2 June 2011, reg. 8, headed, "Extended family members",  stated
that:
    "1. In these Regulations 'extended family member' means a person who is
    not a family member of an EEA national under regulation 7(1)(a), (b) or
    (c) and who satisfies the conditions in paragraphs  (2),  (3),  (4)  or
    (5).
    2. A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if the person  is
    a relative of an EEA national, his spouse or his civil partner and -
          (a) the person is residing in an  EEA  State  in  which  the  EEA
          national also resides and is dependent upon the EEA  national  or
          is a member of his household;
          (b) the person satisfied the condition in paragraph  (a)  and  is
          accompanying the EEA national in the United Kingdom or wishes  to
          join him there; or
          (c) the person satisfied the  condition  in  paragraph  (a),  has
          joined the EEA national in the United Kingdom and continues to be
          dependent upon him or to be a member of his household.
    3. A person satisfies the conditions in this paragraph if the person is
    a relative of an EEA national or his spouse or his civil  partner  and,
    on serious health grounds, strictly requires the personal care  of  the
    EEA national, his spouse or his civil partner.
    4. A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if the person  is
    a relative of an EEA national and would meet the  requirements  in  the
    immigration rules (other than those relating to  entry  clearance)  for
    indefinite leave to  enter  or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
    dependent relative of the EEA national were the EEA national  a  person
    present and settled in the United Kingdom.
    5. A person satisfies the conditions in this paragraph if the person is
    the partner of an EEA national (other than a  civil  partner)  and  can
    prove to the decision maker that he is in a durable  relationship  with
    the EEA national."

Regulation 8(2)(a)  has  now  been  amended  by  the  Immigration  (European
Economic Area) (Amendment ) Regulations 2011 so that for "an EEA State"  the
words substituted are "a country other than the United Kingdom".

Analysis

12. There is no doubt on the papers  before  us  that  the  appellant  comes
within the definition of a "foreign criminal" for the purposes of  the  2007
Act. Accordingly, in terms of section 32 of that Act  it  is  mandatory  for
the Secretary of State to deport him unless  he  comes  within  one  of  the
exceptions specified in section 33.

13. On the evidence in this case there are two exceptions  which  arise  for
consideration. One is Exception 1, namely that the foregoing  provisions  do
not apply "where removal  of  the  foreign  criminal  in  pursuance  of  the
deportation order would breach (a)  "a  person's  Convention  rights".  That
means that in the circumstances of the present case, consideration  must  be
given to whether deportation of the appellant would breach his  own  article
8 rights or those of Ms. Ashley or her son. The  sole  question  for  us  in
relation to this exception is therefore whether removal would  constitute  a
breach of article 8.

The Exception 3 issue

14. The other exception is Exception 3 which arises "where  the  removal  of
the foreign criminal from the UK in pursuance of a deportation  order  would
breach rights of the foreign criminal under the Community  treaties".  Given
the supremacy of EU law, it is appropriate that we consider  this  exception
first. Does this exception apply to the appellant? By virtue  of  s.2(1)  of
the  European  Communities  Act  1972  as  amended  by  the  European  Union
(Amendment) Act 2008, the expression "Community treaties"  [now  amended  to
read "EU treaties"] encompasses secondary EU  legislation  which  of  course
includes 2004/38/EC (the "Citizens Directive"). In turn,  Article  27(1)  of
the Directive, read  in  conjunction  with  recital  23  affords  safeguards
against expulsion to both Union citizens and their family  members.  Article
27(1) states that "Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, Member  States
may restrict the freedom of movement and residence  of  Union  citizens  and
their family members, irrespective of  nationality,  on  grounds  of  public
policy, public security or public health..." Recital 23 states that:

    "Expulsion of Union citizens and their family  members  on  grounds  of
    public policy or public security is a measure that can  seriously  harm
    persons who, having availed  themselves  of  the  rights  and  freedoms
    conferred on them by the Treaty, have become genuinely integrated  into
    the host Member State. The scope for such measures should therefore  be
    limited in accordance with the principle  of  proportionality  to  take
    account of the degree of integration  of  the  persons  concerned,  the
    length of their residence in the host Member State, their age, state of
    health, family and economic situation and the links with their  country
    of origin."

15. But for the appellant to be able to avail himself of such EU  safeguards
against expulsion he would need to show  that  he  qualified  as  a  "family
member" for Article 27.1 purposes. In  our  view  he  cannot  for  two  main
reasons.

16. As to the first reason we would  accept  that  there  are  two  possible
views. It is at least arguable that  the  Article  27(1)  safeguard  against
expulsion is intended to cover family members of all kinds  including  OFMs.
Whilst Article 2.2 would appear to specify that  for  the  purposes  of  the
Directive generally 'family  member'  means  only  those  persons  who  come
within Article 2.2 (and so not to include OFMs under Article  3.2(a))  there
are other provisions which appear to  apply  the  term  'family  member'  to
include both Article 2.2 family members and OFMs: see in particular  Article
8(5), which concerns issue of registration certificates  to  family  members
and which at 8(5)(e) deals with "cases falling  under  Article  3(2)(a));and
Article 8 (which deals with the issue of  residence cards to family  members
and includes  at  Article  10(2)(e)  provisions  for  "cases  falling  under
Article 3(2)(a)").

17. The alternative view, which is the one we take, is that  the  definition
given of family member in Article 2.2 (which does not  extend  to  OFMs)  is
intended to be Directive-wide since the definition set out in  Article  2(2)
is preceded by the opening words  "For  the  purposes  of  this  Directive".
Recital 6 likewise refers to OFMs as "those persons who are not included  in
the definition of family members under this Directive".

18. But even if we are wrong in taking the view that the  scope  of  Article
27.1 does not cover OFMs, that still does not assist  this  appellant.  This
brings us to our second reason for finding that he  is  not  covered  by  EU
safeguards. He only comes within any provisions of the Directive  by  virtue
of being a person  in  a  durable  relationship.  But  under  the  Directive
persons in a durable relationship are not even included  in  the  definition
of OFMs: cf Article 3.2(a) and Article 3.2(b).

19. We have considered whether even  though  the  appellant  does  not  come
within the Directive's safeguards against expulsion  he  might  nevertheless
be able to avail himself of these by virtue of the national law  transposing
the Directive - the 2006 Regulations. Here it does appear to  us  that  even
OFMs (extended family members) are able to invoke  such  safeguards.  Whilst
these  Regulations,  like  the  Directive,  differentiate  between   "family
members" and "extended family members" (called OFMs in the  Directive),  reg
8(3) expressly provides that once a person  has  qualified  as  an  extended
family member and has been issued with residence documentation he  shall  be
treated as a "family member" for as long as  he  continues  to  satisfy  the
underlying conditions and his residence documentation has not ceased  to  be
valid or been revoked. The significance of this extension is that reg  20(1)
provides that: "The Secretary of  State  may  refuse  to  issue,  revoke  or
refuse to renew a registration certificate, a  residence  card,  a  document
certifying permanent  residence,  or  a  permanent  residence  card  if  the
refusal or revocation is justified  on  grounds  of  public  policy,  public
security or public health." And  reg  17  which  deals  with  the  issue  of
residence cards (including  to  extended  family  members:  see  reg  17(4))
states at reg 17(8): "But this regulation is subject to regulation 20(1)."

20. However, the difficulty with taking the national law provisions  of  the
2006 Regulations as the basis for  an  argument  that  the  appellant  comes
within Exception 3 is that the above  provisions  are  ones  that  are  more
generous than the Directive. Article 37 of the  Directive  expressly  allows
for Member States to make more generous provision, but it remains that  such
provisions are not imposed by EU legislation. Hence such provisions  do  not
amount to "rights ...under  the  EU  [previously  Community]  treaties"  The
appellant, therefore, falls outwith Exception 3. That  is  not  to  say  his
position under EU law is entirely irrelevant to  his  case  but  if  it  has
relevance it can only be in the context of Exception 1.

The Exception 1 issue

21. We are back, then, to  the  question  of  whether  the  appellant  falls
within Exception 1. That requires us to determine whether his removal  would
breach a "person's Convention rights". Pursuant to s.6 of the  Human  Rights
Act 1998 and related case law, the cases of Beoku-Betts  and  more  recently
ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4 in particular, that requires us to consider  the
human rights not just of the appellant but also of his partner and her  son.


22. We begin by considering the relationship between the  appellant  and  Ms
Ashley. Here, it seems to us, the fact that Ms Ashley  is  an  EEA  national
exercising Treaty rights means that we must first of  all  consider  whether
the appellant is able to claim  any  connection  with  her  under  the  2006
Regulations. In our view he can. On the evidence before us we are  satisfied
that he comes within the ambit of regulation 8(5) of  the  2006  Regulations
by virtue of his being  in a durable relationship  with  the  EEA  national.
Let us take this step-by-step.

23. It is not in dispute that Ms Ashley is a qualified person  under  reg  6
of the 2006 regulations and that she is in the UK exercising Treaty  rights.


24. There is little case law  on  the  meaning  of  "durable  relationship",
although we have derived help from the case of YB  (EEA  reg  17(4)  -proper
approach) Ivory Coast [2008] UKAIT  00062.  It  is  clear  to  us  that  the
concept is not  co-terminous  with  "family  life"  within  the  meaning  of
Article 8. "Family life" may exist even if only for a short period.  So  the
fact  that  the  FTT  accepted  that  the  appellant  had  a   family   life
relationship or family life relationships does  not  necessarily  show  that
that with his partner was "durable". However, we do not need to explore  the
meaning of the two different provisions further  because  we  are  satisfied
that on the evidence that was  before  the  FTT,  even  if  the  appellant's
relationships with his partner had  limited  factual  content,  it  was  one
properly described as durable. We note that they had  lived  together  since
mid-to-late  2008  and  it  was  accepted  by  the  respondent  that   their
relationship has indeed continued since the hearing before  the  FTT.  There
is evidence that they had made wedding plans and  it  is  clear  that  these
were made before his deception was discovered by  the  authorities.  It  was
after his return from the aborted wedding trip  that  he  was  arrested.  In
addition, there are all the letters when he was in  prison  which  seems  to
provide some testimony to the strength of the relationship.

25. The fact that the appellant is accordingly an "extended  family  member"
for the purposes of the 2006  Regulations  does  not  of  itself  alter  his
status in the UK. That is because  in  respect  of  such  persons  the  2006
Regulations do not impose an obligation on the respondent  to  confirm  that
they are in the  UK  lawfully  by  means  of  issuing  them  with  residence
documentation. Unlike the position with direct family  members  (dealt  with
in  Article  2.2  of  the  Citizens  Directive  and  reg.  7  of  the   2006
Regulations) for whom the issue of  residence  documentation  is  mandatory,
the issue to OFMs of a  residence  card  is  a  matter  of  discretion.  The
Secretary of State has discretion under  reg  17(4)  to  issue  a  residence
permit to an extended family member of a qualified person  if  "in  all  the
circumstances it appears to the Secretary of State appropriate" to do so.

26. However, the fact that in the appellant's case the  Secretary  of  State
has not yet exercised the reg. 17(4) discretion places  us  in  a  difficult
position. It is not open to us to make a decision that he was entitled to  a
residence card. We can only exercise the reg. 17(4) discretion ourselves  if
the respondent had first exercised it: see FD (EEA  discretion  -  basis  of
appeal) Algeria [2007] UKAIT 49 and YB  (EEA  reg  17(4)  -proper  approach)
Ivory Coast [2008] UKAIT 00062.

27. As  to  the  exercise  of  the  reg.  17(4)  discretion  there  are  two
possibilities. Either the respondent will  refuse  to  exercise  it  in  the
appellant's favour or she will not. If she exercises it in  the  appellant's
favour that is not necessarily sufficient to protect the  appellant  against
expulsion: the whole of reg. 17 is "subject to regulation  20(1)"  and  reg.
20(1) of course still permits the expulsion of  an  extended  family  member
albeit only on public policy, public security or public health grounds.  But
if the respondent were  to  decide  to  act  under  reg.  20(1)  that  would
necessitate a fresh decision.

28. Even if the respondent decides to exercise  her  discretion  under  reg.
17(4) adversely to the appellant it remains that she would  need  to  decide
whether the EU/EEA dimension to the case required a  different  approach  to
the Article 8 ECHR issue.  That  is  made  clear  by  the  respondent's  own
European Caseworker Instructions (ECIs) at 5.3. This states that  if  it  is
decided there is a durable relationship then the caseworker  should  proceed
to a stage 3 in which:

      "In relation to durable partners, provided  the  applicant  meets  the
      definition of a  durable  partner  it  is  likely  that  to  refuse  a
      residence card would deter the relevant EEA national's  free  movement
      rights, given that the parties are in  a  long-standing  and  enduring
      relationship akin to marriage. However, the circumstances of the  case
      should still be fully examined to come to a decision on that issue".

29. Given that the same Instructions go on to identify a stage  4  at  which
factors such as criminality or adverse immigration history are examined,  it
is clear that deterrence of a partner's free  movement  rights  is  not  the
only criterion, but it is nevertheless an important one. It may be  that  it
will play an important role in the respondent's reg. 17(4) assessment.  Miss
Ashley and her son have lived  in  the  UK  since  2001.  She  obtained  her
present job  in  February  2010  and  it  is  quite  possible,  as  the  FTT
considered, that the reason the wedding was aborted  and  they  returned  to
the UK was to enable her to take up this relatively well paid position.  She
felt that she would not be able to obtain such a well-paid job  in  Jamaica.
She owns her home in Dagenham but would be unable  to  sell  it  at  present
because she would be in a situation  of  negative  equity.  In  Jamaica  she
would have no  job  and  no  family  support  and  she  did  not  trust  the
authorities to manage her epilepsy. The main barriers as  seen  by  her  are
her job, her health and her son's education. In Jamaica she  would  have  to
pay to send her son to school and for soccer practice but would be  unlikely
to be able to afford to do so. We also note the importance attached  by  the
Court of Justice in the recent judgment in Case  C-34/09  Zambrano  8  March
2011 to the consequences for third country national parents of the right  of
a minor child who is a Union citizen. At para 45 the Court stated that:

      "Accordingly, the answer to the questions referred is that Article  20
      TFEU is to be interpreted as meaning that it precludes a Member  State
      from refusing a third country national upon whom his  minor  children,
      who are European Union citizens, are dependent, a right  of  residence
      in the Member State of residence and nationality  of  those  children,
      and from refusing to  grant  a  work  permit  to  that  third  country
      national, in so far as such decisions deprive those  children  of  the
      genuine enjoyment of the substance of  the  rights  attaching  to  the
      status of European Union citizen."

30.  In the instant case, it is only the appellant who  is  a  third-country
national;  Giani's  mother  is,  like  Giani,  a  Union  citizen,  but  that
difference scarcely weakens the significance of the boy's rights as a  Union
citizen. Giani has made it quite clear that he considers England,  where  he
has lived since the age of 3, to be his home. He  has  friends,  school  and
family here. Were his mother to go and live in Jamaica he would  be  obliged
to go  with  her,  with  adverse  consequences  for  the  enjoyment  of  the
substance of the rights attached to the status of Union citizenship.

31. Hence it seems to us  that  we  cannot  remake  the  decision  in  full.
Whether or not the appellant falls within Exception 1 depends  crucially  on
the outcome of a decision by the respondent as to  whether  the  reg.  17(4)
discretion should be  exercised  in  the  appellant's  favour  or  not.  The
respondent has not as yet exercised that  discretion  because  she  did  not
accept that the appellant was an extended family member. We have  now  found
that he is.

32. The fact that the decision-making process applicable to  this  appellant
remains incomplete is sufficient for us to find that the s.32  decision  was
not in accordance with the law. To be in accordance he  law,  that  decision
would have needed, given that the  appellant  is  a  partner  in  a  durable
relationship within the meaning of reg. 5 of the 2006 Regulations,  to  have
included an assessment of whether that relationship was considered  to  have
obstructed Ms Ashley's exercise of her Treaty rights of free movement.  Such
an assessment had the potential to impact heavily on the proper  conduct  of
the Article 8 ECHR balancing exercise. In the absence of such an  assessment
it cannot be said that the decision has  included  a  lawful  assessment  of
whether the appellant fell within the Exception 1 exception.

33. To summarise our decision:

 (As already found by SIJ  Ward)  the  FTT  materially  erred  in  law;  its
decision has been set aside.

The decision we substitute is to allow the appeal to  the  extent  that  the
matter remains outstanding  before  the  Secretary  of  State  to  re-decide
whether the appellant falls within Exception 1 of s.33 of the  2007  Act  in
light of the fact that the Upper Tribunal has found the appellant to  be  an
extended family member under reg. 8(5) of the 2006 Regulations.


                               Signed                    Date


                        Lady Dorrian
                        Judge of the Upper Tribunal



