
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

  Gauswami (retained right of residence: jobseekers) India [2018] UKUT 00275
                                                                       (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 May 2018                        |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |


                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                        shitalben nagargiri gauswami
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not maDe)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms B Asanovic, instructed by Markand & Co Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


For the purposes of determining retained rights of residence, in  regulation
10(6)(a) of both the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006
and  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations   2016,   the
reference to a worker includes a jobseeker.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

A. The facts

 1. The appellant is a citizen of India, who was born on 21 November  1985.
    On 16 June 1998, Mr V, a Portuguese citizen,  who  was  to  become  the
    appellant's husband, arrived in the United  Kingdom  and  exercised  EU
    Treaty rights in this country.  On 6 September  2006,  Mr  V  became  a
    British citizen by naturalisation.

 2. On 20 July 2008, the appellant and Mr V were married in  India.   Later
    that year, the appellant came to the United Kingdom, with the requisite
    family permit, as the spouse of Mr V.  The permit was  valid  until  20
    May 2009.

 3. On 26 October 2009, the appellant  was  granted  a  residence  card  by
    reason of her being the spouse of an EEA national.  The card was  valid
    until 26 October 2014.

 4. According to the appellant's witness  statement,  there  were  problems
    with the marriage.  As we shall see, there is an issue  as  to  whether
    the appellant was subjected to domestic violence at the hands of Mr  V.
    It is, however, not disputed that on 2 October 2011, the appellant  was
    persuaded or as she says "duped" by Mr  V  into  travelling  to  India.
    Upon arriving in that country, the appellant was told by her mother-in-
    law that Mr V was going to divorce her; that what was described as  her
    "visa" had been cancelled; and that she could not return to the  United
    Kingdom.

 5. Nevertheless, on 21 March 2013 the appellant  returned  to  the  United
    Kingdom in order to  seek  a  reconciliation  with  her  husband.   The
    appellant stayed with a friend, Mrs G, between 21  March  and  10  July
    2013.  The appellant  said  that  she  was  exploited  by  Mrs  G,  who
    compelled the appellant to "work like a  slave".   In  July  2013,  the
    appellant returned to India.  In March 2014, however, Mrs G  telephoned
    the appellant in India to tell her that "she had  received  my  divorce
    papers".  The  appellant  became  "very  upset  and  worried  about  my
    marriage" and accordingly  returned  to  the  United  Kingdom.   Having
    nowhere else to go, she again stayed with Mrs  G.   The  appellant  was
    compelled to sign a letter saying that she was being paid �10  an  hour
    by Mrs G and was  also  required  to  sign  a  tenancy  agreement.   In
    reality, the appellant was not paid anything.  Mrs G also  accused  the
    appellant of stealing money from her.

 6. The appellant says that, in May 2014, she  approached  an  organisation
    that assists victims of domestic violence and  reported  her  husband's
    behaviour to them.

 7. Mr V had, indeed, instituted divorce proceedings against the appellant.
     His petition for divorce was filed on 23  October  2013.   The  decree
    absolute was issued on 29 April 2014.

 8. On 25 April 2014, five days before the decree absolute,  the  appellant
    entered into a jobseeker's agreement with an official of the  Secretary
    of State for  Work  and  Pensions.   She  began  receiving  jobseeker's
    allowance on 2 May 2014.  She remained in  receipt  of  this  allowance
    until  she  secured  employment  on  1  October  2014.   The  appellant
    continues in that employment.

 9. On 2 September 2015, the respondent refused the appellant's application
    for a residence card as confirmation of her right of residence  as  the
    ex-spouse of an EEA national exercising Treaty  rights  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The appellant appealed against that  decision.   Following  a
    hearing at Taylor House on 27 September 2016, First-tier Tribunal Judge
    C M Phillips dismissed the appellant's appeal.  Permission to appeal to
    the Upper Tribunal was refused by the First-tier Tribunal  and  by  the
    Upper Tribunal.  However, the Upper Tribunal's  refusal  of  permission
    was quashed following a grant  of  permission  by  Walker  J  to  bring
    judicial review proceedings to challenge that decision.  Permission  to
    appeal was subsequently granted by the Upper Tribunal.

10. Before turning to the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  decision  and  the
    submissions made regarding it, we must set out the relevant legislative
    provisions and refer to the relevant case law.




B. Legislation

11. Article 45 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union ("the
    Treaty") provides as follows:-

                                 "Article 45
         1.   Freedom of movement for workers shall be secured within the
             Union.
         2.   Such freedom of movement shall entail  the  abolition  of  any
             discrimination based on nationality  between  workers  of  the
             Member States as regards employment,  remuneration  and  other
             conditions of work and employment.
         3.   It shall entail the right, subject to limitations justified on
             grounds of public policy, public security or public health:
             (a)  to accept offers of employment actually made;
             (b)  to move freely within the territory of Member States for
                  this purpose;
             (c)  to stay in a Member State for the purpose  of  employment
                  in accordance with the provisions governing the employment
                  of nationals of that State laid down by law, regulation or
                  administrative action;
             (d)  to remain in the territory of a Member State after having
                  been employed in that State, subject to  conditions  which
                  shall be embodied in regulations to be  drawn  up  by  the
                  Commission.
         4.   The provisions of this article shall not apply to employment
             in the public service."

    It is also necessary to mention Article 21, the relevant part of which
    provides as follows:

                                 "Article 21
         1.   Every citizen of the Union shall have the right to move and
             reside freely within the territory of the Member States,
             subject to the limitations and conditions laid down in the
             Treaties and by the measures adopted to give them effect."

12. The  relevant  provisions  of  Directive  2004/58/EC  of  the  European
    Parliament and of the Council ("the 2004 Directive") are as follows:-

         "Recitals

         ...

         (9)  Union citizens should have the right of residence in the  host
             Member State for a period not exceeding three  months  without
             being subject to any conditions or any formalities other  than
             the requirement to hold a valid  identity  card  or  passport,
             without prejudice to a more favourable treatment applicable to
             jobseekers as recognised by  the  case-law  of  the  Court  of
             Justice.

         ...

                                 CHAPTER III
                             RIGHT OF RESIDENCE
                                  Article 6
                  Right of residence for up to three months
         1.   Union citizens shall  have  the  right  of  residence  on  the
             territory of another Member State for a period of up to  three
             months without any conditions or any  formalities  other  than
             the requirement to hold a valid identity card or passport.
         2.   The provisions of paragraph  1  shall  also  apply  to  family
             members  in  possession  of  a  valid  passport  who  are  not
             nationals of a Member State, accompanying or joining the Union
             citizen.
                                  Article 7
                Right of residence for more than three months
         1.   All Union citizens shall have the right of  residence  on  the
             territory of another Member State for a period of longer  than
             three months if they:
             (a)  are workers or self-employed-employed persons in the host
                  Member State; or
             (b)  have sufficient resources for themselves and their family
                  members not to become a burden on  the  social  assistance
                  system of the host Member State  during  their  period  of
                  residence and have comprehensive sickness insurance  cover
                  in the host Member State; or
             (c)  are  enrolled  at  a  private  or  public  establishment,
                  accredited or financed by the host  Member  State  on  the
                  basis of its legislation or administrative  practice,  for
                  the principal purpose of  following  a  course  of  study,
                  including vocational training; and
             -    have comprehensive sickness insurance cover in  the  host
                  Member State and assure the relevant  national  authority,
                  by means of a declaration or by such equivalent  means  as
                  they may choose, that they have sufficient  resources  for
                  themselves and their family members not to become a burden
                  on the social assistance system of the host  Member  State
                  during their period of residence; or
             (d)  are  family  members  accompanying  or  joining  a  Union
                  citizen who satisfies the conditions referred to in points
                  (a), (b) or (c).
         2.   The right of residence  provided  for  in  paragraph  1  shall
             extend to family members who are not  nationals  of  a  Member
             State, accompanying or joining the Union citizen in  the  host
             Member State, provided that such Union citizen  satisfies  the
             conditions referred to in paragraph l(a), (b) or (c).
         3.   For the purposes of paragraph 1(a), a Union citizen who is  no
             longer a worker  or  self-employed  person  shall  retain  the
             status of worker or  self-employed  person  in  the  following
             circumstances:
             (a)  he/she is temporarily unable to work as the result of  an
                  illness or accident;
             (b)  he/she is in duly recorded involuntary unemployment after
                  having been employed  for  more  than  one  year  and  has
                  registered as a jobseeker  with  the  relevant  employment
                  office;
             (c)  he/she is in duly recorded involuntary unemployment after
                  completing a fixed-term employment contract of less than a
                  year  or  after  having  become  involuntarily  unemployed
                  during the first twelve months and  has  registered  as  a
                  jobseeker with the relevant employment  office.   In  this
                  case, the status of worker shall be retained for  no  less
                  than six months.
             (d)  he/she embarks on vocational training.  Unless he/she  is
                  involuntarily unemployed, the retention of the  status  of
                  worker shall require the training to  be  related  to  the
                  previous employment.
         4.   By way of derogation from paragraphs 1(d) and  2  above,  only
             the spouse, the registered partner  provided  for  in  Article
             2(2)(b)  and  dependent  children  shall  have  the  right  of
             residence as family members of a  Union  citizen  meeting  the
             conditions under 1(c) above.   Article  3(2)  shall  apply  to
             his/her dependent direct relatives in the ascending lines  and
             those of his/her spouse or registered partner.
         ...
                                 Article 13
     Retention of the right of residence by family members in the event
       of divorce, annulment of marriage or termination of registered
                                 partnership
         1.    Without  prejudice  to  the  second  subparagraph,   divorce,
             annulment of the Union citizen's marriage  or  termination  of
             his/her registered partnership, as referred to in  point  2(b)
             of Article 2 shall  not  affect  the  right  of  residence  of
             his/her family members who are nationals of a Member State.
         Before acquiring the right  of  permanent  residence,  the  persons
         concerned must meet the conditions laid down in  points  (a),  (b),
         (c) or (d) of Article 7(1).
         2.   Without prejudice to the second subparagraph, divorce,
             annulment of marriage or termination of the registered
             partnership referred to in point 2(b) of Article 2 shall not
             entail loss of the right of residence of a Union citizen's
             family members who are not nationals of a Member State where:
             (a)   prior  to  initiation  of  the  divorce   or   annulment
                  proceedings or termination of the  registered  partnership
                  referred to in point 2(b) of Article 2,  the  marriage  or
                  registered partnership has lasted at  least  three  years,
                  including one year in the host Member State; or
             (b)  by agreement between the spouses or the partners referred
                  to in point 2(b) of Article  2  or  by  court  order,  the
                  spouse or partner who is not a national of a Member  State
                  has custody of the Union citizen's children; or
             (c)    this   is   warranted   by    particularly    difficult
                  circumstances, such as having been a  victim  of  domestic
                  violence while the marriage or registered partnership  was
                  subsisting; or
             (d)  by agreement between the spouses or partners referred  to
                  in point 2(b) of Article 2 or by court order,  the  spouse
                  or partner who is not a national of a Member State has the
                  right of access to a minor child, provided that the  court
                  has ruled that such access must  be  in  the  host  Member
                  State, and for as long as is required.
         Before acquiring the right of permanent  residence,  the  right  of
         residence of the persons concerned  shall  remain  subject  to  the
         requirement that they are able to show that  they  are  workers  or
         self-employed persons or that they have  sufficient  resources  for
         themselves and their family members not to become a burden  on  the
         social assistance system of the  host  Member  State  during  their
         period of residence and have comprehensive sickness insurance cover
         in the host Member State, or that they are members of  the  family,
         already  constituted  in  the  host  Member  State,  of  a   person
         satisfying these requirements.  "Sufficient resources" shall be  as
         defined in Article 8(4).
         Such family members shall retain their right of residence
         exclusively on personal basis.
         ..."
13. The following provisions of the Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006 (S.I. 2003/26) fall for consideration:-

         "4.  "Worker", "self-employed person", "self-sufficient person" and
             "student"

             (1)  In these Regulations -

                  (a)  "worker" means a worker within the meaning of Article
                      45 of the treaty on the Functioning of  the  European
                      Union;

                  ...

         6.   "Qualified person"

             (1)  In these Regulations, "qualified person" means  a  person
                  who is an EEA national and in the United Kingdom as-

                  (a)  a jobseeker;

                  (b)  a worker;

                  (c)  a self-employed person;

                  (d)  a self-sufficient person; or

                  (e)  a student.

             (2)  Subject to regulations 7A(4) and 7B(4), a person  who  is
                  no longer working shall not  cease  to  be  treated  as  a
                  worker for the purpose of paragraph (1)(b) if-

                  (a)  he is temporarily unable to work as the result of  an
                      illness or accident;

                  (b)  he is in duly recorded involuntary unemployment after
                      having been employed in the  United  Kingdom  for  at
                      least one year, provided that he -

                      (i)  has registered as a jobseeker with the  relevant
                           employment office; and

                      (ii) satisfies conditions A and B;

                  (ba) he is in duly recorded involuntary unemployment after
                      having been employed in the United Kingdom  for  less
                      than one year, provided that he -

                      (i)  has registered as a jobseeker with the  relevant
                           employment office; and

                      (ii) satisfied conditions A and B.

                  (c)  he is involuntarily unemployed and  has  embarked  on
                      vocational training; or

                  (d)  he has voluntarily ceased  working  and  embarked  on
                      vocational training that is related to  his  previous
                      employment.

             (2A) A person to  whom  paragraph  (2)(ba)  applies  may  only
                  retain worker status for a maximum of six months.

              (3) A person who is no longer in  self-employment  shall  not
                  cease to be treated as  a  self-employed  person  for  the
                  purpose of paragraph (1)(c) if he is temporarily unable to
                  pursue his activity  as  a  self-employed  person  as  the
                  result of an illness or accident.

             (4)  For the purpose of paragraph (1)(a), "jobseeker" means  a
                  person who satisfies conditions A, B and, where  relevant,
                  C.

             (5)  Condition A is that the person -

                  (a)   entered  the  United  Kingdom  in  order   to   seek
                      employment; or

                  (b)  is present in the United Kingdom seeking  employment,
                      immediately after enjoying a right to reside pursuant
                      to paragraph (1)(b) to (e) (disregarding  any  period
                      during which worker status was retained  pursuant  to
                      paragraph (2)(b) or (ba).

             (6)  Condition B is that the person can provide evidence  that
                  he is seeking employment and has a genuine chance of being
                  engaged.

             (7)  A person may not retain the status of a  worker  pursuant
                  to paragraph (2)(b), or jobseeker  pursuant  to  paragraph
                  (1)(a), for longer than the relevant period unless she can
                  provide compelling evidence that he is continuing to  seek
                  employment and has a genuine chance of being engaged.

             (8)  In paragraph (7), "the relevant period" means -

                  (a)  in the case  of  a  person  retaining  worker  status
                      pursuant to paragraph (2)(b), a continuous period  of
                      six months;

                  (b)  in the case  of  a  jobseeker,  91  days,  minus  the
                      cumulative total of any days during which the  person
                      concerned previously enjoyed a right to reside  as  a
                      jobseeker,  not  including  any  days  prior   to   a
                      continuous absence from  the  United  Kingdom  of  at
                      least 12 months.

             (9)  Condition  C  applies  where  the  person  concerned  has
                  previously,  enjoyed  a  right  to   reside   under   this
                  regulation as a result of satisfying conditions A and B -

                  (a)  in the case of a person to whom paragraph  (2)(b)  or
                      (ba) applied, for at least six months; or

                  (b)  in the case of a jobseeker, for at least 91  days  in
                      total,

                  unless the person concerned has, since enjoying the  above
                  right to reside, been continuously absent from the  United
                  Kingdom for at least 12 months.

             (10) Condition C is that  the  person  has  had  a  period  of
                  absence from the United Kingdom.

             (11) Where condition C applies -

                  (a)  paragraph (7) does not apply; and

                  (b)  condition  B  has  effect  as  if  "compelling"  were
                      inserted before "evidence".

         7.   Family member

             (1)  Subject to paragraph  (2),  for  the  purposes  of  these
                  Regulations the following persons shall be treated as  the
                  family members of another person-

                  (a)  his spouse or his civil partner;

                  (b)  direct descendants of his, his spouse  or  his  civil
                      partner who are-

                      (i)  under 21; or

                      (ii) dependants of  his,  his  spouse  or  his  civil
                           partner;

                  (c)  dependent direct relatives in his ascending  line  or
                      that of his spouse or his civil partner;

                  (d)  a person who is to be treated as the family member of
                      that other person under paragraph (3).

             (2)  A person shall not be treated under paragraph  (1)(b)  or
                  (c) as the family member of  a  student  residing  in  the
                  United Kingdom after the period of three months  beginning
                  on the date on which the student is admitted to the United
                  Kingdom unless-

                  (a)  in the case of  paragraph  (b),  the  person  is  the
                      dependent child of the student or of  his  spouse  or
                      civil partner; or

                  (b)  the student  also  falls  within  one  of  the  other
                      categories  of   qualified   persons   mentioned   in
                      regulation 6(1).

         (3)  Subject to paragraph (4), a person who is an  extended  family
             member and has been  issued  with  an  EEA  family  permit,  a
             registration certificate or a residence card shall be  treated
             as the family member of the relevant EEA national for as  long
             as he continues to satisfy the conditions in regulation  8(2),
             (3), (4) or (5) in relation  to  that  EEA  national  and  the
             permit, certificate or card has not ceased to be valid or been
             revoked.

         ...

         10.  "Family member who has retained the right of residence"

             (1)  In these Regulations, "family member who has retained the
                  right of residence" means, subject  to  paragraph  (8),  a
                  person who satisfies the conditions in paragraph (2), (3),
                  (4) or (5).

             (2)  A person satisfies the conditions in this paragraph if-

                  (a)  he was a family member of a qualified person or of an
                      EEA national with a permanent right of residence when
                      the qualified person died;

                  (b)  he resided in the United Kingdom in  accordance  with
                      these Regulations for at least the  year  immediately
                      before the death of the qualified person or  the  EEA
                      national with a permanent right of residence; and

                  (c)  he satisfies the condition in paragraph (6).

             (3)  A person satisfies the conditions in this paragraph if-

                  (a)  he is the direct descendant of-

                      (i)  a qualified person or an  EEA  national  with  a
                           permanent right of residence who has died;

                      (ii) a person who ceased to be a qualified person  on
                           ceasing to reside in the United Kingdom; or

                      (iii)    the person  who  was  the  spouse  or  civil
                           partner of the qualified person or  EEA  national
                           with a permanent right of residence mentioned  in
                           sub-paragraph (i) when he died or is  the  spouse
                           or civil partner of the person mentioned in  sub-
                           paragraph (ii); and

                  (b)  he was attending an educational course in the  United
                      Kingdom immediately before the  qualified  person  or
                      the EEA national with a permanent right of  residence
                      died or ceased to be a qualified person and continues
                      to attend such a course.

             (4)  A person satisfies the conditions in  this  paragraph  if
                  the person is the parent with actual custody  of  a  child
                  who satisfies the condition in paragraph (3).

             (5)  A person satisfies the conditions in this paragraph if-

                  (a)  he ceased to be a family member of a qualified person
                      or of an EEA  national  with  a  permanent  right  of
                      residence on the termination of the marriage or civil
                      partnership of the qualified person;

                  (b)  he was residing in the United Kingdom  in  accordance
                      with  these  Regulations   at   the   date   of   the
                      termination;

                  (c)   he satisfies the condition in paragraph (6); and

                  (d)  either-

                      (i)  prior to the initiation of the  proceedings  for
                           the termination of  the  marriage  or  the  civil
                           partnership the marriage or civil partnership had
                           lasted for at least three years and  the  parties
                           to the marriage or civil partnership had  resided
                           in the United  Kingdom  for  at  least  one  year
                           during its duration;

                      (ii) the  former  spouse  or  civil  partner  of  the
                           qualified person has custody of a  child  of  the
                           qualified person  or  the  EEA  national  with  a
                           permanent right of residence;

                      (iii)    the former spouse or civil  partner  of  the
                           qualified person  or  the  EEA  national  with  a
                           permanent right of residence  has  the  right  of
                           access to a child of the qualified person or  the
                           EEA national with a permanent right of residence,
                           where the child is under the age of 18 and  where
                           a court has ordered that such  access  must  take
                           place in the United Kingdom; or

                      (iv) the continued right of residence in  the  United
                           Kingdom   of   the   person   is   warranted   by
                           particularly difficult circumstances, such as  he
                           or another family member having been a victim  of
                           domestic violence while  the  marriage  or  civil
                           partnership as subsisting.

             (6)  The condition in this paragraph is that the person-

                  (a)  is not an EEA national but would, if he were  an  EEA
                      national, be a worker, a self-employed  person  or  a
                      self-sufficient person under regulation 6; or

                  (b)  is the family member of a  person  who  falls  within
                      paragraph (a).

             (7)  In this regulation, "educational course" means  a  course
                  within the scope of Article 12 of Council Regulation (EEC)
                  No. 1612/68 on freedom of movement for workers.

             (8)  A person  with  a  permanent  right  of  residence  under
                  regulation 15 shall not become a  family  member  who  has
                  retained the right of residence on the death or  departure
                  from the United Kingdom of the qualified person or the EEA
                  national with  a  permanent  right  of  residence  or  the
                  termination of the marriage or civil partnership,  as  the
                  case may be, and a family  member  who  has  retained  the
                  right of residence shall cease  to  have  that  status  on
                  acquiring a permanent right of residence under  regulation
                  15."










C. Case law

14. A significant case in the interpretation of the  predecessor  provision
    of Article 45 of the Treaty  is  Antonissen  (R  v  Immigration  Appeal
    Tribunal ex parte Antonissen) (C-292/89).  In its  1991  judgment,  the
    European Court interpreted Article 48 (as it then was) so as to include
    within  its  scope  not  only  persons  who  are  actually  working  or
    travelling to a Member State to accept job offers but also, in  certain
    circumstances, those looking for work ("jobseekers").

15. It is necessary to set out the following provisions of the judgment:-

         "3.  Mr Antonissen arrived in the United Kingdom in  October  1984.
             He had not yet found work there when, on 30 March 1987, he was
             sentenced by  the  Liverpool  Crown  Court  to  two  terms  of
             imprisonment for unlawful possession of cocaine and possession
             of that drug with intent to supply.  He was released on parole
             on 21 December 1987.

         ...

         5.   Mr Antonissen  lodged  an  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of
             State's decision with the Immigration Appeal Tribunal.  Before
             the  Tribunal  Mr  Antonissen  argued  that  since  he  was  a
             Community national he must qualify for the protection afforded
              by Council Directive 64/221/EEC of 25 February  1964  on  the
             coordination of special measures concerning the  movement  and
             residence of foreign nationals which are justified on  grounds
             of public policy, public security or public  health  (Official
             Journal, English Special  Edition  1963-1964,  p.  117).   The
             Tribunal took  the  view  that,  since  he  had  been  seeking
             employment in the United Kingdom for more than six months,  he
             could no longer be treated as a  Community  worker  and  claim
             that the directive should apply in  his  case.   The  Tribunal
             based this part of  its  decision  on  paragraph  143  of  the
             Statement of Changes in  Immigration  Rules  (HC169),  adopted
             pursuant to the 1971 Act, under which a national of  a  Member
             State may be deported if, after six months from  admission  to
             the United Kingdom, he has not yet found employment or is  not
             carrying on any other occupation.

         6.   His appeal being dismissed, Mr Antonissen made an  application
             for judicial review to the  High  Court  of  Justice,  Queen's
             Bench Division, which stayed the proceedings and referred  the
             following questions to the Court of Justice for a  preliminary
             ruling:

             1.   For the purpose of determining whether a  national  of  a
                  Member State is to be treated as  a  "worker"  within  the
                  meaning of Article 48  of  the  EEC  Treaty  when  seeking
                  employment in the territory of another Member State so  as
                  to be immune from  deportation  save  in  accordance  with
                  Council Directive 64/221 of  25  February  1964,  may  the
                  legislature of the second Member State provide that such a
                  national may be required to leave the  territory  of  that
                  State  (subject  to  appeal)  if  after  six  months  from
                  admission  to  that  territory  he  has  failed  to  enter
                  employment?

             2.   In answering the foregoing question what weight if any is
                  to be attached by a court or tribunal of a Member State to
                  the declaration contained in the minutes of the meeting of
                  the Council when the Council adopted Directive 68/360?'

         ...

         8.   By means of  the  questions  submitted  to  the  Court  for  a
             preliminary ruling the national  court  essentially  seeks  to
             establish  whether  it  is  contrary  to  the  provisions   of
             Community law governing the free movement of workers  for  the
             legislation of a Member State to provide that  a  national  of
             another Member State who entered the first State in  order  to
             seek employment may be required to leave the territory of that
             State (subject to appeal) if he has not found employment there
             after six months.

         9.   In that connection it has been argued that, according  to  the
             strict  wording  of  Article  48  of  the  Treaty,   Community
             nationals are given  the  right  to  move  freely  within  the
             territory of  the  Member  States  for  the  purpose  only  of
             accepting offers of employment actually made (Article 48(3)(a)
             and (b)) whilst the right to stay in the territory of a Member
             State is stated to be for the purpose of  employment  (Article
             48(3)(c)).

         10.  Such an interpretation would exclude the right of  a  national
             of a Member State to move freely and to stay in the  territory
             of the other Member States in order to seek employment  there,
             and cannot be upheld.

         11.  Indeed,  as  the  Court  has  consistently  held,  freedom  of
             movement for workers forms  one  of  the  foundations  of  the
             Community and, consequently, the provisions laying  down  that
             freedom  must  be  given  a  broad  interpretation  (see,   in
             particular, the judgment of 3 June 1986 in Case 139/85 Kempf v
             Staatssecretaris van Justitie [1986] ECR 1741, paragraph 13).

         12.  Moreover, a  strict  interpretation  of  Article  48(3)  would
             jeopardize the actual chances that  a  national  of  a  Member
             State who is seeking employment will find it in another Member
             State,  and  would,  as  a   result,   make   that   provision
             ineffective.

         13.   It  follows  that  Article  48(3)  must  be  interpreted   as
             enumerating,  in  a   non-exhaustive   way,   certain   rights
             benefiting nationals of Member States in the  context  of  the
             free movement of workers and that that  freedom  also  entails
             the right for nationals of Member States to move freely within
             the territory of the other Member States and to stay there for
             the purposes of seeking employment.

         14.  Moreover, that interpretation of  the  Treaty  corresponds  to
             that  of  the  Community  legislature,  as  appears  from  the
             provisions adopted in order to implement the principle of free
             movement, in particular Articles 1  and  5  of  Regulation  No
             1612/68/EEC of the Council of 15 October 1968  on  freedom  of
             movement for workers within the Community  (Official  Journal,
             English Special Edition 1968 (II), p. 475),  which  presuppose
             that Community nationals are entitled to move in order to look
             for employment, and hence to stay, in another Member State.

         15.  It must therefore be  ascertained  whether  the  right,  under
             Article 48 and the provisions of Regulation No 1612/68  (cited
             above), to stay in a Member State for the purposes of  seeking
             employment can be subjected to a temporal limitation.

         16.  In that regard, it must be pointed out in the first place that
             the effectiveness of Article  48  is  secured  in  so  far  as
             Community legislation or, in its absence, the legislation of a
             Member State gives persons  concerned  a  reasonable  time  in
             which to apprise themselves, in the territory  of  the  Member
             State concerned, of  offers  of  employment  corresponding  to
             their  occupational  qualifications   and   to   take,   where
             appropriate, the necessary steps in order to be engaged.

         ...

         21.  In the absence of a Community provision prescribing the period
             during which  Community  nationals  seeking  employment  in  a
             Member State may stay there, a period of six months,  such  as
             that laid down in the national legislation  at  issue  in  the
             main  proceedings,  does  not  appear  in  principle   to   be
             insufficient  to  enable  the  persons  concerned  to  apprise
             themselves, in the host Member State, of offers of  employment
             corresponding to  their  occupational  qualifications  and  to
             take, where appropriate, the necessary steps in  order  to  be
             engaged and, therefore, does not jeopardize the  effectiveness
             of the principle of  free  movement.  However,  if  after  the
             expiry of that period the person concerned  provides  evidence
             that he is continuing to  seek  employment  and  that  he  has
             genuine chances of being engaged, he  cannot  be  required  to
             leave the territory of the host Member State.

         22.  It  must  therefore  be  stated  in  reply  to  the  questions
             submitted by the national court that it is not contrary to the
             provisions of Community law governing  the  free  movement  of
             workers for the legislation of a Member State to provide  that
             a national of another Member State who entered the first State
             in order to seek employment  may  be  required  to  leave  the
             territory of that State (subject to  appeal)  if  he  has  not
             found employment there after six  months,  unless  the  person
             concerned provides evidence that  he  is  continuing  to  seek
             employment and that he has genuine chances of being engaged."

16. The CJEU has continued to  reaffirm  Antonissen  in  later  cases;  eg.
    Ioannidis [2005] C-258/04.

17. In Saint Prix v Secretary of State for Work and Pensions (Aire  Centre,
    intervening) [2015] 1 CMLR 5 (Case C-507/12), the CJEU  held  that,  in
    certain circumstances, a worker who became pregnant and ceased work  as
    a result, attained the status of a worker  after  a  reasonable  period
    following the birth:-

         "Consideration of the questions referred

         24.   By  its  questions,  which  it  is  appropriate  to  consider
             together, the referring court asks,  in  essence,  whether  EU
             law, and in particular  Article  45  TFEU  and  Article  7  of
             Directive 2004/38, are to be interpreted  as  meaning  that  a
             woman who gives up work,  or  seeking  work,  because  of  the
             physical constraints of the late stages of pregnancy  and  the
             aftermath of childbirth, retains the status of 'worker' within
             the meaning of those articles.

         ...

         26.  In that regard, it is apparent from Article 1(a) of  Directive
             2004/38 that  that  directive  is  intended  to  set  out  the
             conditions  governing  the  exercise  of  that  right,   which
             include, where residence is desired for  a  period  of  longer
             than three months, in particular the condition  laid  down  in
             Article 7(1)(a) of that directive that Union citizens must  be
             workers or self-employed persons  in  the  host  Member  State
             (see, to that effect, Brey, C-140/12, EU:C:2013:565, paragraph
             53 and the case-law cited).

         27.  Article 7(3) of  Directive  2004/38  provides  that,  for  the
             purposes of paragraph  7(1)(a)  of  that  directive,  a  Union
             citizen who is no longer  a  worker  or  self-employed  person
             shall nevertheless  retain  the  status  of  worker  or  self-
             employed  person  in  specific  cases,  namely  where  he   is
             temporarily unable to work as the  result  of  an  illness  or
             accident, where, in certain situations, he is  in  involuntary
             unemployment, or where, under specified conditions, he embarks
             on vocational training.

         28.  However, Article 7(3) of Directive 2004/38 does not  expressly
             envisage the case of a woman who is in a particular  situation
             because of the physical constraints of the late stages of  her
             pregnancy and the aftermath of childbirth.

         29.  In that regard, the Court has consistently held that pregnancy
             must be clearly distinguished from illness, in that  pregnancy
             is not in any way comparable  with  a  pathological  condition
             (see to that effect, inter alia, Webb, C-32/93, EU:C:1994:300,
             paragraph 25 and the case-law cited).

         30.  It follows that a woman in the situation of Ms Saint Prix, who
             temporarily gives up work because of the late  stages  of  her
             pregnancy and the aftermath of childbirth, cannot be  regarded
             as a person temporarily unable to work as  the  result  of  an
             illness, in  accordance  with  Article  7(3)(a)  of  Directive
             2004/38.

         31.  However, it does not follow from either Article 7 of Directive
             2004/38, considered as a whole, or from the  other  provisions
             of that directive, that, in such circumstances, a  citizen  of
             the Union who does not fulfil the conditions laid down in that
             article is, therefore, systematically deprived of  the  status
             of 'worker', within the meaning of Article 45 TFEU.

         32.  The codification, sought by the directive, of the  instruments
             of EU law existing prior to that  directive,  which  expressly
             seeks to facilitate  the  exercise  of  the  rights  of  Union
             citizens to move and reside freely within the territory of the
             Member States, cannot, by  itself,  limit  the  scope  of  the
             concept of worker within the meaning of the FEU Treaty.

         33.  In that regard, it  must  be  noted  that,  according  to  the
             settled case-law of the Court, the concept of 'worker', within
             the meaning of Article 45 TFEU, in so far as  it  defines  the
             scope of a fundamental freedom provided for by the FEU Treaty,
             must be interpreted broadly (see, to that effect, N., C-46/12,
             EU:C:2013:97, paragraph 39 and the case-law cited).

         34.  Accordingly, the Court has held that any national of a  Member
             State, irrespective of his  place  of  residence  and  of  his
             nationality,  who  has  exercised  the  right  to  freedom  of
             movement for workers and who has been  employed  in  a  Member
             State other than that of his residence falls within the  scope
             of Article 45 TFEU (see, inter alia, Ritter-Coulais, C-152/03,
             EU:C:2006:123,   paragraph   31,   and   Hartmann,   C-212/05,
             EU:C:2007:437, paragraph 17).

         ...

         36.  Consequently, and for the purposes of  the  present  case,  it
             must be pointed out  that  freedom  of  movement  for  workers
             entails the right for  nationals  of  Member  States  to  move
             freely within the territory of other Member States and to stay
             there for the purposes of seeking employment (see, inter alia,
             Antonissen, C-292/89, EU:C:1991:80, paragraph 13).

         37.  It follows that classification as a worker  under  Article  45
             TFEU, and  the  rights  deriving  from  such  status,  do  not
             necessarily depend on the actual or continuing existence of an
             employment relationship (see, to  that  effect,  Lair,  39/86,
             EU:C:1988:322, paragraphs 31 and 36).

         ...

         46.  If, by virtue of that protection, an absence for an  important
             event such as pregnancy or  childbirth  does  not  affect  the
             continuity of the five years of residence in the  host  Member
             State required for the granting of that  right  of  residence,
             the physical constraints of the late stages of  pregnancy  and
             the immediate aftermath of childbirth, which require  a  woman
             to give up work temporarily, cannot,  a  fortiori,  result  in
             that woman losing her status as a worker.

         47.  In the light of all the foregoing considerations,  the  answer
             to the questions referred for  a  preliminary  ruling  by  the
             referring court is that Article 45 TFEU must be interpreted as
             meaning that a woman who  gives  up  work,  or  seeking  work,
             because of the physical constraints  of  the  late  stages  of
             pregnancy and the aftermath of childbirth retains  the  status
             of 'worker', within the meaning of that article, provided  she
             returns to work or  finds  another  job  within  a  reasonable
             period after the birth of her child."




D. The findings of the First-tier Tribunal

18. The First-tier Tribunal Judge was not persuaded that either  Antonissen
    or St Prix assisted the appellant:-

         "25. The case of Saint Prix  can  be  distinguished  on  the  facts
             because the issue was whether a pregnant  woman  who  has  had
             employment in the United Kingdom and remained resident in  the
             UK but who temporarily gave up work because of pregnancy is to
             be considered a 'worker'.  This  appellant  has  not  provided
             satisfactory supporting evidence to show that  she  worked  in
             the United Kingdom prior to leaving for India  on  02  October
             2011 or during her stay of about four  months  from  March  to
             July 2013 when there is evidence that during this  short  stay
             she claimed and received Jobseekers Allowance  from  05  April
             2013 until 27 June 2013.  The appellant has claimed  that  her
             absences from the United Kingdom were involuntary but  I  find
             that her evidence [on] that is not  supported  by  independent
             evidence falls far short  of  that  required  to  make  out  a
             successful claim that she has come within  the  definition  of
             worker within regulation 6 of the 2006 EEA Regulations at  any
             specific time or that she has continuously  come  within  that
             definition.

         26.  I find that the cases of Antonissen C-292/89  which  concerned
             the free movement of workers can also be distinguished on  the
             fact as can the  other  cases  relied  upon  in  the  skeleton
             argument (Levin, Rinner-Kuhn and Megner).  The appellant seeks
             retained rights and therefore  has  to  provide  the  evidence
             specified in regulation 10 of the 2006  EEA  Regulations  with
             reference to regulation 6."

19. This led the judge to the following finding:-

         "30. I find that by arriving in the United Kingdom  in  March  2014
             after an absence of about eight months and  registering  as  a
             Jobseeker four days before her divorce  became  absolute,  and
             being in receipt of Jobseekers Allowance,  the  appellant  has
             not discharged the burden of proof upon her to  show  that  if
             she were an EEA national as at the date of dissolution of  the
             marriage she would be a worker, a self-employed  person  or  a
             self-sufficient person within the terms of regulation 6 of the
             2006 EEA Regulations."




E. Discussion

(a) The effect of Mr V's naturalisation

20. Two matters can be dealt with relatively shortly.  The  first  concerns
    the status of Mr V.  As we have seen, he is a Portuguese national,  who
    became naturalised as a British citizen on 6 September 2006.  Until the
    coming into force on 16 October 2012 of the relevant provision  in  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) (Amendment) Regulations 2012) S.I.
    2012/1547, the fact that a person (P) was both an EEA  national  and  a
    British citizen did not preclude his or  her  family  member  (F)  from
    being entitled to reside in the United Kingdom, pursuant  to  the  2006
    Regulations.  On 16 October 2012, however, the  position  changed;  but
    Schedule 3 to the 2012  Regulations  contained  important  transitional
    provisions:-

        "Amendments to the definition of EEA national

         2.-(1)   Where the right of a family member ("F")  to  be  admitted
                 to, or reside in, the United Kingdom pursuant to  the  2006
                 Regulations depends on the fact that a person ("P")  is  an
                 EEA  national,  P  will,  notwithstanding  the  effect   of
                 paragraph 1(d) of Schedule 1 to these Regulations, continue
                 to be regarded as an EEA national for the  purpose  of  the
                 2006 Regulations where the criteria in  subparagraphs  (2),
                 (3) or (4) are met and for as long as they remain satisfied
                 in accordance with subparagraph (5).

             (2)   The criterion in this subparagraph is met where F was  on
                 16th July 2012 a person with a permanent right to reside in
                 the United Kingdom under the 2006 Regulations.

             ...

             (5)   Where met, the criteria in subparagraph (2), (3) and  (4)
                 remain satisfied until the occurrence of  the  earliest  of
                 the following events-

             ...

                 (d)   the date on which F ceases to be the family member of
                     an EEA national;

             ... "

21. It is not disputed that on 16 July 2012 the appellant was a person with
    a right to reside in the United Kingdom under the 2006 Regulations.  As
    we have seen, the appellant was granted a residence card as the  spouse
    of Mr V on 26 October 2009, which was valid until she ceased to be  his
    family member upon pronouncement of the decree absolute of  divorce  on
    29 April 2014.  Accordingly, Mr V's acquisition of British  citizenship
    did not adversely affect the position.

22. As it happens, there was no  need  for  the  appellant  to  invoke  the
    transitional provisions of the 2012 Regulations. Although  it  was  not
    cited to us, in Lounes v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    (Case C-165/16) the Grand Chamber held that, although  the  acquisition
    by the EU national of British citizenship meant that the third  country
    national did not have a derived  right  of  residence  under  the  2004
    Directive, the third country national was:

         "eligible for a derived right of residence in  the  United  Kingdom
         under Article 21(1) [of the Treaty], on conditions which  must  not
         be stricter than those provided for by Directive  2004/38  for  the
         grant of such a right to a third-country national who is  a  family
         member of a Union citizen who has exercised his right of freedom of
         movement by settling in a Member State other than the Member  State
         of which he is a national" (paragraph 62).




(b) The relevance of domestic violence

23. The second matter concerns the appellant's allegation that she suffered
    domestic abuse at the hands of Mr V.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge, at
    paragraph 31 of the decision, found that the appellant had not provided
    "sufficient,  satisfactory  evidence  of   domestic   violence".    The
    appellant criticises that finding.  She says it was not a  matter  that
    the respondent had put in issue, when refusing her  application  for  a
    residence card in September 2015.  The appellant  accordingly  contends
    that it was procedurally unfair for the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  to
    take the point against her.

24. At the hearing on 2 May 2018, Ms  Asanovic  developed  this  ground  of
    appeal.  She submitted, however, that the issue  of  domestic  violence
    would become relevant only if this Tribunal were to  find  against  the
    appellant on her primary submission, which is that, at the date of  the
    decree absolute, the appellant fell to be treated as a "worker" for the
    purposes of Article 45 of the  Treaty.   In  those  circumstances,  the
    Tribunal would, according to Ms Asanovic,  have  to  make  findings  of
    fact, on proper notice, regarding the allegation of domestic  violence,
    in order to decide whether the  circumstances  of  the  appellant  fell
    within regulation 10(5)(iv) of the 2006 Regulations, such as to warrant
    the continuation of her right of residence in the United  Kingdom.   As
    can be seen, paragraph (iv)  gives  as  an  instance  of  "particularly
    difficult circumstances" which might warrant the  continuation  of  the
    right, the fact that the person concerned or another family member  has
    "been a  victim  of  domestic  violence  while  the  marriage  ...  was
    subsisting".

25. In fact, as the respondent's rule 24 response indicates,  the  question
    whether the appellant was the subject of domestic violence is, for this
    purpose, immaterial.  It is common ground that the appellant  satisfies
    regulation 10(5)(d)(i) in that, prior  to  the  initiation  of  divorce
    proceedings in October 2013, the appellant's marriage had lasted for at
    least three years (in fact, over five) and the appellant had resided in
    the United Kingdom for at least one year during  the  duration  of  the
    marriage (in fact, a total of over three years).

26. The problem for the appellant is that the respondent contends (and  the
    First-tier Tribunal found) that she does not satisfy the  condition  in
    paragraph (6) of regulation 10.  If that is  right,  then  whether  the
    appellant comes within paragraph (5)(d)(i) or (iv) is beside the point,
    since she will not satisfy the condition  in  paragraph  (5)(c),  which
    requires her to satisfy "the condition in paragraph (6)".



(c) The correct date for determining whether the appellant retained a  right
of residence

27. Although both parties at the hearing were  agreed  that  the  date  for
    determining whether the appellant met the requirements  of  Article  13
    was the date of the decree absolute, we need to determine whether  that
    is correct.

28. In Baigazieva v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018]  EWCA
    Civ 1088, Singh LJ observed that, in the light of the  CJEU's  judgment
    in NA v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] QB  109,  the
    respondent now  accepts  that,  in  order  to  meet  the  condition  in
    regulation 10(2)(a) to have been  the  family  member  of  a  qualified
    person (within the meaning of regulation 6), it was sufficient for  the
    person asserting the retained right of residence to show that  the  EEA
    national spouse/partner was a qualified person as at the  date  of  the
    initiation of divorce proceedings, rather than at the  date  of  decree
    absolute. The Court of Appeal accordingly granted permission to  appeal
    in the case before it and allowed the  appeal  by  consent,  since  the
    Upper Tribunal had found that the  date  of  decree  absolute  was  the
    operative date for this purpose.

29. We are entirely satisfied that this development does  not  in  any  way
    affect the fact that the issue is  whether  the  appellant  retained  a
    right of residence at the date of decree absolute. That is the point at
    which it becomes necessary  to  determine  whether  a  right  has  been
    retained for the simple reason that it is at this point that the person
    concerned ceases to be a family member and so ceases to be able to rely
    on the EU spouse or partner for  his  or  her  right  to  reside  under
    Articles 7 and 8 of the 2004 Directive. Unless the former family member
    retains a right of residence at that point under Article 13, he or  she
    will have no rights under the Directive/Regulations.

30.  Indeed, in Baigazieva, the date of decree absolute was acknowledged to
    be the point at which it became necessary to decide the issue. Plainly,
    it could not be earlier. As the  Court  noted,  there  is,  however,  a
    difference between the day by reference to which  it  is  necessary  to
    decide whether a right has  been  retained  and  the  day  or  days  by
    reference to which certain requirements must be met, in order  to  make
    that decision (paragraphs 14 and 15 of the judgment).

31. We are also satisfied that  there  is  nothing  in  Baigazieva  or  the
    related CJEU judgment of NA to require us to conclude that the date for
    determining whether the appellant complied with the requirement to be a
    worker must be the date on which divorce proceedings were commenced. As
    we shall see, it would be very unfair on the appellant  and  others  in
    her position if that were the position.

32. The tenses used in regulation 10(5) and (6) are significant. Regulation
    10(5)(a) and (b) are in the past tense, whereas  regulation  10(6)  and
    regulation 10(5)(c), which introduces sub-paragraph  (6),  are  in  the
    present tense.

33. In order to understand the significance of this, one needs to refer  to
    the text of Article 14. Article 14.2 (a), (b),  (c)  and  (d)  set  out
    requirements to be met in order to retain the right of residence. These
    requirements are essentially backward-looking in nature. So too, as  we
    now know, is the requirement regarding  the  status  of  the  qualified
    person.

34. By contrast, the paragraph  that  follows  sub-paragraph  (d)  ("Before
    acquiring the right of permanent residence ...") is  of  a  present  or
    ongoing nature. This is because a  person  who  retains  the  right  of
    residence has to be a worker/self-employed/self-sufficient and  insured
    person (or a family member of such a person) at all  times  up  to  the
    point that he or she acquires the right of permanent residence; that is
    to say, acquires a right that is no longer  retained  from  a  previous
    relationship with a relevant EU citizen. In short, the meaning  of  the
    words "Before acquiring  ..."  would  perhaps  be  better  conveyed  in
    English by saying "Until the right  of  permanent  residence  has  been
    acquired ...".

35. Regulation 10(6) is how the United Kingdom has decided to give domestic
    legislative effect to that paragraph in Article 14. As will be seen, we
    conclude that regulation  10(6)  does  not  give  proper  or  at  least
    sufficiently clear effect to that Article, so far as concerns  what  is
    meant by being a "worker". But,  so  far  as  its  temporal  aspect  is
    concerned, regulation 10(6) is entirely right. So far as the  appellant
    is concerned, the requirements of that provision must be satisfied both
    on and after the date of the decree absolute.









(d) Was the appellant a worker?

36. We are now able to turn to the key question in the appeal.  At the time
    of the decree absolute, which is the point at which  the  condition  in
    regulation 10(6)(a) has to be satisfied, was the appellant "a worker"?

37. As can be seen from Antonissen,  the  judgments  of  the  CJEU  on  the
    interpretation of  what  became  Article  45  have  subsequently  found
    expression in Directive 2004/58/EC  and  in  the  domestic  legislative
    provisions giving effect to that Directive which, in the  case  of  the
    United Kingdom, were the 2006 Regulations and are now  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016.  Antonissen held, in effect,
    that what is  now  Article  45  encompasses  not  only  those  who  are
    currently workers or who are travelling to an EU State to  take  up  an
    offer of employment but also certain categories of jobseekers.

38.  Regulation 6 of the 2006 Regulations seeks to clarify what is meant by
    a jobseeker, as one of the categories  of  "qualified  person".  In  so
    doing, the regulation introduces  a  distinction  between  workers  and
    jobseekers. Whilst such a distinction is necessary in order to  reflect
    the conditions that case law and, subsequently, the 2004 Directive have
    placed upon job-seeking EU nationals, as regards their  right  of  free
    movement, it means that the appellant faces a difficulty.

39. The case of  Saint  Prix  makes  it  clear  that,  notwithstanding  the
    legislative process of codification of relevant  case  law,  situations
    will continue to arise which call for further interpretation of Article
    45.  In St Prix, a woman who had  ceased  employment  as  a  result  of
    pregnancy could not bring herself within the terms of Article  7(3)  of
    the 2004 Directive, which sets out (in  purportedly  exhaustive  terms)
    the circumstances in which a Union citizen who is no longer a worker or
    self-employed person shall retain that status.

40. Crucially, at paragraph 32 of its judgment, the CJEU  stated  in  terms
    that the codification of case  law  contained  in  the  2004  Directive
    "cannot, by itself, limit the scope of the concept of worker within the
    meaning of the FEU Treaty".  Accordingly, notwithstanding that Ms Saint
    Prix could not bring comply with Article 7(3)  of  the  Directive,  the
    court held that:-

         "Art. 45 TFEU must be interpreted as meaning that a woman who gives
         up work, or seeking work, because of her  physical  constraints  at
         the late stages  of  pregnancy  and  the  aftermath  of  childbirth
         retains the status of "worker", within the meaning of that Article,
         provided she  returns  to  work  or  finds  another  job  within  a
         reasonable period after the birth of her child."  (paragraph 47)

41. The fact that regulation 10(6)(a) of the 2006  Regulations  excludes  a
    jobseeker is not fatal to the appellant's argument.  The definition  of
    "worker" in regulation 4(1)(a) is  "a  worker  within  the  meaning  of
    Article 45 of the Treaty".  Thus, if the appellant can  make  good  her
    contention that Article 45 falls to be construed as including a  person
    in her position,  she  will  satisfy  regulation  10(6)(a)  and,  thus,
    regulation 10(5)(c).

42. It is necessary to recall the purpose behind affording  derived  rights
    of residence to the family members of EU nationals.  If those nationals
    were unable to bring their family  members  with  them  to  another  EU
    State, when travelling there for the purposes of work,  then,  in  many
    cases at least, the national would be less likely to go to  that  State
    for that purpose.  The principle of free movement of workers would,  as
    a result, be weakened.  As the Grand Chamber put  it  in  Lounes,  "the
    purpose and justification of a derived right of residence are therefore
    based on the fact that a refusal to allow such a right would be such as
    to interfere, in particular, with that freedom and with the exercise of
    the  rights  which  Article  21(1)  TFEU  affords  the  Union   citizen
    concerned" (paragraph 48).

43. The retention of rights of residence for family members in the event of
    the death of the EU national, or in the  event  of  divorce  from  that
    national, can be explained in part on the basis that  a  family  member
    may be much less likely to go with the EU national to the  third  party
    State, and make a life there, if the family member knew that, following
    death or divorce from the EU national, he or she would be left  without
    status in that country.

44. It can also be explained as an aspect of the respect to be accorded  to
    family life and human dignity.  Recital  (15)  to  the  2004  Directive
    states:

         "(15) Family members should be legally safeguarded in the event  of
         death of the Union  Citizen,  divorce,  annulment  of  marriage  or
         termination of a registered partnership. With due regard for family
         life and human dignity,  and  in  certain  circumstances  to  guard
         against abuse, measures should therefore be taken to ensure that in
         such circumstances  family  members  already  residing  within  the
         territory of the host Member State retain their right of  residence
         exclusively on a personal basis".

45. Viewed in this light, there is  in  our  view  a  powerful  reason  why
    Article 45 of the Treaty must be interpreted as meaning that  a  family
    member who, at the date of decree absolute, is a jobseeker falls to  be
    treated as a "worker". This is so, whether  one  looks  at  the  matter
    solely by reference to the 2004 Directive or, as the Grand Chamber  did
    in Lounes, through the prism  of  Article  21(1)  of  the  Treaty.  The
    approach adopted in Lounes leads to the same  outcome  because  of  the
    requirement that  any  conditions  must  not  be  stricter  than  those
    provided by the 2004 Directive.

46. A failure to interpret Article 45 in this way would  produce  arbitrary
    and unjustified results.  There may be a number of reasons why a  woman
    does not work, during the currency of her marriage. If, when faced with
    divorce, she decides to seek work, whether through  economic  necessity
    or otherwise, and happens to find a job before the decree absolute, she
    would, on any view, satisfy the requirements of regulation 10(6)(a), so
    as to retain her right of residence.  If, however, she is still seeking
    employment when the decree absolute is pronounced,  then  according  to
    the respondent, she cannot retain the right of residence.  Not only  is
    such a result perverse; we agree with Ms Asanovic that it would  amount
    to indirect discrimination  against  women  and  thus  be  contrary  to
    Articles 21 and 23 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the EU.

47.  All this is a cumulatively compelling reason for construing Article 45
    in the way for which the appellant contends.

48. We also take account of the fact that, at paragraph 33 of its judgment,
    the CJEU in Saint Prix stated that the concept of "worker"  within  the
    meaning of Article 45 "insofar as it defines the scope of a fundamental
    freedom provided by the EU Treaty, must be interpreted broadly".  In so
    saying, the CJEU was reiterating what had been said in previous  cases.



49. We return to the important paragraph in Article 13 that  we  considered
    in paragraph 34 above, which begins:

         "Before acquiring a right of  permanent  residence,  the  right  of
         residence of the persons concerned  shall  remain  subject  to  the
         requirement that they are able to show they are  workers  or  self-
         employed persons or that they have sufficient resources ... . "

    In this paragraph, there is no attempt to  separate  "jobseekers"  from
    the general category of "workers".  This contrasts  with  the  approach
    taken in regulations 6(1) and 10(6) of the 2006 Regulations, which draw
    a distinction between jobseekers and workers, with the result that  the
    respondent is able to argue that the concept of a jobseeker  cannot  be
    found within the expression "worker" in  regulation  10(6)(a).   It  is
    that distinction which is central to the respondent's case.

50. However, if, as we find, Article 45 must for the purposes of  our  case
    be interpreted as including jobseekers, then this line of argument runs
    up against the problem that the definition of  "worker"  in  regulation
    4(1)(a) takes us directly to Article 45 of the Treaty; see paragraph 41
    above.

51.   It  is  true  that  the  wording  of  regulation  10(6)(a)  uses  the
    terminology found in the relevant paragraph of Article 13  of  workers,
    self-employed persons etc. The critical difference,  however,  is  that
    Article 13,  unlike  the  2006  Regulations,  does  not  interact  with
    anything equivalent to regulation 6,  which  is  where  the  respondent
    draws the distinction between workers and  jobseekers.   Thus,  if  one
    looks solely at the 2004 Directive, the only  question  is:  what  does
    Article 45 encompass?

52. We are aware that our finding involves giving a meaning to  Article  45
    as it applies to third country nationals who assert derived  rights  of
    residence. There is nothing novel in this. On  the  contrary,  in  Ruiz
    Zambrano [2012] QB 265, the CJEU interpreted Article 20 of  the  Treaty
    so as to confer,  in  certain  circumstances,  a  derivative  right  of
    residence on third country nationals who are  carers  of  dependant  EU
    citizen children.

53.  In any event, we can detect  no  rational  reason  why  the  appellant
    should lose a retained right of residence merely because  she  had  not
    obtained employment at the date of  the  decree  absolute.  If  such  a
    result were demanded by the wording of the relevant EU legislation,  or
    by EU caselaw,  we  would,  of  course,  be  required  to  follow  that
    legislation. But, as we have shown, that is not the position. The  2006
    Regulations are the problem. They did not correctly transpose  the  law
    on this issue. The same is true of the 2016 Regulations.

54. We are conscious that our conclusion on the position of those, like the
    appellant, who are divorced from an EEA national raises the question of
    whether a family member who is a jobseeker at the date of the death  of
    the EEA national should be treated in like manner. What we have said at
    paragraphs 42 to 44 above applies to this category  also.  Overall,  we
    can see no reason to  distinguish  between  these  categories.  On  the
    contrary, to do so would be problematic.




(e) The appellant as jobseeker

55. The respondent's case is that the appellant could not retain a right of
    residence at the date of her decree absolute,  by  reason  of  being  a
    jobseeker. The respondent does not contend that the appellant was not a
    jobseeker at that date.

56. Regulation 6 explains who jobseekers are. It does  so  compatibly  with
    the Antonissen line of case law. Since the  appellant  is  not  an  EEA
    national, it follows that, in the light of our  findings,  whether  she
    was a jobseeker at the date of decree absolute falls to  be  determined
    by reference to regulation 6, as if she were an EEA national present in
    the United Kingdom and seeking employment, after enjoying  a  right  to
    reside (regulation 6(5)(b)). There is no justification for treating her
    any differently than an EEA national in this regard. As a  result,  the
    appellant would be treated as a jobseeker for 91 days from starting  to
    seek employment, provided she was still looking  for  work  and  had  a
    genuine chance of being employed. After that period, she would have  to
    provide compelling evidence  that  she  was  continuing  to  seek  such
    employment and had such a genuine chance being engaged (regulation 6(4)
    to (8)).

57. As at the date of decree absolute, the appellant had been  a  jobseeker
    for 5 days. There is nothing to suggest that, at that  point,  she  did
    not have a genuine chance of being engaged.

58. Accordingly, we find as a fact that the appellant was  a  jobseeker  at
    the date of decree absolute. She therefore retained on  that  date  her
    right of residence under Article 13.

59. As we have seen, the appellant secured employment within 6  months.  In
    order to have kept her right of  residence,  she  would  have  to  have
    remained a jobseeker up to that point, which means that, after 91 days,
    she  would  have  to  have  provided  "compelling  evidence"   to   the
    respondent, had the  latter  called  into  question  her  status  as  a
    jobseeker. Of course, this did not happen because  the  respondent  did
    not consider the appellant's status as a jobseeker could assist her.

60. At this juncture, we do  not  consider  that  this  issue  affects  our
    decision to allow the appeal. In any event, in our view, the fact  that
    the  appellant  secured  what  has  proved  to  be  durable  employment
    constitutes the requisite compelling evidence.




Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law. We set that decision aside and re-make the decision  in  the
appeal by allowing it.


No anonymity direction is made.


                               Signed                     Date 15 July 2018






                               The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                               President of the Upper Tribunal
                               Immigration and Asylum Chamber







































