

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


    RG (Automatic deport - Section 33(2)(a) exception) Nepal [2010] UKUT 273
                                                                       (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |                             |
|On  4  May 2010                               |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         MR JUSTICE BLAKE, PRESIDENT
                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                                     RG

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Zane Malik, Counsel, instructed by Malik Law
Chambers, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr J. Parkinson, Home Office Presenting Officer

   1. When considering the automatic deportation provision in  s.  32(5)  UK
      Borders Act 2007, and the exemption  at  s.33(2)(a)  relating  to  the
      claimant's private and family life (Article 8 ECHR), the Tribunal must
      give careful consideration to the factors set out at paragraphs  70-73
      of Maslov v Austria [2009] INLR 47 ECHR.

   2. Particular care is required in relation to the consideration of the
      Article 8 ECHR impact on those who were lawfully resident in the UK at
      the time when the offence was committed.


                            DETERMINATION AND REASONS

              Introduction

     1. The appellant in this case is a citizen of Nepal born on 7 February
        1988.  He entered the United Kingdom on 24 February  2005,  with  a
        settlement visa showing that he was accompanying a parent.  He  was
        granted indefinite leave to remain.   The  appellant's  father  had
        served in the Brigade of Ghurkhas for eighteen years, and  in  2005
        when discharged on completion  of  his  service  had  been  granted
        indefinite leave to enter and remain in the UK.  The other  members
        of the appellant's immediate family came to the UK a  little  later
        and included his mother and his  sister  who  first  completed  her
        education here in Nepal  before  relocating  here.   The  appellant
        himself had been born in Hong Kong, where the Brigade  of  Ghurkhas
        used to have its HQ but only lived in  that  country  for  a  short
        period and had returned to Nepal.  The appellant's uncle  had  also
        been a serving soldier in the brigade  of  Ghurkhas  and  has  been
        settled in the UK for longer than the appellant's father.  It seems
        other members of his father's family now reside in Hong Kong.   The
        appellant lived with his parents in  the  UK  and  was  financially
        supported by them.  He was studying to become  an  accountant,  and
        his father paid his course fees.

     2. On the night of the 12 April 2008 there  was  an  incident  at  the
        Temple Pier of London when the appellant was  involved  in  violent
        disorder with two other young men which ended with the  victim,  Mr
        Bishal Gurung, being thrown into the River Thames where he drowned.
         The victim and all the other participants were themselves Nepalese
        citizens.   The  appellant  was  arrested,  charged  with   serious
        offences, and tried at the Central Criminal Court.

     3.  On 29 May 2009 he was convicted of the  offences  of  manslaughter
        and violent disorder.  He was sentenced at the  same  Court  on  10
        July 2009 to a  total  of  three  years  in  prison.   He  was  not
        recommended for deportation. However, he was subject to the  regime
        of automatic deportation pursuant to s. 32(5) of the UK Borders Act
        2007.

     4.  He contended he was  exempt  from  the  requirement  of  automatic
        deportation because any such measure would  breach  his  convention
        right, namely his right for family and  private  life  pursuant  to
        Article 8 of the  European  Convention  of  Human  Rights  (see  UK
        Borders Act s.  33(2)(a)).   The  SSHD  did  not  accept  that  the
        appellant was so exempt and  issued  a  deportation  notice  on  23
        October 2009.  He appealed that notice to a panel of the AIT.   The
        appeal was heard on 23 December 2009 and a determination dismissing
        that appeal was promulgated on 5 January 2010.

     5. The appellant applied for reconsideration on two  grounds.   First,
        that the application of automatic deportation to him for an offence
        committed in 2008 was incompatible with the Article 7 of  the  ECHR
        as it was a retrospective  penalty,  and  second,  that  the  panel
        failed to  properly  apply  the  learning  on  Article  8  and  its
        particular conclusions in the case. Reconsideration was ordered  by
        SIJ Storey on 28 January 2010 and the matter  came  before  us  for
        determination as an appeal to the Upper Tribunal on 4 May 2010.

      Retrospectivity

     6. On that day counsel for the appellant applied for an adjournment to
        enable the Tribunal to have the benefit  of  the  decision  of  the
        Court of Appeal on the Article 7 point in the case of AT (Pakistan)
        and JK (Pakistan) v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 567 where the argument had
        been made on 23 March 2010 and judgment was expected imminently.

     7. We refused the application as we did  not  consider  it  reasonably
        likely that deportation would be considered a  penalty  within  the
        terms of Article 7.   In reaching that conclusion we  had  in  mind
        the judgement of the Grand Chamber of the European Court of Justice
        in Uner v the Netherlands [2006] ECHR 873, where  at  paragraph  56
        the Court said: -

             "It is moreover of the view that  the  decision  to  revoke  a
             resident's permit and  to  impose  an  exclusion  order  on  a
             settled migrant following a criminal conviction in respect  of
             which that migrant  has  been  sentenced  to  a  criminal  law
             penalty does not constitute a double punishment either for the
             purposes of  Article  4  of  protocol  7  or  more  generally.
             Contracting States are entitled to take measures  in  relation
             to persons who have been convicted  of  criminal  offences  in
             order to protect society - provided, of course  that,  to  the
             extent those measures interfere with the rights guaranteed  by
             Article 8, para 1 of the Convention, they are necessary  in  a
             democratic society and proportionate to the aim pursued.  Such
             administrative measures are to be seen  as  preventive  rather
             than punitive in nature (see Maaouia v France)."


     8.   We  are  further  aware  that  the  question   of   retrospective
        application of the automatic deportation regime had been considered
        by Nicol J in Rashid Hussein v SSHD [2009] EWHC 2492  (Admin).   We
        noted that experienced counsel  appearing  in  that  case  had  not
        sought to argue that Article 7 of the ECHR was engaged although  it
        would have provided an answer to the point at issue.  We indicated,
        however, that in the event that the Court of Appeal came to another
        decision, the parties could make representations to us as  to  what
        the appropriate course might be.  We  were  further  influenced  in
        that decision by the  knowledge  that  the  appellant  remained  in
        immigration detention having served his sentence and  was  entitled
        to know the outcome  of  his  appeal  as  soon  as  was  reasonably
        practicable.


     9.  In the event, on the 26 May 2010, the Court  of  Appeal  dismissed
        the appeal in AT (Pakistan) [2010] EWCA Civ 567 agreeing  with  the
        decision of  Nicol  J  and  that  of  the  European  Commission  in
        Moustaquim v Belgium 12 October 1989 rejecting the Article  7  case
        unanimously on the basis that  deportation  is  not  an  additional
        penalty but a security measure.  We observe that Uner v Netherlands
        does not appear to have been cited to the Court.

      Assessment of family and private life

    10. We accordingly proceeded to consider this appeal on  the  basis  of
        the second ground for reconsideration, namely whether the panel had
        correctly  assessed  the  appellant's  claim  to  protection  under
        Article 8 ECHR.

    11. The AIT panel had heard from the appellant, his sister, his  father
        and his uncle.  The tenor of that evidence was that  upon  settling
        in the United Kingdom the family home in Nepal had been sold.   The
        appellant had some friends in Nepal from  his  time  there  but  no
        longer had any close family resident  there.   His  father's  other
        three brothers were resident in Hong Kong which the appellant could
        not enter even though he had been  born  there  since  he  did  not
        comply with the nationality and  immigration  regulations  of  that
        country.  He would accordingly be isolated if he returned to  Nepal
        and it would be very difficult for him to establish himself on  his
        own there.  His father said:-

             "I cannot leave him alone, my wife and myself need to go  with
             him.... People will treat him very badly because he  has  been
             to jail... connection between here  and  there.   Many  people
             from Ghurkhas connection back there  also...  it  was  in  the
             newspapers.  No-one will give him shelter. I cannot  go  as  I
             have a mortgage to pay and work.  My wife cannot go as she has
             depression after her own mother's death.   She  would  not  be
             able to cope; it will be a disaster in our lives.  We have  no
             extended family."


    12.  The father was working as a bus-driver, paying the mortgage on his
        house in the UK, as well as supporting his son financially.


    13. The Home Office submission was that:

             "it was not accepted that there was a family  life,  as  there
             were no issues of dependency beyond the normal ties.   It  was
             cheaper for the Appellant to live with his parents  whilst  he
             was studying and his parents were assisting  him  financially,
             however, he had had part-time work in the past."


         It was also submitted that there was very little  private  life  as
         the appellant had only been in the UK for four years, some of which
         was following his arrest and detention.  It was  submitted  it  was
         not beyond a degree of hardship for the whole family to relocate to
         Nepal.  There was no right to choose where a family life should  be
         exercised.   Further,   even   if   there   was   an   unreasonable
         interference,  the  public  interest   and   proportionality   were
         relevant.  The appellant had been convicted of a very serious crime
         and although he had a previous good character, and  the  crime  was
         out of character, it was a very serious offence after  a  prolonged
         period of violence.


    14. The panel reminded itself of the  key  jurisprudence  from  the  UK
        courts and the decision of the ECtHR in Maslov v Austria  and  then
        considered the first question whether it had been established  that
        there was a family life.  They looked in turn at  the  position  of
        the appellant's mother, father, sister and  uncle  to  see  whether
        there was a situation  of  dependency  other  than  the  normal  in
        respect of an adult child and  his  family  applying  the  test  in
        Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 31.


    15.  It concluded as follows:

              "we are not satisfied after considering all of  the  evidence
             available that the Appellant has  established  a  family  life
             with his parents sister or uncle would engage Article 8, given
             that the Appellant has been in this country  for  nearly  five
             years we are satisfied  that  he  had  however  established  a
             private life.  There  is  no  doubt  in  our  minds  that  the
             decision to remove the Appellant is in accordance with the law
             and does follow a legitimate aim.  If  we  were  incorrect  in
             relation to our decision as to family life  being  established
             and in any event, given our finding that a  private  life  has
             been established, it is necessary to go on to consider whether
             it is proportionate to remove the Appellant."


    16. The panel then considered OH (Serbia) [2008]  EWCA  Civ  694  where
        Wilson LJ at paragraph 14 referred to the earlier judgment  of  the
        Court of Appeal in N (Kenya) where emphasis was placed on the  fact
        that, irrespective of good character and absence  of  risk  of  re-
        offending, the public policy needs to deter and  express  society's
        revulsion of the seriousness of  the  criminality,  went  into  the
        public interest side of the balance.  Judge LJ (as he then was) had
        said in N (Kenya) at 83:-


             "The public good and the public interests are wide ranging but
             undefined  concepts.   In  my  judgement,  whether   expressly
             referred to a decision later or not, broad  issues  of  social
             cohesion and public confidence in the administration system by
             which control is exercised over non-British citizens who enter
             and remain in the UK are engaged.  They include an element  of
             deterrents to non-British citizens who are already here,  even
             if they are genuine refugees, and those minded to come  so  as
             to ensure that  they  clearly  understand  that  whatever  the
             circumstances, one of the consequences of  serious  crime  may
             well be deportation. The SSHD has a primary responsibility for
             this system.  His decisions are of  public  importance  beyond
             the personal impact on the individual or individuals who would
             be directly affected by them.  The adjudicator must  form  his
             own independent judgement.  Provided he is satisfied  that  he
             would exercise the discretion differently to the SSHD he  must
             say so.  Nevertheless in every case he should at least address
             the SSHD's prime responsibility for the  public  interest  and
             the public  good  and  the  impact  that  these  matters  will
             probably have had on the exercise of his discretion "


    17. The panel noted that HHJ Pontius, the trial judge  at  the  Central
        Criminal Court had made the following observations:-


             "You were all young men with previous exemplary behaviour with
             no violence in your background.  You all come from  thoroughly
             respectable families and decent upbringings.  You acted  in  a
             way which was wholly out of character... all of which  can  be
             said for the victim of your drunken  aggression.   It  was  an
             entirely unjustifiable, unprovoked and senseless  episode  and
             he paid with his life.  Upon the evidence and  by  the  jury's
             verdict based upon it, it is clear that none of  you  intended
             he should suffer serious harm, but still less that  he  should
             die...  the  jury's  verdict  make  it  plain  that  you  were
             involved... in picking up the victim  and  throwing  his  near
             insensible body into the river but at that time  you  intended
             no specific harm.  You must have  been  well  aware,  however,
             despite your own drunken state that there was a real risk that
             he would be hurt as a result of such reckless behaviour... you
             were involved in a violent attack following a chase  from  the
             boat... wholly defenceless... he was quickly  brought  to  the
             ground... entirely incapable of any kind of  retaliation,  not
             only because of his state but also because of the sheer  force
             of numbers.  It was only a matter of good fortune that at that
             stage he did not suffer serious injuries...  this  was  wanton
             and  inexcusable  violence  in  public  and  thus  undoubtedly
             deserving of punishment which serves  an  important  deterrent
             purpose.   I bear in mind that none of you carried, still less
             used, a weapon.  I have no doubt that all  three  of  you  now
             feel genuine remorse and indeed,  shame,  not  only  for  your
             behaviour but also for the distress which you have caused your
             own families.  It is a credit to them they came  to  Court  to
             give you their support, although their own shame,  which  your
             appalling  behaviour  made  obvious,  despite  their   outward
             appearance of commendably calm dignity  and  respect  for  the
             Court.  I would expect nothing less from any Ghurkha's family.
              I have concluded that so far as you are all concerned,  there
             is virtually no risk of further serious harm to the public  at
             your hands, and thus  is  not  a  case  where  a  sentence  of
             imprisonment for the public protection is required.   You  are
             all intelligent young men  who  have  always  worked  hard  to
             achieve academic distinctions and you are all ambitious to put
             those achievements to good use in your careers.  This is  very
             much to your credit.  For the reasons I have set out this is a
             case where despite the undoubted gravity  of  the  attack  and
             while in no way diminishing the seriousness  of  his  needless
             death, I can treat  you  all  with  a  justifiable  degree  of
             leniency, confident that none of you will find yourself  in  a
             court again."


    18.  The panel noted that they had no information that would lead to  a
        different conclusion as to the trial judge's assessment that  there
        was virtually no risk  of  further  serious  harm  to  the  public.
        Nevertheless it concluded that that was only one factor to be taken
        into account.  But they also needed to take into account  the  need
        to deter foreign nationals from  committing  serious  crimes.   The
        panel  accepted  that  there  is  likely  to   be   some   societal
        discrimination against the appellant in Nepal as a  result  of  his
        conviction and the evidence that was before them as to  the  nature
        of the Ghurkha community there  and  the  publicity  given  to  his
        conviction.  They were not satisfied that this would  result  in  a
        serious risk of harm to the appellant.  They further noted:-


             "We are satisfied after considering all of the  evidence  that
             there are  strong  family  ties  between  the  appellant,  his
             mother,  his  father,  sister  and  uncle.   Undoubtedly   the
             Appellant will be better off in this country and as  indicated
             above  we  accept   that   he   may   suffer   some   societal
             discrimination as a result of his criminal conviction."


         They gave weight to the fact that the appellant is  a  young  adult
         who had spent the majority of his formative years in Nepal and  who
         could receive  financial  assistance  and  communication  from  his
         family in this country.  After taking into account all the  factors
         and giving due deference to the public interest criteria they  came
         to the  conclusion  that  the  appellant's  removal  would  not  be
         disproportionate  to  the  Respondent's  legitimate  aim   of   the
         prevention  of  crime  and  the  control  of  immigration  did  not
         prejudice the family and private life of the appellant in a  manner
         sufficiently serious to amount to a breach of a  fundamental  right
         protected by Article 8:


             "We do  not  accept  that  the  Appellant  has  shown  in  his
             particular circumstances his  case  falls  within  that  small
             minority of cases envisaged in  Huang  [2007]  UKHL  11.   The
             appeal was dismissed."



          Did the Panel make an error of law in their assessment of  Article
8?

    19. Mr Malik submitted that the panel had erred in failing to recognise
        that the strong family ties that existed between the appellant, his
        parents, sibling and uncle constituted family life for the  purpose
        of Article 8.  His principal  complaint  was  that  the  panel  had
        compartmentalised the  family  life  between  the  various  members
        rather than seeing it as a whole.  He further submitted that having
        discounted those links as family life, the panel when it went on to
        consider private life, essentially only looked  at  the  period  of
        residence that the appellant had in the United Kingdom rather  than
        the quality of the relationships with his parents as an  aspect  of
        private life to which considerable weight should be attached.


    20. In our judgement there is substance in these submissions.  This was
        a case of a young man who had always formed part  of  his  parents'
        household both in Nepal and the UK and  had  never  established  an
        independent household of his own.  Although he was of  the  age  of
        eighteen he was still financially dependent upon his  father  as  a
        student.  He was still a young man.   He  had  been  involved  with
        other young men in some disorder where it seems alcohol had  played
        a role, and tragic consequences, unintended by  the  appellant  had
        followed that made the offending particularly serious.  His  father
        concluded that the appellant needed  guidance  and  looking  after.
        That would seem to be a sensible paternal response to these events.
         We are aware that as a serving Ghurkha soldier  the  father  would
        only have long leave to return to Nepal at irregular periods during
        his service and doubtless would have hoped to seen more of his  son
        now that he had completed his military service and all  the  family
        had relocated to the UK.  The concern  of  the  families  of  those
        involved in this violence was  obvious  and  is  reflected  in  the
        remarks of the highly experienced trial judge, who was well able to
        assess the situation during the course of the criminal trial.


    21. It is difficult to see why  those  unbroken  links  and  continuing
        concern by  the  family  for  the  welfare  of  the  son  does  not
        constitute family life. The panel gave effect to  the  Home  Office
        reliance on the case of Kugathas v SSHD.  In  that  case  the  link
        relied upon was between a mother and her thirty-three year-old  son
        and Sedley LJ observed  that  would  not  necessarily  require  the
        protection of Article 8 without evidence  of  further  elements  of
        dependency.

    22.  Since the hearing of 4 May, the decision in the case of the SSHD v
        HK (Turkey) [2010] EWCA Civ 583 has come to  our  attention.   That
        was a case where the SSHD sought to appeal a decision  by  the  AIT
        allowing an appeal against a deportation decision  made  against  a
        twenty-two year-old student of Turkey who had been convicted of  an
        offence of wounding with intent to cause grievous  bodily  harm  as
        part of a gang response to an earlier incident where  a  friend  of
        the Appellant's had been killed.  The AIT found  that  family  life
        was engaged and the Secretary of State appealed on the  basis  that
        this was not a correct application of the  principle  in  Kugathas.
        Mr Sachdeva appearing for the SSHD cited the relevant  passages  in
        that case.  Sir Scott Baker, giving the judgment to  the  Court  of
        Appeal, rejected that submission in the following terms:


          "16. In my judgement Mr Sachdeva is  seeking  to  read  more  into
          these passages than is  warranted.   Normal  emotional  ties  will
          exist between an adult child and his parent or  other  members  of
          his  family  regardless  of  proximity  and   where   they   live.
          Scrutinising the relevant facts, as one is obliged to  do,  it  is
          apparent that the respondent had lived in the same  house  as  his
          parents since 1994.  He reached his majority in September 2005 but
          continued to live at home.   Undoubtedly  he  had  a  family  life
          whilst he was growing up and I could not regard it as suddenly cut
          off when he reached his majority."


    23. We drew the attention of the parties to this decision  and  invited
        observations both on this paragraph  and  paragraph  [28]  that  we
        consider below. In due course we received written submissions  from
        both parties for which we are grateful.  Mr Parkinson invited us to
        conclude that this decision had no impact on the  AIT's  assessment
        and that the critical issue was whether there was family life still
        in existence at the date of the appeal.


    24. We cannot agree with the first of these submissions. It appears  to
        us the observations at [16] are directly relevant  to  the  present
        case and the AIT were misled  by  the  Home  Office's  reliance  in
        Kugathas into reaching the conclusion that they did on the question
        of whether family life existed between the appellant,  his  parents
        and siblings. We conclude that the family life that  the  appellant
        enjoyed with his family in this country from 2005 was not  suddenly
        cut  off  when  he  reached  the  age  of  18  and   his   personal
        circumstances had not otherwise  materially  changed.   We  further
        conclude he still enjoyed family life here when he  committed  this
        offence at the age of 20 and when this case came before  the  panel
        of the AIT when he was 21.


    25. Moreover, even if family links after the age of eighteen between  a
        child and his parents, who remains part of the same  household,  is
        still to be seen as an aspect of private life as the European Court
        of Human Rights appeared to have thought in the case of AW  Khan  v
        United Kingdom (Application  no.  47486/06)  12  January  2010,  at
        paragraph 32, nevertheless this was an aspect of  private  life  to
        which particular respect is due and carried particular weight.  Our
        analysis of the panel's judgement suggests that it was the fact  of
        the five years' residence that constituted the  private  life  that
        they put into the balance against the public interest in  deporting
        people  who  have  been  found  guilty  of  serious  offences.   No
        particularly  striking  ties  had  been  formed  by  the  appellant
        independent of those with  his  family  during  that  comparatively
        short period of residence here.  He had not married,  or  formed  a
        family of his own.


    26. It is clear that respect  for  family  or  private  life  does  not
        normally require the admission of over-age children who have  lived
        independently abroad, nor in a deportation case will the continuing
        family links of an independent adult of themselves, prevent removal
        on the basis of a disproportionate interference with the  right  of
        respect for that family life.

    27.  However, the essence of the present case  appears  to  be  one  of
        family that have strong mutual links and  that  have  always  lived
        together and who expected to continue to live together  in  the  UK
        upon completion of the father's military service, the uncle  having
        completed that service and relocated to the UK some years  earlier.
        The appellant's offending occurred before he had either built up  a
        substantial independent private life for himself in this country or
        had set up an independent household but he was  still  a  dependent
        member of his family's household.

    28.  We therefore conclude that substantial respect was  due  to  those
        links by way of family life or private life different in kind  from
        the mere number of years of residence here.  The  decision  of  the
        panel to the contrary was accordingly an  error  of  law.   In  our
        judgment it is a material error because where the fundamental  task
        is a balance of proportionality between the right  of  respect  for
        family and private life on the one hand, and the public interest in
        deportation on the other, a failure to give weight to a  factor  in
        favour of the appellant to which weight ought to  be  attached,  is
        likely to materially affect the overall balance. We accordingly set-
        aside the decision and we propose to remake it for ourselves


      Remaking of the decision
    29. The material facts are not in dispute, and have been fully recorded
        by the panel.  Credibility is not an issue.  The panel indicated it
        did not accept the father's evidence that he would return to  Nepal
        to accompany his son if he were deported there as he felt he  could
        not leave him alone, we see no basis for rejecting that as  genuine
        evidence  of  the  dilemma  that  confronts  a  parent   in   these
        circumstances.  Although twenty,  the  son  had  got  himself  into
        difficulties and was clearly in need of guidance and  support.   It
        would be unreasonable to  expect  the  father  and  the  family  to
        relocate en bloc to Nepal where they had sold their home, in  order
        to make their  future  life  in  the  UK,  simply  because  of  the
        appellant's criminal conduct.

    30. There was family  and  private  life  which  required  respect  and
        deportation would interfere with the way that  private  and  family
        life had been led in the past and with the respect that was due  to
        it.

    31.  It is then necessary to assess the strength of the public interest
        in justifying an interference with such  right  of  respect  as  is
        proportionate in all the circumstances.  There  is  no  doubt  that
        deportation  is  a  measure  of  prevention  that  can  promote   a
        legitimate aim for public safety, the  prevention  of  disorder  or
        crime, the protection of the rights and freedoms of  others  albeit
        that general deterrence and an expression of public  revulsion  are
        not  themselves  identified   as   legitimate   aims   to   justify
        interferences with family life under Article 8(2).

    32. The decision in N (Kenya) v SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ 1094 concerned  an
        appellant sentenced to fourteen years imprisonment for offences  of
        abduction,  threats  to  kill,  three  counts  of  rape  and  false
        imprisonment.  The adjudicator had allowed  the  appeal  exercising
        his discretionary judgement under the then  Immigration  Rules  and
        the Court of Appeal upheld the Tribunal in its conclusion  that  he
        was wrong to have  done  so.   OH  (Serbia)  [2008]  EWCA  Civ  694
        concerned a youth who was guilty of wounding with intent  to  cause
        grievous bodily harm and was sentenced to four years'  custody  and
        four years' extended licence period; the question was  whether  the
        Judge  had  erred  in  law  in  exercising  discretion  under   the
        deportation rules.

    33. Doubtless very serious offences such as drug-dealing, use of deadly
        weapons, sexual violence,  and  related  criminality  can  well  be
        marked  out  by  deportation  decisions  designed   to   supplement
        society's abhorrence of such conduct and protect  the  public  from
        others committing such crimes by the principle of deterrent.


    34. The principal offence for which this appellant had  been  convicted
        was manslaughter.  Causing the death of another human being  is  an
        offence that leaves a legacy of suffering for those who  have  lost
        family members. But manslaughter, as has often been recognised,  is
        an  offence  that  can  range  in   seriousness,   reflecting   the
        appropriate penalty that can vary from a community penalty, or even
        a  conditional  discharge  at  one  end  of  the  scale   to   life
        imprisonment at the other.  Here, as the trial  judge's  sentencing
        remarks make plain, there was no premeditation, there was no weapon
        carried or used, there was no intent to cause really serious bodily
        harm, and the appellant on the evidence recorded by  the  judge  in
        his detailed sentencing remarks, had not instigated the  act  which
        caused  death,  namely  throwing  the  deceased  into  the  Thames.
        Despite Mr Parkinson's  submissions  to  the  contrary  we  do  not
        consider that  these  features  were  sufficiently  identified  and
        weighed in the balance by the AIT.

    35.  In HK (Turkey)  (above) the Court of Appeal  further observed:

             "28. Among serious offences, there are of  course  degrees  of
             seriousness.  The  best  indication  of  the  gravity  of  the
             particular offence will ordinarily, it seems to me,  be  found
             in the Judge's sentencing remarks and the sentence passed, the
             starting point of course being the actual offence  itself,  in
             this case one under section 18 of  the  Offences  Against  the
             Person Act 1861. In my  judgment  tribunals,  and  indeed  the
             Secretary of State, should be careful not to make findings  or
             draw inferences that are inconsistent with  anything  said  by
             the judge who presided over the trial. In this case the Asylum
             and Immigration Tribunal rightly directed itself at  paragraph
             43 in the passage I have set out that the Secretary  of  State
             has a duty to deter and to remove foreign nationals who commit
             serious criminal offences. He was, in my view acting fully  in
             accordance with the law in deciding to deport the  respondent.
             But, it seems to me, when  it  comes  to  the  proportionality
             exercise it is necessary to form a view where on the scale  of
             seriousness the respondent's conduct comes so that the Article
             8 considerations can properly be balanced against the Rule 364
             presumption. In some cases the seriousness of the  offence  is
             so overwhelming as to trump all else. This, however, was not a
             case, serious as it was,  where  the  gravity  was  such  that
             deportation was virtually inevitable albeit there  would  have
             to be compelling reasons to allow  the  respondent  to  remain
             here.


             29....Admittedly Rix L.J. said in DS (India)  v  Secretary  of
             State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 544 paragraph 37
             the public interest in deportation of those who commit serious
             crimes goes well beyond depriving the offender in question  of
             the  right  to  re-offend  in  this  country;  it  extends  to
             deterring  and  preventing  serious  crime  generally  and  to
             upholding abhorrence  of  such  offending.  However,  it  may,
             depending  on  the  circumstances  become  relevant   in   the
             balancing exercise  when  one  comes  to  look  at  Article  8
             considerations   and   consider   whether    it    would    be
             disproportionate to make a deportation order. As Richards L.J.
             pointed out in JO (Uganda) & anr v Secretary of State for  the
             Home Department [2010] EWCA Civ 10, paragraph  29  the  actual
             weight to be placed on the criminal offending must  depend  on
             the seriousness of the offence (s) and the other circumstances
             of the case."

    36. In our judgment it is easier to justify a  response  of  deterrence
        and the expression  of  revulsion  for  very  serious  premeditated
        offences of the kind we have identified earlier.  The present  case
        is  significantly  different  from  this  class  or  the   offences
        committed in the case of N (Kenya) or OH (Serbia).


    37. Count 1 of the  indictment  was  violent  disorder  for  which  the
        appellant received twelve months' imprisonment,  again  serious  in
        the sense of any outbreak of disorder on the  streets  is  serious,
        but again not the kind of premeditated conduct that by itself might
        be said to make the appellant's continued  presence  in  the  UK  a
        detriment exercising judicial discretion.

    38.  This is a case to which the automatic deportation provisions  have
        applied because a  sentence  of  twelve  months'  imprisonment  was
        imposed. Deportation is automatic save where a human rights'  claim
        prevented it.  Neither the  trial  judge  nor  the  respondent  has
        decided that deportation is the appropriate course  in  the  public
        interest in the light  of  the  particular  circumstances  of  this
        offence.  The crime  is  a  serious  one  inevitably,  but  in  our
        judgment was not of the  degree  of  seriousness  that  required  a
        severe sentence or a recommendation for deportation.

    39. There is a danger in equating the kind of  seriousness  of  offence
        needed to justify deportation irrespective of any likelihood of re-
        offending and the criteria for  automatic  deportation  subject  to
        human  rights  claims  under  the  Borders  Act.  Where   automatic
        deportation arises in a case where there is a  family  and  private
        life to which respect is owed, the task of the Immigration Judge is
        to carefully assess the factors that are identified in the case  of
        Maslov v Austria  23 June 2008  [2009] INLR  47  where  the   Grand
        Chamber of the Court  said:
             "70. The court would stress  that  while  the  criteria  which
             emerge from its case-law and are spelled out  in  the  Boultif
             and �ner judgments are meant to facilitate the application  of
             Art 8 in expulsion cases by domestic courts, the weight to  be
             attached to  the  respective  criteria  will  inevitably  vary
             according  to  the  specific  circumstances  of   each   case.
             Moreover, it has to be borne in mind that  where,  as  in  the
             present case, the interference  with  the  applicant's  rights
             under Art 8 pursues, as a legitimate aim, the  'prevention  of
             disorder or crime' ...,  the  above  criteria  ultimately  are
             designed to help evaluate the extent to  which  the  applicant
             can be expected to cause disorder or  to  engage  in  criminal
             activities.
             71. In a case like the present one, where  the  person  to  be
             expelled is a young adult who has not  yet  founded  a  family
             life of his own, the relevant criteria are:
             - the nature and seriousness of the offence committed  by  the
          applicant;
             - the length of the applicant's stay in the country from which
          he or she is to be              expelled;
             - the time elapsed since the offence  was  committed  and  the
             applicant's conduct      during that period;
             - the solidity of social, cultural and family  ties  with  the
             host country and with the country of destination.
             72. The court would also clarify that the age  of  the  person
             concerned can play a role when  applying  some  of  the  above
             criteria.  For  instance,  when  assessing  the   nature   and
             seriousness of the offences committed by an applicant, it  has
             to be taken into account whether he or she committed them as a
             juvenile or as an adult ....
             73. In turn, when assessing the length of the applicant's stay
             in the country from which he or she is to be expelled and  the
             solidity of the social, cultural and family ties with the host
             country, it evidently makes a difference  whether  the  person
             concerned had already come to the country during  his  or  her
             childhood or youth, or was even born there, or whether  he  or
             she only came as an adult. This tendency is also reflected  in
             various  Council  of  Europe  instruments,  in  particular  in
             Committee  of  Ministers   Recommendations   Rec(2001)15   and
             Rec(2002)4 ...."
              (words in italics are our emphasis)
    40.  Bringing together the observations made earlier in this  judgment,
        and addressing these issues we would observe:


                  i) There was a clear judicial finding by  an  experienced
                     criminal judge that the appellant  could  be  expected
                     not to cause future  disorder  or  engage  in  further
                     criminal activities. No material has  been  identified
                     that might  undermine  that  conclusion,  and  so  the
                     ultimate aim of justification of the interference  has
                     not been made out.
                 ii) The appellant is a young adult who has not yet founded
                     a family life of his own.
                iii) The nature and seriousness of the offence are not such
                     as to justify interference  with  family  and  private
                     life alone, irrespective of the threat to  the  public
                     interest that the  appellant's  future  conduct  might
                     create.
                 iv) The appellant has been present in the UK for 5  years.
                     He  entered  as  a  child  with  the  expectation   of
                     indefinite residence here, but has not lived here from
                     an early age or most of his life as in the case of  HK
                     (Turkey) or A.W. Khan v United Kingdom. As  the  Court
                     of Appeal observe in JO (Uganda) [2010]  EWCA  Civ  10
                     this  is  neither   a   necessary   precondition   nor
                     determinative factor and each case must be assessed on
                     its own merits. We observe that where there  has  been
                     long residence as a child that can outweigh the public
                     interest in deportation in even the most serious  kind
                     of offences, such as wounding  with  intent  to  cause
                     grievous bodily harm, and dealing in Class A drugs.
                  v) Two years have lapsed  since  the  commission  of  the
                     offence.  The   appellant   remains   in   immigration
                     detention, but nothing suggests that his conduct would
                     threaten public safety if  released.  His  family  are
                     concerned for him and would accept him back to support
                     him and his father is anxious  that  he  develops  the
                     self discipline and maturity to prevent  conduct  that
                     puts him in  situations  of  public  disorder  in  the
                     future.
                 vi) All  the  appellants'  immediate  and  closest  family
                     members are in the United Kingdom. He  has  no  house,
                     home, family or social support network to turn  to  in
                     Nepal.
                vii) The appellant's crime was committed at  age  20  as  a
                     young adult rather than a  juvenile.  Even  for  those
                     committing offences over the age of 18, youth  remains
                     one  of  the  most  powerful  mitigating  factors   in
                     criminal  sentencing  policy  and   it   is   also   a
                     considerable factor in the assessment of justification
                     of interference with family and private  life  in  the
                     public interest.


    41. We are also troubled by the panel's  reference  to  Lord  Bingham's
        observations in Huang.  It was inappropriate in a case of this sort
        and such translocation of judicial comment made in one  context  to
        another is more likely to mislead than assist.  It  is  plain  that
        the question for evaluation in a criminal  deportation  of  someone
        lawfully resident here is not whether the case is "exceptional"  or
        belongs to "a small minority".   The  observations  in  Huang  were
        directed  to  cases  where  despite  failure  to  comply  with  the
        Immigration Rules admission may be required by Article 8.  Here the
        appellant and his family were all lawfully admitted and no question
        of primary immigration policy arises.


      Conclusions


    42. Three years after his entry to the UK the young man was party to an
        act of disorder with another that had  terrible  unintended  tragic
        consequences.   Deportation  has  a  significant  impact  upon  his
        relations with his family with whom he  expected  to  continue  his
        life in the same jurisdiction when he moved with them  as  a  child
        from Nepal to the UK.  The offence is wholly out of  character  and
        the judicial assessment is that he will be unlikely to ever  appear
        before the criminal courts again.


    43. The regime of automatic deportation where it has  impact  upon  the
        family or private life of those lawfully resident here and deserves
        respect requires a very careful consideration of the seriousness of
        the offence and the extent to which the deportation can be said  to
        enhance public protection on the  one  hand  and  the  impact  upon
        private and family life on the other.


    44. We conclude on all the evidence in the  case  that  deportation  of
        this young man for this offending with the serious consequences  it
        would have for him  and  his  family  is  disproportionate.  It  is
        therefore not necessary in a democratic  society  for  one  of  the
        reasons recognised by Article 8(2). We conclude that that the first
        exception to automatic deportation applies (s.33(2)(a) Borders  Act
        2007) and the respondent could not make the deportation order under
        appeal.

      This appeal is allowed.

    45. We propose to formally promulgate this decision at an oral  hearing
        when we shall set aside the deportation order. As a consequence  we
        shall also set aside the order of detention  pending  removal  with
        effect from  the  date  of  promulgation  subject  to  any  further
        submissions  we  receive  on  that  day.  This  decision  has  been
        communicated in draft in advance to enable the  representatives  to
        consider  what  submissions  (if  any)  they  wish  to  make  about
        consequential matters.


      Signed

       [pic]

      Mr Justice Blake,
      President of the Upper Tribunal,
      Immigration and Asylum Chamber

