

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

      Begum (EEA - worker - jobseeker) Pakistan [2011] UKUT 00275(IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 22 March 2011                              |                             |
|                                              |23 June 2011                 |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                    DESIGNATED IMMIGRATION JUDGE McCARTHY

                                   Between

                                SURRAYA BEGUM
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Chawla, instructed by IAS
For the Respondent:    Ms D Cantrell, Senior Presenting Officer

(1)   When deciding whether an EEA national is a worker for the purposes  of
the EEA Regulations, regard must be had to the fact  that  the  term  has  a
meaning in EU law, that it must be interpreted broadly and that  it  is  not
conditioned by the type of employment or the amount of income derived.   But
a person who does not pursue effective and genuine  activities,  or  pursues
activities on such a small scale as to be regarded as  purely  marginal  and
ancillary or which have no economic value to an employer, is not  a  worker.
In this context, regard must be  given  to  the  nature  of  the  employment
relationship and the rights and duties of the person concerned to decide  if
work activities are effective and genuine.

(2)   When considering whether an  EEA  national  is  a  jobseeker  for  the
purposes of EU law, regard must be had to whether  the  person  entered  the
United Kingdom to seek employment  and,  if  so,  whether  that  person  can
provide evidence that they have a genuine chance of  being  engaged.   If  a
person does not or cannot provide  relevant  evidence,  then  an  appeal  is
bound to fail on this ground.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. On 17 November 2009, the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    refused the appellant's application for a residence card as the  family
    member of a Union citizen.  In a separate letter of the same date,  the
    Secretary of State gave his reasons for refusing the  application.   In
    summary, the application was refused because the appellant  had  failed
    to provide satisfactory evidence to show that her husband,  an  Italian
    national, was working as claimed.  The reason for this  conclusion  was
    that the official of the UK Border  Agency  acting  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State had been unable  to  verify  the  existence  of  the
    stated employer of the appellant's husband.

 2. The appellant appealed against this immigration  decision  as  she  was
    permitted to do under reg. 26 of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006.  Her appeal was dismissed  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 18 February 2010.  The reasons why the Immigration Judge
    dismissed the appeal are evident in the following  extract  taken  from
    para. 20 of her determination:

           "...  There  has  been  no  evidence  of  [business]   premises,
           equipment or relevant insurances being carried.  There has  been
           no suggestion that there was a business plan of  any  sort.   In
           its totality the setting up of the business  and  employment  of
           the Appellant's husband in the circumstances described tended to
           give the impression that it was a business of  convenience,  and
           with the deficiencies already pointed out had the appearance  of
           insubstantial  foundations  and  very  limited   prospects   for
           viability."

 3. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal against
    this determination.  The grounds for that application can be summarised
    as follows:

        a. The Immigration Judge failed to direct herself to  the  relevant
           legal provisions that identify who is a worker  under  Community
           law.  As such, the findings relating to the appellant's  husband
           cannot be sustained.

        b. The Immigration Judge failed to make material findings  of  fact
           because she did not have regard to the claim of the  appellant's
           husband that he was looking for a  second  job.   As  such,  she
           should have considered his position as a jobseeker.

    Permission to appeal was granted on 9 September 2010.

 4. The grounds of application have been adopted as the grounds of  appeal.
    We take each in turn.







    Did the Immigration Judge err in deciding whether the appellant  was  a
'worker'?

 5. In settling the first ground, the  appellant  refers  to  two  reported
    decisions, OA (Prisoner - Not a qualified worker) Nigeria [2006]  UKAIT
    00066 and RP (EEA Regs - worker - cessation) Italy [2006] UKAIT  00025,
    which discuss Community law about who is a worker.  They are a starting
    point.  A fuller and more recent discussion of Community  law  relating
    to who is a worker can be found  in  Barry  v  The  London  Borough  of
    Southwark [2008] EWCA Civ 1440.  It is to that  judgment  we  turn  for
    authority on the first issue arising in this appeal.

 6. The Court of Appeal there examines the jurisprudence of  the  Court  of
    Justice of the European Union (formerly the European Court of Justice).
     Reliance was placed in particular on the decisions  in  D  M  Levin  v
    Staatssecretaris van Justitie (case no. 53/81) and Lawrie-Blum  v  Land
    Baden-Wurttemberg (case no. 66/85).    The Court of  Appeal  identifies
    the following features for a Union citizen to be regarded as a  worker.



        a. The terms 'worker' and 'activity as an employed person'  have  a
           Community meaning and may not be defined  by  reference  to  the
           national laws of the Member  States  (see  para.  11  of  Levin,
           citied in para. 18 of the judgment).

        b. Since it defines the scope of freedom of movement, the Community
           concept of a 'worker' must be interpreted broadly (see para.  16
           of Lawrie-Blum, cited in para. 39 of the judgment).

        c. The right of residence  as  a  worker  is  not  subject  to  any
           condition relating to the type of employment or to the amount of
           income derived from it (see para. 14 of Levin, citied  in  para.
           18 of the judgment).

        d.  A  worker  is  a  person  who  pursues  effective  and  genuine
           activities, to the exclusion of activities on such a small scale
           as to be regarded as purely marginal and ancillary (see para. 17
           of Levin, citied in para. 18 of the judgment).

        e. The concept of 'worker'  must  be  defined  in  accordance  with
           objective criteria which distinguish the employment relationship
           by reference to the rights and duties of the persons  concerned.
           The essential feature of an employment relationship is that  for
           a period of time a person performs services for  and  under  the
           direction of another person in  return  for  which  he  receives
           remuneration (see para. 17 of Lawrie-Blum, cited in para. 39  of
           the judgment).

        f. Such activities must have economic value to  the  employer  (see
           para. 19 of Lawrie-Blum, cited in para. 39 of the judgment).

 7. These six features set out the requirements that a Union  citizen  must
    demonstrate to be treated as a worker.  With these factors in mind, the
    challenge posed by the first ground is whether or not  the  conclusions
    of the Immigration Judge are consistent with this approach.

 8. In order to answer this  question,  it  is  relevant  to  set  out  the
    evidence that the Immigration Judge took into account.  In summary,  it
    was as follows.

 9. First, there were documents and oral evidence dealing directly with the
    employment relationship.  The evidence established  that  the  employer
    was a friend of the father of the appellant's husband and it was  as  a
    result of this connection that the appellant's husband  was  recruited.
    The documents were a contract of employment, which  was  signed  on  30
    June 2009, described itself as a 'pro forma', wage  slips  and  letters
    from HM Revenue & Customs regarding the business and National Insurance
    contributions.

10. Secondly, the evidence about the business and employer was as  follows.
    The employer claimed he established  the  business  in  June  2009  and
    employed the appellant's husband soon thereafter.   The  employer  said
    that he did not have knowledge of the building industry but  relied  on
    the appellant's husband who could undertake brickwork  and  plastering.
    The employer explained that he had changed the business address to  his
    home address.  The employer confirmed there was no employer's or public
    liability insurance.  The employer confirmed he was not a member  of  a
    trade organisation.  The employer confirmed there was  no  evidence  of
    the business having secure premises to store  equipment  and  materials
    for the business.  The employer confirmed there was no evidence of  the
    company having any transport.  The employer admitted that  he  did  not
    have any documents showing profit or loss for the period from when  the
    business started up to the date of hearing (20 January 2010).  He  only
    had receipts for small items purchased and some rough working papers.

11. Thirdly, there were allegations about the existence  of  the  business.
    The Secretary of State alleged that the company was  not  traceable  at
    Companies House. The employer explained that  because  he  was  a  sole
    proprietor he did not need to register.  The Secretary of State alleged
    that the company could not be found using internet search engines  such
    as Google or online directories such as Yell.com.   The  employer  said
    that he could not afford to advertise and this was  why  there  was  no
    evidence about the company.  The Secretary of State said she  had  been
    unable to contact the employer on the telephone number  provided.   The
    Secretary of State queried the reliability  of  the  letters  from  two
    accountants relating to the business and employment.  It was unclear on
    the basis of the other evidence how the authors of  the  letters  could
    describe the business as established and thriving.

12. It was from this evidence that the Immigration Judge concluded that the
    employer was running a "business of convenience".  Mr Chawla  submitted
    that these factors did not undermine  the  status  of  the  appellant's
    husband as  a  worker.   He  pointed  to  the  employment  relationship
    established by the contract of  employment.   He  relied  on  the  wage
    slips, two accountancy letters and documents from HM Revenue &  Customs
    as  further  evidence  of  the  employment  relationship.   Mr   Chawla
    maintained that these documents demonstrated there  was  an  employment
    relationship.  He submitted that the evidence was not given the  weight
    it deserved and that the Immigration Judge was distracted by irrelevant
    matters that related to the employer and not the employee.   Mr  Chawla
    concluded that if the evidence had been  properly  assessed,  then  the
    only legitimate finding would have been that  the  appellant's  husband
    was a worker.

13. In response to our questions, Mr Chawla acknowledged that there was  no
    evidence that the appellant had ever undertaken any actual work for the
    business.  Mr Chawla had no response to our concerns about the terms of
    the contract which included paying the  appellant's  husband  for  four
    hours each weekday morning whether or not any work was  actually  done.
    We noted that the contract contained an exclusivity clause and that the
    appellant's husband  was  not  permitted  to  work  elsewhere  for  the
    duration of the contract.  We also noted that contrary to law there was
    no entitlement to annual leave or sick leave.

14. In response to the first ground we make the following findings.  First,
    although we find the term used by the Immigration Judge,  "business  of
    convenience", to be descriptive,  it  is  unhelpful  because  it  could
    easily  be  confused  with  the  established  concept  of  marriage  of
    convenience.  The latter term  relates  specifically  to  circumstances
    where there is an attempt to abuse the provisions of Community law  and
    where such abuse falls foul of article 35 of  the  Citizen's  Directive
    (2004/38/EC).  In the appeal there was no  allegation  of  abuse.   The
    reasons for refusal were merely that the appellant's husband was not  a
    qualified person because he was not a worker.

15. Secondly,  we  are  satisfied  that  the  Immigration  Judge  correctly
    assessed that the appellant's husband  was  not  a  worker  within  the
    meaning of Community law.  She had regard to all the evidence and  drew
    the conclusion that the work was neither effective  nor  genuine.   The
    employment relationship was clearly  of  no  economic  benefit  to  the
    employer.  We find no error on a point  of  law  with  regard  to  this
    matter.

    Did the Immigration Judge err in not considering whether the  appellant
    was a jobseeker?

16. We move on to consider the remaining ground of appeal.   The  appellant
    says that her husband was not only working but that he was also looking
    for work.  As such, it was stated that he was a jobseeker  and  thereby
    met the requirements of Community law on that basis.

17. The evidence relied upon  was  one  comment  made  by  the  appellant's
    husband in answer to a question put to him in  cross-examination.   The
    appellant's husband was asked what  he  did  in  his  other  time.   He
    replied that he "was looking for a job, a second job."   The  appellant
    relies  on  a  transcript  of  the  hearing  prepared  by   her   legal
    representatives, which has been submitted in accordance with directions
    and to which is attached a statement  from  her  representative.   That
    transcript is unchallenged.

18. It is clear that the Immigration Judge did not consider this  evidence.
    There is no reference to it in  her  determination.   The  question  is
    whether this omission is an error on a point of law.

19. Mr Chawla confirmed no other evidence was presented to the  Immigration
    Judge to demonstrate that  the  appellant's  husband  was  looking  for
    additional  work.   Neither  witness  statement  mentioned   that   the
    appellant's husband was looking for additional work.   The  appellant's
    representative did not mention the issue in the  skeleton  argument  on
    which they relied at that time. We  have  not  seen  any  note  by  the
    Immigration Judge but we have examined the transcript provided  by  the
    appellant's representatives and notice  that  no  argument  was  raised
    about job seeking during closing submissions.

20. We start from the fact  that  the  issue  was  not  argued  before  the
    Immigration Judge.  It was for the appellant to make her case.  She was
    professionally represented.  Since nothing had been said in support  of
    the present argument, it would be hard  to  criticise  the  Immigration
    Judge for not dealing with it.  Although in R v Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department ex parte Robinson  [1997]  EWCA  Civ  4001  it  was
    recognised that the Tribunal has a duty to take an  obvious  Convention
    point in a protection context, we would be  cautious  before  extending
    that duty to a judge dealing  with  a  matter  of  private  entitlement
    albeit within Community law.  We  are  not  persuaded,  therefore,  the
    Immigration Judge made an error in not dealing with the issue.

21. In any event, we are of the opinion that even if the Immigration  Judge
    had dealt with the issue, on the material available she could only have
    concluded that the evidence did not establish that the appellant was  a
    jobseeker for the purposes of Community law.

22. Although the evidence given by the appellant's husband was clear to the
    effect that he said he was looking for work, the evidence was merely an
    assertion.  That assertion was not supported by any  further  evidence.
    No details were given as to what  steps  the  appellant's  husband  had
    taken to look for work and there was no  supporting  evidence  to  show
    what efforts he had made.

23. EU law provides for jobseekers in two distinct situations.   Provisions
    have been made in relation to Union citizens who move to another Member
    State to look for work but who have never worked  in  the  host  Member
    State.  The other provisions relate to Union citizens who  are  seeking
    work after previously working in the host Member State.

24. The provisions relating to Union citizens in the  second  category  are
    much more robust than those in the former since in the second situation
    Union citizens will often retain  their  rights  of  residence  already
    secured.  The strength of these provisions can  be  seen  by  examining
    art. 7(3)(b)  and  (c)  of  the  Citizens  Directive  (2004/38/EC),  as
    discussed by the Court of Appeal in Tilianu v The  Secretary  of  State
    for Work and Pension [2010] EWCA Civ 1397.

25. In this appeal, however, given the facts found by the Immigration Judge
    and upheld by us, we are concerned  with  a  Union  citizen  who  falls
    within the first category, that is, Union citizens who  have  moved  to
    the United Kingdom and  who  have  yet  to  find  work.   It  is  those
    provisions we need to examine.

26. Little is said in the Citizens Directive about free movement rights  of
    Union citizens to move to  another  Member  State  to  look  for  work.
    Article 14(4) provides as follows:

           14(4). By way of derogation from paragraphs 1 and 2 and  without
           prejudice to the provisions of Chapter VI, an expulsion  measure
           may in no case be adopted against Union citizens or their family
           members if:
             (a) the Union citizens are workers or  self-employed  persons,
             or
             (b) the Union citizens  entered  the  territory  of  the  host
             Member State in order to seek employment. In  this  case,  the
             Union citizens and their family members may  not  be  expelled
             for as long as the Union citizens can  provide  evidence  that
             they are continuing to seek employment and that  they  have  a
             genuine chance of being engaged.


27. The provision in art. 14(4)(b) are given effect in the  United  Kingdom
    through  reg.  6(4)  of  the  Immigration  (European   Economic   Area)
    Regulations 2006:

           6(4) For the purpose of paragraph (1)(a), "jobseeker"  means  a
           person who enters the United Kingdom in order to seek employment
           and can provide evidence that he is seeking employment and has a
           genuine chance of being engaged.


    It may be that the provisions of reg. 6(4) appear to be  somewhat  more
    generous than those in art. 14(4).  This is not, however, the case.  It
    must be remembered that art. 14 deals with the retention of  the  right
    of residence and it is in that context that expulsion measures may  not
    be adopted.  This, in turn, was a measure introduced into the Citizen's
    Directive to reflect the judgment of the European Court of Justice  (as
    it then was) in Antonissen [1991] EUECJ C-292/89,  the  conclusions  of
    which are summarised by the Tribunal in para.  30  of  MDB  and  others
    (Article 12, 1612/68) Italy [2010] UKUT 161 (IAC):

           Whilst Antonissen established that a job seeker could qualify as
           a worker, the case also made  clear  that  the  period  of  time
           allowed for the job-seeker to find employment was not indefinite
           and that the applicant had to show that he was someone  who  was
           genuinely seeking employment.

28. The Tribunal also considered the question of who is a jobseeker  in  AG
    and others (EEA- jobseeker - self-sufficient person  -  proof)  Germany
    [2007] UKAIT 00075 and, after having drawn conclusions similar to those
    in MDB  and  others,  examined  the  further  question  of  proof.   It
    concluded (as summarised in the headnote) that:

           The burden of proof is on the applicant/appellant  to  establish
           any  EEA  right  of  admission  or  residence.  A   failure   to
           substantiate any such right - for example by failing to  produce
           relevant evidence - is likely to mean that the claim/appeal will
           fail.

29. Applying these principles to the facts in this appeal, we find there is
    no possibility that the single comment made by the appellant's  husband
    during cross-examination to the effect that he was looking for a second
    job could be regarded as being  satisfactory  evidence  to  meet  these
    requirements.  The appellant failed to provide evidence  to  show  that
    her husband was seeking additional employment or that he had a  genuine
    chance of being engaged.

30. As there was no prospect of success on this issue  given  the  evidence
    presented, even if the Immigration Judge had erred by  not  taking  the
    issue of her own initiative, any error was  wholly  immaterial  to  the
    result.

Other issues

31. Mr Chawla specifically accepted that no other issues arose.

Decision

The determination discloses no error on a point  of  law.   The  appellant's
appeal to this Tribunal is dismissed.





                               Signed                         Date




                               DIJ McCarthy
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

