
                                                                      [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                         MB (Article 8 - near miss) Pakistan [2010] UKUT 282
                                                                       (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |                             |
|On 16 July 2010                               |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                             LORD JUSTICE SEDLEY
                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE ALLEN
                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE KEKIC

                                   Between

                                     mb

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms B Asanovic, instructed by Middlesex Law Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr M Blundell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



1.    In an Article 8 case, when balancing the  demands  of  fair  and  firm
    immigration control against the disruption of  the  family  or  private
    life of a person if removed for  non-compliance  with  the  Immigration
    Rules, the  nature  and  degree  of  the  non-compliance  may  well  be
    significant.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    This  appeal  comes  before  the  Tribunal  by  permission  of  Senior
    Immigration Judge Eshun on the following  basis.   Mr  Bhatt,  who  was
    present here as a student, had failed to secure renewal or extension of
    his permission to remain here for that purpose because of two  failures
    to comply with the Rules as to eligibility.  Of the two Rules that  had
    not been complied with there was an arguable case that the  finding  of
    non-compliance with one of them was erroneous  with  no  such  arguable
    case and indeed no challenge in relation to the other.  This being  so,
    there was an unassailable finding of breach  of  the  Rules.   But  the
    grounds of appeal before the Senior Immigration Judge went further  and
    asserted that Immigration Judge Morris had wholly  failed  to  consider
    the Article 8 appeal which it was said was also before  her.   On  this
    issue alone permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted.

2.    When one looks at the refusal letter dated 3 November 2009,  one  sees
    that the reasons given are entirely Rule related.  When  one  looks  at
    the appeal form which brought the case before the First-tier  Tribunal,
    one sees that the box is struck through which reads "If the Home Office
    has stated that specific Articles of the European Convention  on  Human
    Rights do not apply to your case and you disagree please explain why in
    this box".  When one looks at the grounds  of  appeal  annexed  to  the
    form, one sees that they relate entirely to the Rules  and  say  not  a
    syllable about the Convention.  And when one looks  at  the  pro  forma
    letter from the UK Border Agency, one sees  that  Section  C  captioned
    "Right of appeal" spells out that an appeal must be on one or  more  of
    the following grounds  and  that  these  include  incompatibility  with
    Convention rights.  There follows  under  this  heading  the  one  stop
    warning: "You must now inform us of  any  reasons  why  you  think  you
    should be allowed to stay in this country".  There was therefore  every
    possible warning of the need to advance an Article 8 claim by the  time
    the matter  reached  the  Immigration  Judge  and  equally  clearly  no
    endeavour to do so.  It follows in our judgment that no  criticism  can
    be levelled at Immigration Judge Morris for not dealing with an Article
    8 claim that was never advanced.

3.    Today appearing for Mr Bhatt, Ms Asanovic accepts  that  this  is  the
    situation but  she  has  quoted  to  us  a  note  made  by  those  then
    representing Mr Bhatt to the effect  that  Article  8  was  engaged  by
    reason of the harshness of the Rule.  Significantly it does not  appear
    that even then personal circumstances were being invoked.

4.    There is  before  this  Tribunal  a  witness  statement  containing  a
    paragraph referring to the appellant's personal circumstances.  It  was
    not before the Immigration Judge and there was therefore no  evidential
    basis upon which to proceed with any  Article  8  claim.   The  passage
    before us might or might not found an Article 8 case but that does  not
    arise unless and until it is established that there was an error of law
    in the way the Immigration Judge at first instance handled the matter.

5.    We have considered whether, notwithstanding that it  was  not  on  her
    written agenda, the Immigration Judge ought to have dealt with this  as
    what one could call a Robinson obvious point.  It is the  case,  as  Mr
    Blundell very properly for the Home Office has pointed out to us,  that
    this is a door which at least is arguably opened by what  has  recently
    been said by the Court of Appeal in the  case  of  Pankina  and  Others
    [2010] EWCA Civ 719 from paragraphs 41  to  47.   Because  we  are  not
    required to determine this question, we do no more than note that it is
    at least respectably arguable that if an Article  8  case  is  properly
    before a fact finding Tribunal or Tribunal of law in this field, one of
    the matters which may go to proportionality is what is described by  Ms
    Asanovic as  a  near  miss  argument.   That  is  to  say,  if  one  is
    considering on the one hand the demands of a firm and fair  immigration
    control policy and on the other the situation of somebody whose  family
    or private life is going to be disrupted in a material way  by  removal
    for non-compliance with the Rules.  It may well matter what the  nature
    and degree of non-compliance was.  We go no further down that  road  at
    present because it does not arise materially in this case.  This  case,
    in our judgment, goes off on the fact that there was no Article 8 claim
    adumbrated before the Immigration Judge, nor was any  such  claim  also
    obviously present as to require to be dealt with whether or not it  had
    been put in the grounds of appeal.

6.    There was, in our judgment, no error of  law  in  the  first  instance
    decision and for that reason this appeal fails.

Signed


Lord Justice Sedley
(sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal)
