

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

R (on the  application  of  Shehu)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department (Citizens Directive: no  suspensive  appeals)  IJR  [2016]  UKUT
00287 (IAC)


             IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

|                                              |                             |
|Heard at  Field House                         |Decision signed:   26 May    |
|                                              |2016                         |
|On: 24 May 2016                               |Handed down:      7 June 2016|


                                   Before

                      Upper Tribunal Judge John FREEMAN

                                   Between

                The Queen on the application of Mexhun SHEHU
                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

Counsel for the applicant: Sandra Akinbolu  (instructed by Malik & Malik)
Counsel for the respondent:       William Irwin (instructed by GLD)

The redress procedure required  by  articles  31  and  35  of  the  Citizens
Directive does not make it necessary to treat EEA appeals  of  any  kind  as
suspensive, since arrangements can be made, on the  conditions  set  out  in
article 31.4, for allowing the subject to  submit  his  defence  in  person,
which is reason enough for declining to treat the decision of the  Court  of
Appeal in Ahmed as per incuriam  for not dealing with article 35.

                                  JUDGMENT

1.     This is an application for judicial review of  the  decision  of  the
    respondent on 7 July 2015, to make removal directions against a citizen
    of Albania, born 27 May 1995, being maintained while he had  an  appeal
    pending against refusal of an EEA residence card.  The  respondent  had
    made that removal decision on the  basis  that  the  applicant  was  an
    overstayer; but she proceeded, on 14 July, to refuse a residence  card,
    on the basis that  she  was  not  satisfied  that  he  had  a  'durable
    relationship' with an EEA citizen, as he had claimed; or that  the  EEA
    citizen concerned was a 'qualified person', in terms of the Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 [the EEA Regulations].

 2. As the law stands since 6 April 2015, the removal decision  carried  no
    right of appeal, either in or  out-of-country.  The  EEA  decision  was
    appealable; but the point raised was whether or not such an appeal  had
    suspensive effect. On that basis, following the  grant  of  a  stay  on
    removal on 15 July, permission was  given  on  2  December.  The  Upper
    Tribunal decision in Bilal Ahmed (EEA/s 10 appeal rights: effect  (IJR)
    [2015] UKUT 436 (IAC) had already been sent out, on 24 July, so had not
    been referred to in the grounds filed. However, those representing  the
    applicant should not have allowed the  permission  judge  to  make  the
    order he did, without referring him to that decision. It has since been
    comprehensively upheld in Ahmed [2016] EWCA Civ 303.

 3. It follows that the challenge to the decision to remove, because  there
    was an EEA appeal pending,  can  only  succeed  if  Miss  Akinbolu  can
    distinguish, or otherwise avoid the effect  of  that  decision  of  the
    Court of Appeal.  She  sought  for  the  first  time  in  her  skeleton
    argument, produced for the first  time  on  the  date  of  the  present
    hearing, without previous notice to the respondent or to the  Tribunal,
    to raise another ground, which was that the respondent was  obliged  to
    make a full examination of the applicant's EEA rights  before  deciding
    to remove him, which entitlement raised a question of  precedent  fact,
    as in Khawaja [1983] UKHL 8, and  other  well-known  authorities.  This
    point appears also to have been disposed of by the Court of  Appeal  in
    Ahmed, at paragraphs 24 - 27; but, even if I am wrong about  that,  and
    it is arguable, the interests of justice  require  that  it  should  be
    dealt with in a case where both sides, and the  Tribunal,  have  had  a
    proper opportunity to prepare to do so.

 4. Returning to the pending appeal point, Miss  Akinbolu's  main  argument
    was that the  Court  of  Appeal  had  reached  their  decision  without
    adequate  consideration  of  Directive  2004/38/EC  of   the   European
    Parliament and of the Council [the Citizens Directive] on which the EEA
    Regulations were based. It would be a bold decision on my part to  hold
    that one by a Court of Appeal composed of three judges, the  author  of
    the leading judgment being Laws LJ, whose experience in this  field  is
    unrivalled by anyone,  was  in  effect  per  incuriam.  However,  since
    permission was granted on the basis it had been, even though  (or  even
    because)  the   applicant's   representatives   had   neglected   their
    professional duty to keep the Tribunal informed of relevant  decisions,
    especially those which went against their client's interests,  I  shall
    have to deal with Miss Akinbolu's submissions.

 5. Laws LJ dealt with the Citizens Directive point as follows: it is worth
    citing what he had to say in full.

 17. The appellant next has a submission arising out of the  terms  of  the
     Directive.  He relies particularly on Article 31.4:

           "Member States may exclude the individual concerned  from  their
           territory pending  the  redress  procedure,  but  they  may  not
           prevent the individual from submitting his/her defence in person
           except when his/her appearance may  cause  serious  troubles  to
           public policy or public security or when the appeal or  judicial
           review concerns a denial of entry to the territory."

 18. However, this provision has to be seen in context.   It  is  succinctly
     explained in the reasoning of the Upper Tribunal at paragraph 28:

           "Mr Karim's attempt to invoke Article 31 as in some way covering
           an appeal against the refusal of a residence card  must  fail.
           That Article occurs within Chapter VI of the Directive, which is
           headed 'RESTRICTIONS ON THE RIGHT OF  ENTRY  AND  THE  RIGHT  OF
           RESIDENCE ON GROUNDS OF PUBLIC POLICY, PUBLIC SECURITY OR PUBLIC
           HEALTH'.  Article 27 (general principles) states that,  subject
           to the provisions of Chapter VI 'Member States may restrict  the
           freedom of movement and residence of Union  citizens  and  their
           family members,  irrespective  of  nationality,  on  grounds  of
           public policy, public security or public health'.   Article 27,
           together with Article 28  (protection  against  expulsion)  and
           Article 29 (public health)  accordingly  informs  who  are  the
           'persons concerned' referred to  in  Article 31(1).   They  are
           Union citizens and their family members, subject to expulsion or
           removal  measures.   As  a result,  Article 31  has  nothing
           whatsoever to say about a person who is not being  expelled  as
           a Union citizen or family member but who is  appealing  against
           a decision that he or she is not such a family member."

 19. I do not think that this reasoning is affected by Article 15, to which
     Mr Malik referred this morning.  That Article is concerned effectively
     with prohibitions  as  such.   In  my  judgment  the  Upper  Tribunal's
     reasoning is plainly correct.  I note, as the Upper  Tribunal  did  at
     paragraph 27, that in an observation by the Commission on  an  earlier
     version of what became  the  Directive,  COM/2001/0527  final,  it  was
     stated that:

           "Giving appeals automatic  suspensory  effect  would  not  be  a
           suitable solution, since it would lay the arrangements  open  to
           abuse."

 20. I have not found any assistance in the cases of Secretary of State for
     the Home Department v Islam, Rahman & Ors [2013] WLR  230  or  McCarthy
     [2015] QB 151 (?) [sic: 651, or McCarthy and  others  [2014]  EUECJ  C-
     202/13], both decided in the Court of Justice.  Mr Malik  referred  to
     them in the course of his submissions this morning.

 21. Accordingly in my judgment the Directive does not assist the appellant.
      His appeal against the refusal of a residence card had no  suspensive
     effect, nor is there any provision conferring upon him a right not  to
     be removed from the United Kingdom during the  time  provided  for  the
     giving of notice of appeal against a refusal of  the  residence  card.
     Mr Malik contends otherwise at paragraph 25 of his skeleton.

 6. Miss Akinbolu boldly submitted that the Court of Appeal's  decision  on
    this point in particular must be treated as per incuriam,  since  there
    was nothing to show that they had had  the  full  text  of  article  31
    before them. Lest I should be accused of the same failing, I shall  set
    it out here: the title is 'Procedural Safeguards'.

    1.        The persons concerned shall  have  access  to  judicial  and,
        where appropriate, administrative redress procedures  in  the  host
        Member State to appeal against or seek review of any decision taken
        against them on the grounds of public policy,  public  security  or
        public health.
    2.        Where the application for appeal against or  judicial  review
        of the expulsion decision is accompanied by an application  for  an
        interim order to  suspend  enforcement  of  that  decision,  actual
        removal from the territory may not take place until  such  time  as
        the decision on the interim order has been taken, except:
        - where the expulsion decision is  based  on  a  previous  judicial
             decision; or
        - where the persons concerned have had previous access to  judicial
             review; or
        - where the expulsion decision is based on  imperative  grounds  of
             public security under Article 28(3).
    3.        The redress procedures shall allow for an examination of  the
        legality of the decision, as well as of the facts and circumstances
        on which the proposed measure is based. They shall ensure that  the
        decision is not  disproportionate,  particularly  in  view  of  the
        requirements laid down in Article 28.
    4.        Member States may exclude the individual concerned from their
        territory pending the redress procedure, but they may  not  prevent
        the individual from submitting his/her defence  in  person,  except
        when his/her appearance may cause serious troubles to public policy
        or public security or when the appeal or judicial review concerns a
        denial of entry to the territory.

 7. Miss Akinbolu's best point seemed to be that Laws  LJ  could  not  have
    considered the exception "where the expulsion decision is  based  on  a
    previous  judicial  decision",  in  saying  what  he  did   about   the
    possibility of (serial) automatically  suspensive  appeals  leading  to
    abuse at paragraph 19. Both she and Mr Irwin took me to the text of the
    Commission's observations, referred to by Laws  LJ  and  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal; however, I do not find it  necessary  to  go  there  in  this
    decision, for reasons which I shall go on to give.

 8. The short answer to Miss Akinbolu's point at first sight seemed to  lie
    in the closing words of article 31.1, which apply the article solely to
    decisions taken "on the grounds of public policy,  public  security  or
    public health", which the present one was not. Her reply was  to  refer
    to article 35: the title is 'Abuse of rights'.

       Member States may adopt the necessary measures to  refuse,  terminate
       or withdraw any right conferred by this  Directive  in  the  case  of
       abuse of rights or fraud, such as marriages of convenience. Any  such
       measure  shall  be  proportionate  and  subject  to  the   procedural
       safeguards provided for in Articles 30 and 31.

 9. Here Miss Akinbolu relied, in general terms, on Rosa  [2016]  EWCA  Civ
    14: however the relevant passage (Richards LJ giving the only judgment)
    follows.

  24. In my judgment, the legal burden lies on the  Secretary  of  State  to
      prove that an otherwise valid marriage is a marriage of convenience so
      as to justify the refusal of an application for a residence card under
      the EEA Regulations.  The reasoning to that effect in  Papajorgji,  as
      endorsed in Agho, is compelling.
  25. I do not accept Mr Kellar's submission that the burden of proof  is  a
      matter for national  law  alone.   The  EEA  Regulations  have  to  be
      interpreted  and  applied  in  line  with  the  Directive  which  they
      implement.  Although the Directive is silent as to  burden  of  proof,
      the Commission's guidance (paragraph 20 above) provides the key to the
      correct approach under it.  Article 35 of the Directive provides  that
      the rights otherwise  conferred  by  the  Directive  may  be  refused,
      terminated or withdrawn in the case of abuse of rights or fraud,  such
      as marriages of convenience.  As a matter of  general  principle,  one
      would expect that the burden of  proving  that  an  exception  applies
      should lie on the authorities of the Member State seeking to  restrict
      rights conferred by the Directive - in this case, that it  should  lie
      on the Secretary of State when seeking to rely on the existence  of  a
      marriage of convenience as a reason for refusing a residence  card  to
      which the applicant is otherwise entitled.  That is the  approach  set
      out clearly in the Commission's guidance, and there is  no  reason  to
      doubt the correctness of the guidance on the point.
  26. The guidance also shows the subsidiary role that  national  procedural
      rules have in this context.  As a matter of  EU  law,  the  burden  of
      proof lies on the authorities of the Member State seeking to  restrict
      rights under the Directive, but it is for the national court to verify
      the existence of the abuse  relied  on,  evidence  of  which  must  be
      adduced in accordance with the rules of national law.  ...

10. As the terms of the Court of Appeal's paragraph 26 make clear, that was
    a decision about the burden of proof in legal proceedings, in that case
    a statutory immigration appeal,  as  to  which  it  confirmed  previous
    authority with some clarity.  If  it  also  applies  to  administrative
    decisions, then article 35 of the Citizens Directive would have  to  be
    read as applying  the  procedural  safeguards  in  article  31  to  the
    decision under challenge in the present case;  and  Mr  Irwin  did  not
    suggest any reason why that should not be so.

11. However, looking back at the  terms  of  article  31.4,  the  following
    things are clear: there is a redress procedure (the EEA appeal, whether
    suspensive or not); and

        Member States may  exclude  the  individual  concerned  from  their
        territory pending the redress procedure, but they may  not  prevent
        the individual from submitting his/her defence  in  person,  except
        when his/her appearance may cause serious troubles to public policy
        or public security or when the appeal or judicial review concerns a
        denial of entry to the territory.

12. While reg. 29AA 'Temporary admission in order to submit case in person'
    of the EEA Regulations will not apply in terms to this applicant, since
    it is not proposed to remove him under reg. 19 (3) (b), but  under  the
    general power to remove persons  here  without  leave,  its  enactment,
    clearly in response to articles 31 and 35 of the Citizens Directive, is
    enough to show that the required redress procedure  does  not  make  it
    necessary to treat EEA  appeals  of  this  kind  as  suspensive,  since
    arrangements can be made, on the conditions set out  in  article  31.4,
    for allowing the subject to submit his defence in person.

13. That in my judgment  is  reason  enough  for  declining  to  treat  the
    decision of the Court of Appeal in  Ahmed  as  per  incuriam   for  not
    dealing with article 35, and it follows that this claim cannot succeed.

Application


                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)


