



                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


R (on  the  application  of  Nawaz)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department (ETS: review standard/evidential basis) [2017] UKUT 00288 (IAC)

                    on an application for JUDICIAL REVIEW

|At    Field House                             |    Decision signed:         |
|                                              |07.06.2017                   |
|on    30.05.2017                              |    Handed down:             |
|                                              |20.06.2017                   |



                 The Queen on the application of Mohd. NAWAZ

                                                              Applicant

                                      v

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                              Respondent


                  Before Upper Tribunal Judge John FREEMAN


Counsel for the applicant: Barnabas Lams
Counsel for the respondent:       Natasha Barnes


 a) Deception in ETS cases is not a question of precedent fact,  except  in
    particular circumstances, for example those in  Abbas  [2017]  EWHC  78
    (Admin).
 b) There is no fundamental right to study in a foreign  country;  nor  for
    children to be there with their would-be student  parents;  nor  can  a
    different standard of review  fairly  be  applied  in  these  cases  to
    applicants with and without children.
 c) It follows that the standard of review in all such cases is on ordinary
    judicial review principles, requiring fair  consideration,  bearing  in
    mind both the potentially serious  effects  of  deception  findings  in
    general, and the requirements of effective administration.
 d) Oral or other evidence of an  applicant's  English-language  skills  or
    attainments is unlikely to have any decisive effect in judicial  review
    proceedings on the fairness of the decision under  challenge,  for  the
    reasons given in Habib (JR/1260/2016) [20], and those at [21].
 e) Evidence obtained by use of the Look-up Tool, and subject to the  human
    verification procedure, is an  adequate  basis  for  the  Secretary  of
    State's deception finding in these cases,  in  the  light  of  Flynn  &
    another [2008] EWCA Crim 970 [24 - 27], and the  evidence  of  both  Dr
    Harrison and Professor French.
 f) The lack of visible note-taking by the human verifiers does not provide
    any ground of challenge to the decision as insufficiently  transparent,
    where there has been an offer (whether accepted or not)  to  provide  a
    copy of a voice recording for analysis.



                                  DECISION

1.     This is an application for judicial review of  the  decision  of  the
    respondent on 18 March 2016, to curtail leave to remain  as  a  student
    for a citizen  of  Pakistan,  born  there  on  25  November  1981.  The
    respondent took the view that the applicant had engaged in deception by
    getting a certificate from a TOEIC [Test of English  for  International
    Communication], administered by ETS [Educational Testing Services], and
    later reported by them as having been taken for him by  a  proxy.  This
    certificate was not used in any application for leave  to  remain.  The
    decision letter did not give details of when or where the test had been
    taken; but the supplementary decision letter of 5 September  2016  says
    it was on 19 September 2012 at Elizabeth College (in London).

 2. As it happened, this case came on straight after I had handed  down  my
    judgment in Ranjit Kaur (JR 8997-15), a copy of which  is  attached  to
    this. I had provided copies for counsel in this case too, and  made  it
    clear to them that I was not prepared to go over the same ground again;
    but I would, and  did  consider  any  new  evidence  or  arguments  put
    forward.

 3. The material put forward by Mr Lams fell into two main parts:

        a. proposed oral evidence by the applicant himself, and an argument
           based on Manchester City Council v Pinnock [2010] UKSC 45 as  to
           why I should admit it; and

        b. challenges to the  reliability  of  the  respondent's  evidence,
           based on  what  Mr  Lams  said  were  unresolved  contradictions
           between Dr Harrison and Professor French (see Ranjit Kaur for an
           introduction), and on Flynn & another [2008] EWCA Crim 970.

 4. The application to file a witness statement by  the  applicant  (8  May
    2017) was very late indeed (26 May), and Mr Lams did not apply to  call
    him to give oral evidence till the start of the hearing; but I made  it
    clear that I should not refuse to consider the  proposed  contents,  so
    far as they seemed reasonably capable of being decisive.  At  the  same
    time I allowed Miss Barnes to put in a statement by Adam Sewell,  which
    provides an explanation for one of the points made  by  the  applicant.
    Neither counsel opposed this course.

 5. The applicant's further statement gave details of how he had passed  an
    IELTS English-language test in 2008: however he had failed a TOEIC test
    in speaking and writing in December 2011, but passed in  January  2012.
    On 19 September that year he had sat both speaking and writing tests at
    Elizabeth College, and he gives details of how  he  got  there;  on  23
    October he had sat the listening and reading tests at  Colwell  College
    in Leicester. He says he passed the speaking and writing  at  Elizabeth
    College on 19 December, presumably meaning that was  when  he  got  the
    results, and also passed the listening and reading.



 6. However, the applicant said, he had never sat the TOEIC test at Colwell
    College on 16 November 2011, still less given his  date  of  birth  for
    that as 7 May 1978, as the Home Office claimed. These details  did  not
    come from the decision letter, or the further letter  of  5  September,
    but from a  statement  previously  filed  by  Mr  Sewell.  His  further
    statement explains that  the  19  September  2012  tests  at  Elizabeth
    College had provided a date of birth exactly matching the  applicant's;
    but the 16 November test at Colwell  College  had  not,  and  had  been
    included in his evidence by a mistake on his own part.

 7. There was more to Mr Sewell's further evidence; but, as this point  was
    not pursued before me by Mr Lams, realistically in the light of  it,  I
    need not go into it any further.  What  Mr  Lams  did  pursue  was  the
    applicant's suggestion that, in  the  perhaps  not  entirely  idiomatic
    words of his statement:

       The Home Office allegations  are  false.  I  am  a  highly  education
       individual and very competent in the English language. Before I  came
       to the UK I had passed IELTS exam which is more tough than the  TOEIC
       examination.

 8. The applicant says he  had  completed  an  MBA  at  the  University  of
    Cardiff, and was studying for a  PhD  at  Bolton  when  his  leave  was
    curtailed. Similar scenarios have featured in a number of previous  ETS
    cases, including Habib (JR/1260/2016), briefly referred  to  in  Ranjit
    Kaur. I had not dealt with that decision in any detail at  all,  partly
    because it could not help  the  applicant  in  that  case,  and  partly
    because it had not been reported, or permission to cite it obtained.

 9. However, though there is nothing so far to show that  Habib   has  been
    reported, I note the terms of the Presidential Guidance Note  of  2011,
    no 2, as updated from time to time:

       14.    Judgments of the Chamber on applications for  judicial  review
           (following grant of permission) in immigration  judicial  review
           proceedings3 are automatically given a neutral  citation  (which
           includes the letters "IJR") and reported,  without  keywords  or
           italicised summary.

    Though this does not seem to have happened yet with Habib,  clearly  it
    will; so Miss Barnes did not require permission to  cite  it.  I  shall
    return to the relevant parts in due course.

10. Mr Lams's argument  on  Pinnock  is  that  the  circumstances  of  this
    applicant's case required a higher standard of review, in terms of  the
    spectrum discussed in Ranjit Kaur,  because,  as  the  decision  letter
    itself had made clear, the decision involved the best interests of  his
    child or children. The applicant's son is named in  the  letter  before
    claim, though no date of birth or further details have been given there
    or since; nor was permission granted on anything to do with this point.
    However, the duty under s. 55 of the Children Act to consider his  best
    interests is acknowledged in  the  decision  letter,  and  so  I  shall
    consider Pinnock in the light of that.

11. Mr Lams took me straight to paragraph 74 of Pinnock:

       In summary. Where it is required  in  order  to  give  effect  to  an
       occupier's article 8 Convention rights, the court's powers of  review
       can, in an appropriate case, extend to reconsidering for  itself  the
       facts found by a local authority,  or  indeed  to  considering  facts
       which have arisen since the issue of proceedings, by hearing evidence
       and forming its own view.

12. However, as so often, the background to  that  statement  of  principle
    needs to be considered. Mr Pinnock was the occupier of a house let  him
    on a secure tenancy by the local authority, where  he  lived  with  his
    partner and some or all of their five children. Because of his family's
    behaviour,  previous  County  Court  proceedings  had  resulted  in   a
    'demotion of tenancy order' under the Housing Act 1996.  Since  further
    proceedings were taken by the local authority within  a  year  of  this
    order, that provision  entitled  them  to  serve  a  notice  seeking  a
    possession order, subject to a statutory review by  them.  Unless  this
    procedure had not been followed, the Court was then obliged to make the
    order sought.

13. That was the background against which the County  Court  judge  in  the
    current proceedings had decided (see paragraph 19 of the Supreme  Court
    judgment) that his r�le  was  "limited  to  conducting  a  conventional
    judicial review", and did not extend to resolving factual disputes. The
    local authority's decision to serve a notice within the time limited by
    the demotion order might be regarded as a condition  precedent  to  the
    court's obligation to grant possession.

14. That was the legal basis on which Mr Lams argued that I should consider
    the facts of this case and hear evidence for myself. He did not  go  so
    far as to suggest that I should consider  the  best  interests  of  the
    applicant's son for myself, and, in view of the basis on which judicial
    review was sought and permission granted, could not have done  so;  but
    he did argue that, because those interests were likely to be  seriously
    affected by the decision under challenge, that decision  needed  to  be
    subject to a higher standard of review.

15. As I made clear in Ranjit Kaur  at paragraphs 18 - 20, any decision  of
    this kind is one with potentially serious effects, in terms of the time
    bar on future visa applications; but it is  not  in  itself  one  which
    engages the applicant's fundamental rights; or those of any children he
    may have (which the applicant in that  case  did  not).  No-one  has  a
    fundamental right to study in a foreign country; nor, consequently,  to
    be with their parents when exercising any such right as  they  claimed.
    What this applicant was entitled  to  was  fair  consideration  on  the
    evidence of the means by which  he  had  got  his  current  leave,  and
    judicial review of its curtailment, bearing in mind the consequences.

16. As for the argument that the existence of children  required  a  higher
    standard of review of the basis for the curtailment decision itself, it
    is useful to set  out  the  rule  for  which  Mr  Lams  was  in  effect
    contending: someone with children is entitled to set his  own  evidence
    against the evidence before the decision-maker, in a  way  in  which  a
    childless person is not. That proposition cannot be right or fair,  and
    I do not accept it. What the best interests of children might  require,
    once the curtailment decision had been made, is  a  separate  question,
    and, as explained at 14, not one before me.

17. It follows that I do not accept Mr Lams's argument on  Pinnock  that  I
    should consider the facts behind the curtailment for  myself,  or  hear
    the applicant's evidence in order to do so. As for  the  argument  that
    the question of deception was one of precedent fact, so that  this  was
    necessary for that reason, it has consistently been  rejected  by  this
    Tribunal and the  courts,  except  where  there  was  reason  for  some
    exception.

18. One example of that was Abbas [2017] EWHC 78 (Admin), also referred  to
    in Ranjit Kaur. Here the validity of the applicant's grant of leave was
    a  condition  precedent  to  the  success  of   his   application   for
    naturalization as a British citizen. That was why Wm  Davis  J  had  to
    treat the decision on it as a matter of precedent fact, for him to  re-
    examine on that basis. In this case the finding of deception was simply
    the factual basis for the decision under challenge itself, which has to
    be considered on ordinary judicial review principles, as set out at 15.

19. For completeness, I should say that I saw nothing in a  final  argument
    by Mr Lams on the standard of  review,  based  on  the  writer  of  the
    supplementary decision letter having  set  the  standard  of  proof  of
    deception as  being  on  the  balance  of  probabilities.  Miss  Barnes
    accepted that this was the correct standard: whether or not  it  set  a
    higher hurdle than appears in other  cases,  the  question  for  me  is
    whether the respondent reached a fair decision on all the evidence.

20. I can now return to Habib. The passage relied on by Miss Barnes  is  at
    paragraph 104:

       I  remind  myself  that  the  applicant's   actual   English-language
       competence, whether at the date  of  the  decision  or  now,  is  not
       determinative of this application. It is not for the  Upper  Tribunal
       to seek to establish for itself the level  of  competence  which  the
       applicant has in the English language, or what other reason he  might
       have had for choosing to pay someone else to take his test  for  him,
       as the respondent and ETS say that he did. As stated in Abbas,  there
       are many reasons why a person might choose a dishonest,  rather  than
       an honest, way to obtain an English language qualification. ...

21. To those considerations, which  are  in  no  way  diminished  by  being
    referred to as common  sense,  has  to  be  added  the  possibility  of
    language colleges themselves taking the initiative in  encouraging  the
    use of proxies. I pointed this out  to  the  parties  as  a  very  real
    consideration in cases such as these, where  the  whole  pattern  of  a
    college's results led to that conclusion.

22. The only counter-argument put forward by Mr Lams referred to  paragraph
    94 of Habib. Here Judge Gleeson noted a previous  decision  by  another
    Upper Tribunal judge, with a contrary result. However, it is clear that
    this (Kadivar IA 42545-14) was not only an  unreported  decision  on  a
    statutory appeal, but one where the  presenting  officer  had  accepted
    that the appellant had given a credible  account  and  was  a  reliable
    witness. On a statutory appeal, he had a right to give his evidence and
    have the judge consider it for herself on its merits,  and  it  follows
    that this decision could  have  no  bearing  on  the  question  of  the
    standard of review to be applied in this case.

23. The result is that  I  am  not  prepared  to  accept  this  applicant's
    proposed evidence as capable of  having  any  decisive  effect  in  the
    present case, which I have to consider on Mr Lams's  remaining  points.
    Before returning to the differences between Dr Harrison  and  Professor
    French, I will deal with the effect of Flynn.

24. Flynn, as the citation will have made clear, was a  criminal  decision,
    inevitably depending to a considerable extent on the standard of  proof
    in such cases, where the jury had to be sure that the  defendants  were
    guilty before finding them so; and to the judge's power under s. 78 (1)
    of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 to exclude evidence  whose
    admission would be unfair in all the circumstances.

25. However Flynn was referred to by Dr Harrison: at p 10 of his report  he
    cited this passage:

         63. The increasing use sought to be made of lay listener  evidence
             from police officers must, in our  opinion,  be  treated  with
             great  caution  and  great  care.   In  our  view  where   the
             prosecution seek to rely on such evidence it is desirable that
             an expert should be instructed to give an independent  opinion
             on the validity of such evidence.  In  addition,  as  outlined
             above, great care should be taken by police officers to record
             the procedures taken by them which form the  basis  for  their
             evidence.  Whether the evidence is sufficiently  probative  to
             be admitted will depend very much on the facts of each case.
         64. It goes  without  saying  that  in  all  cases  in  which  the
             prosecution rely on voice recognition  evidence,  whether  lay
             listener, or expert, or both,  the  judge  must  give  a  very
             careful direction to the jury warning  it  of  the  danger  of
             mistakes in such cases.

26. This ties in with Dr Harrison's main contention, which was that only  a
    recognized  expert  could  reliably  pronounce  on  voice   recognition
    evidence. It is interesting to see, in that context, that the Court  of
    Appeal had just made it clear (at paragraph 62)  that  they  considered
    it:

        ... neither possible nor desirable to go  as  far  as  the  Northern
             Ireland Court of Criminal Appeal in O'Doherty which ruled  that
             auditory analysis evidence given by experts in this  field  was
             inadmissible unless supported by expert  evidence  of  acoustic
             analysis.  So far as lay listener evidence is concerned, in our
             opinion, the key to admissibility is the degree of  familiarity
             of the witness with the suspect's voice.  Even then the dangers
             of a mis-identification remain; the more so where the recording
             of the voice to be identified is poor.

27.  Clearly  the  Court  of  Appeal  regarded  lay  listener  evidence  as
    admissible, even in a criminal case, where  the  question  was  one  of
    recognition, and subject to the  warning  in  the  last  sentence.  The
    present case, and others like it, involve not recognition, but matching
    of unfamiliar voices, and there is typically no information, one way or
    the other, about the quality of the recording itself.

28. Turning to Mr Lams's argument on the differences  between  Dr  Harrison
    and Professor French, I need to start by remembering that it could  not
    be based on any suggestion  that  the  decision-maker  could  not  have
    validly reached the decision under challenge in the face of conflicting
    expert evidence as such, because neither report  was  before  him.  The
    purpose of both of them, as I made clear in Ranjit Kaur, was to  enable
    me to carry out an informed review of  the  Look-up  Tool  evidence  on
    which the decision had been reached.

29. It is not surprising, especially as both experts  come  from  the  same
    stable (JP French Associates) that there  is  a  good  deal  of  common
    ground between them. Dr Harrison lists, at paragraphs 4.1  -  4.5.4  of
    his report, a number of components of the auditory-phonetic analysis to
    be expected of an expert in the field,  which  Mr  Lams  accepted  were
    broadly the equivalent of the 13 features listed by Professor French at
    paragraph 3.3.1 of his.

30. At paragraph 4.7 Dr Harrison  gives  the  generally  accepted  training
    required for such an expert as at least a master's degree in  phonetics
    or linguistics, with "... substantial components of  phonetics,  socio-
    phonetics and speech acoustics". That should ideally be followed by one
    to two years' specific forensic training, involving shadowing the  work
    of an established  expert,  and  doing  independent  work  checked  and
    scrutinized by a mentor, all over a large number of different  forensic
    cases. Professor French does not dissent from that.

31. However Professor French also notes at paragraph 3.3.1:

       One would expect phoneticians to have a heightened awareness  of  the
       features. However, that is not to  say  that  only  phoneticians  can
       perceive them. Non-phoneticians are regularly heard  to  comment  on,
       for example, accent, grammatical errors, distinctive voices or speech
       impediments. [The approach of ETS's trained listeners  -  see  Ranjit
       Kaur  for details] was analytical rather than merely undifferentiated
       holistic listening and ... the components and features attended to in
       comparing  the  voices  matched  by  the   ASR   [Automatic   Speaker
       Recognition system] stood in at least  a  rough  correspondence  with
       those outlined above and by Dr Harrison.

32. Mr Lams pointed out, however, that Professor  French  had  accepted  at
    3.3.2 that listeners were typically available for two  or  three  days'
    training, followed by  a  mentoring  period  of  varied  duration.  The
    trainers themselves might have had no university education in phonetics
    or speech science. Professor French nevertheless goes on to  say  that,
    while this was far from ideal, the areas of training corresponded  with
    those in university  forensic  speech  science  courses  and  "...  the
    descriptions [by ETS] of those areas indicate knowledge of  significant
    issues in speaker comparison testing".

33. Another criticism of Dr Harrison's related to the lack  of  note-taking
    by the listeners, which would have provided some transparency  and  the
    possibility of checking their results.  Professor  French  accepted  at
    3.3.5 that this was the case, while giving reasons for not accepting Dr
    Harrison's estimate of the time required for the analysis as  a  whole.
    Mr Lams criticized ETS's verification process as  'completely  opaque',
    in the light of what Mr Millington [see Ranjit Kaur  for  introduction]
    had said at paragraph 29 of his statement [AB 103 in this  case]  about
    the lack of details for  the  biometric  technology  used  in  the  ASR
    process, owing to a  confidentiality  agreement  between  ETS  and  the
    suppliers of it.

34. Next Mr Lams referred to the points made by Dr Harrison at  5.3:  while
    he did not enlarge on those about duration [5.3.1] or  quality  [5.3.2]
    of samples, he noted Professor French's main conclusions at 4.

          1. The conditions used for trained listener pair confirmation, in
             conjunction  with  the   (albeit   unspecified)   conservative
             thresholds set for ASR match identification ... would,  in  my
             view, have resulted in  substantially  more  false  rejections
             than false positives.
          2. Even though there is still material missing from the  body  of
             information called for by Dr Harrison, I am not convinced that
             the provision of such information could be used to establish a
             closely specified percentage of false positives.
          3. If the 2% error established for  the  TOEFL  pilot  recordings
             were to apply to the TOEIC recordings, then I  would  estimate
             the rate of false positives to be very substantially less than
             1% after the process of trained listeners  had  been  applied.
             This is because: [Professor French goes on to give reasons for
             his conclusions].

35. As Mr Lams pointed out, Dr Harrison had given his view at 5.3.3 on  the
    reference population used in systems such as the ASR:

       For the reference populations to do the job correctly, it must  match
       various  characteristics  of  the  materials  being  testing   [sic],
       including recording quality and language. If there is a mismatch with
       these characteristics then the system is likely to make more errors.

    Mr Lams suggested that Professor French's final conclusion (3) had been
    based on no more than an assumption about the populations used  in  the
    TOEFL and TOEIC tests. I asked  him  whether  there  were  anything  to
    suggest any significant difference  between  the  two  populations,  on
    which he was only able to refer to the general lack of any data at  all
    beyond the spread-sheets obtained through the Look-up Tool.

36. Finally Mr Lams referred to the difficulties inherent in comparing non-
    native English-speakers, noted by Dr  Harrison  at  6.3.7.  These  were
    dealt with by Professor French at 3.3.4 on the basis that the listeners

       ... were in a more favourable position than  most  lay-listeners,  in
       that they  had  gained  familiarity  with  foreign  accented  English
       through their  involvement  in  the  TOEFL  program  from  'reviewing
       speaking responses from candidates around the world'.

    Mr  Lams  described  that  as  highlighting  the  tentative  nature  of
    Professor French's conclusions.

37. I need not deal to any extent with  Miss  Barnes's  submissions,  which
    were largely anticipated in argument,  as  reflected  above.  The  only
    significant point to which I have  not  so  far  referred  was  on  the
    question of the contrasting background to analysis of voice recognition
    evidence, as dealt with in  the  consideration  of  individual  serious
    criminal cases in Flynn; and in dealing with  what  appeared  from  the
    'Panorama' programme [see Ranjit Kaur] to be evidence of deception on a
    massive scale.

38. While it is clear  that  the  consequences  of  deception  findings  in
    individual cases might be very serious for the subject, I put it to  Mr
    Lams in the course of argument that the duty of the decision-maker must
    be to give a decision which was fair in all the circumstances. Mr  Lams
    accepted that the answer to the question of what was fair was  specific
    to the circumstances, but suggested that the  scale  of  the  suspected
    fraud should make no difference in an individual case. I cannot  accept
    this: the  respondent  had  a  duty  to  the  public,  as  well  as  to
    individuals affected, and needed to balance the interests of  effective
    administration with those of fairness.

CONCLUSIONS

39. Dealing with Mr Lams's points on the  evidence,  the  basis  of  expert
    analysis of voice comparison evidence is  agreed  by  Dr  Harrison  and
    Professor French, in terms of  what  are  essentially  common  factors.
    Structured and reasoned analysis  of  those  factors  is  what  can  be
    expected from those who hold themselves out as experts  in  the  field;
    but not even in criminal cases, at least in England and Wales, is  such
    evidence regarded as essential: see Flynn.

40. Professor French goes on to make  what  I  consider  a  very  important
    point: see 31. Although technical analysis of voice comparison evidence
    is possible, and no  doubt  the  ideal,  this  is  not  an  exclusively
    technical subject (as for example might be analysis of blood for DNA or
    other features). It  is  one  of  which  all  human  beings  have  some
    knowledge, including  knowledge  of  and  ability  to  comment  on  the
    features identified by Dr Harrison and Professor French.

41. While the training of a  recognized  expert  ideally  involves  both  a
    master's degree and what might be described as a practical pupillage to
    follow, and the ETS training for listeners fell  well  short  of  that,
    they were trained in areas corresponding to the factors  identified  by
    the experts. The lack of note-taking, at least in available form, is  a
    deficiency which will have to be taken account of.

42. So  far  as  the  comparability  of  TOEIC  and  TOEFL  populations  is
    concerned, while there is no direct evidence to support it, neither  is
    there any going the other way. Without at  least  some  reason  to  the
    contrary, it might well be supposed that  two  groups  taking  English-
    language tests for non-native speakers, wishing to study  or  establish
    themselves in foreign countries, might at least be broadly comparable.

43. As for the difficulties posed by  voice  comparison  evidence  of  non-
    native speakers, Professor French accepts that they do exist; but  once
    again (see 36) he notes the advantages given by  practical  experience.
    It is reasonable to suppose that the scale of ETS's operations provided
    a good deal of this, from candidates around the world.

44. Clearly the  original  ASR  system  on  its  own  was  not  capable  of
    independent  verification,  owing  to  the  confidentiality   agreement
    between ETS and their supplier; but, even in the light of Dr Harrison's
    strictures on it, the evidence was held in SM and Qadir (ETS - Evidence
    - Burden of Proof) [2016] UKUT 229  (IAC)  to  satisfy  the  evidential
    burden on the Home Office. It is not too surprising that it should  not
    have outweighed the evidence given by Dr Harrison  and  the  appellants
    themselves in their statutory appeals in that case.

45. Looking at the evidence before the decision-maker in  this  case,  with
    the benefit  of  the  balanced  hindsight  provided,  not  only  by  Dr
    Harrison, but now also Professor French,  a  number  of  things  become
    clear. Dr Harrison sets what might be called the gold standard for  the
    kind of independent expert analysis of voice comparison evidence  which
    would ideally be required in a criminal case such as Flynn,  where  one
    or a relatively small number of speakers will be under consideration.

46. However Professor French confirms, from the point  of  view  of  an  at
    least equally recognized expert, that natural ability,  training,  even
    of a fairly basic kind, and experience all play a valuable  part.  With
    the hindsight provided by his evidence, as well as Dr Harrison's,  into
    the system of ASR, together with human verification, operated by ETS, I
    do not think the respondent can be regarded as having  acted  unfairly,
    in this and very many other cases of the same kind, in taking it as the
    basis for findings of deception.

47. While the lack of visible note-taking  means  that  direct  independent
    checking of results obtained in an individual  case  is  not  possible,
    this applicant, like Ranjit Kaur, was offered the chance to get  copies
    of the recordings made in his case, so he could have them analysed: see
    supplementary decision letter paragraph 22. The system as  a  whole  is
    not unfair, in the context in which it had to be operated.

Application

                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)




                               [Please see next page for appendix]
[appendix]



                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber

       Application no: JR 8997-15

                    on an application for JUDICIAL REVIEW

|At    Field House                             |Decision signed:   25.05.2017|
|on    12.05.2017                              |Handed down:      30.05.2017 |


                 The Queen on the application of ranjit kaur
                                                                   Applicant

                                      v

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


                  Before Upper Tribunal Judge John FREEMAN


Counsel for the applicant: Hafsah Masood
Counsel for the respondent:       Rory Dunlop

                                  DECISION

    1.       This is an application for judicial review of the decision  of
       the respondent on 11 June 2015, confirmed on  administrative  review
       on the 26th, to refuse an application for further leave to remain as
       a student by a citizen of India, born there in 1980.

    2. The first decision refused the application on these grounds:

      a. (Immigration Rules paragraph 322 (2)): the applicant had made false
         representations (involving proxy taking of an ETS  English-language
         test) to get leave to remain in 2013; and

      b. she had not provided a valid CAS [Confirmation  of  Acceptance  for
         Studies], which would have required satisfactory evidence of funds.

    The decision on administrative review confirmed the  decision  on  (a),
    and said nothing more about  (b).  Although  the  applicant  needed  to
    succeed on both points to get leave to remain, it is agreed that she is
    entitled to challenge the decision on (a), in view of its  consequences
    for the future.

CASE HISTORY

    3. I shall need to go into this, to set the scene  for  an  application
       with which the hearing before me began.

    23.07.2015             judicial review claim filed
    29.09           Upper Tribunal Judge Ward
                    (a) refuses an extension of time for acknowledgement of
    service [AoS]
                    (b) grants permission, with standard directions
    30.10           UT Judge Allen extends time  for  detailed  grounds  of
    defence
    04.11           detailed grounds of defence filed and served


    26.05.2016             respondent  applies  for  adjournment  to  await
    result of lead cases
                      (a) MA [2016] UKUT 450 (IAC)
                      (b) Mohibullah  [2016] UKUT 561 (IAC)
                      (c) Saha & another  [2017] UKUT 17 (IAC)
    09.06           UT Judge  Blum  gives  applicant  till  28  days  after
                    publication of decisions in all  lead  cases  to  notify
                    Upper Tribunal whether  [s]he  intends  to  pursue  this
                    claim, and directs that
              (a)  if the answer is no, it will be treated as withdrawn;
                      (b)  if yes, then further directions were to follow,
                         beginning with the applicant serving amended
                         grounds, if so advised.


    13.01.2017             final decision in Saha handed down
    10.02           time for applicant to comply with Judge Blum's order
       expires
    14.03           hearing listed for 14 May
    25.04           GLD (Mr Hayes) speaks to applicant's previous
                    solicitors: they have withdrawn
    26.04     respondent
                    (a) offers access to voice recording used on applicant's
                       ETS test; and
                    (b) applies for permission to file further evidence
    05.05     respondent's skeleton argument
    09.05     applicant's skeleton argument
    10.05     respondent replies, with witness statement from Mr Hayes


    4. Since the respondent's application of  26  April  was  opposed,  the
       hearing began with Mr Dunlop addressing me on it. Referring  to  his
       reply (paragraph 8), he made these points:

      c. the question was whether it was in the  interests  of  justice,  in
         terms of the overriding  objective,  to  admit  the  evidence:  see
         Nottinghamshire and City of Nottingham  Fire  Authority  v  Gladman
         Commercial Properties [2011] EWHC 1918 (Ch);

      d. the late stage at which it had been put forward was the applicant's
         fault, for not complying with Judge Blum's order;

      e. the applicant's present  solicitors  had  in  any  case  only  been
         instructed at about the same time as  the  evidence  had  been  put
         forward; and (not in the reply)

      f. the evidence was vital to the issues before me; and  the  applicant
         had not taken up the offer to examine the voice recording;

      g. it would, even if the applicant succeeded in  having  the  decision
         under challenge set aside, be relevant to the relief to be granted;
         and finally

      h. similar evidence had been  consistently  considered  by  the  Upper
         Tribunal, in Saha, Mohibullah  and elsewhere.

    5. On (4), Miss  Masood  explained  that  the  offer  about  the  voice
       recording had only been made to the applicant's previous solicitors:
       she hadn't heard of it herself till the morning of  the  hearing.  I
       invited Mr Dunlop  to  confirm  that  it  remained  open,  which  on
       instructions he did; but Miss Masood said the applicant preferred to
       go on with the hearing.

    6. Miss Masood argued that the applicant had been entitled to  know  in
       good time what the case against her was; and,  out  of  the  further
       evidence put forward, only the  statement  of  Jacqueline  John-Rose
       (signed 25 April 2017) had not  been  already  in  existence  before
       Judge Blum's order came into effect on 10 February. The  reports  by
       Professor French and Mr Heighway were over  a  year  old:  in  fact,
       though Professor French's is dated 20 April 2016, Mr Heighway's  did
       not appear till last December. Documents they referred  to  had  not
       been disclosed, under the respondent's duty of candour.

    7. My conclusions on the respondent's application are as  follows:  the
       overriding objective is to deal with cases fairly  and  justly;  the
       evidence put forward is obviously highly relevant, for reasons which
       will become clear  when  I  discuss  it;  so  unless  it  cannot  be
       admitted, fairly to the applicant in terms of the case history,  and
       of her ability, through Miss Masood, to deal with it,  then  in  the
       interests of justice I ought to let it in.  While,  as  Miss  Masood
       pointed out, it had not  been  in  existence  at  the  date  of  the
       decision under challenge, so could not be relied on by the decision-
       maker, it was clearly relevant to the reliability  of  the  evidence
       which had been relied on.

    8. Dealing first with the history, as I put it to Miss Masood, the case
       was on ice till 10 February this year: it might  with  hindsight  be
       regretted that Judge Blum's order, perhaps in standard terms,  given
       the large number of cases like this before the Tribunal at the time,
       did not say anything about the consequences  of  the  applicant  not
       saying anything at all before the deadline about what she wanted  to
       do. However, he had very clearly directed her to do so,  and,  under
       r. 2 of the  Upper  Tribunal  Procedure  Rules  (if  authority  were
       required for this)

       (4) Parties must
             (a) help the Upper Tribunal to further the overriding
       objective; and
             (b) co-operate with the Upper Tribunal generally.

    9. The applicant failed to do anything at all to communicate  with  the
       Tribunal till she put in her skeleton argument on 9 May,  only  five
       days  before  the  hearing;  and  then  only  in  response  to   the
       respondent's. Mr Hayes explains in his statement why no  action  had
       been taken on the respondent's side before 26 April, and  I  do  not
       blame him, or her in the least for  that.  Putting  it  in  ordinary
       language, if mixing metaphors: till 10 February this case  had  been
       on ice,  and  since  then  the  ball  had  been  very  much  in  the
       applicant's court. The fact that she and her present solicitors  had
       not received the further evidence till 26 April, a fortnight  before
       the hearing, was in reality her fault, whatever the terms set out in
       the standard directions, given back in September 2015.

   10. So much for the case history: turning to the  applicant's  situation
       on the date of the hearing before  me,  it  remained  open  to  her,
       whenever the opportunity had originally been offered, to examine the
       actual evidence on which  the  decision  under  challenge  had  been
       based, and  to  test  Professor  French  and  Mr  Heighway's  expert
       evidence against the thing itself. On advice, she chose not to  take
       this opportunity; but to adopt the tactical position of  seeking  to
       exclude the evidence altogether.

   11. I am not blaming Miss Masood for that, since she  had  clearly  been
       put in a difficult position by the applicant's very late instruction
       of her present solicitors, and no doubt Miss Masood herself, coupled
       with the applicant's previous complete  inaction  from  10  February
       onwards. However, litigation is not a game, but a  serious  business
       whose object is fairness  and  justice.  On  both  heads  I  had  no
       hesitation in ruling that the further evidence should be admitted.

APPLICANT'S CASE

   12. Miss Masood put her case on two main grounds:  first,  the  decision
       under challenge had been based on evidence of insufficient  quality;
       next, the applicant had not been given an opportunity to answer  the
       allegations against her. While what I have already said is  of  some
       relevance on these substantive issues, as  well  as  the  procedural
       ones discussed,  Miss  Masood  developed  her  submissions  at  some
       length, and I will deal with them.

   13. On Miss Masood's first ground, she began by pointing  out  that  the
       decision under challenge, as made, had been based  on  nothing  more
       than an 'invalid' match on the Look-up Tool. Since these  and  other
       terms used, though well known to those  involved  in  litigation  of
       this kind, are very far from plain, or even  legal  English,  I  had
       better do what I can to explain them, from the  decided  cases,  and
       then go on to discuss the standard  of  review,  before  turning  to
       assess the evidence itself.

   14. SM and Qadir  (ETS - Evidence - Burden of  Proof)  [2016]  UKUT  229
       sets  the  scene:  TOEIC  [Test   of   English   for   International
       Communication] refers to the test taken by those involved  in  these
       cases, so as to satisfy the requirements of the Rules by  getting  a
       certificate  establishing   their   English-language   skills;   ETS
       [Educational Testing Services] is 'the  international  entity  which
       provided the Home Office with services relating to English  language
       testing in the United Kingdom'; the Look-up Tool is the Home  Office
       system under which ETS testing analyses were matched to  the  person
       with the name, date of birth  and  nationality  of  the  certificate
       holder. Matches were graded either valid, invalid, or questionable.

   15. Standard of review        Miss Masood referred to the test  used  by
       the Tribunal (McCloskey P  and  UTJ  Rintoul)  at  paragraph  63  of
       Mohibullah: whether the decision under challenge "... lay within the
       spectrum of decisions open to the hypothetical reasonable  decision-
       maker". She suggested that, despite the Tribunal's reference to Keyu
       & others [2015] UKSC 69, this represented an  incorrect  reading  of
       that authority. (The same panel in Saha  nevertheless described  it,
       at paragraph 61, as an 'elevated hurdle').

   16. This was rather a bold submission to make at the  present  stage  of
       these  proceedings,  contrary  to  the  reported   decision   of   a
       Presidential panel of this Tribunal; but I  need  to  deal  with  it
       before going any further. While Keyu involved a great deal  of  very
       learned discussion of the standard of review, it is quite clear that
       the Supreme Court declined the appellants' invitation to lay down  a
       new one. Perhaps this was most clearly  set  out  by  Lord  Kerr  at
       paragraph 278:

       ... the present  appeal  ...  is  not  the  occasion  to  review  the
       authorities. Final conclusions on a number of interesting issues that
       arise in this area must await a case where they  can  be  more  fully
       explored. These include whether irrationality and proportionality are
       forms of review which are bluntly opposed to each other and  mutually
       exclusive; whether intensity of review operates on a  sliding  scale,
       dependent on the nature of the decision under challenge and that,  in
       consequence, the debate about a 'choice' between proportionality  and
       rationality is no longer relevant; whether  there  is  any  place  in
       modern administrative law for a 'pure' irrationality ground of review
       ie one which poses the  question,  'could  any  reasonable  decision-
       maker, acting reasonably, have reached this conclusion'; and  whether
       proportionality provides a more structured and transparent  means  of
       review.

   17. I shall proceed on the basis that the question posed by  Lord  Kerr,
       referring to 'any reasonable decision-maker', is still the one to be
       answered in judicial review proceedings of this kind. Referring to a
       previous Court of Appeal  decision,  in  which  he  had  taken  part
       himself, Lord Mance  at  paragraph  53  of  Kennedy  v.  Information
       Commissioner  [2014] UKSC  20  alluded  to  the  spectrum  of  cases
       between those where "... a low intensity of  review  is  applied  to
       cases  involving  issues   'depending   essentially   on   political
       judgment'", and "... decisions infringing fundamental rights,  where
       unreasonableness is not equated with 'absurdity' or 'perversity' and
       a 'lower' threshold of unreasonableness is used".

   18. This is the spectrum referred  to  by  McCloskey  P  in  Mohibullah:
       perhaps he considered the concept too well known to require  further
       elaboration. While I certainly  agree  with  Miss  Masood  that  the
       decision now under  challenge  had  nothing  to  do  with  political
       judgment, on the other hand it  did  not  infringe  the  applicant's
       fundamental rights, which are not  engaged  by  Rules  regulating  a
       person's ability to pursue their studies outside their own  country.
       Nevertheless,  it  was   a   decision   with   potentially   serious
       consequences for her, in terms of the time  bar[1]  on  future  visa
       applications, and I shall bear that in mind.

   19. The other authority Miss  Masood  referred  to  on  this  point  was
       Khawaja [1983] UKHL 8. At paragraph 39 Lord Wilberforce set out  the
       functions of the courts, as will be seen, but first making it  clear
       that the case in hand involved someone not only subject  to  removal
       as an illegal entrant who had practised  deceit,  but  detained  for
       that to take place. This applicant, on the other hand, has not  been
       detained, and would have every opportunity  to  leave  this  country
       voluntarily to avoid that happening.

   20. This is the relevant passage from Khawaja:

       3. The court's  investigation  of  the  facts  is  of  a  supervisory
       character and not by way of appeal (it should not be forgotten that a
       right of appeal as to the facts exists under section 16 of the Act of
       1971 even though Parliament has thought fit to impose conditions upon
       its exercise). It should appraise the quality  of  the  evidence  and
       decide whether that justifies the conclusion reached -  e.g.  whether
       it justifies a conclusion that the applicant obtained  permission  to
       entry by fraud or deceit. An allegation that he has done so being  of
       a  serious  character  and  involving  issues  of  personal  liberty,
       requires a corresponding degree of satisfaction as to  the  evidence.
       If the court is not satisfied with any part of the  evidence  it  may
       remit the  matter  for  reconsideration  or  itself  receive  further
       evidence. It should quash the detention order where the evidence  was
       not such as the authorities  should  have  relied  on  or  where  the
       evidence received does  not  justify  the  decision  reached  or,  of
       course, for any serious procedural irregularity.

    With the reservation about this case set out at 19, that is the
    approach I shall follow.

   21. Assessment of evidence    Besides suggesting that use of the Look-up
       Tool was not enough to produce a reliable result on  its  own,  Miss
       Masood referred to the facts she said should have  been  taken  into
       account by the decision-maker. The Home  Office  computerized  case-
       notes [GCID] showed she had been doing a  course  for  the  Graduate
       Certificate in Hospitality Management, with Foundation  English,  at
       the University of West London, before taking the ETS test in 2013.

   22. As for the ETS test, the only information available to the decision-
       maker had been from ETS itself, and from the Home  Office  witnesses
       Peter  Millington  and  Rebecca  Collings  (the  so-called   generic
       evidence, since it  applied  to  all  ETS  cases).  In  Qadir,  this
       evidence was subjected to the following main criticisms:

    (i)        Neither  witness  has  any  qualifications   or   expertise,
        vocational or otherwise, in the scientific subject matter of  these
        appeals, namely voice recognition technology and techniques.
     ii) In making its decisions in individual cases, the  Home  Office  was
         entirely dependent on the information provided by ETS.  At a  later
         stage viz from around June 2014 this dependency  extended  to  what
         was reported by its delegation which went to the United States.
    iii)  ETS  was  the  sole  arbiter  of  the  information  disclosed  and
         assertions made to the delegation. For its part, the  delegation  -
         unsurprisingly, given its lack  of  expertise  -  and  indeed,  the
         entirety of the Secretary of State's officials and decision  makers
         accepted uncritically everything reported by ETS.

   23. On the other hand, the Tribunal in Qadir  (a statutory appeal) found
       (at paragraph 68) that, on the basis of this evidence, the Secretary
       of State had discharged the evidential burden of raising a  case  of
       deception which called for an  answer  from  the  appellants;   but,
       considering their own evidence and that of their expert  witness  Dr
       Harrison, went on to find that the legal burden of proving deception
       had not been discharged.

   24. In Gazi   (ETS - judicial review) (IJR) [2015]  UKUT  327  (IAC)  Dr
       Harrison's evidence was summarized as follows at paragraph 20:

    (i)       In principle, the ETS methodology constitutes  "a  reasonable
        approach".  However,  the  specifics  of  its  implementation   are
        insufficiently particularised in the Respondent's  evidence,  which
        suffers from "a lack of technical information and detail".
    (ii)      The Secretary of State's evidence fails to  acknowledge  that
        the  human  verification  mechanism  "is  almost  certain  to  have
        resulted in false positive results".
    (iii)     The fact of an  unknown  number  of  false  positive  results
        results in  "an  unknown  number  of  test  takers  who  have  been
        incorrectly identified  as  having  fraudulently  taken  the  TOEIC
        test".
    (iv)      The accuracy and  reliability  of  the  ETS  results  overall
        cannot be gauged in the absence of sufficient  technical  knowledge
        of the process.
    (v)        This  inadequacy  could  be  rectified  to  some  extent  by
        disclosure of the audio material from individual tests, which would
        facilitate  independent  auditing  through  the   auditory-acoustic
        phonetic testing methodology.

   25. The complaint at (v) about failure to disclose  voice-recordings  is
       of course in striking contrast to the position now  reached  in  the
       present  case.  However,  in  Gazi  at  paragraph  34  the  Tribunal
       (McCloskey P) declined to find that the respondent had acted with an
       'improper purpose' by making a decision to remove the  applicant  on
       insufficient evidence, with only an out-of-country right of  appeal,
       on the basis that Dr Harrison's evidence had come after the decision
       under challenge, which is not the case here.

   26. As will be remembered, the test this applicant had taken,  allegedly
       by proxy, in 2013, was the TOEIC; but Miss Masood pointed  out  that
       ETS's testing tool had originally been developed for the TOEFL [Test
       of English as a Foreign Language].  See  Mr  Millington's  statement
       paragraph 26:

       ... the intention had been to further establish the technology within
       the TOEFL system before applying it to  the  TOEIC  system.  However,
       following the revelations in the Panorama programme [February  2014],
       ETS decided to deploy it as an  analytical  tool  to  retrospectively
       identify levels of abuse across EPN[2]

   27. Although Mr Millington noted (paragraph 31) that  pilot  testing  of
       the technology had shown  an  error  rate  of  less  than  2%,  Miss
       Masood's point was that his evidence did not show whether or not the
       TOEFL and TOEIC  populations  were  comparable.  As  for  the  human
       verification process which followed the use of the tool,  there  was
       nothing to show the error rates involved in that.

   28. Procedural unfairness     This formed the other main  part  of  Miss
       Masood's case, as to whether the applicant  had  been  given  enough
       opportunity to answer the charge against her. While the gist  of  it
       had been given in the decision letter, Miss  Masood  suggested  that
       the context (see Doody [1993] UKHL 8) required something  more.  The
       relevant context was that this was  a  decision  with  no  right  of
       appeal, and only a limited right of administrative  review.  At  the
       date of the  decision  under  challenge  the  Rules  did  not  allow
       submission of fresh evidence on applying for  administrative  review
       of a paragraph 322 (2) decision such as this, though that has  since
       changed. Miss Masood's submission was that the respondent had had  a
       duty to allow the applicant to make representations  addressing  the
       gist of the decision.



   29. This point had been referred to in Mohibullah  at paragraph 80:

       We  recognise  that  in  theory  the  Applicant   could   have   made
       representations to the Secretary of State after communication of  the
       impugned decision. However, it is far from clear that  the  Secretary
       of State would have  been  either  willing  or,  more  fundamentally,
       legally empowered to revoke the decision. Furthermore, there  is  the
       inescapable and prosaic reality highlighted by [previous decisions of
       the courts] that the exercise of  post-decision  representations,  in
       the real world, may well be an arid one.

   30. Miss Masood went on to refer to one of those decisions, SP [2004]
       EWCA Civ 1750: I have cited the relevant part at some length below,
       because I agree with Mr Dunlop that it is a case where the context
       is particularly important. Hooper LJ, giving what was in effect the
       judgment of the court, said this:

    59. Unless constrained by authority to find otherwise, I have no  doubt
        that contemporary standards of fairness and the principles  in  PSO
        4950 required the appellant to have given SP an opportunity to make
        representations before the order was made  to  remove  her  to  the
        segregation unit for reasons of good order and discipline.
    60. As I have shown, there is  a  substantial  difference  between  the
        regime for a 17 year old on her unit and in the segregation regime.
         Although  not  formally  a  punishment  measure,  removal  to  the
        segregation unit is in fact the most severe punishment that can  be
        awarded following disciplinary charges for  an  inmate  of  a  YOI.
        Although the purpose of sending the respondent into segregation was
        to protect others from the risk of harm, nonetheless there must  be
        in the eyes of the detainees  and  others  a  substantial  punitive
        element.
    61. The appellant's own PSO requires all staff must deal with the young
        women in their care openly and fairly, and to be mindful  of  their
        vulnerability (paragraph 46  above).   A  requirement  to  give  an
        opportunity to an inmate such as SP  to  comment  on  the  proposed
        reasons for removing her to  the  segregation  unit  would  fulfill
        [sic] the objective of dealing with the inmate "fairly and openly."

   31. Respondent's additional evidence        Miss Masood  now  turned  to
       deal with the respondent's case, as set out in the evidence which  I
       had allowed Mr Dunlop to put in. She first  referred  to  the  well-
       known principles set out in  Fordham's  Administrative  Law:  public
       bodies are not to act lightly, and refusal of relief, on  the  basis
       that proper consideration of  an  application  would  have  made  no
       difference, is to be exercised sparingly. Though Miss Masood did not
       refer to this  authority,  the  principles  to  be  applied  by  the
       Tribunal, on a claim such as this, filed before  8  August  2016[3],
       are set out in Ermakov [1995] EWCA Civ 42.

   32. Dealing with the evidence itself, Jacqueline John-Rose had used  the
       Look-up Tool to summarize  the  results  from  the  applicant's  New
       London College test centre on the day in question, 27 February 2013.
       The outcome is at exhibit  JJR4  to  her  statement:  it  shows  88%
       invalid, and 13%  questionable[4]  for  the  day  as  a  whole,  and
       comparable figures of 89% and 11% for the morning only. Adam Sewell,
       analysing the results for New London College for TOEIC  tests  taken
       between 20 March 2012 and 15 May 2013 had given them as 74% invalid,
       and none genuine, leaving 26% questionable.

   33. However, according to Miss Masood, all this amounted to no more than
       circumstantial  evidence  of  limited  value,  and  was  'inherently
       implausible', though she did not explain why. She suggested that, if
       the applicant had been given the chance to do  so,  then  she  might
       have wanted to get in touch with the college about her own  results.
       I inquired whether it was still in being: Mr Dunlop told me that  it
       was the subject of a pending judicial review case  of  its  own;  so
       perhaps its continued  existence  as  a  seat  of  learning  may  be
       questionable.

   34. Miss Masood went on to deal with the evidence of  Professor  French,
       which  he  helpfully  summarized  at  p  12  of  his  report.   Some
       explanation will be required by anyone who has not read the body  of
       it: 'ASR' means Automatic  Speaker  Recognition;  'trained  listener
       pair confirmation' is a more  detailed  description  of  the  'human
       verification process' already referred to, while  'false  positives'
       represent wrong classification of results as  invalid,  with  'false
       rejections' being the reverse. 'MFCCs' are 'mel  frequency  cepstrum
       coefficients'; but, as Professor French provides no explanation  for
       this term, so neither can I.

   35. This is what Professor French says there: it seems best  to  set  it
       out in full, so Miss Masood's arguments can be followed.

      i. The conditions used for  trained  listener  pair  confirmation,  in
         conjunction with the (albeit  unspecified)  conservative  threshold
         set for  ASR  match  identification  (witness  statement  of  Peter
         Millington,  para  31)  would,  in  my  view,  have   resulted   in
         substantially more false rejections than false positives.
      j. Even though there is  still  material  missing  from  the  body  of
         information called for by Dr Harrison, I am not convinced that  the
         provision of such information could be used to establish a  closely
         specified percentage of false positives.
      k. If the 2% error rate established for  the  TOEFL  pilot  recordings
         were to apply to the TOEIC recordings, then I  would  estimate  the
         rate of false positives to be very substantially less than 1% after
         the process of assessment by trained listeners  had  been  applied.
         This is because:
               i. there were stringent  criteria  for  verification  by  the
                  trained listeners;
              ii.  the  trained  listeners  had  potentially   more   speech
                  available from the tests than that processed by the ASR;
             iii. the trained listeners had available a much wider range  of
                  speech features on which to base their decisions than just
                  vocal tract resonances as reflected in  an  MFCC  analysis
                  performed by the ASR.
      l. Even if the TOEIC recordings were on average somewhat  shorter  and
         poorer in quality than the TOEFL  pilot  test  recordings,  on  the
         basis of the information that has  been  provided,  I  would  still
         estimate the number of false positives emanating from  the  overall
         process of ASR analysis  followed  by  assessment  by  two  trained
         listeners to be very small.

   36. Miss Masood noted that Professor French had said at paragraph  3.3.2
       of his report that "It remains unclear exactly how much training the
       listeners underwent  ...".  However  I  note  that  he  goes  on  to
       summarize the position as follows:

       ... it would appear from  the  information  given  that  the  trained
       listeners at ETS  would  be  in  a  significantly  less  advantageous
       position than forensic  phoneticians/speech  scientists  (minimum  of
       master's degree in the subject area and 1 -  2  years  working  under
       supervision), but in a distinctly better position than untrained lay-
       listeners attempting the same task.

   37. Again, Miss Masood referred to Professor French's remarks (at 3.3.6)
       about Dr  Harrison's  comments  on  the  lack  of  testing  for  new
       listeners: to summarize them, Professor French notes  Dr  Harrison's
       description  of  the  induction  given  as  "peer  [review]  by   an
       experienced analyst until a level of  confidence  was  reached  that
       they were capable of carrying out the work on their  own".  He  says
       that, while this was not ideal, new listeners, so far  as  practical
       work  is  concerned,  are  in  the  same  position  as  new   speech
       scientists, who are also subject to in-house mentoring, rather  than
       any formal testing.

   38. Finally, Miss Masood referred to  the  rejection  letters  from  two
       universities (West of Scotland [UWS], 25 November 2014; and Reading,
       4 December that year) refusing her a place as she had previously sat
       a TOEIC test. While Miss Masood relied on these  to  show  a  direct
       link between the decision-making process and the applicant's lack of
       further academic progress, it seems to me even more noteworthy  that
       these rejections had given the applicant reason at least to  suspect
       that her 2013 result would be regarded by the Home Office as at best
       unreliable, over six months before the decision under  challenge  on
       11 June 2015. If she had been in any kind of doubt as to why, a very
       little inquiry would have pointed  to  what  was  disclosed  in  the
       'Panorama' programme as the reason.





RESPONDENT'S CASE

   39. Reliability of the evidence      Mr  Dunlop  pointed  out  that  the
       challenge to the use of the Look-up Tool had been  rejected  by  the
       Tribunal at paragraph 35 in Gazi, and at 63 in  Mohibullah.  As  for
       the further evidence since filed, the Tribunal in Saha  (McCloskey P
       and Judge Rintoul) had regarded it as allaying  concerns  previously
       expressed in Qadir . In Abbas [2017] EWHC 78 (Admin) Wm. Davis J had
       considered the evidence of Dr  Harrison,  Professor  French  and  Mr
       Sewell (see 32) at paragraphs 12 - 13, and at 16 concluded  that  Mr
       Sewell's evidence provided significant  circumstantial  support  for
       the proposition that anyone who supposedly took the  TOEIC  test  at
       the centre in question was party to a fraud. There  was  no  witness
       statement filed by the applicant to gainsay this body of evidence.

   40. Mr Dunlop went on to refer to the acknowledgement by the Tribunal at
       paragraph 57 in MA (ETS - TOEIC testing)[2016] UKUT 450 (IAC) of the
       range of reasons why people with perfectly good English might engage
       in TOEIC fraud. I suggested  to  the  parties  that,  besides  these
       personal reasons, another might have to be added:  where,  as  here,
       the great  majority  of  a  college's  results  were  classified  as
       invalid, and the rest questionable, the  college,  rather  than  the
       individual students, might be assumed to have taken the  initiative.
       If that is right, and no reason was put forward against it, then the
       students' collusion in the process was to an extent  understandable;
       but still something for which individuals would  have  to  take  the
       responsibility. Finally Mr Dunlop referred  to  the  offer  to  make
       voice-recordings available in the present case, already noted at 25.

   41. Procedural unfairness     Mr Dunlop referred to  the  point  already
       dealt with at 38  about the  warning  given  the  applicant  by  the
       rejection letters  she  had  received,  before  the  decision  under
       challenge: a similar situation had been dealt with in Mohibullah  at
       paragraph 82. He referred to the Divisional  Court  decision  (later
       upheld on this point in Berriew & others  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  199  at
       paragraph 75) for the proposition  that,  where  consultation  would
       have made no difference, a decision should not be set aside for lack
       of it. Finally Mr Dunlop sought to refer  to  Habib  (JR/1260/2016);
       but, since this was an unreported decision of  the  Upper  Tribunal,
       and he had not obtained the necessary permission under the  Practice
       Directions, I need not deal with that.

APPLICANT'S REPLY

   42. Miss Masood correctly pointed out  that  the  further  evidence  put
       forward had only been produced after  the hearing in Saha:  however,
       it does not  seem  to  me  that  this  could  adversely  affect  its
       reliability; nor could the view taken on that  by  Wm.  Davis  J  in
       Abbas be adversely affected by his having dealt with the question of
       deception as a matter of precedent fact (since the previous grant of
       leave was a condition precedent to the validity of  the  application
       for naturalization). She accepted that the 'Panorama' programme  had
       been broadcast in February  2014,  so  putting  the  allegations  of
       generalized fraud in ETS tests into the public domain; but she  said
       the rejection letters in November and December that  year  were  too
       vague to give the applicant notice of the problem she was  about  to
       face in renewing her leave.

CONCLUSIONS

   43. By the time this applicant made her application for leave to  remain
       on 23 December 2014, she would have been well aware what her  recent
       rejection letters,  which  meant  she  was  unable  to  provide  the
       necessary CAS [Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies],  were  based
       on. The more explicit of the two is the UWS one, which  referred  to
       the Home Office having 'serious concerns' on the authenticity of the
       TOEIC test she had taken. It does not seem to me, at  least  in  the
       particular circumstances of this case, that there can be anything in
       Miss Masood's argument, however carefully  put  together,  that  the
       applicant was entitled to advance warning that the respondent had it
       in mind to refuse her application on the very same ground.

   44. Turning to the reliability of the evidence on which the decision was
       reached, as already made clear at 16 - 20, I approach  it  from  the
       stand-point  of  whether   any   reasonable   decision-maker   could
       reasonably have reached it, bearing  in  mind  its  consequences  in
       terms of the spectrum referred to in the authorities: not so serious
       as the immediate segregation of the  young  person  in  SP,  or  the
       imminent removal of the d�tenu in Khawaja; but  serious  enough  for
       her to be barred from applying for a visa for a whole  year  if  she
       left voluntarily at her own expense, and a good deal longer  if  she
       did not.

   45. As for Miss Masood's argument that  the  validity  of  the  decision
       could only be judged on the material available at the time,  I  have
       to reject it.  Putting  the  situation  at  its  simplest,  the  raw
       material was provided to the decision-maker by the Look-up Tool; and
       it was the validity or otherwise of  that  raw  material  which  was
       discussed in turn by Dr Harrison, Professor  French  and  the  other
       witnesses.

   46. It was the whole body of evidence to  which  I  have  just  referred
       which has been exhaustively considered by  various  panels  of  this
       Tribunal, many of them Presidential  ones,  in  the  authorities  to
       which I have been referred, as well as by Wm Davis J in Abbas. I  do
       not see any grounds for distinguishing the basis of assessment  used
       in those cases. It was a perfectly straightforward question for  all
       the decision-makers, and the fact that Wm Davis J had to approach it
       as one  of  fact  for  himself  makes  his  decision  all  the  more
       persuasive.

   47. While the state of the evidence in Qadir made it  possible  for  the
       appellants to satisfy the Tribunal, on their own evidence and  those
       of their expert, that the respondent had  not  satisfied  the  legal
       burden of proving deceit, the evidence which  she  has  put  forward
       since has invariably satisfied both courts and  this  Tribunal  that
       evidence obtained through the ETS Look-up Tool entitled a reasonable
       decision-maker to refuse an application made in these circumstances.
       It is certainly a pity that this evidence was not assembled  in  the
       first place; but its effect is very clear.

   48. Finally, there is the position of this applicant to  be  considered.
       Having received the administrative review refusal on 26  June  2015,
       she applied in good time for judicial review on 23 July, and was not
       obliged to take  any  further  steps  in  the  proceedings  till  10
       February 2017, when the time given  by  Judge  Blum,  following  the
       final decision in Saha, expired. However she did not take any  steps
       to investigate the factual basis for the decision under challenge in
       her own case, or to put forward any evidence to counter it.

   49. After 10 February, the applicant let the  case  remain  asleep  till
       after 26 April, when Mr Hayes, late or not, did his best to find out
       what was going on on her side. Even if, as she says,  the  offer  to
       provide the voice recording used for her test was only  communicated
       to her on the date of the hearing, it was there to take  up  if  her
       real concern was to test the reliability of the evidential basis for
       the decision under challenge.

   50. Even without those considerations, however, I  regard  the  decision
       under challenge as neither  procedurally  unfair,  nor  evidentially
       unreliable, for the reasons already given.

Application

                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)




                               -----------------------
[1]    Only one year if  she  voluntarily  left  this  country  at  her  own
    expense; five years if she left voluntarily at Government expense;  and
    ten years if she had to be removed: see decision letter.
[2]    ETS Preferred Network: see Mr Millington's statement paragraph 16.
[3]    when s. 16 (3E) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act  2007
    came into force
[4]    No doubt the apparently impossible combined figures  are  the  result
    of approximation of fractions.

