
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

       TS (Political opponents -risk) Burma CG [2013] UKUT 00281 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |                             |
|On 11, 12 and 13 March 2013                   |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                                     TS
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Mullins, instructed by Gillman-Smith Lee
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


 1. In order to decide whether a person would be at risk of persecution  in
    Burma because of opposition to the current government, it is  necessary
    to assess whether such activity is reasonably likely to lead to a  risk
    of detention.  Detention in Burma, even for  a  short  period,  carries
    with it a real risk of serious ill-treatment, contrary to Article 3  of
    the ECHR and amounting to persecution/serious harm within  the  meaning
    of the Qualification Directive.

 2. A person is  at  real  risk  of  being  detained  in  Burma  where  the
    authorities regard him or her to be a threat to the  stability  of  the
    regime or of the Burmese Union.

 3. The spectrum of those potentially at risk ranges from those who are (or
    are perceived to be) actively seeking to overthrow  the  government  to
    those who are in outspoken and vexing  opposition  to  it.   Whether  a
    person is in need of  protection  will  depend  upon  past  and  future
    political behaviour.  This  assessment  has  to  be  made  against  the
    background of a recently reforming government that carries a legacy  of
    repression and continues to closely monitor those  in  opposition.  The
    evidence points to a continuing anxiety over the break up of the  state
    and the loss of its power.

 4. The question of risk of ill-treatment will in general turn upon whether
    a returnee is detained by the authorities at any stage after return.

 5. A person who has a profile of  voicing opposition to the government  in
    the  United  Kingdom   through  participation  in   demonstrations   or
    attendance at political meetings will not for this reason alone  be  of
    sufficient concern to the Burmese authorities to  result  in  detention
    immediately upon arrival.  This  is  irrespective  of  whether  the  UK
    activity has been driven by opportunistic or genuinely held  views  and
    is regardless of the prominence of the profile in this country.

 6. A person who has  a  profile  of  voicing  opposition  to  the  Burmese
    government in the United Kingdom can expect to be monitored upon return
    by the Burmese authorities.  The intensity of that monitoring  will  in
    general depend upon the extent of opposition activity abroad.

 7. Whether there is a real risk that monitoring  will  lead  to  detention
    following return will in each case depend on the  Burmese  authorities'
    view of the information it  already  possesses  coupled  with  what  it
    receives as the result of any post-arrival monitoring.  Their view will
    be shaped by (i) how active the person had been in the United  Kingdom,
    for example by leading demonstrations or becoming a prominent voice  in
    political meetings, (ii) what he/she did before  leaving  Burma,  (iii)
    what that person does on return, (iv)the profile of the  people  he  or
    she mixes with and (v) whether a person is of an ethnicity that is seen
    by the government to be de-stabilising the union, or  if  the  person's
    activity is of a kind that has an  ethnic,  geo-political  or  economic
    regional component, which is regarded by the Burmese  government  as  a
    sensitive issue.

 8. It is someone's profile in the eyes of the state that  is  the  key  to
    determining risk.  The more the person concerned  maintains  an  active
    political profile in  Burma,  post-return,  the  greater  the  risk  of
    significant monitoring, carrying with it a real risk of detention.

 9. In general, none of the risks identified above is reasonably likely  to
    arise if an individual's international prominence is  very  high.   The
    evidence shows that the government is keen to avoid  adverse  publicity
    resulting from the detention of internationally well-known activists.

10. In the light of these conclusions, TL  and  Others  (Burma  CG)  [2009]
    UKAIT 00017 can no longer be relied on for Country Guidance.  The issue
    of illegal exit and its consequences considered in HM (risk factors for
    Burmese Citizens) Burma CG [2006] UKAIT 00012 were not addressed by the
    parties and the guidance in that decision remains in force for the time
    being.

11. There is evidence of positive changes in Burma  which  as  they  become
    embedded may result in the need for the present country guidance to  be
    revisited by the Upper Tribunal in the short to medium term.





                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


|TABLE OF CONTENTS                         Paragraphs                       |
|Preliminary matters                                 |1-7                   |
|Ambit of the appeal                                 |8                     |
|Agreed Facts in TS's case                           |9-11                  |
|Existing Burma Country Guidance cases               |12-14                 |
|Summary of the evidence                             |                      |
| Evidence of Mr Maung, TN and HHS                   |15-20                 |
| Evidence of Dr Zarni                               |21-22                 |
| Evidence of Marcia Robiou                          |23-26                 |
| The Report of the Special Rapporteur               |27-35                 |
|            Other country information               |36                    |
|Submissions                                         |37-46                 |
|Legal background                                    |53-57                 |
|Discussion and country guidance                     |58-83                 |
|Determination of the appeal                         |84-85                 |
|Schedule One                                        |                      |
|            Evidence of Ms Marcia Robiou            |1-36                  |
|              Evidence of Dr Zarni                  |37-60                 |
|              Report of Special Rapporteur          |88-89                 |
|Schedule Two                                        |                      |
|            Summary of skeleton argument -Mr Mullins|1-8                   |
|               Mr Mullins supplementary skeleton    |9-16                  |
|argument                                            |                      |
|               Summary of Mr Avery's initial        |17-23                 |
|skeleton argument                                   |                      |
|               Mr Avery's supplementary submissions |24-27                 |
|                                                    |                      |
|Schedule Three- Documents considered                |                      |

 Preliminary Matters

 1. This appeal concerns a national of Burma who was born on  9  May  1958.
    On 18 March 2008 he unsuccessfully applied to the Secretary of State to
    be recognised as a refugee.  As a  result  was  faced  with  a  removal
    decision dated 24 March 2009, which he then unsuccessfully appealed  to
    a judge of the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Immigration  Judge
    Neyman).  On 9 December 2009 Senior Immigration Judge Moulden  made  an
    order for reconsideration.  By virtue of  the  transitional  provisions
    contained in the Transfer of Functions of the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    Tribunal Order 2010 and by application of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007, the  appeal  came  before  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Freeman  on  15  March  2010.  He  dismissed  the  appeal.  Thereafter,
    permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal was granted by Longmore  LJ
    at an oral hearing on 26 January 2011. On 23 May 2011 Sullivan  LJ,  by
    consent, ordered that the determination of Judge Freeman be  set  aside
    and that the appeal be  remitted  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  for  appeal
    against the decision of the Secretary of State to be reconsidered.  The
    Statement of Reasons records that at [4]:

        "The Respondent accepts that the findings of fact,  concerning  the
        finding that the Burmese authorities (as distinct from the  British
        authorities) would know that the appellant is a hanger on  with  no
        real commitment to the opportunist (sic) cause, is an error of law"

 2. By this route, the appeal has come before us to re-make the decision.

 3. The reference to "hanger-on" in the  Court  of  Appeal's  Statement  of
    Reasons comes from a decision of  the  Upper  Tribunal  giving  country
    guidance on Burma: TL and Others (sur place activities - risk) Burma CG
    [2009] UKAIT 00017. This decision was recently the subject  of  similar
    criticism by the Court of Appeal in KS  (Burma)  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  67;
    although by then the Upper Tribunal had already decided, having  regard
    to the recent and well-publicised events of change in  Burma,  to  list
    this appeal for country guidance.

 4. It is unsatisfactory that the journey of this appeal through the  Upper
    Tribunal has been a slow one.  There are a number  of  appeals  in  the
    system that has been held up as a result and  the  need  for  a  prompt
    disposal became all the more important after KS (Burma).  No procedural
    issues were left unresolved by the date of hearing and we are  grateful
    to Mr Mullins (and his instructing solicitors) and Mr Avery  for  their
    prompt attention  to  the  directions  issues  and  their  helpful  and
    constructive approach to ensure the earliest possible hearing  of  this
    appeal once the decision had been made to list it for hearing.

 5. Facts have been agreed between the parties and there was, therefore, no
    need for TS to give evidence.   We  heard  evidence  however  from  two
    expert witnesses, Marcia Robiou and Dr Maung Zarni, by video link  from
    Bangkok and Kuala Lumpur respectively, on 11 and  12  March.   We  also
    heard evidence from three witnesses of fact relating to the experiences
    of Mr Maung, a British Citizen of Burmese origin.  He recently  applied
    to the Burmese consulate for a visa to visit his  wife  and  child  who
    currently reside in Burma having left the UK on Boxing Day 2012.

 6. Shortly before the hearing it became  apparent  that  Dr  Maung  Zarni,
    under pressure of time due to a change in his circumstances, was unable
    to prepare a supplementary report and so it was decided that  he  would
    participate in a telephone interview (by Skype) with Mr  Avery  and  Mr
    Mullins in order to respond  to  questions  posed  in  advance  by  the
    parties. A record was taken and this  is  summarised  in  the  relevant
    section below. Mr Avery had no objection to the additional reports from
    the experts being served at the last minute and he was content with the
    time made available for him to consider what was being  added  to  what
    had already been said. Similarly he had no objection to  Mr  Maung  and
    the additional witnesses giving evidence. As it turned  out,  the  SSHD
    accepted their evidence.

 7. The format of this determination is as follows. We set  out  below  the
    agreed facts relating to the appellant and thereafter the ambit of  the
    issues for us to determine.  Details of the expert and  other  evidence
    are set out in Schedule One.  Our conclusions on that evidence  are  in
    the body of this determination, as well as a summary of the submissions
    for which more detail is provided in Schedule Two.  The  relevant  case
    law and previous country guidance is considered in  the  body  of  this
    determination, followed  by  our  general  conclusions  giving  country
    guidance and our determination of the appeal.  The country on which  we
    give guidance is referred to variously in the  evidence  before  us  as
    Burma and Myanmar.  We have referred to it as Burma simply because that
    is how it was referred to in previous guidance. The former title  Union
    of Burma relates to the creation of the current state comprising  Upper
    and Lower Burma and the  Frontier  Areas,  which  had  been  separately
    administered under British rule prior to independence in 1948.

The ambit of this appeal

 8. The ambit of this appeal decided by the Tribunal and agreed between the
    parties is in the following terms:-

      i) What is the risk to a Burmese citizen who has taken part in
         demonstrations in the UK against the current Burmese regime, upon
         his return to Burma?

     ii) What is the relevance to the assessment in (i) above of someone who
         came to the adverse attention of the authorities before leaving
         Burma but was nevertheless able to travel out of the country on a
         valid Burmese passport?

    iii) To what extent do the Burmese authorities distinguish between
         returnees who have no real political or oppositionist commitment
         but who attend demonstrations to bolster a claim to asylum and
         those who attend political demonstrations out of a genuine
         commitment to the opposition cause?

     iv) What impact does the answer to the (iii) above have on the risk on
         return?

      v) Do head notes 1-5 and 7 of TL and Others (Burma CG) [2009] UKAIT
         00017 provide an accurate factual analysis and risk assessment
         faced by asylum seekers returning to Burma who have sought
         protection based on their political opposition to the current
         regime?

     vi) What is the risk with reference to the appellant's particular
         circumstances?

Agreed Facts in the appellant's Case.

 9. Although the SSHD initially  indicated  that  there  were  matters  she
    disputed, at a case management hearing  on  23  January  the  following
    facts were agreed.

10. In relation to the appellant's immigration history it was  agreed  that
    he first arrived in the UK on 4th April 2000, aged 41,  with  leave  to
    enter to study  English.  Such  leave  was  extended  on  a  number  of
    occasions, it last being conferred until 31 October 2005. The appellant
    was apprehended as a overstayer on 8 March 2008 and claimed  asylum  on
    18 March 2008.

11. The following further facts were agreed :-

      i) The appellant was born in Hinthada in South Burma on 9th May  1958.
         In September 2004 he renewed his Burmese passport  at  the  Burmese
         Embassy in London. His passport expired on the 19th January 2008;

     ii) Between September and December 2007 he participated in at least  30
         demonstrations   in   Parliament   Square   against   the   Burmese
         government's treatment of Buddhist monks within Burma. In  November
         2007 he attended three demonstrations outside Downing Street.  That
         month he also attended  two  meetings  of  the  Burmese  Democratic
         Movement Association (BDMA) at the Buddhist monastery in Colindale,
         north London;

    iii) On 16th May 2008 he  took  part  in  a  demonstration  outside  the
         Burmese Embassy  and  collected  donations  from  his  friends  for
         victims  of  Cyclone  Nargis.  During  that  demonstration  he  saw
         officials  within   the   Embassy   taking   photographs   of   the
         demonstrators outside;

     iv) His claim for asylum was refused on the 22nd February 2009  against
         which he appealed. He continued his political  activities  and  was
         involved in protests outside the Burmese embassy on the 27th March,
         15th and 18th May. On 23rd May 2009 he protested outside the French
         Embassy  over  Total  Oil's  support  of  the  Burmese  Government.
         Photographs of him appear on  www.totaloutofburma.blogspot.com.  On
         19th June he demonstrated outside the Burmese Embassy to demand the
         release of Aung San Suu Kyi on her 64th birthday.  He  appeared  on
         www.youtube.com.

      v) Between the 30th  July  and  25th  September  2009,  the  appellant
         attended seven more demonstrations  outside  the  Burmese  Embassy.
         25th  September  was  the  second  Anniversary   of   the   Saffron
         Revolution. Footage from the demonstration appeared on Myanmar  TV,
         which contained pictures of the appellant. Four days after the news
         broadcast, a military officer paid a visit to the appellant's  wife
         in Burma to find out his whereabouts. She told the officer  he  was
         in England. The officer then asked what he was doing in England and
         if she knew anything about him appearing on TV taking part  in  the
         demonstration. She replied that he was studying in England and that
         she knew nothing about his picture appearing on TV;

     vi) On 26th March 2010 the appellant attended a  demonstration  outside
         the Burmese Embassy in the United Kingdom to mark Burma  Resistance
         Day. On 3rd May 2010  he  attended  a  demonstration  in  Trafalgar
         Square to demand the release of comedian,  Zarganar.  Between  27th
         May  and  6th  August  2010,  the  appellant  attended  five   more
         demonstrations outside the Burmese Embassy. On 6th November 2010 he
         participated in a rally and peaceful march to condemn Burma's  sham
         election following which he appeared on Youtube;

    vii) On 25th March 2011 the appellant attended a  demonstration  outside
         the Burmese Embassy to mark Burma Resistance Day. Between 17th June
         and 19th July 2011, the  appellant  participated  in  four  further
         demonstrations outside the Burmese Embassy. In  the  first  two  of
         these demonstrations, which took  place  in  June,  his  photograph
         appeared on the internet. On 22nd June 2011 the appellant  attended
         the Aung San Suu Kyi event at the Royal Albert Hall;

   viii) On 26th September 2012 he joined the "National League for Democracy
         - Liberated Area UK" (NLD-LA UK) as a member although he  had  been
         to meetings before joining. Before  joining  NLD-LA  UK  he  was  a
         member of the Burmese Democratic Movement  Association  (BDMA)  but
         when they reformed  and  changed  their  name  to  88  New  Student
         Generation he decided to join NLD-LA UK. He is a  member  of  their
         Activities Committee and helps to proof read  letters  prepared  by
         members of NLD-LA UK before they are sent  to  Aung  San  Suu  Kyi.
         These included proposed reforms for Myanmar. His photograph appears
         on the members' page of NLD-LA UK's website. On 27th September 2012
         he attended a NLD-LA UK dinner  party  and  Skype  discussion.  His
         photograph from this dinner appears on the NLD-LA  UK  website.  On
         3rd October he attended a meeting of the NLD-LA UK at  the  party's
         headquarters. His photograph  from  this  meeting  appears  on  the
         party's website;

     ix) The appellant  supports  democracy,  freeing  political  prisoners,
         unity amongst all ethnic groups and self-determination for Kachins.
         His participation in demonstrations protesting  against  the  civil
         war in Kachinland and Kachin's fight for  self-determination  would
         be seen by the Burmese government as supporting the  KNO  and  KIA,
         neither of which are recognised by the Burmese authorities;

      x) If forced to return to Burma the appellant will continue  with  his
         political activities against the Burmese government, to  fight  for
         changes to the constitution, fair  elections,  self-government  for
         other ethnic groups' and release of  all  political  prisoners.  He
         would continue his protests in Burma, including by taking  part  in
         demonstrations, because he believes in genuine democracy.

Existing Burma Country Guidance Cases

12. There are two extant country guidance cases on Burma.  The first is  HM
    (risk factors for Burmese citizens) Burma CG [2006] UKAIT 00012,  which
    became country guidance on 28 February 2006. In HM, the  Tribunal  gave
    the following country guidance:

    (1)     A Burmese citizen who has left Burma illegally is in general at
        real risk on return to Burma of imprisonment  in  conditions  which
        are reasonably likely to violate his rights under Article 3 of  the
        ECHR.  Exit will be illegal where it is done without  authorisation
        from the Burmese authorities, however obtained,  and  will  include
        travel to a country to which the person concerned was not permitted
        to go by the terms of an authorised exit. We consider it is  proper
        to infer this conclusion from the effect in the Van Tha case of the
        employment of Article 5(j) of the Burma Emergency Act 1950,  either
        on the basis of the application of that Article  in  that  case  or
        also as a consequence of a breach of the exit requirements we  have
        set out in paragraph 83.


    (2)      A  Burmese  citizen  is  in  general  at  real  risk  of  such
        imprisonment if he is returned to Burma  from  the  United  Kingdom
        without being in possession of a valid Burmese passport.


    (3)     It is not reasonably likely  that  a  Burmese  citizen  in  the
        United Kingdom will be  issued  with  a  passport  by  the  Burmese
        authorities in London, unless he is able to present to the  Embassy
        an expired passport in his name.


    (4)     If it comes to the attention of the Burmese authorities that  a
        person falling within (1) or (2) is a failed asylum seeker, that is
        reasonably likely to have a significant effect upon the  length  of
        the prison sentence imposed for his illegal exit and/or  entry.  To
        return such a person from the United Kingdom would accordingly be a
        breach of Article 33 of the Refugee Convention.  Whether that  fact
        would come to the attention of the  authorities  will  need  to  be
        determined on the facts of the particular  case,  bearing  in  mind
        that the person is highly likely to be interrogated on return.


    (5)     It has not been shown that a person who does  not  fall  within
        (1) or (2) above faces a real risk of persecution or Article 3 ill-
        treatment on return to Burma by reason of having claimed asylum  in
        the United Kingdom, even if the Burmese authorities have reason  to
        believe that he has made such a claim, unless the authorities  have
        reason to regard him as a political opponent.

13. The second Country Guidance case is TL which was added to  the  country
    guidance list on the 28 April 2009, and set out the following guidance:



     1. The country guidance given by the Tribunal in HM (Risk factors  for
        Burmese citizens)  Burma  CG  [2006]  UKAIT  00012  remains  valid.
        Despite the release of some long term detainees no  significant  or
        reliable change has occurred in the approach of the authorities  in
        Burma to be able to say that the human rights  situation  there  is
        any better than it was at the time the Tribunal in  HM  promulgated
        its determination.

     2. The identities and roles  of  genuine  activists  in  Burmese  pro-
        democracy organisations based in London are likely to be  known  to
        the Burmese authorities.

     3. Participation in demonstrations  outside  the  Burmese  embassy  in
        London by Burmese nationals is likely to be recorded by the Burmese
        authorities in London and made known to the Burmese authorities  in
        Burma.  Those Burmese nationals participating on  a  regular  basis
        are likely to have been photographed by the Burmese authorities and
        identified.

     4. If such a person were returned to Burma and there is an  additional
        factor which would trigger the attention of the Burmese authorities
        (e.g. lack of a valid Burmese passport; absence  of  permission  to
        exit Burma; previously having come to the adverse attention of  the
        authorities as an opponent of the regime; or  having  a  connection
        with known political opponents) there is a real risk of persecution
        and article 3 ill-treatment on return.

     5. It may be that a pro-democracy  demonstrator  outside  the  Burmese
        embassy known to the authorities to have a real commitment  to  the
        cause without an additional risk factor would equally  be  at  risk
        but each case must be determined on its own facts.

     6. It is unlikely that the Burmese authorities would persecute someone
        whom they knew to be a hanger-on with no  real  commitment  to  the
        oppositionist cause  who  was  demonstrating  merely  in  order  to
        enhance a false claim for asylum but each case must be  decided  on
        its own facts.

     7. In granting permission to  leave  Burma  the  authorities  are  not
        concerned with the places which the passport holder may  visit  nor
        the length of time during which they may be absent from Burma.  The
        Burmese authorities are not interested per se in the places visited
        by a returning Burmese national who had  had  permission  to  leave
        Burma nor how long they stayed away.

14. As detailed above, the guidance given in TL was subject to scrutiny  by
    the Court of Appeal in the recent decision in KS (Burma &NL (Burma), in
    which Maurice Kay LJ, with the agreement of Moore-Bick and  Rimer  LJJ,
    allowed the appeals before them to the extent that were remitted to the
    Upper Tribunal for further consideration, on the basis  that  that  the
    guidance in TL on hangers-on was legally flawed. This was said to be so
    for reason that the underlying assumption that the Burmese  authorities
    in Rangoon[1] operate a  rational  decision-making  process  which  can
    reliably be trusted to distinguish between a genuine political opponent
    and a hanger-on, was flawed. It was found that there was no evidence as
    to how the authorities in Burma, faced with  a  person  identified  and
    photographed participating in an anti-government demonstration  outside
    the embassy in London, might go about satisfying  themselves  that  the
    person in question is simply an opportunistic hanger-on, and  that  the
    general evidence about  the  behaviour  of  the  authorities  does  not
    support a tendency to rational, careful assessment.


Summary of the Evidence

Evidence of Mr Maung, TN and HHS

15. Mr Maung is a naturalised British Citizen of  Burmese  origin  who  has
    demonstrated in front of  the  Burmese  Embassy  in  the  past.  On  28
    February 2013 he attended the Burmese Embassy to apply for  a  visa  to
    enter Burma as a British citizen to visit his wife and children who had
    recently returned to Burma. His naturalisation as a British citizen has
    deprived him of Burmese nationality. He was accompanied by two  Burmese
    passport-holders, TN and HHS, to act as his sponsors, a requirement  he
    had been told about during prior enquiries made at the embassy.


16. On arrival at the embassy, Mr Maung  was  required  to  hand  over  his
    application form and was also asked to write down on a blank  sheet  of
    paper how he had come to the United Kingdom, and how he had come to  be
    a British Citizen.  Once that was handed over, he and the sponsors were
    called into a room to see a consular official who asked them to read  a
    form in which it was confirmed that on returning  to  Burma,  Mr  Maung
    would  obey  Burmese  law,  would  not  participate  in  any  political
    activities, and would not go  to  any  restricted  areas.  He  and  the
    sponsors signed this form and the sponsors  were  asked  to  leave  the
    room.


17. The consular official then interviewed Mr Maung alone about how he  had
    obtained his British status. Mr Maung explained  he  had  not  obtained
    this through claiming asylum. He was asked if he  had  participated  in
    demonstrations outside the embassy, which he denied. He was then warned
    that he  should  not  lie  because  CCTV,  video  and  photographs  are
    accessible, that his  application  would  be  sent  back  to  the  Home
    Ministry in Burma for investigation; and, that  it  would  take  months
    before he gets the result. Mr Maung explained in re-examination that he
    had not told the truth about demonstrating because  he  believed  that,
    had he done so, his application would have been refused.


18. TN and HHS gave oral evidence confirming Mr  Maung's  evidence  in  all
    material respects.


19. Mr Avery challenged none of the evidence of  these  two  witnesses,  or
    that of Mr Maung, and later expressly accepted their accounts as fact.


20. We turn to the evidence of those put forward as expert witnesses.


Evidence of Dr Zarni


21. Dr Zarni comes from a large  "military  clan"  in  Burma,  having  been
    admitted to the Officer Training Corp, and has done extensive  research
    on military affairs in the past 23 years.  He is a founder of the  Free
    Burma Coalition and campaigned internationally for the  improvement  of
    human rights conditions in Burma from 1995 to 2004. He obtained  a  PhD
    from the University of Wisconsin, USA,  with  a  thesis  entitled  'The
    Politics of  Education  under  Burmese  Military  Rule'  and  has  held
    professorships and visiting fellowships at a number of Universities  in
    the United Kingdom, United States of America  and  Thailand,  including
    Oxford University and the LSE.  He  joined  the  University  of  Brunei
    Darussalam as Associate Professor in Social Anthropology on  1  January
    2012. In 2011 he was appointed, after an open competition, as the  sole
    expert reviewer of the United Kingdom's Country of  Origin  Information
    Report on Burma. As indicated above, full details of  his  evidence  is
    set out in Schedule 1.

22. Dr Zarni's evidence can be summarised as follows:-



     i) The military are still in charge in  Burma,  despite  presenting  a
        show of reform.  Expectations of significant improvement have  been
        misplaced as is shown by the low number of prisoners of  conscience
        who have been released. There is a  significant  disparity  between
        the reality on the ground and the officially stated aspirations.

     ii) In order to assess the situation, one must understand the  military
         mindset  which  is  a)  unused  to  disobedience  by  civilians  or
         military, b) is focused on security above all and c)  is  concerned
         with loss of face. In this context demonstrations outside embassies
         are viewed with disproportionate significance.

    iii)  The Burmese state has expended a considerable amount on setting up
         a large, sophisticated surveillance system using personnel  trained
         in Russia, and operating  outside  and  within  Burma.  The  regime
         continues to photograph and document those who demonstrate  outside
         embassies. This has not changed.

     iv)  The risk  to  individuals  may  fluctuate  according  to  what  is
         happening  at  the  time  in  Burma.  The  anniversaries  of   some
         historical events raise tensions, and the  regime  is  particularly
         sensitive to demonstrations about ethnic nationalities.

      v) The rule of law does not run in Burma; rather,  state  institutions
         and personnel operate in an inconsistent manner. The consequence of
         this is that: i) jailed political activists  have  no  recourse  to
         law; and ii) it is difficult to predict whether an individual would
         be at risk. Those who are arrested, even for short periods, are  at
         risk of torture.

     vi) The authorities are unpredictable, but Dr Zarni was  not  aware  of
         anyone being mistreated at the point of return within the last  two
         years.

    vii) There may be ill-treatment of activists without a profile  who  are
         not known, and people are  still  detained.  Those  whose  activity
         abroad is known are likely to be monitored and later questioned  at
         which point there is a continuing risk of torture.

   viii)  Dr Zarni revised his opinion in e-mails sent  to  the  appellant's
         solicitors on 11 March 2013 as to whether the appellant,  or  those
         who had demonstrated outside the embassy, would be safe on return.


Evidence of Marcia Robiou

23. Ms Robiou describes herself as a  "committed  human  rights  specialist
    with a strong track record in writing, research and advocacy". She  was
    awarded a Bachelor of Arts in Anthropology and  Politics  at  New  York
    University in 2006. She worked as a teacher in Mandalay, Burma, between
    January 2010 and May 2010 and was  thereafter  employed  as  a  Program
    Manager for an education network in Thailand. Since May 2011,  she  has
    been employed by the Assistance Association for Political  Prisoners  -
    Burma, ['AAPP'] in Mae Sot, Thailand, as a Human  Rights  Research  and
    Advocacy Adviser.  In  her  oral  evidence  Ms  Robiou  described  this
    organisation as having been founded  in  2000  by  two  former  Burmese
    political  prisoners,  being  entirely  staffed  by  former   political
    prisoners from Burma, as having 10 people working  in  headquarters  in
    Mae Sot and as having an underground network of '10  to  12  groups  of
    five to seven former political prisoners spread throughout Burma and in
    particular near major prisons'. As to her role within the organisation,
    in  her  oral  evidence,  she  described  this  as  involving  briefing
    diplomats and  government  officials  on  the  situation  of  political
    prisoners in Burma and writing urgent appeals based on  data  collected
    by the networks inside Burma.  Ms  Robiou  also  currently  acts  as  a
    'Researcher, Writer and Advocacy Consultant' to an organisation  called
    Minority Rights Group International' also based in Mae  Sot,  Thailand.
    In that role she has authored a report on the denial  of  participation
    rights for ethnic minorities in Burma, as well facilitating training on
    'data collection for ethnic minority groups'.

24. We were provided with a lengthy written report from Ms Robiou, dated 22
    January 2013, as well as three written  addenda  to  that  report.  The
    first and second addenda are dated 5 March 2013, with the  third  being
    undated. In addition Ms Robiou provided evidence by way  of  an  e-mail
    dated 8 March 2013, addressed to Mr Mullins.

25. By way of a further e-mail dated 14 March 2013 (and in response to  our
    request for confirmation), Ms  Robiou  stated  that  she  provided  her
    evidence to the tribunal in her personal capacity and not on behalf  of
    the AAPP.

26. We set Ms Robiou's evidence out in detail in Schedule 1. In summary  it
    is as follows:-

      i) Although the regime in Burma is slowly opening up, only small scale
         reforms have taken place.  Characteristics  commonly  exhibited  in
         authoritarian regimes still remain in place;

     ii) People are arrested and tortured whenever they are deemed a  threat
         to  the  state.  Low-level   protestors   and   demonstrators   are
         arbitrarily and briefly detained and then  released.  In  detention
         they are subject to physical harm and  verbal  harassment.  In  her
         oral evidence Ms Robiou  categorised  the  risk  of  ill  treatment
         during a brief detention as being 'very  high',  (she  had  earlier
         categorised this risk, during her written evidence, as 'real').

    iii) Many of the arrests  have  been  of  Kachin  ethnic  minorities  or
         members of the All Burma Student Federation Union. There have  been
         at least 52 politically motivated arrests since 17 September  2012.
         There has  been  a  dramatic  increase  in  the  number  of  public
         demonstrations in the past year.

     iv) Legal reforms are undermined by vague and broad  provisions  making
         it clear that criticism of the regime is not tolerated.

      v) Former political prisoners who have been released  by  the  current
         regime have complained of being monitored and such persons are 'not
         really' free and are  vulnerable  to  arrest  at  any  time.  Their
         criminal records remain intact.  They  are  subject  to  harassment
         including  denial  of  passports,  being  barred  from   employment
         opportunities, and denial of educational opportunities.

     vi) The administration has extended an 'olive branch' to  activists  in
         exile for the purposes of gaining political capital in the eyes  of
         the international community.

    vii) The Burmese authorities have an institutionalised and sophisticated
         spy network throughout  the  world  with  Burmese  embassies  being
         staffed  by  Military  Intelligence.  It  is  common  for  Military
         Intelligence to go  undercover  and  infiltrate  protests,  student
         unions and 'known hangouts for dissidents'. These networks  monitor
         and document information on individuals involved  in  oppositionist
         movement. The information held by the Burmese authorities  is  very
         detailed.

   viii) Ms Robiou initially stated that she found it difficult  to  comment
         as to how the Burmese authorities would treat persons  returned  to
         Burma who had demonstrated outside the Burmese  Embassy  but  where
         there were no  records  held  of  oppositionist  activities  within
         Burma. She subsequently gave evidence that if  a  returnee,  having
         demonstrated in the United Kingdom, is neither a prominent activist
         nor has a history of oppositionist activity in Burma,  there  would
         be a low risk of such person suffering serious harassment from  the
         Burmese authorities, unless  he/she  continued  to  demonstrate  in
         Burma.

     ix) She is aware of low profile activists,  who  have  not  engaged  in
         protests, demonstrations or processions, having returned  to  Burma
         and having not been harassed. These persons had either been engaged
         in lobbying activities against the Burmese government or were staff
         members of vocal exiled organisations. This is 'standard' for  low-
         level activists seeking to return to Burma with no plans to partake
         in political activity.

      x) Risks to an individual would increase if that individual had a long
         history of visible and outspoken  political  activism  against  the
         regime in Burma, is a member of  an  ethnic  minority  particularly
         Kachin, or lives near a conflict area or a development project.  If
         the authorities believe an individual has useful  information  such
         as the  structure  of  an  underground  network,  or  is  eager  to
         attribute blame for a  particular  crime  such  as  a  recent  bomb
         explosion, the  suspect  will  be  psychologically  and  physically
         tortured.

     xi) In her written report,  Ms  Robiou  expresses  the  view  that  the
         appellant would be  at  risk  if  he  continues  his  oppositionist
         activity in Burma or travels to an  ethnic  minority  region  where
         there is open conflict; there being ongoing  conflicts  in  Kachin,
         Shan, Karen, Karenni and Arakan States. In her  oral  evidence,  Ms
         Robiou was of the view that the appellant's political  activity  in
         the United Kingdom would put him at risk upon return to  Burma;  in
         that he would be monitored and then  interrogated  during  a  brief
         detention, at which time he would be tortured.

    xii) High profile activists in the  international  arena  are  generally
         allowed to carry out their political  and  humanitarian  activities
         with little or no incidences of harassment. This is  a  tactic  the
         government of Burma uses to  'trick'  the  international  community
         into believing  that  they  are  genuinely  reform  minded.  Highly
         outspoken activists with foreign passports had  returned  to  Burma
         with no incidences of arrest or major harassment.

   xiii)  Ms  Robiou  initially  gave  evidence  that  whilst  the   Burmese
         authorities had previously followed and monitored suspects, she had
         only noticed such actions by the  current  regime  in  relation  to
         prominent activists; however in her e-mail of the 8 March 2013  she
         had stated that low-level critics are still monitored, followed and
         harassed.

    xiv) There is a 'real risk' to anyone  who  publically  demonstrates  in
         Burma, regardless of their ethnic origin. She was  unaware  of  any
         cases in  the  post  Thein  Sein  regime  of  an  individual  being
         questioned who is merely associated with activists.

The Report of the Special Rapporteur on the situation  of  human  rights  in
Myanmar and the Burmese government's response

27. Between 11 to 16 February 2013, the United  Nations  appointed  Special
    Rapporteur, Professor Tomas Quintana, conducted a  mission  to  Myanmar
    and met the Minister for Home Affairs, the Minister for Social Welfare,
    Relief and Resettlement, the Attorney General, the Deputy  Minister  of
    Foreign Affairs, the Deputy Minister for  Border  Affairs,  the  Deputy
    Chief Justice and other justices of  the  Supreme  Court,  as  well  as
    several members of parliament and parliamentary committees. In  Yangon,
    he met Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, members  of  the  Myanmar  National  Human
    Rights Commission, 'prisoners of conscience'  held  in  Insein  prison,
    former detainees from Buthidaung Prison,  the  United  Nations  country
    team and the diplomatic community. He also  visited  Yangon  University
    and met with the Dean and students, and  visited  the  offices  of  the
    Myanmar Times.

28. The Special Rapporteur also visited Rakhine State, where he  met  state
    authorities and community  leaders.  He  visited  camps  for  displaced
    persons for both Buddhist and Muslim communities in Sittwe, Myebon  and
    Pauk Taw and visited Sittwe Prison. He also visited Kachin State, where
    he met state authorities and visited camps  for  displaced  persons  in
    Myitkyina and Waingmaw and visited Myitkyina Prison.  In  an  'Advanced
    Unedited Version' of his report to the Human Rights  Council,  dated  6
    March 2013, on the 'situation of human rights in Myanmar', the  Special
    Rapporteur noted that 800 prisoners of conscience  had  been  released,
    albeit the law enables the attachment of conditions to  such  releases.
    Over 250 prisoners of conscience remain detained. Many former political
    prisoners continue to be denied a passport, and some of those who  were
    medical or legal professionals have had their  licences  to  carry  out
    such work revoked.

29. The Special Rapporteur is  concerned  about  the  ongoing  practice  of
    torture in Burma and had received allegations  of  arbitrary  detention
    and torture by the military of Kachin men accused of belonging  to  the
    Kachin Independence Army. In Rakhine state he received  allegations  of
    Muslims being tortured and beaten to death in  detention.  He  received
    consistent  information  that   professionalised   torture   techniques
    continue to be used by police officers on  suspects  of  violent  crime
    with the aim of extracting confessions. A culture  of  impunity  exists
    for acts of torture in police stations, prisons  and  other  places  of
    detention. In November 2012 it was agreed to allow the ICRC  access  to
    prisons. There had been a pilot visit by the ICRC in the  period  prior
    to his report.

30. Public broadcast news remains heavily censored, but there is  increased
    freedom for  internet  users,  with  internet  cafe  owners  no  longer
    receiving police visits  and  no  longer  required  to  keeps  logs  of
    computers used by customers[2]. There are ongoing arrests and detention
    of persons involved in peaceful protests. If a peaceful  protest  takes
    place without a permit the criminal law provides for a period of 1 year
    imprisonment and a fine. Concern is expressed by the Special Rapporteur
    over the police handling of protests.

31. The report concludes:-

         "82.     Continuing reforms in Myanmar  are  resulting  in  ongoing
             improvements to the human rights situation. Important  changes
             have taken place, such as legislative  reform,  but  sometimes
             not to the point where international  human  rights  standards
             are met.

         83.      There remains a large gap between reform at  the  top  and
             implementation on the ground. While acknowledging that it will
             take time to close this gap, this should not  be  used  as  an
             excuse to avoid taking necessary steps, such as  the  capacity
             development of police, army, judges and lawyers.

         84.      While the process of reform is  continuing  in  the  right
             direction, there are  significant  human  rights  shortcomings
             that remain unaddressed, such as  discrimination  against  the
             Rohingya  in  Rakhine  State  and  the  ongoing  human  rights
             violations in relation to the conflict in  Kachin  State.  The
             Special Rapporteur believes that now is the  time  to  address
             these shortcomings before they become further  entrenched  and
             destabilise the reform process.

         85.      The Special Rapporteur believes the  continuing  existence
             of his mandate  is  vital  to  highlight  these  concerns  and
             support the Government in addressing them. It helps to  remind
             the international community of the importance of  prioritising
             human rights in its  bilateral  relations  with  Myanmar.  And
             ultimately, it provides a positive contribution  to  improving
             the situation of human rights for the people in Myanmar."
32. The Burmese government has made observations  on  the  report.   As  to
    prisoners of conscience, and the reference to allegations of  continued
    arrest for political reasons, it  stated that:

         "These allegations are unfounded.  Nobody is arrested on  political
         grounds.  Maintenance of law and order is a key  responsibility  of
         the government.  Legal action is taken against  those  who  violate
         the existing laws."

33. By way of  response  to  "conditions  of  detention  and  treatment  of
    prisoners," it is stated:


         "3.      Paragraph 11 of the Report  contains  the  allegations  of
             arbitrary  arrest  and  torture  of  the  people  accused   of
             association with the Kachin Independence  Army  (KIA).   Legal
             action was taken against those who were found guilty of  being
             unlawfully associative with the KIA.

         4.       Paragraph 11 also contains  the  allegations  that  Muslim
             prisoners detained in Buthidaun prison after the  violence  in
             2012 were tortured and beaten to death.  The authorities  have
             examined these allegations.   After  verification  they  found
             that the allegations were baseless."

34. The government also maintains that  the  allegations  regarding  attack
    against the  civilian  population  and  other  forms  of  human  rights
    violations and the chapter headed "Conflict and the Situation of Ethnic
    Minorities" are unfounded, with the observation that it is  regrettable
    that the report has omitted the destructive, terrorist  acts  committed
    by the KIA in Kachin State.  As to the situation in Rakhine State it is
    similarly stated that the allegations in paragraph 48 of the report  of
    harassment, arbitrary arrest and  arbitrary  restriction  of  movement,
    destruction of places of worship and restrictions are  unfounded,  with
    reference to temporary places of worship being set up in the IDP  camps
    and government medical personnel actively working with the Myanmar  Red
    Cross.

35. The references in the report to human rights  violations  committed  by
    Nasaka particularly against  the  Muslim  community  are  described  as
    "inappropriate" and therefore "unacceptable."  It is  stated  that  the
    1982 Myanmar Citizenship Act does not target any particular group.   It
    is not agreed that Dr Tun  Aung  is  a  prisoner  of  conscience.   The
    government does not share the Special Rapporteur's view  regarding  the
    risks taken by Rohingyas in taking to sea in the Bay of Bengal.  As  to
    the emphasis made by the Special Rapporteur that the laws of  the  land
    should be in line with International Human Rights Standards and applied
    equally to  all  persons,  institutions  and  entities,  including  the
    military, and the need for civilian control  of  the  military,  it  is
    stated:

         "The Special Rapporteur's recommendations  that  are  contained  in
         paragraph 66 are premature.  Time is  not  right  to  consider  the
         amendment of our constitutional provisions."

Other country information

36. We have before us a wide range of country information. We have taken an
    overview on this additional evidence, which has assisted us in reaching
    the conclusions set out below. We have had  particular  regard  to  the
    most recent reports including those  by  Human  Rights  Watch,  Amnesty
    International and ACCORD although we have not considered  it  necessary
    to summarise their contents.





Submissions

Respondent's submissions

37. We summarise below the submissions of the parties.  These comprise  the
    skeleton arguments served prior to the hearing, final  closing  written
    submissions helpfully completed by the parties before the third day  of
    the hearing and oral submissions (the detail of all of which is set out
    in Schedule One).

38. As observed above, the facts pertaining to the appellant are no  longer
    in dispute.

39. Mr Avery accepted that there was no evidence  before  the  Tribunal  to
    rebut the findings of the Tribunal in  HM  that  prison  conditions  in
    Burma are in themselves a breach of Article 3 ECHR. He further accepted
    the evidence of Mr Maung, TN and HHS to be credible in its entirety.

40. As to why the SSHD had not herself adduced any evidence either from the
    overseas post or by way of an expert, Mr Avery observed that  this  was
    due to "time and money".

41. Mr Avery further observed that the contents of the Secretary of State's
    most recent Operational  Guidance  Note  relating  to  Burma  reflected
    current country guidance and was therefore,  he  submitted,  of  little
    assistance in determining whether such guidance required alteration.

42. He was unaware if there had been  any  recent  returns  to  Burma.   Mr
    Mullins, having conferred with  his  instructing  solicitor,  confirmed
    that he was not aware of any returns either.

43. The essence of what Mr Avery had to say at the hearing was to  urge  us
    to draw an adverse inference  from  the  changes  in  evidence  of  the
    experts, as between their original reports and the addenda, which  they
    subsequently relied on. He argued  that  they  had  given  insufficient
    reasons for such changes.

44. Mr Avery emphasised the respondent's case to be  that  an  individual's
    participation in demonstrations in the UK would not of itself be likely
    to result in ill-treatment on return and that, if  he  had  left  Burma
    legally, any risk was likely to be less. He submitted that if  such  an
    individual had left illegally, the risk upon return would be  dependent
    on the specific facts. He then invited the Tribunal  to  conclude  that
    the situation in Burma had significantly changed since the date of  the
    determination in TL; submitting that it would have  been  inconceivable
    at the time that TL was decided that opposition parties  could  operate
    in Burma in the manner in which they currently operate.

45. As to the risk from those who demonstrated in Burma, Mr Avery submitted
    that the conclusions of the experts on this issue were not borne out by
    the evidence they sought to rely upon in this regard.

46. When asked whether there was a distinction in the  treatment  of  those
    who are briefly  detained  and  those  who  are  imprisoned,  Mr  Avery
    submitted  that  the  former  suffer  from  harassment,  and  that  any
    assertion they are ill-treated and tortured during  a  brief  detention
    was neither clear nor supported by evidence.



The appellant's submissions

47. Like Mr  Avery,  Mr  Mullins  relied  on  his  skeleton  arguments.  He
    supplemented these, in part, at the hearing but added nothing new of  a
    material nature.

48. We queried the reference in Mr Mullins supplementary skeleton  argument
    to the submission that the appellant would not be given  permission  to
    return (having regard to Mr Maung's evidence) in  the  light  of  their
    difference in nationality. He responded candidly by accepting  that  he
    was "flying a kite" in making such a submission.

49. In response to our further questions, Mr Mullins submitted that  it  is
    possible a refusal to allow a national to re-enter his own country may,
    following Adan Nooh, Lazarevic & Radojevic v SSHD [1997] EWCA Civ  1007
    amount to persecution, but  he  conceded  that  there  was  no  further
    evidence to support such a  submission  that  the  Burmese  authorities
    would act in such a manner.

50. Mr Mullins submitted that the evidence of the experts could  be  relied
    on, and that it could not be suggested  that  their  sources  could  be
    bettered. He observed that their concerns mirrored the reality  on  the
    ground; that the Burmese regime had  successfully  sought  to  woo  the
    international community to get investment, and that  the  changes  were
    superficial.  He argued that there is a real  risk  of  those  who  are
    returned to Burma being monitored and that this  would  place  them  in
    danger if they continued to participate in political activities; noting
    as he did so that the respondent had accepted that  the appellant would
    do so.

51. Mr Mullins further submitted that it had to  be  assumed  that  Burmese
    intelligence would continue to monitor and record demonstrations in the
    United Kingdom as before.

52. We asked Mr Mullins to address us on the risk to a returnee on  arrival
    at the airport in Burma. He couched his submission in terms of the risk
    to the appellant that as identified in the evidence of  Dr  Zarni,  the
    appellant was likely to be called in for questioning and that he  would
    be monitored after he leaves the airport.   As  to  what  would  happen
    thereafter, Mr Mullins argued the risk to  the  appellant  would  arise
    when (a) contacting others to find out when  and  where  demonstrations
    are to be held and (b) when he attended  demonstrations  in  Burma.  He
    submitted that the fact that the appellant  would  be  monitored  would
    subsequently lead to him being questioned  and,  consequently,  to  him
    being tortured.



Legal Background

53. The legislative framework to these appeals includes  international  and
    European Union law comprising the Refugee Convention and  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights (the Human Rights Convention),  the  Charter
    of Fundamental Rights of the  European  Union  (the  Charter)  and  the
    Council Directive 2004/83/EC (the Directive).  This framework is  well-
    known and does not need to be elaborated.

54. The now well-established principles laid down by the Supreme  Court  in
    HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31 set out the approach we are required  to  take
    when considering situations where it is said that  concealment  or  the
    exercise of discretion might avoid  a  risk  of  persecution;  see  the
    judgments of Lord Hope [35] and Lord Rodger [82].

55. Although the Supreme Court was concerned with  issues  surrounding  gay
    men, the principles are applicable to cases other than those  involving
    sexual orientation; see: RT (Zimbabwe) [2012] UKSC 38.

56. In Germany v Y & Z [2012] EUECJ C-71/11 the Court of Justice  concluded
    that an individual will have a well-founded fear of persecution  if  he
    intends, once back in  his  country  of  origin,  to  pursue  religious
    activities which expose him to a  risk  of  persecution  and  where  it
    cannot reasonably be expected that he should forego  these  activities,
    and specifically to forego manifesting his faith.

57. We consider in the context of the appeal before us, and  following  RT,
    that the same  must  apply  as  if  "political"  were  substituted  for
    "religious".

Discussion

58. Although the Secretary of State chose not to be represented by  counsel
    in this appeal, this does not mean we were without  "proper  argument":
    see S v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2002] EWCA Civ  539
    where Laws LJ referred (at paragraph 29) to "the duty to  give  reasons
    with a particular rigour" in  country  guidance  cases  and  HM  (Iraq)
    [2011] EWCA Civ 1536, where Sullivan LJ emphasised the need for "proper
    argument".

59. We are satisfied that  Mr  Avery,  a  Senior  Presenting  Officer  with
    considerable experience, had a good grasp of the issues in the case and
    represented the Secretary of State in an  authoritative  and  competent
    manner, reflected in the arguments which he made on  the  Secretary  of
    State's behalf and the matters which he conceded. This  is  not  to  be
    taken  as  an  indication  by  the  Tribunal  that  the  employment  of
    presenting officers on country guidance should  be  routinely  applied.
    Complex matters of law or a considerable volume of  evidence  may  well
    result in a need for counsel.

60. We do, however, express some concern that the Secretary  of  State  has
    chosen, in a case designated to provide country guidance, not  to  call
    expert, or indeed  any,  evidence.   The  explanation  that  there  was
    neither available time nor money indicates to us that the Secretary  of
    State has chosen to apply her available resources  elsewhere.  How  the
    Secretary of State allocates the finite resources available to her  is,
    of course, entirely a matter for her. We simply  observe  that  Country
    Guidance decisions are intended to be as comprehensive as  the  subject
    permits and to be authoritative in forming  the  Secretary  of  State's
    instructions to its officers, as well as  judges  hearing  appeals.  If
    there is a dispute between the parties on matters directly relevant  to
    the guidance to be given by the Tribunal, as there is  in  the  instant
    case, there are obvious benefits to both parties  calling  evidence  to
    support their position.

61. If the Secretary of State chooses not to call evidence to rebut  expert
    testimony on behalf of an  appellant,  she  must  accept  that  such  a
    failure may have a bearing on the findings made by the  Tribunal.  That
    is not to say that unchallenged or un-contradicted expert evidence must
    be accepted by the Tribunal if there is good reason not to do  so  (see
    KS (Burma) at [29]), but inevitably if only one party provides  expert,
    or indeed any, evidence, there is a greater likelihood of such evidence
    being accepted.

62. We now turn to the evidence of those put forward as  expert  witnesses.
    In respect of both experts, the weight we can give  to  their  evidence
    has been reduced for the reasons we now set out.

63. We consider Dr Zarni to be well-qualified to  speak  about  matters  in
    Burma, despite not having been there for some six years.   As  with  Ms
    Robiou, Dr Zarni acknowledged areas about which he was unable  to  give
    an opinion. In respect of both experts the weight we can give to  their
    evidence has been reduced for the reasons we now set out.

64. We note that Dr Zarni's initial  report  is  dated  16  November  2011,
    which, in the context of the rapid changes in Burma,  is  a  factor  we
    take into account in assessing his views about  the  apparent  lack  of
    progress by the time of writing.  By the time of his  Skype  interview,
    over a year had elapsed since that report had been made  available.  We
    have particular concern over the evidence of  Dr  Zarni  regarding  the
    risk to those  returning  to  Burma  who  had  previously  demonstrated
    outside the Burmese Embassy in the  United  Kingdom.  In  answer  to  a
    question on this issue put to him at the Skype interview of 12 February
    2013, Dr Zarni unequivocally stated contrary to the  opinion  given  in
    his report in November 2011, that he did not know whether there  was  a
    still a risk on return for failed asylum  seekers  who  had  previously
    demonstrated outside the embassy in London and  neither  could  he  say
    whether the appellant would  be  arrested  and  tortured  upon  return.
    However in an e-mail to the appellant's solicitors sent on the 11 March
    2013, i.e. just under a month later, he stated that the risk to Burmese
    citizens who have taken part in  anti-regime  protests  in  the  United
    Kingdom of getting arrested and tortured remains as high  as  prior  to
    the reforms.

65. In an e-mail of the same date sent to Mr Mullins,  Dr  Zarni  explained
    that this 'modification' to his evidence was a  consequence  of  having
    taken into account two additional sources of evidence, namely, (i)  the
    Special Rapporteur's report and (ii), 'a recent interview with a former
    political prisoner who gave a local grounded analysis of the  situation
    pertaining to political arrests and detainees'. Despite accepting  that
    in this e-mail he  had  modified  his  evidence,  Dr  Zarni  sought  to
    maintain at the hearing before the Tribunal that his evidence  had  not
    changed  regarding  the  risk  to  returned  asylum  seekers  who   had
    previously demonstrated outside the Burmese Embassy in London.

66. We consider that, contrary to this assertion, Dr Zarni did  change  his
    position on this core aspect and that he did so without any coherent or
    reasonable  explanation.  There  was  nothing  new   in   the   Special
    Rapporteur's report that could have better informed  Dr  Zarni  in  the
    evidence he gave in relation to the  risk  to  those  persons  who  had
    previously demonstrated outside the Burmese Embassy in  London.  As  to
    the relevance of the evidence derived from the 'interview with a former
    political prisoner', although Dr Zarni did not disclose the  detail  in
    his written evidence it turned out that this was  an  edited  interview
    that Dr Zarni had seen on television, recorded in Norway and  shown  on
    the Voice of Burma. The shortcomings of relying on  such  evidence  are
    obvious, and the fact that Dr Zarni was prepared,  based  partially  on
    such evidence, to move from a position where he was  originally  unable
    to provide evidence as to the level of risk to returned asylum  seekers
    who had demonstrated outside the Burmese  embassy  in  London,  to  one
    where he was able to assert a definitive position on such a  matter  to
    the Tribunal, leads us to question the academic rigour  with  which  he
    has approached the task before him. This in turn affects not  only  the
    weight we attach to his evidence on this one  issue  but  also  to  our
    consideration of his evidence as a whole.

67. Similarly, while Ms Robiou has relevant  academic  credentials,  recent
    experience in Burma, and substantial experience in the field  of  human
    rights research and advocacy, as reflected in  her  current  post  with
    AAPP and Minority Rights Group International, the weight we can  attach
    to her evidence is diminished because (i) much of the  information  she
    relies upon to  form  her  conclusions  is  derived  from  'underground
    networks' of former political prisoners operating near major prisons in
    Burma, evidence which is not capable of objective  scrutiny,  (ii)  the
    nature of the information she receives as part of her post at AAPP  and
    the  Minority  Rights  Group  is,  by  the   very   nature   of   those
    organisations, partisan in its  presentation  and  assertions   on  the
    denial of rights in Burma rather than on the wider picture  and,  (iii)
    that her evidence displays in part a lack of consistency and sufficient
    academic rigour.

68. In relation to the "underground  networks",  their  very  anonymity  as
    sources is problematic. Whilst there will be occasions when  an  expert
    is unable to disclose the identities  of  sources,  particularly  where
    there is a potential risk to the parties concerned, the weight that can
    be given to such evidence depends on the  quality  of  the  rest  of  a
    report and, the adequacy of sourcing overall, as well as the particular
    expertise that is drawn upon.

69. As to the third reason identified above, we have concerns insofar as Ms
    Robiou's evidence relates to (i) the  category  of  persons  which  the
    Burmese state "monitor, follow and harass",  (ii)  the  risk  to  those
    persons returning to Burma who had previously demonstrated outside  the
    embassy in London and, (iii) the risk  to  persons  who  take  part  in
    political demonstrations in Burma.

70. In relation to the first category, Ms Robiou changed  her  evidence  on
    this issue, stating in her original report that a person who was not  a
    prominent activist would not likely be followed or  monitored,  whereas
    in her e-mail of 8 March 2013 she stated that even  low  level  critics
    are  monitored,  followed  and  harassed  on  a  regular   basis.   Her
    explanation for this change of evidence was that since the  writing  of
    her original report low-level critics had returned  and  suffered  such
    actions. When pressed on this issue she provided  no  further  examples
    other than two, or possibly three, of her  colleagues  at  AAPP  having
    recently returned and having heard a sound 'like  typewriters'  in  the
    background when on the telephone in Burma. Much as  in  respect  of  Dr
    Zarni, we find the fact that  Ms  Robiou  was  prepared  to  alter  her
    evidence to significant effect on  the  basis  of  thin  evidence  that
    cannot be objectively verified, bears directly on the weight we  attach
    to her evidence as a whole.

71. As to the second and third categories, Ms Robiou's evidence relating to
    the risk to those  persons  returning  to  Burma  who  have  previously
    demonstrated outside the Burmese embassy in London, this  suffers  from
    serious contradiction,  without  satisfactory  explanation.  Ms  Robiou
    accepted that she was unaware of any such person suffering difficulties
    upon return. She further noted that the government of  Burma  is  being
    careful not to upset members  of  the  international  community.  As  a
    consequence she initially concluded that (i) the appellant  would  only
    be at risk 'if he continues his oppositionist activity in  Burma'  and,
    (ii) that, unless such a person  is  a  prominent  activist  or  has  a
    history of oppositionist activity in Burma,  the  risk  of  them  being
    'harassed' in Burma would be low. However,  in  the  same  report,  she
    concludes that the risk to low profile returnees would  conceivably  be
    higher than those with more prominent profiles. In her oral evidence Ms
    Robiou asserted, contrary to the position she set out in writing,  that
    the appellant's activities in the UK would put him at risk upon return.



72. We finally turn to the evidence given by Ms Robiou in relation to those
    persons who take part in political demonstrations  in  Burma.  In  this
    regard Ms Robiou maintained that anyone undertaking such activity is at
    real and high or very high risk  (the  assessment  has  been  variously
    stated) of being detained and ill-treated.  Our  difficulty  with  such
    evidence is that the examples provided support a different  contention:
    being the leader or leaders of such demonstrations runs a high risk  of
    detention and ill-treatment. When  pressed  as  to  the  basis  of  her
    conclusions on this issue, Ms Robiou confirmed that she  did  not  have
    any statistical evidence to support her evidence, but  that  there  had
    been 'some' detentions at every protest.

73. Given the current spotlight on Burma, we consider that had  there  been
    detentions of the type and scale claimed,  this  would  have  attracted
    wide publicity. The absence of such evidence  inevitably  dictates  the
    weight we can give to her assertion regarding the  risk  faced  by  all
    persons taking part in political demonstrations.

74. Turning to the  evidence  provided  in  the  report  from  the  Special
    Rapporteur, neither party sought to suggest that such evidence was  not
    cogent, considered  and  of  significant  weight.  It  is  recent,  was
    produced on the basis of a wide range of sources and followed  a  visit
    by the Special Rapporteur to Burma. There can be no doubt, and  neither
    was there any suggestion otherwise, that the report is independent  and
    well researched.

75. In addition, the other country information provided by the appellant is
    extensive, and is, almost in its entirety, at one with the report  from
    the Special Rapporteur. Without this body  of  evidence,  we  would  be
    faced with difficulties in deciding this appeal in  the  light  of  the
    short-comings in the expert evidence. We do  not  discount  the  expert
    evidence of Dr Zarni and Ms Robiou altogether; it is a  matter  of  the
    weight we can give to it. It  appears  to  us  that  the  experts  have
    endeavoured to fill perceived gaps in their initial reports because  of
    a lack of evidence and in doing so have revealed  a  real  struggle  to
    find the evidence to support their ultimate  conclusions.  In  contrast
    the report by the Special Rapporteur is untouched by such concerns,  it
    accords with other major reports and it is one to which we are able  to
    give particular weight.

76. With these matters in mind and drawing together  the  evidence  of  the
    expert witnesses and the report from the  Special  Rapporteur,  and  in
    addition,  the  country  information,  we  begin   with   our   general
    conclusions and findings on the Burmese state's respect for  the  human
    rights of those who are opposed  to  the  government  and/or  who  seek
    reform in the country.

77. There is no doubt that  significant  progress  has  been  made  by  the
    government to attempt to address serious  human  rights  abuses,  which
    have been well-chronicled in recent years. The  enquiry  before  us  is
    whether, notwithstanding the stated  intention  of  the  government  to
    address the problem, there remains a culture in the security  services,
    including the police, of abusive action towards those  opposed  to  the
    government and its policies,  and  a  lack  respect  for  human  rights
    generally and in addition, specifically in relation to the concerns  of
    ethnic nationalities.  We have no doubt the government  is  seeking  to
    persuade other countries and international agencies that  the  days  of
    human rights abuses are over, and its motive for doing so is clear,  as
    observed by the Special Rapporteur.

78. Taking into account all the evidence before us, we consider that whilst
    there is a real possibility of an enduring and permanent improvement in
    the Burmese government's respect for human rights and it  may  well  be
    that, with the passage of time, the positive changes that have occurred
    will become sufficiently embedded to warrant a  re-examination  of  the
    situation in Burma in the short to medium term.  Nevertheless,  we  are
    not satisfied that the reforms and improvements  to  the  human  rights
    have yet reached root and  branch  level  such  that  those  who  voice
    opposition to the regime are free to do so confidently without risk  of
    discriminatory  interference  by  the  state  with  potentially  severe
    consequences for some at present.

79. It is not disputed that prison  conditions  in  Burma  are  severe  and
    likely to breach the Article 3 threshold: see HM [83]. The evidence  we
    have heard is of a risk of interrogation and brief detention  of  those
    who participate in demonstrations particularly when they are unlawfully
    held or when there is sufficient interest in them  from  monitoring  to
    lead to detention for interrogation. The evidence of Ms Robiou  and  Dr
    Zarni points to a risk of ill-treatment  in  detention.  This  receives
    support in the Special Rapporteur's report. He makes specific reference
    to the ongoing practice of torture in detention in Myanmar as  well  as
    in locations outside the  principal  cities.  He  refers  also  to  the
    culture of impunity that exists for acts of torture in police stations,
    prisons  and  other  places  of  detention,  particularly  during   the
    interrogation of suspects.  The reference to torture in police stations
    indicates that the risk of harm may even be present when  detention  is
    short.

80. We therefore conclude that despite the assertions to  the  contrary  by
    the Burmese government, there remains a real risk  of  torture  and  or
    serious ill-treatment during short detentions.

81. There is no evidence that the sophisticated state intelligence  network
    has been dismantled.  The evidence we heard from Dr  Zarni  as  to  the
    investment in training  of  that  network  is  not  undermined  by  the
    concerns we have otherwise expressed as to his evidence.   We  conclude
    that the state will be aware of those who are actively opposed  to  the
    government and its policies and who represent, in the state's  view,  a
    threat of destabilisation; and, those who do not have  such  a  profile
    although voice opposition either in Burma or abroad.  We approach  this
    aspect of the evidence  with  particular  care  in  the  light  of  the
    observation at [31] in the judgment of Maurice Kay LJ in KS:

         "The second flaw is the  underlying  assumption  that  the  Burmese
         authorities in Rangoon operate a rational decision  making  process
         which can reliably be trusted  to  distinguish  between  a  genuine
         political opponent and a hanger-on.  There is no  evidence  of  how
         the authorities, faced with a person  identified  and  photographed
         participating  in  an  anti-government  demonstration  outside  the
         Embassy in London might go about  satisfying  themselves  that  the
         person in question  is  simply  an  opportunistic  hanger-on.   The
         general evidence about the behaviour of the  authorities  does  not
         support a tendency to rational, careful assessment.   The  accepted
         evidence is of a repressive, arbitrary regime.   A  presumption  of
         rational assessment - which is what paragraph 93 amounts to  -  is,
         in my judgment, counterintuitive in the context of the rest of  the
         accepted  evidence.   The  confidence   placed   in   the   Burmese
         authorities is not supported by evidence.  For these reasons, I  do
         not consider that the reasoning of the UT can be supported."

82. We heard evidence that intelligence gathered in  London  on  those  who
    demonstrate against  the  government  and  who  are  involved  here  in
    political opposition is fed  back  to  senior  officers  in  Burma  for
    assessment.  Given Dr Zarni's experience we are satisfied  this  is  an
    accurate reflection on what has gone before and we have no evidence  to
    believe that it does not continue.  It appears to us that  the  Burmese
    government is seeking  to  achieve  what  may  well  prove  to  be  the
    impossible; to maintain control of its citizens, to  permit  opposition
    but to preserve itself in power, and furthermore to preserve the Union.
     This explains the evidence we  have  heard  of  the  response  by  the
    government to protests in regions where there is a strong  presence  of
    "ethnic nationalities" and the concern expressed by  Dr  Zarni  in  his
    evidence  of  the  snowballing  effect  when  the  causes   of   ethnic
    nationalities are taken up by mainstream oppositionists in the  country
    at large.  In such a context and because considerable resources  appear
    to be devoted to intelligence and control, it is highly  unlikely  that
    this is executed without some form of evaluation of the security threat
    an individual may pose.  This is reinforced by the  evidence  we  heard
    about monitoring which we consider to be indicative  of  an  evaluative
    based approach by the Burmese authorities  in  particular  the  matters
    referred to in [22(iii)] and [26(iv)] above and [8], [44] and  [48]  in
    Schedule Two. Although it is clear as  a  general  principle  that  for
    repressive  arbitrary  regimes  rational  decision  making  cannot   be
    assumed, on the particular evidence now before us, risk can be assessed
    on what surveillance and monitoring are likely to reveal.

83.  Based on the evidence as a whole, the guidance we give is as follows.

      i) In order to decide whether a person would be at risk of persecution
         in Burma because of opposition to the  current  government,  it  is
         necessary to assess whether such activity is reasonably  likely  to
         lead to a risk of detention.  Detention in Burma, even for a  short
         period, carries with it  a  real  risk  of  serious  ill-treatment,
         contrary  to   Article   3   of   the   ECHR   and   amounting   to
         persecution/serious harm within the meaning  of  the  Qualification
         Directive.

     ii) A person is at real risk of  being  detained  in  Burma  where  the
         authorities regard him or her to be a threat to  the  stability  of
         the regime or of the Burmese Union.

    iii) The spectrum of those potentially at risk ranges from those who are
         (or  are  perceived  to  be)  actively  seeking  to  overthrow  the
         government to those who are in outspoken and vexing  opposition  to
         it.  Whether a person is in need of  protection  will  depend  upon
         past and future political behaviour. This assessment has to be made
         against the background of  a  recently  reforming  government  that
         carries a legacy of repression and  continues  to  closely  monitor
         those in opposition. The evidence points to  a  continuing  anxiety
         over the break up of the state and the loss of its power.

     iv) The question of risk of ill-treatment will  in  general  turn  upon
         whether a returnee is detained by  the  authorities  at  any  stage
         after return.

      v) A person who has a profile of  voicing opposition to the government
         in the United Kingdom  through participation in  demonstrations  or
         attendance at political meetings will not for this reason alone  be
         of sufficient concern to  the  Burmese  authorities  to  result  in
         detention  immediately  upon  arrival.   This  is  irrespective  of
         whether the  UK  activity  has  been  driven  by  opportunistic  or
         genuinely held views and is regardless of  the  prominence  of  the
         profile in this country.

     vi) A person who has a profile of voicing  opposition  to  the  Burmese
         government in the United Kingdom can expect to  be  monitored  upon
         return  by  the  Burmese  authorities.   The  intensity   of   that
         monitoring will in general depend upon  the  extent  of  opposition
         activity abroad.

    vii) Whether there is a real risk that monitoring will lead to detention
         following  return  will  in  each  case  depend  on   the   Burmese
         authorities' view of the information it already  possesses  coupled
         with what it receives as the result of any post-arrival monitoring.
          Their view will be shaped by (i) how active the person had been in
         the United  Kingdom,  for  example  by  leading  demonstrations  or
         becoming a prominent voice in political meetings, (ii) what  he/she
         did before leaving Burma, (iii) what that person  does  on  return,
         (iv)the profile of the people he or she mixes with and (v)  whether
         a person is of an ethnicity that is seen by the government to be de-
         stabilising the union, or if the person's activity  is  of  a  kind
         that has an ethnic, geo-political or economic  regional  component,
         which is regarded by the Burmese government as a sensitive issue.

   viii) It is someone's profile in the eyes of the state that is the key to
         determining risk.  The  more  the  person  concerned  maintains  an
         active political profile in Burma,  post-return,  the  greater  the
         risk of significant monitoring, carrying with it  a  real  risk  of
         detention.

     ix) In general, none of the risks identified above is reasonably likely
         to arise if an individual's international prominence is very  high.
         The evidence shows that the government is  keen  to  avoid  adverse
         publicity resulting from the  detention  of  internationally  well-
         known activists.

      x) In the light of these conclusions, TL and Others (Burma CG)  [2009]
         UKAIT 00017 can no longer be relied on for Country  Guidance.   The
         issue of illegal exit and its consequences considered in  HM  (risk
         factors for Burmese Citizens) Burma CG [2006] UKAIT 00012 were  not
         addressed by the parties and the guidance in that decision  remains
         in force for the time being.

     xi) There is evidence of positive changes in Burma which as they become
         embedded may result in the need for the present country guidance to
         be revisited by the Upper Tribunal in the short to medium term.

Determination of the Appeal

84. As we have observed there is no dispute on the facts. The appellant has
    been able to demonstrate a high-profile in the UK, and also  an  active
    intention to protest and demonstrate on return.  The  authorities  will
    know about him; it is not likely that he will be detained on arrival at
    the airport, but he will be monitored and, as he progresses politically
    in Burma, it is reasonably likely that he will be seen  as  vexing  the
    authorities by espousing the separatist cause and he will  be  detained
    for questioning. He will thus be in need of protection. His  appeal  is
    allowed.

85. We have all contributed to this determination.



Upper                 Tribunal                 Judge                  Dawson
       Dated 10 June 2013

Schedule one - the expert and other evidence in detail

Evidence of Ms Marcia Robiou

 1. Ms Robiou describes herself as a  'Committed  human  rights  specialist
    with a strong track record in writing, research and advocacy'. She  was
    awarded a Bachelor of Arts in Anthropology and  Politics  at  New  York
    University in 2006. She worked as a teacher in Mandalay, Burma, between
    January 2010 and May 2010 and was  thereafter  employed  as  a  Program
    Manager for an education network in Thailand. Since May  2011  she  has
    been employed by the Assistance Association for Political  Prisoners  -
    Burma, [hereinafter 'AAPP'] in Mae Sot, Thailand,  as  a  Human  Rights
    Research and Advocacy Adviser. In her oral evidence Ms Robiou described
    this organisation as having been founded in 2000 by two former  Burmese
    political  prisoners,  being  entirely  staffed  by  former   political
    prisoners from Burma, as having ten people working in  headquarters  in
    Mae Sot and as having an underground network of '10 to 12 groups  of  5
    to  7  former  political  prisoners  spread  throughout  Burma  and  in
    particular near major prisons'. As to her role within the  organisation
    she described  this,  in  her  oral  evidence,  as  involving  briefing
    diplomats and  government  officials  on  the  situation  of  political
    prisoners in Burma and writing urgent appeals based on dater  collected
    by the networks inside Burma.  Ms  Robiou  also  currently  acts  as  a
    'Researcher, Writer and Advocacy Consultant' to an organisation  called
    Minority Rights Group International' also based in Mae  Sot,  Thailand.
    In that role she has authored a report on the denial  of  participation
    rights for ethnic minorities in Burma, as well facilitating training on
    'data collection for ethnic minority groups'.

 2. We were provided with a lengthy written report from Ms Robiou, dated 22
    January 2013, as well as three written  addenda  to  that  report.  The
    first and second addenda are dated 5 March 2013, with the  third  being
    undated. In addition Ms Robiou provided evidence by way  of  an  e-mail
    dated 8 March 2013, to Mr Mullins.

 3. By way of a further e-mail dated 14 March 2013 Ms Robiou confirmed that
    she provided her evidence to the tribunal in her personal capacity  and
    not on behalf of the AAPP.

Written Evidence

 4. Ms Robiou's report of 22 January 2013 is  largely  drawn  as  a  direct
    response to questions posited of her by the appellant's legal  advisers
    [check].

 5. Commenting on the attitudes and mind set  of  the  Burmese  regime  she
    observes:

      a. Although the regime in Burma  is  slowly  opening,  characteristics
         commonly exhibited in authoritarian regimes still remain in place.

      b. Small scale reforms, such  as  legalising  protests  and  increased
         space for political parties to operate, have taken place. There  is
         now a greater sense of freedom in Burma that was not  in  existence
         under the previous regime. Genuine free and fair elections have yet
         to take place.

      c.    There is no guarantee or respect for human  rights.  People  are
         arrested and tortured whenever they are  deemed  a  threat  to  the
         state. Legal reforms are undermined by vague and  broad  provisions
         making it clear that criticism of the regime is not tolerated. This
         conclusion is supported by reference to the arrest  in  March  2012
         and re-arrest in December 2012 of the dissident monk Nyi  Nyi  Lwin
         (formerly known as U Gambira).

 6. Ms Robiou notes that there have been at least 52 politically  motivated
    arrests in Burma since 17 September 2012. Many of the arrests have been
    of Kachin ethnic  minorities  or  members  of  the  All  Burma  Student
    Federation Union. Some of the 52 may have been  released  on  bond  but
    still face court proceedings. As of the date of the report  there  were
    222 political prisoners in detention. The government continues to  deny
    the existence of political prisoners, asserting such  persons  to  have
    'committed criminal activities'.

 7. As to how the Burmese administration views the opposition in  exile  Ms
    Robiou considers that:

      a. The administration treats the opposition in exile with  scepticism.
         They have extended an 'olive branch' to activists in exile for  the
         purposes  of  gaining  political  capital  in  the  eyes   of   the
         international community.

      b. The names of 2,082 people were removed from the blacklist;  a  list
         comprised of foreign and Burmese nationals regarded and threats  to
         peace and stability. These names were made public in  August  2012.
         4000 names remain on the blacklist. Nobody knows whose name  is  on
         the blacklist, save for the President.

 8. Ms Robiou identifies the fact that  the  Burmese  authorities  have  an
    institutionalised and sophisticated spy network  throughout  the  world
    with Burmese embassies being staffed by Military  Intelligence.  It  is
    common for  Military  Intelligence  to  go  undercover  and  infiltrate
    protests, student unions and 'known  hangouts  for  dissidents'.  These
    networks monitor and document information on  individuals  involved  in
    oppositionist movement. The information held by the Burmese authorities
    is very detailed. Each month a report  is  compiled  and  sent  to  the
    Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Military Strategic Command Centre.

 9. In answer to a question as  to  how  the  Burmese  regime  would  treat
    persons returned to Burma who have  demonstrated  outside  the  Burmese
    embassy, but where there were no other records  held  of  oppositionist
    activities within Burma, Ms Robiou responded by observing  that  it  is
    difficult to comment on such matters given the unpredictable nature  of
    the Burmese regime. She noted however that:

      a. A number of highly outspoken activists with foreign  passports  had
         returned to Burma with no incidences of arrest or major harassment,
         including senior figures for the AAPP;

      b. There have been accounts of returning exiles being forced to sign a
         form pledging they will not partake of any activities or engage  in
         criticism that will 'harm the state';

      c.    Risk  levels  are  exacerbated  by  outstanding  grave  criminal
         charges such as for rape or murder, a long history of  visible  and
         outspoken political activism against the regime in Burma,  being  a
         member of an ethnic minority particularly Kachin, or living near  a
         conflict area or a development project.

10. Ms Robiou considers there to be a 'real',  'real  and  high'  or  'very
    high' risk of detention (as variously stated) to anyone who  publically
    demonstrates in Burma, regardless of their ethnic origin. She  observes
    that there has been  a  dramatic  increase  in  the  number  of  public
    demonstrations in the past year and  although  peaceful  demonstrations
    have been legalised, this is superficial and the repression  of  public
    demonstrations still takes place.  Ms Robiou supports  this  conclusion
    with reference to the arrest in September 2012 of 13 activists  leading
    a peaceful march of 1000  demonstrators  to  commemorate  International
    Peace Day and to call for an end to the civil wars in Kachin state  and
    elsewhere in Burma, and the arrest and ill treatment of the leaders  of
    an anti copper mine protest in Sagaing Division.  She  notes  that  the
    length of time spent in detention after arrest varies widely.

11. Ms Robiou further considers that the Burmese regime regards  those  who
    associate with suspected opponents with the same level of suspicion  it
    regards  genuine  dissidents  and   activists,   subjecting   them   to
    harassment, such as visiting the person at his/her place  of  residence
    to conduct a search of  their  home.  Whilst  the  Burmese  authorities
    previously followed and monitored suspects, she had only  noticed  such
    actions by the current regime in relation to prominent  activists.  She
    further acknowledged that she was unaware of  any  cases  in  the  post
    Thein Sein regime where an individual was questioned merely  for  being
    associated with  activists.  She  also  acknowledged  the  practice  of
    visiting a suspect's house does not occur as often  under  the  current
    regime.

12. Suspects face being apprehended and taken to a detention centre. If the
    authorities believe the individual has useful information, such as  the
    structure of an  underground  network,  or  where  they  are  eager  to
    attribute blame for a particular crime such as a recent bomb explosion,
    the suspect will be psychologically and physically tortured.

13. Former political prisoners who have been released by the current regime
    have complained of being monitored and such persons  are  'not  really'
    free and are vulnerable to arrest at any time. Their  criminal  records
    remain intact. They are  subject  to  harassment  including  denial  of
    passports, being barred from employment opportunities,  and  denial  of
    educational opportunities.

14. Ms Robiou continues by observing that the regime acts  in  this  manner
    because it is characterised by the paranoia of  losing  their  hold  on
    power.  Associates  of  activists  are  monitored   in   order   gather
    information on the activist/network so as to  pre-empt  something  from
    happening, such as a  large  protest.  Political  prisoners  are  often
    charged with other serious offences.

15. She considers that it is reasonable to draw a distinction between those
    who have demonstrated in Burma, where it is inconceivable that a person
    would demonstrate unless that person opposed the regime, and those  who
    have attended demonstrations in the United Kingdom; where demonstrators
    run a very low risk of being arrested. She noted, however, that  anyone
    who engages in oppositionist activity is viewed with mistrust and  seen
    as the opposition.

16. In response to being asked  whether  she  agreed  with  the  Tribunal's
    assessment in TL (Burma) that 'the regime would not  persecute  someone
    who they knew to  be  a  hanger-on  with  no  real  commitment  to  the
    oppositionist cause who was demonstrating in the United Kingdom  merely
    to enhance a false claim for asylum', Ms  Robiou  stated  that  she  is
    unaware of any way in which the Burmese authorities would  be  able  to
    determine  a  person's  motivation  for  demonstrating  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

17. Ms Robiou states that if a returnee, having demonstrated in the  United
    Kingdom,  is  neither  a  prominent  activist  nor  has  a  history  of
    oppositionist activity in Burma, there would be  a  low  risk  of  such
    person suffering  serious  harassment  from  the  Burmese  authorities,
    unless he/she continued to demonstrate in Burma. It is conceivable that
    a  returning  exile  not  well  known  on  either   the   domestic   of
    international scene for his/her oppositionist  activity  is  at  higher
    risk than a more prominent returning exile. Arresting exiles on  return
    is seen to tarnish the administration's reputation. It is therefore not
    in the interest of the regime to  arrest  a  returned  exile  from  the
    United Kingdom. She acknowledged that she is unaware of  any  returning
    exile having been arrested in Burma for their activism  in  the  United
    Kingdom. Prominent leaders are subjected to harassment  such  as  phone
    tapping and restrictions on their freedom of movement.

18. Ms Robiou notes that two of her colleagues, former political prisoners,
    have returned permanently to  Burma  without  official  invitation  and
    using their Burmese passports. One works on a mental health project for
    former political prisoners and the other  for  an  exiled  organisation
    that documents human rights abuses. Neither has faced any harassment or
    monitoring.

19. She further confirms that bribery is endemic in Burma. She  was  unable
    to comment on the extent bribery plays in the issuing of passports  and
    exit documentation, or as it relates to immigration officers at  points
    of entry and departure from Burma.

20. In respect of the appellant, Ms Robiou concludes that he  would  be  at
    risk if he continues his oppositionist activity in Burma or travels  to
    an ethnic minority region where  there  is  open  conflict.  There  are
    ongoing conflicts in Kachin, Shan, Karen, Karenni and Arakan State. She
    states that she cannot be certain that the appellant would be  arrested
    simply as a consequence of the activities  he  has  undertaken  in  the
    United Kingdom.

21. She confirms that in order to better assess personal risk an individual
    could take the step of asking for an official invitation to  visit  the
    country from the government of Burma. She suggests that this is a  path
    that the appellant may wish to take. However she also states that it is
    mainly exiled  organisation  and  not  individuals  that  are  extended
    official invitations to return to Burma.

22. In the first addendum to her report  of  22  January  2013,  Ms  Robiou
    observes as follows:

      a.  Low  profile  activists  and  dissidents  are   disproportionately
         targeted by the state security forces;

      b. High profile activists in the  international  arena  are  generally
         allowed to carry out their political  and  humanitarian  activities
         with little or no incidences of harassment. This is  a  tactic  the
         Government of Burma uses to  'trick'  the  international  community
         that they are genuinely reform minded;

      c.    Individuals with no history of activism  are  now  fighting  for
         their rights. The government, instead of responding to the concerns
         of the people, have responded in manners reminiscent of the 'brutal
         military rule';

      d. There has been  an  arbitrary  application  of  the  protest  bill.
         Demonstrations  that  support  government  policy  are  allowed  to
         proceed, whereas those which criticise government  policy  are  not
         allowed to and participants in such demonstrations are the  subject
         of arrests, detentions and ill treatment.

23. In the second  addendum,  Ms  Robiou  cites  examples  of  low  profile
    demonstrators briefly detained (for several hours)  for  violating  the
    Peace Assembly and Procession  Bill  but  who  have  not  faced  formal
    charges. She refers to such individuals being questioned and  a  number
    being required to sign admissions that they did not have permission  to
    protest.

24. Ms Robiou further identifies that three activists who played a  leading
    role in the copper mine  protests  were  assaulted  and  treated  in  a
    degrading manner whilst in detention.  She also provides an example  of
    a labour activist who spent 177 days  on  remand  awaiting  trial,  his
    family members being refused permission to see  him  on  at  least  two
    occasions. Annexed to the second Addendum are three  lists;  the  first
    identifies the names of eight persons convicted and sentenced under the
    'Protest Bill', the legal provision breached,  the date  those  persons
    were arrested (all in November or December 2012) and the sentence  each
    received (either one month or  six  months  imprisonment);  the  second
    lists 84 persons currently awaiting trial under  for  such  crimes  and
    includes the date of the persons arrest,  and the third list  comprises
    of the names of 40 persons that have been arrested for 'other' criminal
    offences.

25. In the third addendum to her report, Ms Robiou  confirms  that  she  is
    aware of low profile activists,  who  have  not  engaged  in  protests,
    demonstrations or processions who have returned to Burma and  have  not
    been harassed.  These  persons  were  engaged  in  lobbying  activities
    against the Burmese government or were staff  members  of  vocal  exile
    organisations.  Her opinion is that this is 'standard'  for  low  level
    activists seeking to return to  Burma  with  no  plans  to  partake  in
    political activity.

26. In her e-mail of the 8 March, Ms Robiou states:

      a. Low level protestors and demonstrators are arbitrarily and  briefly
         detained. In detention they are subject to physical harm and verbal
         harassment.

      b. Critics in Burma are monitored, followed and harassed on a  regular
         basis;

      c.    Her colleagues, low level activists who have returned  to  Burma
         to obtain passports, have  complained  of  having  their  telephone
         conversations tapped;

      d. The appellant will be subject  to  some  sort  of  monitoring  upon
         return. Depending on how much a threat the government perceives him
         to be, and his political activities in Burma, he could  be  subject
         to other repressive tactics such  as  restrictions  on  freedom  of
         movement and denial of employment opportunities.

      e. The 120 arrests that AAPP have record is not a 'small' number. Each
         and every protest faces some level of repression.

Oral evidence

27. In examine in chief Mr  Robiou  stated  that  the  lists  of  those  in
    detention attached to the second addendum of her report of January 2013
    are incomplete. AAPP has a complete picture in relation to the  Rangoon
    and Mandalay areas, but not for other areas. She expected  the  numbers
    to rise exponentially  as  other  areas  of  Burma  are  accessed.  She
    confirmed that AAPP has sent her a monthly list of those in  detention,
    which shows 77 individuals facing trial under the Protest Bill, 48 face
    trials under miscellaneous Acts although many of  these  were  arrested
    whilst protesting and 45 are on trial in Shan state.   In  her  further
    belief is that approximately 1000 persons  are  imprisoned  in  Rakhine
    state, having  been  involved  in  clashes  in  July  and  August.  She
    considered  that  those  persons  who  live  in  conflict  states   are
    disproportionately targeted, with innocent people  being  arrested  and
    tortured. In response to being asked the  numbers  of  innocent  people
    detained, Ms Robiou acknowledged that it was difficult to  access  such
    information. She stated she was aware that 57 people are  on  trial  in
    Kachin State and that many people are held in secret detention centres;
    not even family members knowing where they are detained.

28. It is Ms Robiou's opinion that the appellant would  be  monitored  upon
    return to Burma. She agreed that the evidence given in her email of the
    8  March  2013  was  true,  noting  that  low  level   protestors   and
    demonstrators are arbitrarily briefly detained, without being told why,
    and suffer physical harm and verbal harassment during such a detention.
    She supported this conclusion by reference to the consequences suffered
    by a female  copper  mine  protestor  who  was  sexually  abused  by  a
    policeman. She did not consider this to be  an  isolated  incident  and
    thought the risk of ill treatment during a brief detention to be  'very
    high'.

29. Finally in examination in chief, in response to being  asked  what  she
    thought placed the appellant in a high risk category of  a  short  term
    detention, Ms Robiou stated that  the  appellant's  previous  political
    activity in the United Kingdom  would  put  him  at  risk  because  the
    government would be monitoring who he is interacting with and what sort
    of activities he was undertaking in Burma. She 'suspected' that  during
    interrogation or  brief  detention  the  interrogators  would  want  to
    extract  information  about  the  appellant's  activist  networks.  The
    preferred tool for doing so is torture.

30. In  cross  examination  Mr  Avery  asked  Ms  Robiou  whether  her  two
    colleagues who had returned to Burma had any evidence to support  their
    belief that their phones were tapped. She responded by  accepting  that
    such beliefs were based on suspicion only, however each had  heard  the
    sound of typewriters in the background whilst on  the  telephone.  This
    was something that often used to happen under the  military  rule.  She
    accepted that this was the extent of the difficulties suffered  by  her
    colleagues.

31. Mr Avery then drew Ms Robiou's attention  to  a  conflict  between  the
    evidence she gave in her e-mail of the 8 March 2013,  in  which  it  is
    stated that low level critics are monitored, followed and harassed on a
    regular basis, and the evidence given in her report of 22 January 2013,
    in which it is said that  the  practice  of  following  and  monitoring
    suspects continued only in relation to prominent activists.  Ms  Robiou
    explained this by stating in the past couple of months more  low  level
    activists located in Thailand have gone back  to  Burma  to  apply  for
    passports or visit family members. However, at the time of writing  the
    report of 22 January 2013 only high level activists had gone back,  and
    these were mainly at the invitation of the government.

32. She then acknowledged that she is aware of only 13 of  the  1000  Peace
    Day protestors having been arrested; although she believed that she had
    only 70% of the complete picture. When asked what evidence she  had  to
    support her contention that there is a high risk of being detained at a
    protest, Ms Robiou accepted that she had  no  statistical  evidence  to
    support her contention, but was nevertheless aware that there have been
    detentions at every protest in Burma. She  observed  that  the  Burmese
    government was very keen to give the impression  to  the  international
    community that there are no political prisoners and that they  are  not
    arresting political activists.

33. Ms Robiou was then invited to comment on a report authored  by  Amnesty
    International dated 23 May 2012,  in  which  it  was  stated  that  the
    government had released 650 political prisoners between  May  2011  and
    January  2012,  and  that  many  of  these  persons  had  told  Amnesty
    International [during 2 visits by the organisation to Burma] that  they
    had been relatively free to resume  their  political  activity  without
    harassment or intimidation. She stated in reply that she did not  agree
    with Amnesty International's statement,  observing  that  if  activists
    were free to pursue activities in Burma then AAPP would be in Burma.

34. In response to questions from the Tribunal  Ms  Robiou  confirmed  that
    AAPP had been founded in 2000 and  is  funded  primarily  by  the  Open
    Society Foundation, National Endowment for Democracy,  the  Netherlands
    Embassy in Bangkok and the OAK Foundation. Of the  ten  people  working
    the headquarters, 4 had returned to Burma in the past twelve months;  1
    permanently and 3 on visits. Of the 3 persons who  had  returned  on  a
    visit, 2 had been at the invitation of the government.  Each  of  three
    persons believed their telephones had been tapped and heard  the  sound
    of typewriters in the background when making a telephone call.

35. Ms Robiou further confirmed that she was aware of 2 political prisoners
    who had been freed and then re-arrested - U Gambira and Nay Myo Zin,  a
    charity worker who had been arrested  twice  since  being  released  on
    October 2011.

36. In re-examination Ms Robiou observed that an individual  could  contact
    the Ministry of Home Affairs in order to ascertain whether they were on
    the blacklist, although it was unclear how responsive they would be  to
    such a request. Doing so would not offer any protection however.

Dr Zarni's written evidence

37. Dr Zarni's initial report is dated 16 November 2011. He  comes  from  a
    large military clan in Burma,  having  been  admitted  to  the  Officer
    Training Corp and has done extensive research on  military  affairs  in
    the past 23 years.  He is a founder of the  Free  Burma  Coalition  and
    campaigned for the improvement of human rights conditions in Burma from
    1995 to 2004 internationally.

38. In his report he acknowledges that the appellant was not found to  have
    been politically active in  Burma  and  the  focus  of  his  report  is
    therefore on the consequences of his activities in the UK [10].

39. Commenting on recent developments in Burma he observes:

      a. That some critics and dissidents had begun to return and  that  the
         government  was  considering  the  release  of   jailed   political
         activists at home.

      b. On 25 August 2011  UN  Special  Envoy  on  Human  Rights  in  Burma
         Professor Quintana said that he welcomed some positive developments
         but noted that there is still  serious  and  ongoing  human  rights
         concerns that need to  be  addressed  particularly  the  continuing
         detention of a large number of  prisoners  of  conscience  and  the
         continuing  allegations  of  torture   and   ill-treatment   during
         interrogation.

      c.     UN  Secretary  General  Ban  Ki-Moon  has  said  that  a   real
         opportunity for progress exists but the government must step up its
         efforts for reform if it is to  bring  about  an  inclusive  -  and
         irreversible - transition.   In  particular  the  authorities  must
         cultivate improved dialogue with all political actors  and  release
         all the many political prisoners.

      d. The Prime Minister of Myanmar has referred in his statement to  the
         General Assembly that an early amnesty is being considered.  [15]

40. Dr Zarni refers to the latest report by the Assistance Association  for
    Political Prisoners in Burma published in 2010 which  says  that  there
    are more than 2,000 people behind bars without access of guarantees  to
    due process.  There are 42 prisons in Burma, 109 labour  camps  and  an
    unknown number of interrogation centres, and the deplorable  conditions
    in these places are well-documented.

41. Dr Zarni considers also that:

 a. Jailed political activists have no recourse to law, the single  biggest
    obstacle in effective intervention of human rights being the absence of
    an independent judiciary.

 b. there is a difference between the role and function for  law  in  Burma
    and any norm based judicial systems [19] this  being  characterised  as
    the "un-Rule of law" which is differentiated from the rule  of  law  in
    depending upon uncertainty rather than certainty by which citizens  can
    organise their lives and arbitrariness rather than  consistency  as  to
    how state institutions and personnel operate and it is  concerned  with
    the denial with rights in the absence of norms upon  which  rights  can
    even be nominally established.

42. Dr Zarni notes that there are signs that as at  November  2011,  Burma,
    may be at the point where changes become possible although:

 a. expectations that Burma's human rights conditions were going to improve
    significantly once the Burmese government declared  an  amnesty  on  12
    October 2011 turned out to be misplaced, given the very low  number  of
    prisoners of conscience that were released;

 b. it has been argued that the political  detainees  were  like  hostages,
    being released at a trickle in exchange for  deals  being  struck  with
    various parties at home and abroad;

 c.   There is a  significant  disparity  between  reality  on  the  ground
    regarding human rights and governmental conditions and  the  officially
    stated aspiration of goals which the Burmese military government claims
    to be striving towards and which the UN and international human  rights
    organisations are urging the Burmese government to move.

43. The Burmese military rulers' attitudes are comprehensible only  through
    consideration of their mental/psychological make-up  whereby:

 a. Unquestioning loyalty and compliance from subordinates is  required  at
    all levels of the military; any disagreement and  difference  expressed
    by subordinates is seen as  a  sign  of  disloyalty  and  disorder  and
    subordination;

 b. Military leaders at all levels do not tolerate  any  form  of  dissent;
    under military rule military leaders have come to accept the same  from
    the non-military  sections  of  society  and  government  with  a  zero
    tolerance towards public political opposition  and  defiance  pervading
    all aspects of the state;

 c.   Citizens' political protests are seen as unlawful acts of  individual
    defiance and disloyalty to the nation, the official expression used  in
    reference to Burmese opposition activists being  "external  destructive
    elements and lackeys of the alien powers";

 d. No material distinction or difference is  made  between  organisers  of
    protests and those who merely join the  anti-government  discrimination
    demonstrations either at home or abroad.

44. Dr Zarni considered  that  it  would  be  difficult  for  the  military
    government to assess commitment to the opposition's cause on  the  part
    of those Burmese nationals who turn up to  demonstrate  abroad  outside
    diplomatic missions, but that there are certainly informers both within
    the country and outside who trade information  for  different  purposes
    and the regime relies  heavily  on  human  intelligence  in  monitoring
    opposition of the activists inside and outside the country.

45. A person who had had contact with the opposition  in  exile  would,  on
    return, be likely to be interrogated about those contacts  and  torture
    is the norm during interrogation period when confessions  are  forcibly
    extracted.  What  would  constitute  real  commitment   can   only   be
    established over a period of time in assessing whether an activist  has
    a real commitment to democratisation or the stamina to stick  with  the
    opposition's cause.

46. Protests by overseas communities in front of diplomatic  posts  do  not
    immediately threaten to destabilise or disrupt the military  controlled
    social order inside Burma, but because these protest demonstrations are
    usually headline  news,  the  impact  amongst  the  Burmese  public  is
    significant and for that reason the government views  transmitted  news
    of protests in front of its  embassies  abroad  and  other  direct  and
    practical instigations as having a contagious impact.  Exiled activists
    are commonly known amongst the Burmese public as well as the government
    to incite popular protests and mass revolt within Burma.

47. Dr Zarni considers that Burmese military rulers attach disproportionate
    significance to peaceful protests by ex-patriots, exiles and migrs in
    front of Burmese Embassies around the world, a significance attached to
    this  being  comprehensible   only   through   consideration   of   the
    mental/psychological make-up  of  military  leadership,  in  particular
    "loss of face".  This is felt to an extreme degree by Burmese  generals
    which  is  why  they  view  the  simple  act   of   Burmese   nationals
    demonstrating in front of Burmese Embassies abroad in such  a  negative
    light.   Most of the news that has come out of Burma since  the  bloody
    crackdown of the people power uprising in 1988 has been grim and whilst
    the generals come to the  negative  news  coverage  of  their  military
    regime and since April 2011 constitution of military rule as  a  given,
    they  remain  extremely  sensitive  to  Burmese  nationals   expressing
    negative views about the military and its rule.

The Military's surveillance of citizens abroad

48. The  military  government  attaches  much  significance  to  monitoring
    Burmese nationals abroad  even  so  far  as  to  violate  international
    policies and  legal  requirements  such  as  placing  Burmese  military
    intelligence officials at the Burmese Embassy although the  embassy  in
    London is not supposed  to  have  any  military  attach.   It  is  the
    responsibility for these military intelligence officials  operating  as
    civilian diplomats to record and  report  dissident  activities  abroad
    including  anti-government  protests  in  front   of   their   embassy.
    Officials whom Dr Zarni met gave the impression that they were able  to
    keep a watchful eye on the Burmese exiled  communities  in  London  and
    Washington through  the  frequent  Burmese  embassy  functions  and  to
    Burmese monasteries.  In the Burmese Ministry of Foreign Affairs almost
    all officials at all levels are military or ex-military officers and in
    addition, military intelligence personnel from the Ministry of  Defence
    intelligence  are  attached  to  all  embassies.   There  are  numerous
    eyewitness  accounts  of  Burmese  Embassy  staff   photographing   and
    recording  protestors  outside  the  embassies  for  the   purpose   of
    establishing their identities.  Video  and  photographic  recording  of
    virtually  all  dissident  activities  including  protests  inside  and
    outside Burma for the purpose of establishing the identities of  those,
    not just protestors and  key  participants,  but  also  hangers-on  and
    onlookers is  a  well-known  intelligence/police  practice  by  Burmese
    security organisations.  Dr Zarni has seen  embassy  officials  in  all
    venues photographing and recording demonstrations of his own  contacts,
    it is clear that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs maintains a  blacklist
    of both Burmese political activists abroad and  foreign  nationals  who
    are regime critics.

Would Burmese failed asylum seekers upon return be subject to  ill-treatment
by the military and police intelligence

49. Since the announcement in September 2011 by President Thein  Sein  that
    his government will  consider  leniently  those  political  exiles  and
    activists abroad who wish to return to Burma, a number of high  profile
    dissidents have returned and so far are known to be left  unharmed  but
    can be arrested at any time.  The amnesty turned out to  be  of  little
    significance when only ten percent of the 2,000 jailed  activists  were
    released and where well-known activists' prominence may  have  afforded
    them a degree of protection, it  not  being  in  the  interest  of  the
    government when it is  trying  to  project  a  new  image  to  be  seen
    arresting or maltreating returning famous dissidents.

50. In Dr Zarni's opinion, the government is  trying  to  cultivate  a  new
    image as a benevolent constitutional government rather than  trying  to
    bring about genuine improvement on human rights  and  political  fronts
    and the same induced  personal  protection  from  persecution  is  less
    likely to be  available  to  face  those  activists  whose  records  of
    political opposition rest only with the military government's  security
    agencies.

51. Because those who are labelled as  "hangers-on"  among  protestors  and
    organisers in front of British Embassies are not on  the  human  rights
    and  political  radar  of  any   major   international   human   rights
    organisation, western embassies in Rangoon or even local Burmese media,
    there is no way of knowing  whether  they  disappear  upon  arrival  at
    Rangoon and other ports of entry into Burma.

52. Dr Zarni's view is that, although it is not possible to be certain, the
    authorities in Burma will not make any distinction between those with a
    real commitment to democratisation by the opposition movement or  those
    who may be merely be motivated in order  to  get  asylum  abroad.   The
    concept of "hangers-on" has  absolutely  no  meaning  for  the  Burmese
    authorities as no threat is to be tolerated and no amount of  challenge
    to their authority is  insignificant.   He  does  not  think  that  any
    organisation could or would  conceivably  want  to  monitor  so  called
    hangers-on who are only known to the Burmese security  agencies  thanks
    to their participation in anti-government protests in front of  Burmese
    Embassies in London etc.  In the absence  of  any  definitive  evidence
    either way one is left with only the human rights track record  of  the
    military government and the existing verifiable conditions in terms  of
    the absence of independent judiciary and the essential due process, the
    continuing use of torture and other numerous forms of ill-treatment and
    that there is always the risk  of  detention  and  arrest  for  Burmese
    nationals  politically  active  abroad  when  they  return  to   Burma,
    regardless of whether  they  have  a  recorded  and  known  history  of
    political involvement inside the country.

Factors that can exacerbate the risk to the group of "hangers-on"

53. There are a number of factors which would likely exacerbate the risk to
    "hangers-on" such as:-

 a. political arrests and upheavals inside Burma which erupt chronically;

 b. bomb explosions and other terrorist acts usually attributed  to  exiles
    and foreign-based Burmese organisations;

 c.   increased military tensions with armed ethnic minority  organisations
    which have a strong diaspora support; and

 d. Rumours and  intelligence  that  some  exile  groups  are  planning  or
    instigating popular unrest in the country around historically important
    dates.

54. Although it is not possible to predict when exactly  such  an  enhanced
    risk might arise, there are some recurring occasions such as  2  March,
    18 September and 8 August during which  the  surveillance  of  citizens
    while security forces would be tighter  and  surprise  security  sweeps
    would be more frequent than usual.

55. At certain times there would also be enhanced checks on people arriving
    at an airport or on people who have recently returned from abroad given
    the carrying out of enhanced  checks  within  the  country.  Also  some
    irregularities in their passports and national ID cards which  everyone
    is required to carry with  them  at  all  times  or  suspicious/nervous
    behaviour will attract immediate attention to activists on arrival Even
    if they encounter no trouble at security immigration booths on arrival,
    the fact that their identities are established and  maintained  in  the
    government's database of persona non grata the security agencies are in
    a position to track them down should they feel stricter surveillance is
    called for on the aforementioned occasions.  Should a so-called hanger-
    on be arrested on arrival or  subsequently,  he  would  be  subject  to
    arbitrary and ill-treatment at  the  hands  of  security  agencies  and
    reference is made to reports of those returned in  particular  the  COI
    Report (17 June 2011) at 33.25 referring to an IRBD  report  indicating
    that two persons with apparently similar circumstances may  be  treated
    completely differently by the Myanmar authorities which do not  operate
    according to rational methods.

56. So far as Dr Zarni is aware, the FCO in Rangoon  does  not  devote  any
    human or financial resources to the systematic monitoring  of  how  the
    authorities handle Burmese deportees and  returning  Burmese  nationals
    who may have demonstrated outside the Burmese Embassies abroad.  It  is
    highly improbable that the FCO officials  in  Burma  will  know  where,
    when, why and how arbitrary arrests and detentions of Burmese deportees
    and returning nationals from abroad take place.  The FCO is  not  in  a
    position to make a definite judgment as to whether  it  is  only  rally
    leaders and individuals who also have histories inside Burma who  would
    be particularly at risk as it appears to have done so without  material
    evidence or a system of monitoring in place in order to be able to make
    that assessment and "particularly" does not rule out the possibility of
    risk to people who do not fall within  the  categories  identified.  In
    contrast the Burmese authorities have a well-documented system  set  up
    abroad to identify  all  demonstrators  in  front  of  their  embassies
    abroad.

57. In his view the appellant, if  returned,  faces  risks  common  to  all
    political activists: arbitrary arrest, detention,  interrogation  which
    is usually through various means of torture  starting  with  systematic
    sleep deprivation, beating and hitting and he would  be  treated  as  a
    political activist even if the reasons for his political activism  were
    purely opportunistic.  Dr Zarni then refers to  evidence  showing  that
    military intelligence search, arrest and  interrogate  without  warrant
    anyone deemed  political  despite  provisions  to  the  contrary.   All
    prominent political prisoners interviewed  were  held  longer  than  48
    hours without warrant and without being brought for judicial authority,
    their basic rights to due process were denied and there  are  instances
    in which military intelligence has passed sentences orally at the  time
    of arrest before any trial has taken place.

58. Dr Zarni notes that the  Burmese  military  regime  used  to  send  its
    intelligence agents to East Germany for advanced training and continues
    to use the Stasi methodology of training citizens to spy on each other.
    From his own first-hand  interactions  with  Burmese  intelligence  and
    diplomatic officials in the US and the UK, Dr  Zarni  is  of  the  view
    focus and  energies  of  Burmese  intelligence  personnel  abroad   are
    directed at monitoring various anti-government  activities  of  Burmese
    political exiles and activists and that they recruit informers  through
    a few Burmese monasteries in the UK where  Burmese  exiles  expatriates
    and migrs congregate and business associates, foreign  academics  and
    those who need consular assistance  for  example  passport  renewal  or
    Burmese entry visas may also  volunteer  information  about  what  they
    consider anti-government activities.   There is no way of  ascertaining
    whether the UK based network of Burmese spies and informers are able to
    provide information on those who are genuine opponents or those who are
    not, that is who are hangers-on but even if they were able  to  provide
    categorical information to headquarters in Burma, Dr Zarni considers it
    to be unlikely to  make  a  difference  in  the  eyes  of  the  Burmese
    authorities in light of the fact that the military or leadership  views
    any and all imposition abroad as an act of national  betrayal  designed
    to tarnish the image of the country and  hence  inflict  loss  of  face
    internationally.

59. Based on the appellant's statement that he has  participated  in  anti-
    government demonstrations in London and attended political meetings  at
    the Burmese monastery in Colindale, Dr Zarni considers that he will  in
    all likelihood be  in  the  military  government's  database  of  those
    Burmese nationals who publicly registered  an  opposition  towards  the
    government and this will rule out  the  possibility  that  the  Burmese
    authorities will only regard him  as  a  mere  hanger-on  even  in  the
    unlikely event they  make  such  distinctions  amongst  anti-government
    activists abroad.

60. Given well-documented and pervasive rights abuses, Dr  Zarni  considers
    that it is important to understand that the  nature  of  the  state  in
    Burma is highly arbitrary and therefore any decisions  made  concerning
    repatriation should be done with extreme caution and the Upper Tribunal
    should take extreme care before deciding it is safe to  return  TSs  to
    Burma.  While it is not certain what exactly the authorities  would  do
    if he  were  forcibly  returned,  he  is  likely  to  be  detained  and
    interrogated either upon return or subsequently given the frequency  of
    his protest demonstrations in front of the embassy and the fact that he
    would by now be well-known to the intelligence agencies inside Burma  a
    chance of him being left unharmed by the authorities will  diminish  in
    times of high security alerts  generally  triggered  by  the  occasions
    referred to above.

Summary of Transcript of Conference Call with Dr Zarni

61. There is no other evidence  to  believe  the  regime  has  modified  or
    changed its activity in taking photographs of  those  demonstrating  at
    the embassy and there appears to  be  no  change  to  the  government's
    priorities in terms of intelligence gathering.

62. The main concern of the regime is how the  demonstrations  may  tarnish
    the good name of  the  country  especially  now  that  they  have  been
    welcomed back into the international community.   There  is  a  renewed
    sense of importance attached to demonstrations around the world outside
    Burmese  Embassies  and  Burmese  Embassies   coming   from   different
    communities, particularly  the  Kachin  Christian  minorities  and  the
    Rohinja Muslim minority

63. Given that the mindset of the authorities is security  first,  security
    second and  security  third  this  is  virtually  unchanged  and  human
    intelligence reliance may intensify, using and relying  upon  extensive
    formal and  informal  networks  of  voluntary  informants  as  well  as
    professional trained human intelligence officers.  Some 5,000 to 10,000
    Burmese military officers  have  now  received  technical  training  in
    Pakistan, Russia, China and India and the trained officers are known to
    be expert at hacking emails of journalists, dissidents and other common
    figures in and out of the country and  civil  monitoring  continues  to
    monitor cyberspace and will continue to record and take photographs  of
    demonstrations.  All the pictures are not  taken  for  the  purpose  of
    keeping them in the embassies but transmitting them  electronically  to
    headquarters for further investigation and ID identification purposes.

64. There is no crystal clear definition of what are genuinely  suppressive
    anti-government activities and what are  phoney  subversive  activities
    designed to establish one's status  as  a  dissident.   In  Burma  such
    things are not spelt out or even where the laws are clearly  spelt  out
    the application of laws concerning subversive activities is elastic  in
    the sense that individual officers retain a large degree of  discretion
    or discretionary part to deem a particular person a  genuine  dissident
    or phony who poses no threat to the regime.  The decision of whether  a
    person is genuine or not is contingent upon which officer or agency  is
    interpreting the matter.  The  intelligence  agency  has  improved  its
    ability to rely on human intelligence because it  has  built  up  cyber
    intelligence networks  with  very  well-trained  computer  hackers  and
    social media experts trained specially in Russia.

65. The authorities continue to torture  during  investigations:  the  most
    common records being psychological torture and sleep deprivation  which
    does not result in physical injury.   It  is  not  clear  whether  they
    continue to beat up detainees during interrogations because if let  out
    within a short period they would now go to the press and tell what  had
    been done to them and in that sense the  physical  torture  may  be  in
    decline but they have other methods available.

66. The authorities continue to view transmitted news protests in front  of
    embassies as having a contagious impact at home.  There  are  now  some
    three to four million people known to be internet users  in  Burma  who
    use cyber cafes.  Facebook is the most popular medium  in  the  country
    and so images get picked up and are re-transmitted by various different
    groups using Facebook and other social media websites.  The  images  of
    political defiance towards the military regime are treated seriously by
    the authorities.  Although the end  of  official  censorship  has  been
    announced, there is an array of different laws designed to  restrict  a
    flow of information.  The attitude of the  authorities  is  still  very
    much  that  there  is  a  danger  of  "external,  internal  destructive
    elements, lackeys of aliens instilling wrong thoughts   in  youth  that
    patriotism and nationalistic spirit are out of date  instigating  youth
    to entertain tendencies of confrontation violence in mind".

67. So far as Dr Zarni is aware the military is not decreasing or  removing
    their military intelligence officer officials at the Burmese Embassy in
    London and if anything there will be  an  increase  in  the  number  of
    military intelligence agencies in their London Embassy given the extent
    to which the  West  is  bending  over  backwards  to  woo  the  Burmese
    government away from China.

68. There is always a risk of detention and arrest  for  Burmese  nationals
    politically active abroad and it is noted that when Aung  San  Suu  Kyi
    attended a public meeting at the Royal Theatre near  Waterloo,  London,
    in response as to whether it  was  safe  and  secure  for  Burmese  ex-
    patriots and exiles to return it was that you have  to  make  your  own
    judgment and that you would not say  it  is  completely  safe  for  the
    Burmese to return, it depends on individual cases.  There is  always  a
    risk of being detained.

69. The crucial element is unpredictability as one never  knows  what  will
    trigger suspicion in the minds of local and national security officials
    as there is no uniformity as enforcement is so unpredictable  that  you
    will never know when a certain activity will  be  deemed  a  threat  to
    national security.  In the case of little-known activists who may  have
    participated by demonstrating in front of the Burmese Embassy they will
    have no way of knowing where their pictures end up  and  who  might  be
    viewing them.   The  crucial  thing  is  that  the  laws  are  enforced
    elastically and one can never  be  sure  of  what  will  trigger  one's
    arrest.  A protest in itself does not pose any  security  threat  other
    than at best reputational damage but protest as a  clear  indicator  of
    your sentiments makes protest  crucial.   The  Burmese  government  see
    protesting as an indicator of either hardcore dissidents or potentially
    hardcore dissidents that is the crucial point.

70. If the British government does not know what  Burmese  citizens  abroad
    are doing below the radar then they cannot say with certainty that they
    are not at risk of being picked up by intelligence. The main mission of
    the British Embassy in Burma is to promote the British  national  self-
    interest. They know every single important dissident but  that  is  not
    the population with which we are concerned.  If you look at the current
    political development the big activists from Aung San Suu Kyi  down  to
    the next 500 or 100 dissidents with recognisable names are no longer at
    a high risk as before, the risk is with little-known but up and  coming
    activists who had basically picked up where the big  famous  dissidents
    left off.

71. Turning to the FCO letter 4 February 2011 Dr Zarni said  he  could  not
    with certainty say that the appellant would most likely be arrested  at
    Rangoon or other point of entry or elsewhere  in  the  country  and  he
    cannot know whether he would be arrested or tortured  or  whether  they
    would let him come and go  without  harming  him  and  he  cannot  know
    whether he would be safe or not as he  has  no  evidence  to  determine
    this.  He does not know whether there is  still  a  risk  to  returning
    failed asylum seekers who have demonstrated outside the Burmese Embassy
    in London and defers to the FCO letter.

72. Dr Zarni said that even given recent developments there would not be  a
    difference in the  eyes  of  the  authorities  to  whether  someone  is
    categorised as a genuine appellant or a hanger-on assuming the  Burmese
    spies or informers are able to provide this information.  The system is
    not one of a vast bureaucratic evil machine coordinated from  the  very
    top down to the ground root; there are different layers of officers and
    non-officers who are pursuing their own interests  like  keeping  their
    job which is what makes it so difficult in the context where  the  rule
    of law is not clearly established, not clearly  or  uniformly  enforced
    and so it is difficult to answer with certainty many  of  the  specific
    questions put.

73. Asked if he was confident that the reform process  would  not  go  into
    reverse, Dr Zarni said that there  are  some  ominous  signs  that  the
    Ministry of Defence and its  economic  conglomerate  is  under  Chinese
    pressure,  resorting  to  the  use  of   canisters   containing   white
    phosphorous and using teargas to quell demonstrations or  to  break  up
    mass gatherings indicating that the military has  a  clear  mindset  in
    terms of where its core interests lie in the regime,   and  anyone  who
    attempts to rock the boat is going to  get  the  same  treatment.   The
    generals have swapped their military attire for civilian clothing, have
    dropped the language of authoritarianism  and  speak  the  language  of
    democratic democracy in civil society but their interest  and  mindset,
    where  for  operational  and  modus  operandi  remain  unchanged.   The
    dissidents are not running the country and do not even have  a  say  in
    what types of reform packages are debated  or  discussed.   The  reform
    process remains fragile and remains reversible  primarily  because  the
    reforms are not about genuine democratisation or the  genuine  transfer
    of power from an entrenched military  but  are  about  reinventing  the
    Burmese military in a way that is acceptable to the western government,
    international lending agencies and investors.

Dr Zarni's emails of 13 March 2013

74. In the first email of 13 March,  Dr  Zarni  states  that  the  risk  to
    Burmese citizens who had taken part  in  anti-regime  protests  in  the
    United Kingdom of being arrested and tortured on return remains as high
    as before the reforms. In his second email he explains (in response  to
    Mr Mullins request to explain his change  in  assessment  from  one  of
    uncertainty to one of high risk) that this is based on new  information
    from various sources, as well as observations on the heightened risk in
    times of political fluidity; that the most significant source is the UN
    Special Rapporteur; that the other source is a recent interview with  a
    former political prisoner; that none touched on returnees and the risks
    they faced; and, that he is drawing a new conclusion based on  how  the
    regime is treating local protestors.

Dr Zarni's oral evidence

75. Dr Zarni adopted as his initial report  dated  14  November  2011,  the
    transcript of his Skype interview on  12  February  2013  and  his  two
    emails of 13 March 2013 as his  evidence  in  chief,  adding  that  the
    former political prisoner to whom he referred in his second  email  was
    someone visiting Oslo whose interview on the "Voice of  Burma"  he  had
    seen.  He said he had not had any discussions with Ms Robiou.  He  said
    that since his report of November  2011,  he  had  had  interviews  and
    conversations with different Burmese  sources,  some  from  inside  the
    country when they had travelled abroad; he has not been back  to  Burma
    since 2006, and contacts people there via email, mobile  and  Facebook.
    His contacts come through a  social  network  established  since  Burma
    opened up.

76. In cross-examination, it was put to Dr Zarni that 2013, in  saying   in
    his first email of 13 March 2013 that the risk to Burmese citizens  who
    had taken part in anti-regime protests in the United Kingdom  of  being
    arrested and tortured on return remains as high as before the  reforms,
    he had changed his position from the Skype interview [Q12 & Q 13] where
    he said that he could not know if the appellant would be safe on return
    as he had no evidence to determine if he would be safe or not; and that
    he did not know if those who demonstrated outside the embassy would  be
    at risk on return.

77. Dr Zarni's response was that his view had not changed at all;  that  he
    had made the observation that in times  of  political  uncertainty  the
    risk of those returning and finding extra vigilance will increase,  and
    that there are now three major developments: systematic persecution  of
    Muslims in Western Burma, triggering demonstrations; over a year and  a
    half of  civil  war  in  Northern  Burma;  and,  land  confiscation  in
    government projects leading to small  scale  protests  which  had  been
    picked up by the UNHRC Special Rapporteur.  Dr Zarni said that  he  had
    modified his position in the light of the Special  Rapporteur's  report
    who (unlike him) was able to visit prisons and see the situation on the
    ground, and so he deferred to him, adding that the report should  carry
    greater weight than the FCO letter to which he had previously deferred.



78. It was put to Dr Zarni  that  the  Special  Rapporteur's  report  added
    nothing new; he said that it depends on how you read it. He said he was
    not changing his view, just expressing a greater degree  of  confidence
    on his earlier  opinion,  that  there  is  always  a  risk  of  arrest,
    detention or torture.  He said that he had not been fully confident  to
    express his views before, until he read the report, and as the  Special
    Rapporteur  was  politically  independent  and  had  reached  the  same
    conclusion as him that added to his confidence.

79. Asked when he had decided to change his view on the position of  people
    returning from the UK, he said that he was not making observations with
    specific reference to those returning from  the  UK  but  that  Burmese
    nationals who protest outside embassies would face  the  same  risk  as
    they would in the past, but that he could not  quantify  the  level  of
    risk to those returning, due to the high level of arbitrariness how the
    security forces conduct themselves.  He was not, however, able to  give
    examples of anyone who had been ill-treated on return within  the  last
    two years.

80. Dr Zarni did not accept that this suggests there is no problem as  what
    is under consideration  is  not  Burmese  who  are  politically  active
    abroad, but those who do not have profiles as dissidents  and  who  are
    not known to the outside world, and so it is not known who gets  picked
    up on return.  He said he had no evidence to support or refute his view
    that there is a group of those who are not media literate  and  are  on
    the margins and who may face difficulties on return but had no specific
    examples of this. He further understands that the Burmese  regime  does
    not have a clear definition of what constitutes a political crime.

81. Commenting on Ms Robiou's view that demonstrating outside Burma was not
    likely to cause someone to be at risk, Dr Zarni said that it depends on
    where the demonstration takes place, who is targeted and  the  type  of
    media coverage received; it is not possible  to  make  such  a  blanket
    statement.

82. Dr Zarni said that although a  lot  of  high-profile  former  political
    prisoners  have  returned,  it  is  in  the  interest  of  the  Burmese
    Government to treat them well, as it is trying hard to show that it  is
    reformist, but what is of concern are those not on the  radar.  He  did
    not know how the Burmese government would assess if a person  would  be
    likely to come the attention of the international community, and  while
    they had made mistakes in the past, he was not aware  of  any  examples
    recently, although that did not mean it had not taken place.

83. Asked to comment on the lack of evidence of low-level  activists  being
    at risk, Dr Zarni said that people are being detained left  and  right,
    and that the Burmese government makes it their business to record every
    protest outside their embassies, the evidence being transmitted back to
    the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

84. In re-examination, he said that if not arrested on return,  someone  of
    whom there is a record of their demonstrating outside an  embassy  will
    be called in for questioning, without a warrant or due process, at  any
    time. There is a special breach of  the  police  whose  mission  is  to
    monitor, interrogate and extract information from anyone  suspected  of
    being  engaged  in  anti-government  activities,   including   peaceful
    protests. Any Burmese  national  with  a  known  history  of  political
    activities faces a greater risk of being closely monitored, and  called
    in for questioning, even if there is no concrete evidence. A protest in
    the locality may be enough to trigger this.

85. Dr  Zarni  was  sure  that  as  the  appellant  had  attended  over  30
    demonstrations  that  his  face  would   be   recognised   by   Burmese
    intelligence, as they take pictures of the demonstrations. He said that
    most Burmese come to the UK on official documents,  and  register  with
    the consulate so the embassy will have  records  of  them;  it  is  the
    responsibility of the intelligence officials in  the  embassy  to  link
    names to photographs. Dr Zarni's belief was that raw  intelligence  was
    sent back to Burma and any risk analysis  was  carried  out  by  senior
    officials there.

86. Dr Zarni concurred  with  Ms  Robiou's  view  that  previous  political
    activity would put THE APPELLANT at risk as he would  be  monitored  on
    return to determine with whom he was interacting,  and  that  he  would
    face a brief detention and interrogation about this.

87. Dr Zarni considered that an individual who had studied  in  the  United
    Kingdom but had  not  attended  political  meetings  or  demonstrations
    outside of Burma would not be at risk on return. He considered that  if
    someone expresses political views publicly in social media,  this  will
    in due course come to the attention of Burmese intelligence  which  has
    spent a considerable amount in having  some  10,000  military  officers
    trained in cyber espionage  in  Russia.   He  said  that  the  regime's
    current  concern  is  not  from  well-known  dissidents  but  with  its
    relationship with little-known low  level,  organic  opposition  coming
    from those fighting loss of land  and  similar  issues.  That  type  of
    opposition cannot, in the view  of  Dr  Zarni  be  separate  from  that
    centred on the cities, as there is a lot of across the board solidarity
    between the various groups.

Report of Special Rapporteur

88. In the chapter headed "Human Rights Situation", the Special Rapporteur,
    Professor Quintana sets out a number  of  chapter  headings  comprising
    Prisoners of Conscience,  conditions  of  detention  and  treatment  of
    prisoners,  Freedom  of  Expression  and  Freedom   of   Assembly   and
    Association.  From these we note the following:

 a. The grant of amnesties following the formation of  the  new  government
    and the release of 800 prisoners of conscience (the most  recent  being
    announced on 16 November 2012 is welcomed although it is noted that the
    code of criminal procedure enables the attachment of conditions and  it
    is reiterated that the release  of  prisoners  of  conscience  must  be
    without any  conditions.   Credible  sources  indicate  that  over  250
    prisoners of conscience remain behind  bars.   The  announcement  on  6
    February (2013) of  the  formation  of  a  committee  to  identify  the
    remaining  prisoners  of  conscience  to  be   released   follows   the
    government's earlier commitment made on 18 November 2012 to set up such
    a mechanism.

 b. Professor Quintana visited Insein prison where he met five prisoners of
    conscience whose names are provided as well as Sittwe prison  where  he
    met another.  Their cases were discussed along with four  international
    non-governmental organisation workers who remain in  Buthidaung  prison
    with the home affairs minister in Naypyitaw.

 c.   In Yangon Professor  Quintana  met  recently  released  prisoners  of
    conscience, two of whom are named whom he  had  previously  visited  in
    Insein prison.  He observes that many former prisoners continue  to  be
    denied passports and cannot travel abroad, and whilst some medical  and
    legal professionals have had their licences revoked.

 d. Specifically about conditions of detention and treatment of  prisoners,
    Professor Quintana observes:

             "11.       The  Special  Rapporteur  is  concerned  about  the
                  ongoing practice of torture  in  places  of  detention  in
                  Myanmar.  During his interviews with displaced persons  in
                  the camps in  Nyitkyina  and  Waingmaw  and  prisoners  in
                  Myitkyina prison  he  received  allegations  of  arbitrary
                  arrest and torture during interrogation by the military of
                  Kachin men accused of belonging to the Kachin Independence
                  Army (KIA).  In Rakhine  State,  he  received  allegations
                  that Muslim prisoners detained in Buthidaung prison  after
                  last June and October's violence  had  been  tortured  and
                  beaten to death.

             12.       While in Yangon, the Special Rapporteur met with the
                  sister of Myint Swe  who  died  following  torture  during
                  interrogation whilst  in  police  custody.   His  case  is
                  consistent with other information the  Special  Rapporteur
                  has  continued  to  receive  on  professionalised  torture
                  techniques being used by police officers  on  suspects  of
                  violent crime with the aim of extracting confessions.   He
                  highlights that addressing human rights violations through
                  the criminal justice system is  necessary  to  combat  the
                  culture of impunity that exists for  acts  of  torture  in
                  police stations, prisons and in other places of detention,
                  particularly during the  interrogation  of  suspects.   In
                  addition he encourages the government  to  initiate  human
                  rights training programs for police  officers  and  prison
                  officials, and to develop the capacity of  other  relevant
                  public officials, including judges and  doctors,  who  can
                  intervene on suspected cases of torture.

             13.       The Special Rapporteur acknowledges the steps  being
                  taken by the Government to address the ongoing practice of
                  torture in Myanmar.  He commends  the  Government  on  its
                  commitment  last  November  to  allow  the   International
                  Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) to resume prison  visits
                  in order to assess conditions  and  facilitate  access  to
                  healthcare, and notes the subsequent successful completion
                  of the first pilot visit in January ..."

 e. In respect of freedom of expression, Professor Quintana notes  that  in
    2012 no journalists  were  jailed  in  Myanmar  and  the  country  rose
    eighteen places to 151 out of  179  states  in  the  2013  World  Press
    Freedom Index.  He was concerned that  public  broadcast  news  remains
    heavily censored, but  welcomes  the  increased  freedom  for  internet
    users, with internet caf owners no longer receiving police visits  and
    no longer required to keep logs of the computers used by its customers.
     He expresses concern, however, about the decision of Parliament on  17
    January to investigate the online  activities  of  a  blogger  who  had
    criticised MPs' amendments to the constitutional tribunal law.

 f.   In respect of freedom of expression, Professor Quintana notes that in
    2012 no journalists  were  jailed  in  Myanmar  and  the  country  rose
    eighteen places to 151 out of  179  states  in  the  2013  World  Press
    Freedom Index.  He was concerned that  public  broadcast  news  remains
    heavily censored, but  welcomes  the  increased  freedom  for  internet
    users, with internet caf owners no longer receiving police visits  and
    no longer required to keep logs of the computers used by its customers.
     He expresses concern, however, about the decision of Parliament on  17
    January to investigate the online  activities  of  a  blogger  who  had
    criticised MPs' amendments to the constitutional tribunal law.

 g. Concerns are expressed over the extent to which the right to freedom of
    assembly and association is being respected because  of  shortfalls  in
    the  2011  Peaceful  Assembly  and  Peaceful  Procession  Act  and  its
    associated  bylaw  as  well  as  the  problematic  implementation   and
    enforcement of this legislation by state officials and police  officers
    on the ground.  This is reflected in the ongoing arrest  and  detention
    of people involved in peaceful protests.  If  a  peaceful  assembly  or
    procession takes place without a permit the criminal code provides  for
    punishment of up to one year imprisonment and a fine  of  30,000  kyat.
    Furthermore, he observes the act is  being  used  in  conjunction  with
    other laws under which the  failure  to  gain  permission  to  hold  an
    assembly can result in two years' imprisonment of the criminal code and
    five years sentence  under  1988  law  relating  to  the  formation  of
    organisations for people who participate in groups that in,  broad  and
    vague terms:

             "... attempt, instigate, incite, abet or commit acts that  may
             in any way disrupt law and order, peace and  tranquillity,  or
             safe and secure communications; [or]  affect  or  disrupt  the
             regularity of state machinery."

         There was an additional power  to  the  President  under  the  1908
         Unlawful Associations Act authorising the President to  declare  at
         his discretion any organisation to be unlawful with the sanction of
         between two and three years imprisonment for a member  of  such  an
         association.

 h. Reference is made to thirteen activists having been arrested under what
    we understand to be the Peaceful Assembly and Peaceful  Procession  Act
    on 21 December 2013 in Yangon in which opposition was voiced to the war
    in Kachin State, and in October ten activists  in  Mandalay  Bago  were
    charged under the Act with participating in peaceful  protests  against
    electricity charges.  Reference is also made to four gold mine  workers
    having been sentenced to six months imprisonment for leading a march on
    23 November 2012 on the basis that they had done so without permission.
     On  26  November  eight  activists  including  a  former  prisoner  of
    conscience who was named were arrested for protesting in Yangon against
    the expansion of the Monywa copper mine and they too were  charged  for
    protesting without a permit.  On 13 December four activists in Mandalay
    and four activists in Monywa were arrested for the same reason, and  on
    18 January they were sentenced  to  one  month  imprisonment  but  were
    released as they had already  spent  33  days  in  prison  after  their
    arrest.

 i.   Concern is expressed by Professor Quintana over the  police  handling
    of protests.  In their attempt on 29 November to clear the main protest
    site near the copper mine in Monywa resulted in 73 people including  67
    monks being injured, with around 30 persons  suffering  burn  injuries.
    Mr Quintana had met with the participants in the protests who described
    how incendiary devices had been used to disperse the crowds,  resulting
    in serious injuries.  The Minister of Home Affairs denied this  and  Mr
    Quintana welcomes the establishment by the government on 1 December  of
    a commission chaired by Aung San Suu Kyi to look into the protests.

89. The report additionally considers the situation in  Burma  under  these
    further chapter headings:

 a. Conflict and the Situation of Ethnic Minorities

 b. Situation in Rakhine State

 c.   Democratic Transition and Establishing the Rule of Law

 d. Truth, Justice and Accountability.

    before the following conclusions are made:

         "82.     Continuing reforms in Myanmar  are  resulting  in  ongoing
             improvements to the human rights situation. Important  changes
             have taken place, such as legislative  reform,  but  sometimes
             not to the point where international  human  rights  standards
             are met.

         83.      There remains a large gap between reform at  the  top  and
             implementation on the ground. While acknowledging that it will
             take time to close this gap, this should not  be  used  as  an
             excuse to avoid taking necessary steps, such as  the  capacity
             development of police, army, judges and lawyers.

         84.      While the process of reform is  continuing  in  the  right
             direction, there are  significant  human  rights  shortcomings
             that remain unaddressed, such as  discrimination  against  the
             Rohingya  in  Rakhine  State  and  the  ongoing  human  rights
             violations in relation to the conflict in  Kachin  State.  The
             Special Rapporteur believes that now is the  time  to  address
             these shortcomings before they become further  entrenched  and
             destabilise the reform process.

         85.      The Special Rapporteur believes the continuing existence
             of his mandate is vital to highlight these concerns and
             support the Government in addressing them. It helps to remind
             the international community of the importance of prioritising
             human rights in its bilateral relations with Myanmar. And
             ultimately, it provides a positive contribution to improving
             the situation of human rights for the people in Myanmar."



Schedule two - Submissions in detail


Summary of Skeleton Argument - Mr Mullins


 1. Mr Mullins notes the acceptance by the respondent of the  Statement  of
    facts and sets out the ambit of the case, its  procedural  history  and
    the relevant legal provisions in international law,  European  law  and
    domestic law. He also sets out the headnote of  TL  &  ors  (sur  place
    activities - risk) Burma CG [2009] UKAIT 17 and the  relevant  passages
    from KS & NL (Burma) [2013] EWCA Civ 67, and refers to Maurice Kay LJ's
    approval in that case of the UT's  approach  in  BA  (Demonstrators  in
    Britain - risk on return) Iran CG [2011] UKUT 36 (IAC).

 2. It is submitted also that an individual who has  no  political  beliefs
    should not be expected to pretend to the contrary to avoid persecution,
    and that an individual has a well-founded fear  of  persecution  if  he
    intends on  return  to  his  country  of  origin  to  pursue  political
    activities which would expose him to  a  risk  of  persecution  and  it
    cannot reasonably  be  expected  for  him  to  forego  manifesting  his
    political beliefs.

 3. Mr Mullins submits that on the basis of the evidence set out in TL, and
    in particular that of Mr Morland, as confirmed by a letter from the FCO
    dated 4 February 2011 and set out in the OGN of September 2012 that:

      a. An individual's participation in demonstrations outside the Burmese
         embassy is very likely to be recorded, and those records sent to
         the Burmese immigration authorities;

      b. Burmese nationals who regularly participate in such demonstrations
         are very likely to be have been photographed by the Burmese
         authorities;

      c. If such a person is returned and there are additional risk factors
         that would trigger the attention of the Burmese authorities, there
         is a real risk of persecution on return;

 4. Mr Mullins submits that the Burmese regime:-

      a. on the basis of Dr Zarni's evidence;

          i. Has not changed in respect of intelligence gathering, and its
             policy and priorities are very much driven by the security of
             the regime; and

         ii. Still relies heaving on human intelligence both inside and
             outside Burma and

      b. on the basis of Ms Robiou's evidence:-

          i. has a sophisticated network of spies throughout the country,
             monitoring those believed to be dissidents, to collect
             evidence against them, to understand how the organisations
             operate, and to pre-empt anti-state activities;

         ii.  has a sophisticated network throughout the world, staffed by
             military intelligence, who monitor and document information on
             those involved in the oppositionist movement;

    and that accordingly, it is likely that the measures identified as put
    in place in TL are still in place, and that while high profile leaders
    may not be at risk, that does not apply to those without an
    identifiable profile, nothing Ms Robiou's evidence that those who do
    return are forced so sign a pledge not to partake in activities or
    engaged in criticism harming the state.

 5. Relying on Dr Zarni's evidence, he submits that there is still a risk
    on return of detention and arrest for Burmese nationals politically
    active abroad, and that, relying on Ms Robiou's evidence,  those
    dissidents with international profiles may on return be protected by
    that profile, those less well known may well be at greater risk.

 6. He submits that, on the basis of the evidence of both Dr Zarni and Ms
    Robiou and bearing in mind the conclusions of the Court of Appeal, the
    regime does not differentiate between those returnees who have no real
    commitment and attend demonstrations just to bolster a claim and those
    whose commitment in genuine, the regime being concerned not so much
    with motive but with the act.

 7. In conclusion, Mr Mullins submits that risk on return will turn on what
    the returnee does on his return and that if he refuses to sign the
    pledge referred to above, he will be denied entry.

 8. As regards the appellant, it is submitted that he will continue to
    demonstrate on his return, putting him at a very high risk of being
    arrested, and once detained, he is likely to be tortured.

Mr Mullin's supplementary skeleton argument

 9. In summary, Ms Robiou's evidence is that:-

      a. There are a lot of arrests in Burma that do not lead to formal
         charges, but are brief detentions during which the risk of torture
         is still very high;

      b. The appellant's political activity in the UK will put him at risk
         on return to Burma as the government will monitor him and will seek
         to interrogate him about his activist networks and by using
         torture;

      c. There is more evidence of torture and abuse in ethnic minority
         areas than in urban areas;

      d. A lot of exiled organisations, including her own, consider that it
         is still not safe to return to Burma although they have visited the
         country recently;

10. Ms Robiou's evidence is supported by the Special Rapporteur's Report
    dated 16 February 2013 as this draws attention to:-

      a. the on-going practice of arbitrary arrest and torture of Kachin
         men;

      b. the detention of NGO staff in Rakhine state;

      c. the still significant number of prisoners of conscience despite the
         large number of releases;

      d. the widespread use of torture;

      e. the shortcomings of the Peaceful Assembly procession Act
         demonstrated by the arrest and detention of people involved in
         peaceful protest

11. Ms Robiou's evidence is also supported by the statement by the Special
    Rapporteur that people are still being arrested and imprisoned for
    holding demonstrations; and, by the investigation into the Copper Mine
    Protests.

12. In summary, Dr Zarni's evidence is that:-

      a. Recent developments, and the Special Rapporteur's Report  have led
         him to a more pessimistic assessment of the dangers to those
         returning from abroad;

      b. Returning protestors from abroad are likely to be called in for
         questioning, without warrant, at the airport or subsequently,
         without due process and are likely to be monitored;

      c. Those with a known history face a greater risk of being closely
         monitored, and being called in for questioning, their past record
         being an aggravating factor;

      d. The appellant has been a regular face at demonstrations, has shown
         up in photographs with well-known dissidents and is likely to be
         known to Burmese Intelligence;

      e. The regime is concerned with protests snow-balling, and as there is
         solidarity between the different groups, a distinction between them
         cannot be drawn.

13. Mr Maung's evidence is significant as:-

      a. It confirms that the embassy is still filing and photographing
         demonstrations, passing that information back to Burma;

      b. That the reforms are superficial;

      c. That those who refused to sign declarations will be refused a visa;

      d. The appellant will be not be given permission to return, and that
         even if he is allowed to return, the intelligence services will
         have a record of his activities.

14. The response of the Burmese govt to the Special Rapporteur's report - a
    wholesale rebuttal of all the conclusions - indicates the very limited
    nature of the reforms, and confirms Dr Zarni and Ms Robiou's fears that
    the reforms are simply cosmetic.

15. The respondent's submissions do not address the fact that the brief
    detentions referred to by Ms Robiou do not lead to trial and rely on
    her evidence selectively, incorrectly dismissing her evidence that the
    phones of those who return are tapped. The respondent also fails to
    take into account Ms Robiou's reasons for nuancing her opinion - that
    it is only in recent weeks that low-level activists have returned.

16. Mr Maung's evidence corroborates the fears of Ms Robiou and Dr Zarni
    that, away from the spotlight, the Burmese government continues to
    harass the population and to intimidate and suppress freedom of
    expression. The appellant will not be able to return to Burma without
    attending the embassy to have his passport renewed and as he has
    demonstrated on at least 62 occasions outside the embassy, he will most
    certainly be known by intelligence officers in Rangoon, and will be at
    risk of detention and torture on return.

Summary of Mr Avery's initial skeleton argument

17. Mr Avery sets out the background to the case, and the agreed ambit.  He
    also submits that the appellant's sur place activity and the
    observations in YB Eritrea are relevant.

18. An individual would not be at risk on return to Burma on the basis of
    demonstrations in the United Kingdom alone, the available evidence
    disclosing only one incident of a returning political activist being
    detained, that individual having an outstanding arrest warrant. Ms
    Robiou's evidence indicates that a person without a history of activism
    would not be a risk, and Dr Zarni defers to the FCO letter to the
    effect that without additional risk factors, those who have
    demonstrated outside the embassy are not at risk of persecution on
    return.

19. Whether an individual who had come to the adverse attention of the
    authorities but had been able to leave using a valid Burmese passport
    would be at risk on return, having also demonstrated outside the
    Embassy is fact sensitive.

20. There is no evidence to suggest that the Burmese authorities do
    distinguish between those demonstrators who have a genuine commitment
    to the opposition cause, and those who attend to bolster asylum
    claimed, but neither category is at risk.

21. Since TL was promulgated in 2009, there has been a substantial and
    durable improvement in Burma. In TL it was noted that any sign of
    dissent, even minor, was savagely punished; now, the NLD has
    participated in elections; the NLD leader, Aung San Suu Kyi has been
    released and has been elected to parliament; laws have been passed
    allowing demonstrations and restrictions on the press have been
    relaxed; political prisoners have been released; and, many exiled
    opposition activists have returned.

22. While it is possible that those demonstrating in Burma would be at risk
    of arrest, it is not accepted that this would be reasonably likely. The
    opinion of Ms Robiou that the risk is very high is not supported by the
    evidence in her report.

23. Although it is accepted that there have been arrests at demonstrations,
    it is not considered that it is reasonably likely that the appellant
    would face arrest and/or ill-treatment.

Mr Avery's supplementary submissions

24. Ms Robiou has not given a sufficient basis for revising her view that a
    returnee who was not a prominent activist would be at risk of being
    monitored; the suspicions of her colleagues who had returned to Burma
    that their phones were being tapped as they heard sounds "like
    typewriters" was unconvincing evidence of actual monitoring.  Neither
    Ms Robiou's evidence of 13 arrests when 1000 demonstrated, figures she
    described as 70% accurate, nor the other figures, support her claim
    that there is a high risk of arrest for those demonstrating in Burma.
    The evidence suggests that those who arrested are the leaders of the
    demonstration.

25. Dr Zarni has in his email substantially revised his answers to Qs 12
    and 13 from the Skype interview.  The three reasons for this doing so -
    the political fluidity of the situation, the views of the Special
    Rapporteur and a TV interview with a freed political prisoner, are
    lacking in substance. Since the Skype phone-call, there has been no
    substantial change in the political situation in Burma and the Special
    Rapporteur's report contains no new information not already in the
    public domain.  Dr Zarni is unable to point to any evidence that people
    who were low-level activists abroad had suffered any difficulties on
    return. The view that they were under the radar is unsustainable.

26. While not doubting the evidence of Mr Maung and those who attended the
    embassy with him, there is no other evidence showing that former
    Burmese nationals who have become British had experienced difficulties
    in obtaining visas to return to Burma. This evidence is of limited
    assistance.

27. The respondent maintains her position that, in the light of the changes
    in the general situation in Burma, a history of demonstrating in the
    United Kingdom would not on its own lead to a reasonable likelihood
    that a returnee would face ill-treatment. While there may have been
    arrests following demonstrations in Burma, the numbers are small and
    appear to be confined to the leaders of protests. Even were the
    appellant to participate in demonstrations in Burma on his return, he
    would not be at real risk of ill-treatment.
Schedule three -Documents considered


|Date           |Document                                                    |
|2008           |Constitution of Burma 2008                                  |
|20/09/2008     |Myanmar Launches Cyberspace Attacks -                       |
|11/11/2008     |Burma Blogger Jailed for 20 Years                           |
|01/06/2010     |Asian Legal Resource Centre - Diagnosing the un-rule of law |
|               |in Burma: A submission to the UN Human Rights Council's     |
|               |Universal Periodic Review                                   |
|06/09/2011     |Burmese Pipeline to China Under Construction, Despite       |
|               |Criticism                                                   |
|07/10/2011     |Austrian Centre for Country of Origin & Asylum Research and |
|               |Documentation (ACCORD) - Myanmar                            |
|16/11/2011     |Report of Dr Maung Zarni                                    |
|01/01/2012     |Human Rights Watch - Burma country summary                  |
|05/03/2012     |Addendum II to Marcia Robiou's Report                       |
|16/03/2012     |RFA - A person calling for the release of political         |
|               |prisoners, arrested                                         |
|16/03/2012     |DVB - A solo protested was sent to mental illness hospital  |
|28/04/2012     |ThitHtooLwin - U Soe Kywe, called for repairing the damaged |
|               |roads, sentenced one year                                   |
|25/05/2012     |Amnesty International - Document - Myanmar: Revisiting Human|
|               |Rights in Myanmar                                           |
|26/05/2012     |BBC News - Burma's ethnic conflicts see slow progress to    |
|               |resolution                                                  |
|31/05/2012     |Torture and Ill Treatment in Burma -                        |
|01/07/2012     |UKBA - Burma OGN                                            |
|13/07/2012     |Seven farmers arrested by the army                          |
|16/07/2012     |DVB- The Army indicted farmers in Padaung                   |
|23/07/2012     |RFA - All Burma Federation of Student Union members parents |
|               |pressured by Special Branch Police                          |
|31/07/2012     |DVB - Four leaders in the farmers protest in Thegon,        |
|               |arrested                                                    |
|28/08/2012     |Mizzima - The second court of four ethnic Kachin, arrested  |
|               |from refugee camp, held                                     |
|29/08/2012     |Radio Free Asia - Burma: Karen face rights abuses           |
|01/09/2012     |Chin Human Rights Organization - "Threats to Our Existence":|
|               |Persecution of Ethnic Chin Christians in Burma: Contents,   |
|               |chapters 4 & 5                                              |
|01/09/2012     |Land Grabbing in Dawei - September 2012                     |
|03/09/2012     |The Irrawaddy - Mandalay Monks Hold Ant-Rohingya Protests   |
|               |dated 3.9.12                                                |
|03/09/2012     |The Myanmar Times - Controversial Former ABSDF Leader       |
|               |returns                                                     |
|05/09/2012     |Integrated Regional Information Networks (IRIN) - Chins     |
|               |denied religious freedom in Myanmar                         |
|06/09/2012     |The Irrawaddy - Exiled Dissidents Return to Push Reform     |
|               |dated 6.9.12                                                |
|07/09/2012     |Radio Free Asia - Burma: Karen recruited for army labor     |
|09/09/2012     |The Myanmar Times - 88 Gen Leaders Unhappy about Passport   |
|               |Delays                                                      |
|10/09/2012     |Radio Free Asia - Burma: Dozen mine protesters arrested     |
|11/09/2012     |Legendary 30-Comrade Member Invited to Return to Burma      |
|11/09/2012     |BBC News - Burmese Political Satirists Return Home from     |
|               |Exile                                                       |
|17/09/2012     |Human Rights Watch - Burma: Former Political Prisoners      |
|               |Persecuted                                                  |
|17/09/2012     |BBC News Asia - Burma Releases 500 Prisoners in Amnesty     |
|               |dated 17.9.12                                               |
|25/09/2012     |United Nations General Assembly - Situation of human rights |
|               |in Myanmar                                                  |
|27/09/2012     |AAPP - Arbitrary arrests in Burma: a tool to repress        |
|               |critical voices                                             |
|27/09/2012     |BBC News - Burma Ex-General Shwe Mann Rides Wave of Change  |
|01/10/2012     |Human Rights Watch - Burma: Peaceful Protest Organizers     |
|               |Charged                                                     |
|01/10/2012     |RFA - two leaders of peace protest summoned by Sanchaung    |
|               |Township Court                                              |
|01/10/2012     |Mizzima - Myanmar Human Rights Commission asked to          |
|               |investigate the circumstances of the death of a Kachin girl |
|01/11/2012     |Austrian Centre for Country of Origin & Asylum Research and |
|               |Documentation (ACCORD) - Myanmar Update                     |
|15/11/2012     |Radio Free Asia - Burma's new amnesty under fire            |
|16/11/2012     |Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre (IDMC) -Myanmar: 89 |
|               |killed, more than 36,000 people newly displaced in new waves|
|               |of violence                                                 |
|17/11/2012     |Human Rights Watch - Burma: Satellite Images Show Widespread|
|               |Attacks on Rohingya                                         |
|17/11/2012     |Press TV: Rohinga Muslims in Myanmar's Rakine state face    |
|               |genocide: OIC                                               |
|19/11/2012     |Integrated Regional Information Networks (IRIN) - How real  |
|               |are Myanmar's reforms?                                      |
|29/11/2012     |AAPP - List of brutally crackdown in Latt Pa Daung Mountain |
|               |copper mine                                                 |
|29/11/2012     |AAPP - President U Thein Sein: Immediately investigate and  |
|               |bring justice the police responsible for grave crimes       |
|               |committed against peaceful demonstrators                    |
|29/11/2012     |Burma: Riot Police Move in to Break up Copper Mine Protests |
|29/11/2012     |DVB TV Live - Thein Sein's Office Says Crackdown Protects   |
|               |"Rule of Law"                                               |
|30/11/2012     |Court Judgement of political prisoner - Dr. Tun Aung        |
|01/12/2012     |Human Rights Watch - Burma: Investigate Violent Crackdown on|
|               |Mine Protesters                                             |
|03/12/2012     |Kachiland News - KIO condemns government's violent crackdown|
|               |on Letpadaung protesters                                    |
|03/12/2012     |BBC News - Burma leader Thein Sein signs law allowing       |
|               |protests                                                    |
|04/12/2012     |Air War in Kachinland: Burma Military Air Attacks on Kachin |
|               |Territory                                                   |
|04/12/2012     |The Irrawaddy - Letpadaung Protests to Test the Limits of   |
|               |Reforms                                                     |
|06/12/2012     |UN News Service - Myanmar: UN official urges stepped-up     |
|               |efforts to address humanitarian issues causing instability  |
|09/12/2012     |The Irrawaddy - Monks stage protest in Rangoon              |
|10/12/2012     |Deutsche Welle - Myanmar activists protest jailing of       |
|               |ex-monk                                                     |
|10/12/2012     |Myanmar Times - China vows to respect findings of mine probe|
|11/12/2012     |Associated Press (AP) - Myanmar court grants bail to Yangon |
|               |demonstrators against copper mine                           |
|12/12/2012     |The Irrawaddy - Allegations of Development Abuses Rife      |
|               |Across Burma                                                |
|12/12/2012     |Associated Press (AP) - Protesting gold miners claim homes  |
|               |destroyed                                                   |
|12/12/2012     |Monks Protest in Burmese Cities over Mine Crackdown         |
|13/12/2012     |Global Post - Copper mine strikes raise questions in Myanmar|
|13/12/2012     |The Irrawaddy - Protesting gold miners claim homes destroyed|
|14/12/2012     |The Irrawaddy - Anti-Copper Mine Activists Detained         |
|14/12/2012     |AsiaNews.it - Burmese activists arrested for demonstrating  |
|               |against violence towards monks                              |
|14/12/2012     |                                                            |
|17/12/2012     |AFP, AP, Global Post, The Irrawady - Burma: Further arrests,|
|               |as mining protests continue                                 |
|27/12/2012     |Radio Free Asia - Burma: Bomb blast, shelling in Kachin     |
|29/12/2012     |Radio Free Asia - Burma: Warning over Kachin conflict       |
|31/12/2012     |AAPP - Arrest since November 2012. AAPP do not find that    |
|               |they are released from prison                               |
|02/01/2013     |Video Shows Burma Military Targeting Kachin Rebels          |
|02/01/2013     |Myanmar Military Admits to Airstrikes on Kachin Rebels      |
|03/01/2013     |BBC News - Burma admits military airstrikes on Kachin rebels|
|03/01/2013     |AAPP- Political prisoners facing trial                      |
|05/01/2013     |AAPP - Burma: Investigate the death of former political     |
|               |prisoner                                                    |
|05/01/2013     |AAPP - Burma: Investigate death of former political prisoner|
|06/01/2013     |Burma: In Memoriam: Phyo Wai Aung, a Courageous Fighter     |
|               |Against Inhuman Abuse                                       |
|07/01/2013     |The Irrawaddy - Returning to a Relaxed Rangoon dated 7.1.13 |
|08/01/2013     |AAPP - Update of all political prisoners list               |
|12/01/2013     |The Irrawaddy - Rohingya continue to flee West Burma in     |
|               |thousands                                                   |
|14/01/2013     |Karen News - Burma military expands conflict in Kachin state|
|               |with air power                                              |
|14/01/2013     |Aung San Suu Kyi to head inquiry into violent crackdown on  |
|               |Burma Mine Protests                                         |
|14/01/2013     |The Vigilante Journalist: Exclusive Interview: DVB Chief    |
|               |Returns to Burma after 24 years of exile                    |
|15/01/2013     |Amnesty International - Myanmar - Protect civilians caught  |
|               |in Kachin state conflict, investigate attacks               |
|17/01/2013     |Karen News - International community condemns Burma's       |
|               |government over Kachin conflict                             |
|17/01/2013     |Burma: Halt Indiscriminate Attacks on Kachin State          |
|17/01/2013     | Human Rights Watch - Halt Indiscriminate Attacks in Kachin |
|               |state                                                       |
|22/01/2013     |Expert's report of Ms. Marcia Robiou                        |
|22/01/2013     |Annex A - Ms. Robiou biography                              |
|22/01/2013     |Report of Marcia Robiou                                     |
|26/01/2013     |Kachin Rebels in Burma Lose Key Hilltop                     |
|26/01/2013     |Voice of America: Burma Protests US Embassy Criticism       |
|28/01/2013     |Govt Slams US Kachin Statement                              |
|               |                                                            |
|               |                                                            |
|               |                                                            |
|07/02/2013     |Burma Initiates Committee Scrutinizing the Political        |
|               |Prisoners Left Behind -                                     |
|10/02/2013     |E-Mails of Reporters in Myanmar are Hacked                  |
|10/02/2013     |Burma Observers Participate in US Led Military Exercises in |
|               |Thailand                                                    |
|11/02/2013     |Transcript of Conference Call with Dr Maung Zarni           |
|11/02/2013     |Google and Facebook Remain Tentative in Myanmar             |
|14/02/2013     |Report of Evidence Regarding Controversies at Letpadaung    |
|               |Hill Copper Mine Project by Lawyers Network/Justice Report  |
|               |on Letpadaung Copper Mine                                   |
|16/02/2013     |Statement of the Special Rapporteur on the Situation of     |
|               |Human Rights in Myanmar                                     |
|17/02/2013     |UN: Myanmar Tortured Kachin                                 |
|19/02/2013     |The Telegraph: Burma Copper Mine Protest Broken up by Riot  |
|               |Police -                                                    |
|05/03/2013     |Addendum I to Marcia Robiou's Report                        |
|06/03/2013     |Report of the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human  |
|               |rights in Myanmar by T Quintana                             |
|08/03/2013     |Global Post - dated 8th March 2013                          |
|08/03/2013     |Email from Marcia Robiou dated 8th March 2013               |
|09/03/2013     |Statement of Saw Ming Maung and status documents            |
|11/03/2013     |Email from Dr Maung Zarni dated 11th March 2013             |
|11/03/2013     |Email from Dr Maung Zarni dated 11th March 2013 at 3.23pm   |
|12/03/2013     |Statement of HHS                                            |
|12/03/2013     |Statement of Thu Latt N Myo                                 |
|               |                                                            |
|undated        |List of injured in Copper Mine Protest                      |
|undated        |Schedule of People Sentenced under Protest Bill             |
|undated        |Schedule of People Facing Trial under Protest Bill          |
|undated        |Schedule of People Facing Trial under other Legislation     |
|undated        |Addendum III to Marcia Robiou's Report                      |






-----------------------
[1] As with the name of the country, we refer to Yangon as Rangoon simply
because that is how the city was referred to in the evidence before us.
[2] Since reserving our decision it has been widely reported that certain
privately owned newspapers are now permitted.

