

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Johnson (deportation - 4 years imprisonment) [2016] UKUT 00282 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated   |
|On 26 April 2016                     |                            |
|                                     |............................|
|                                     |...........                 |

                                   Before

                         The Hon. MR JUSTICE TURNER
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN

                                   Between

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Remmond Johnson
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Secretary of State:  Mr S. Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer
For Mr Johnson:        Mr D. Lemer, Counsel, instructed by Howe & Co.,
                       Solicitors


When a foreign offender has been convicted of an offence for  which  he  has
been sentenced to imprisonment of at least  4  years  and  has  successfully
appealed on human rights grounds, this does not  prevent  the  Secretary  of
State from relying on the conviction for the purposes  of  paragraph  398(a)
of the Immigration Rules and s.117C of the 2002  Act  if  and  when  he  re-
offends even if the later offence results in less than 4 years  imprisonment
or, indeed, less than 12 months imprisonment.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. In the re-making of the decision, following a finding that the  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge had made an error on a  point  of  law,  we  shall
      revert to the  terminology  adopted  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
      describing Mr Johnson as 'the appellant'.


The application for an adjournment


   2. Mr Lemer renewed an  application  to  adjourn  the  hearing  which  we
      refused  for  the  reasons  given  in  a  short  oral  decision.    In
      particular, we were not satisfied that the appellant had provided  any
      adequate explanation for his being in funds for the  purposes  of  the
      hearing today but not in funds a few days ago when the application was
      made.  Further, there has been ample opportunity for the appellant  to
      secure evidence from a social worker as to the effect on the  children
      and the overriding objective is not suited to delay the hearing on the
      purely speculative basis on what such a report might contain.  Neither
      the respondent nor the Tribunal disputes the fact that  the  appellant
      has a genuine relationship with his children  and  family  members  or
      they with him.


The immigration history


   3. The appellant was born on 5  October  1980  and  came  to  the  United
      Kingdom when he was 6 in 1986 or 1987. He first came to the  attention
      of the authorities in October 2001 when he was 21 years old  following
      his arrest for theft, apparently from his employer. When his case  was
      considered by the Tribunal in 2009, there were 11 convictions  for  22
      offences recorded against him.  By adding offences committed in  2013,
      and by reference to the Police National Computer  print-out  submitted
      under cover of the respondent's skeleton argument, Mr Kotas calculates
      the tally as now standing at 15 convictions for 50 offences.   In  the
      scheme of things, the precise number is immaterial. The offences  were
      mainly  offences  of  dishonesty  in  various   forms,   assault   and
      threatening abusive or insulting conduct.


   4. On 13 July 2007 at Chelmsford Crown Court the appellant was  convicted
      on two counts of possessing Class A controlled drugs  with  intent  to
      supply following a not guilty plea to which  he  was  sentenced  to  4
      years imprisonment, ('the 2007 convictions').  He was released in 2009
      after serving 2 years of his sentence.  His subsequent appeal  against
      a  deportation  order  was  allowed  by  the  Tribunal  in   2009   on
      proportionality grounds applying a broad Article 8 brush.

   5. In 2013, he was convicted of 7 counts of making off without payment, 9
      counts of driving whilst disqualified, and 8 counts of using  a  motor
      vehicle without insurance, ('the 2013 convictions'). This was part  of
      a criminal spree that took place from 2 November 2012 to 8 April 2013,
      presumably about a year after the end of his period  on  licence.  The
      disqualification had been imposed for  other  offences  only  a  month
      before.


Paragraph 398
   6. Paragraph 398 has been amended since the Secretary of State made her
      decision.  At the time the decision was made on 28 January  2014,  the
      Rules in bracketed sections in italics have since been omitted by rule
      changes introduced on 28 July 2014.  Hence the  respondent's  decision
      maker properly applied the old law; the First-tier Tribunal Judge was,
      however, required to apply the new law in her decision promulgated  on
      24 October 2014 as, of course, do we.[1]  The changes are reflected in
      the words set in square brackets.  Together, these provide:


      398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary to
      the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the Human  Rights  Convention,
      and


      (a) the deportation of the person from the  UK  is  conducive  to  the
           public good [and in the public interest] because they have  been
           convicted of an offence for which they have been sentenced to  a
           period of imprisonment of at least four years;


      (b) the deportation of the person from the  UK  is  conducive  to  the
           public good [and in the public interest] because they have  been
           convicted of an offence for which they have been sentenced to  a
           period of imprisonment of less than 4  years  but  at  least  12
           months; or


      (c) the deportation of the person from the  UK  is  conducive  to  the
           public good [and in the public interest] because, in the view of
           the Secretary of State, their offending has caused serious  harm
           or they  are  a  persistent  offender  who  shows  a  particular
           disregard for the law, the Secretary of State in assessing  that
           claim will consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A  applies  and,
           if it does not, (it will only be  in  exceptional  circumstances
           that the public interest in deportation will  be  outweighed  by
           other factors) [the public interest in deportation will only  be
           outweighed by other factors  where  there  are  very  compelling
           circumstances over and above those described in  paragraphs  399
           and 399A.]


   7. The changes set out above were noted by Aikens LJ  in  YM  (Uganda)  v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA  Civ  1292  (10
      October 2014) and are set out here to note the  growing  emphasis  the
      Secretary of State places upon her  own  developing  policies  on  the
      public interest in removing foreign offenders who have been  sentenced
      to periods of imprisonment.    As we shall see, with the  introduction
      of s. 117A-C, there has been a shift away from simple reliance on  the
      Immigration Rules (brought into effect by  Statutory  Instrument)  and
      Parliament's use  of  Statute  albeit  in  the  form  of  a  statutory
      requirement for  the  Tribunal  to  'have  regard  to'  the  specified
      criteria. Whilst the terms of Article 8 (and in particular, the  terms
      of Article 8(2)) remain constant, the movement  since  the  First-tier
      Tribunal reached its decision in 2009 is to crank up the place of  the
      public interest criteria (but not necessarily  their  weight)  in  the
      proportionality balance.



The application of paragraph 398


   8. The First-tier Tribunal Judge considered that paragraph 398(a) had  no
      application since the relevant offences for her purposes were the 2013
      convictions for which the appellant received a sentence of  10  months
      imprisonment.  Hence, neither 398  (a),  (4  years  imprisonment)  nor
      paragraph 398(b), (imprisonment of less than 4 years but at  least  12
      months) had any application. This resulted in the Judge  treating  the
      appellant as falling within paragraph 398(c) which, for our  purposes,
      was as 'a persistent offender who shows a particular disregard for the
      law', a classification which the appellant himself does not  (and,  of
      course, cannot) seek to argue against.


   9.  The  consequences  of  an  application  under  paragraph  398(a)  are
      striking: the public interest in deportation will only  be  outweighed
      by other factors where there are very  compelling  circumstances  over
      and above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.  They  represent
      a   practical   and   linguistic   up-lift   from   the   'exceptional
      circumstances' originally envisaged in paragraph 398.

  10. Mr Lemer conceded that he was not able to identify any very compelling
      circumstances sufficient to outweigh the pressure  in  favour  of  the
      appellant's deportation.  Hence, if the appeal is to  be  assessed  by
      reference to paragraph 398(a), he accepts that the appellant loses his
      appeal.

  11. In contrast, the application of  paragraph  398(c)  -  the  persistent
      offender categorisation -  allows  an  appellant  to  rely  upon  both
      paragraph 399 and 399A:

      399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c) applies if -
      (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with
      a child under the age of 18 years who is in the UK and (i)  the  child
      is a  British  citizen;  or  (ii)  the  child  has  lived  in  the  UK
      continuously for at least the seven years  immediately  preceding  the
      date of the immigration decision; and in either case


            (a) (it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
           United Kingdom) [it would be unduly harsh for the child to  live
           in the country to which the person is to be deported]; and


            (b) (there is no other family member who is able to care for the
           child in the United Kingdom) [it would be unduly harsh  for  the
           child to remain in the UK  without  the  person  who  is  to  be
           deported];


      or (b) the person has a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  with  a
      partner who is in the UK and is a British citizen, [or] settled in the
      UK, (or in the UK with refugee leave or humanitarian protection,)  and
      ((i) the person has lived in the UK with valid leave continuously  for
      at  least  the  15  years  immediately  preceding  the  date  of   the
      immigration decision (discounting any period of imprisonment) and (ii)
      there are insurmountable obstacles to family life  with  that  partner
      continuing outside the United Kingdom)


            [(i) the relationship was formed at a time when the  person  was
           in  the  UK  lawfully  and  their  immigration  status  was  not
           precarious; and
            (ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to  live  in  the
           country to which  the  person  is  to  be  deported  because  of
           compelling circumstances  over  and  above  those  described  in
           paragraph EX.2 of Appendix FM; and
            (iii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to remain in the
           UK without the person who is to be deported].


      399A. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c) applies  if
      - ((a) the person has lived continuously in the UK  for  at  least  20
      years immediately preceding  the  date  of  the  immigration  decision
      (discounting any period of imprisonment) and he has no ties (including
      social, cultural or family ) with the country to which he  would  have
      to go if required to leave the UK; or (b) the person is aged under  25
      years, he has spent at least half of his life living  continuously  in
      the UK immediately preceding the  date  of  the  immigration  decision
      (discounting any period of imprisonment) and he has no ties (including
      social, cultural or family) with the country to which he would have to
      go if required to leave the UK.)
      [(a) the person has been lawfully resident in the UK for most  of  his
      life; and (b) he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and
      (c) there would be very significant obstacles to his integration  into
      the country to which it is proposed he is deported].

  12. Mr Johnson is unable to rely upon the relationship he has with  either
      of his partners for the reasons that will later emerge.  There  is  no
      suggestion that the children will be  expected  to  travel  to  Sierra
      Leone which the respondent concedes would be unduly  harsh  for  them.
      The issue is, therefore, reduced to  a  consideration  of  whether  it
      would be unduly harsh the child to remain in the UK without the person
      who is to be deported.

  13. For the reasons that follow, Mr Johnson's  appeal  must  fail  at  the
      first hurdle.

  14. Mr Lemer submitted that paragraphs 398(a) and 398(c) were alternatives
      and the Secretary of State was required to select  which  of  the  two
      routes she chose to pursue.  He based this submission on the effect of
      the words of s.117C (7)) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
      Act, 2002.

  15. Part 5A of the 2002 Act was introduced by s.19 of the Immigration  Act
      2014 setting out criteria, pursuant to s.117A to which  the  court  or
      tribunal must have regard (amongst other matters):


       117CArticle 8: additional considerations in cases  involving  foreign
      criminals
      (1)The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest.
      (2)The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,  the
      greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.
      (3)In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not been  sentenced
      to a period of imprisonment of four years or more, the public interest
      requires C's deportation unless Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies.

       (5)Exception  2  applies  where  C  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting
      relationship with a qualifying partner, or a  genuine  and  subsisting
      parental relationship with a qualifying child, and the effect  of  C's
      deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.
      (6)In the case of a foreign criminal  who  has  been  sentenced  to  a
      period of imprisonment of at least four  years,  the  public  interest
      requires deportation unless there are very  compelling  circumstances,
      over and above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2.
      (7)The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to be  taken  into
      account where a court or tribunal is considering a decision to  deport
      a foreign criminal only to the extent that the reason for the decision
      was the offence or offences for which the criminal has been convicted.

  16. Mr  Lemer  submitted  that  the  underlying  decision  to  deport  the
      applicant was  the  decision  made  in  January  2014  to  deport  the
      appellant as a result of the 2013  convictions.   Pursuant  to  s.117C
      (7), the only consideration that the appellant was permitted  to  take
      into account was the conviction which resulted in  a  sentence  of  10
      months imprisonment.  This was because the statutory criteria set  out
      in s.117C are limited to the reason for the decision being the offence
      or offences for which the criminal has been convicted.

  17. This requires consideration of the decision letter.  On page 3 of 6 of
      the letter, under the heading 'Sentence length' the decision maker set
      out in full all three limbs  (sub-paragraphs  (a),  (b)  and  (c))  of
      paragraph 398 and then continued:

      As  stated  earlier  in  this  letter,  deportation  action  is  being
      considered against you on conducive grounds  in  light  of  your  2013
      convictions for making off without payment, driving while disqualified
      and using a vehicle without insurance.

  18. Mr Lemer relied on this as supporting his submission (as well  as  the
      introductory  paragraph  of  the  letter  which   recited   the   2013
      convictions under the heading 'Liability to Deportation'  but  omitted
      reference to the 2007 convictions until later on the same page when it
      was mentioned under 'Background'.  The submission fails to  take  into
      account the words that immediately follow:


      However, it is noted that you  were  sentenced  in  2007  to  4  years
      imprisonment for possessing controlled drugs with  intent  to  supply.
      Paragraph  398  (A)  of  the  rules  is  therefore   applicable   when
      considering Article 8 in your case.
      The Immigration Rules state  that  it  will  only  be  in  exceptional
      circumstances that a person's right  to  family  and/or  private  life
      would outweigh the public interest in seeing a person  deported  where
      they had been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at  least  four
      years.
      Exceptional circumstances
      Consideration has been given to your personal circumstances,  as  well
      as those family members affected by the decision to deport you. It has
      been concluded  that  the  reasons  given  below  that  there  are  no
      exceptional circumstances in your case which would outweigh the public
      interest in seeing you deported.

  19. Thereafter, due consideration is given to the appellant's  family  and
      private life which included specific reference to  his  daughters  and
      partners and C.


  20. Insofar as Mr Lemer seeks to argue that the respondent  is  restricted
      to a consideration of the 2013 convictions, he misconstrues the  words
      of s.117C (7) which does not  contain  the  limitations  he  seeks  to
      impose. If, as a matter of fact, he seeks  to  construe  the  decision
      letter as confining itself to a consideration of the 2013 convictions,
      he is wrong to do so as the decision maker would have had no reason to
      set  out  paragraph  398(a)  and  then  make  reference  to  the  2007
      convictions unless the respondent was intending to rely upon them.

  21. Finally, it makes no sense to operate a statutory restriction  on  the
      criteria that a decision maker must have regard to when, on any  view,
      the earlier offending is a material factor. Mr Lemer  did  not  submit
      that the decision maker was excluded altogether from reliance upon the
      2007 convictions. Rather he argued that the  Secretary  of  State  was
      limited to her consideration of them as part of the (admitted) element
      found in paragraph  398  (c)  that  the  appellant  was  a  persistent
      offender who had shown a particular disregard for the law. It seems to
      us that it is sophistry to construe  the  appellant's  sentence  of  4
      years as an inadmissible  criterion  for  the  purposes  of  paragraph
      398(a) but admissible as a criterion in paragraph 398(c).

  22. Mr Lemer  also  argued  that  the  structure  of  paragraph  398  only
      permitted the respondent to rely upon one of the three classifications
      (a) to (c). He submitted that the respondent had a choice as to  which
      route under paragraph 398 he intended to follow in securing a  foreign
      criminal's removal.  In doing so, he relied upon the use of  the  word
      'or' at the end of subparagraph (b).

  23. We reject this argument. The draftsman envisaged options when creating
      the three categories set out in paragraph 398. Had the draftsman  used
      the word 'and', the effect would have been  that  each  of  the  three
      requirements had to be satisfied.  That  would  have  been  impossible
      since the same person could not both have been sentenced to  at  least
      four years imprisonment as well as less than four years.   Whilst  the
      use of the word 'and' connotes cumulative or conjunctive requirements;
      the word 'or' connotes alternatives  but  is  silent  on  whether  the
      person qualifies under one or more of the specified categories.

  24. He submitted that the Secretary of State elected  to  apply  paragraph
      398(c) - the persistent offender route - and did not choose to  invoke
      paragraph 398(a).   This,  however,  is  a  clear  misreading  of  the
      decision letter in which the Secretary of State expressly relied  upon
      both paragraph 398(a)  and  the  fact  that  the  appellant  had  been
      sentenced to a period of 4 years imprisonment as well as the fact that
      the appellant was a persistent offender.

  25. No assistance was provided by Mr Lemer's reliance on the  decision  in
      the Court of Appeal in YM (Uganda) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
      Department [2014] EWCA Civ 1292 (10 October 2014) in which Counsel for
      the Secretary of State had submitted that sequential  offending  which
      resulted in a total period of imprisonment of  over  four  years  fell
      within paragraph 398(a).  Aikens LJ (with whom the others  members  of
      the Court agreed) rejected that interpretation.  He stated:
      43. The wording of Rule 398 in  its  2012  version  is  unsatisfactory
      because, although it is meant to be part of a "complete code" it  does
      not deal with the very  many  different  possible  circumstances  that
      might arise. Nonetheless, the wording refers to "an offence" not  more
      than one. Even if the  singular  included  the  plural,  it  would  be
      necessary to import more words into Rule 398(a) if the aim was to take
      account of all the person's offences historically, then tot up all the
      sentences of all those offences, so as to make  a  grand  total  of  a
      period of imprisonment which, in  total  for  a  number  of  different
      offences on different occasions, amounted to at least four years. I am
      not prepared to manipulate the wording  of  Rule  398(a)  to  such  an
      extent to produce that result. We have to construe the words  sensibly
      in their normal and natural meaning.
      44. Therefore, in my view, only one offence at a time has to be  taken
      into account and the only question is  whether,  for  that  particular
      offence, the sentence was more than 4 years.

  26. This reasoning is consistent with the Secretary of State's approach in
      the present appeal based on the  fact  that  the  appellant  had  been
      convicted of an offence for which he had been sentenced to at least  4
      years imprisonment.


  27. We recognise the possibility of an  appellant  being  sentenced  to  4
      years imprisonment as a young man and subsequently succeeding  in  his
      appeal on Article 8 grounds and thereafter leading  a  blameless  life
      for the following 40 or 50  years  until  a  second  short  period  of
      imprisonment triggers the consideration of paragraph 398(a). In such a
      case, however, the significance of his  earlier  sentence  would  have
      receded to the point of its being immaterial to the  consideration  of
      what should happen to the appellant following his  second  conviction.
      We see this as a paradigm example of a  very  compelling  circumstance
      sufficient to protect the appellant against expulsion.

  28. In most circumstances, however, a successful appeal  on  human  rights
      grounds, notwithstanding a period of imprisonment of four  years,  can
      only have been predicated upon the appellant satisfying  the  Tribunal
      that he has turned the corner and that he no longer represents a  risk
      to society. In many cases it will have been accompanied by an  express
      warning from the Secretary of  State  or  the  Tribunal  that  further
      offending would not be tolerated. In the present appeal  this  appears
      to be what the appellant's partner was suggesting when,  in  paragraph
      45 of the decision, it is said that she  could  not  remember  if  the
      appellant had made any promises at the 2009 hearing but she assumed he
      had. It is however self-evident that, in order to succeed in  such  an
      appeal, the appellant would have had to have  satisfied  the  Tribunal
      that there was to be no more offending. A subsequent conviction would,
      save in exceptional circumstances, confound this prediction acting, as
      it were,  like  the  imposition  of  a  suspended  sentence  following
      reoffending. We do not therefore, see anything intrinsically unfair in
      the respondent or the Tribunal applying the words of paragraph  398(a)
      to all cases in which an appellant has been sentenced to a  period  of
      imprisonment of at least four years irrespective of whether it  was  a
      later offence that triggered a decision to deport him.


  29. Any individual imprisoned for such a significant period of  time  must
      have it in his mind that he is living on borrowed time,  as  it  were,
      and that any further offending  may  have  the  consequence  that  the
      Tribunal revisits an earlier appeal at which he successfully  resisted
      deportation.


  30.  Finally,  the  appellant's  contention  that,  for  the  purposes  of
      paragraph 398(a) the offence that triggers deportation can only be the
      most recent offending is nowhere to be  found  in  the  words  of  the
      paragraph and the expression 'they have been sentenced'. Had  it  been
      the intention to limit the operation of the subparagraph in the manner
      suggested, it would require drastic rewriting.

Conclusion on the preliminary issue

  31. We invited Mr Lemer to address us  on  this  issue  as  a  preliminary
      matter but we reserved our judgment on the issue  until  we  had  also
      heard his submissions upon the operation of paragraph 398(c).  However
      having now given our judgement on this  issue,  it  disposes  of  this
      appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.   Our  conclusion  is  that,  once  the
      appellant has been sentenced to a term of imprisonment of 4  years  or
      more, he falls within the terms of paragraph 398(a) and the  Secretary
      of State is entitled to rely upon it in deciding  whether  or  not  to
      make a deportation order.  It is no bar to the Secretary of State that
      she took no  action  to  deport  the  offender  as  a  result  of  the
      conviction and sentence nor that the appellant  successfully  appealed
      following his conviction and sentence.  Such a claimant is  no  longer
      entitled to rely upon the exceptions set out within s.  117C.   Whilst
      we permitted the exceptions to be argued before us de bene esse,  this
      is not a practice which should be followed in other cases since it  is
      simply not material.  Ultimately, no decision against  a  non-national
      can violate his Article 8  rights  but,  in  the  case  of  a  foreign
      criminal who has been sentenced to at least 4 years imprisonment,  the
      route by which he might  avoid  removal,  as  part  of  the  'complete
      code'[2] is to establish the very compelling  circumstances  over  and
      above those described in paragraphs 399 and  399A;  no  more,  and  no
      less.

  32. It is impermissible to rely upon the contents of the respondent's  own
      instructions to case-workers as a means of interpreting  the  contents
      of  a  Statutory  Instrument.   Immigration  Directorate  Instructions
      (IDIs) may be  used  to  identify  a  policy  more  favourable  to  an
      appellant than the Immigration Rules but  cannot  impose  requirements
      more onerous to a claimant than the Rules.  Hence,  the  IDIs  are  of
      limited use as a means of construction.   However,  the  relevant  IDI
      (Chapter 13) in this case is in the following terms, where material:

      Chapter 13: criminality guidance in Article 8 ECHR cases

      2.2.2 Once a foreign criminal has been sentenced to  a  period  of  at
      least four years' imprisonment,  he  will  never  be  eligible  to  be
      considered under the exceptions. This applies even if deportation  was
      not pursued at the time of the four year sentence because  there  were
      very compelling circumstances such that deportation  would  have  been
      disproportionate, and the foreign criminal goes on to reoffend and  is
      sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than four years. This is
      because his deportation will continue to be conducive  to  the  public
      good and in the public interest for the four year sentence as well  as
      any subsequent sentences.

  33. This accords with our view of the effect of paragraphs 398 to 399A.

[Paragraphs 34 to 47  of  the  determination  have  been  omitted  from  the
reported decision.]

DECISION

        1. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal has been set  aside
           as containing a material error on a point of law.
        2. We re-make the decision allowing the Secretary of State's appeal
           against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.
        3. We dismiss the appeal of Mr Johnson  against  the  Secretary  of
           State's decision to make a deportation order on all the  grounds
           advanced.





                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                                                               28 April 2016
                                                     -----------------------
[1] YM (Uganda) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2014]  EWCA
Civ 1292 (10 October 2014), paragraphs 38 and 39.
[2] MF (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2013]  EWCA
Civ 1192 per the Master of the Rolls, paragraph 16

