
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

AAR & AA (Non-Arab Darfuris - return) Sudan [2019] UKUT 00282 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|                                              |                              |
|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12-14 February 2019                        |                              |
|And on 10 July 2019                           |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM

                                   Between

                                     AAR
                                      &
                                     AA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONs made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For Appellant AAR:     Mr C Jacobs, Counsel instructed by Fountain
                    Solicitors
For Appellant AA:      Mr T Hodson, In-House Advocate at Elder Rahimi
                    Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr J Anderson,
Counsel instructed by the Treasury Solicitor


    The situation in Sudan remains volatile after civil protests started in
    late 2018 and the future is unpredictable. There is insufficient
    evidence currently available to show that the guidance given in AA (non-
    Arab Darfuris -  relocation) Sudan CG [2009] UKAIT 00056 and MM
    (Darfuris) Sudan CG [2015] UKUT 00010 (IAC) requires revision. Those
    cases should still be followed.



                            DECISION AND REASONS


    INTRODUCTION

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
(SI 2008/269) the Upper Tribunal continues the anonymity orders made by the
First-tier Tribunal. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a Court directs
otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form of publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original appellants. This
direction applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure to comply
with this direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.

The question in these appeals is "whether the guidance given in AA (non-
Arab Darfuris -  relocation) Sudan CG [2009] UKAIT 00056 and MM (Darfuris)
Sudan CG [2015] UKUT 00010 (IAC) requires revision in the light of the
current country evidence including consideration of internal relocation of
non-Arab Darfuris to Khartoum."

For ease of reference, for the purposes of this decision we use the
abbreviated term "Darfuri" to mean a non-Arab Darfuri.

The profiles of the two appellants which fall to be assessed against the
country evidence are not in dispute.

    AAR

The first appellant, AAR, is a citizen of Sudan, born in 1993. He is from
the Berti tribe and is a Darfuri.

On 2 March 2017, AAR claimed asylum in the UK. His asylum claim was that he
moved to Omdurman and then to Abu Hamad in North Sudan to dig for gold. In
April 2014 he was stopped by people in civilian clothes and questioned. He
was detained because he was a member of the Berti tribe. He was accused of
supporting the opposition but this accusation was made merely because he
was Darfuri. He was mistreated during the detention. He was released on
conditions, including being required to report every week, refraining from
digging for gold and avoiding any involvement with the opposition. AAR left
Sudan in May 2015 and attempted to travel to Israel via Egypt. He was
encountered by the authorities in Egypt on the border as he attempted to
enter Israel and was returned to Sudan. He was detained by the Sudanese
authorities on return and then either escaped from detention or was
released on bail. He returned to prospecting for gold on the Libyan border
and left to cross into Libya in September 2015, arriving in the UK in March
2017.

 In a decision dated 29 August 2017 the respondent refused AAR's asylum
claim. The respondent accepted AAR's claim to be a member of the Berti
tribe and a Darfuri but did not accept that he was ever arrested and
detained or that he was wanted by the Sudanese authorities. It was not
accepted that he would be at risk on return.

AAR appealed against the refusal of his asylum claim. On 6 November 2017,
the First-tier Tribunal dismissed his appeal. The Tribunal did not find
AAR's account to be credible. It was not accepted that he had been arrested
or detained or that the authorities in Sudan had kept a record on him. The
First-Tier Tribunal found that AAR had not been involved in politics and
did not have any particular profile of any kind, other than his Darfuri
ethnicity.

The First-tier Tribunal considered the respondent's Country Policy
Information Note (CPIN) dated 4 August 2017 and found that it provided
cogent reasons to depart from the guidance given in AA (Sudan) and MM
(Sudan).

The appellant appealed against the decision of the First-Tier Tribunal. In
a decision dated 3 January 2018, the First-tier Tribunal granted permission
to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

In a decision dated 16 May 2018, the Upper Tribunal upheld the adverse
credibility findings but found an error of law in the approach of the First-
Tier Tribunal to the CPIN, the extant Country Guidance cases and the
guidance of the Court of Appeal in SG (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the
Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 940. The Upper Tribunal set aside the
decision of the First-Tier Tribunal and identified that the appeal was
suitable for hearing as a Country Guidance case on the question set out in
paragraph 2 above.

    AA

The second appellant, AA, is a citizen of Sudan, born in 1991. He is from
the Zaghawa tribe and is a Darfuri.

AA entered the UK illegally on 23 January 2016 and claimed asylum on the
same day. His asylum claim was that he was detained in Sudan on 11 October
2014 for a period of 7 days merely because he was Darfuri and thereafter
held for 5 months at a government army camp near Al Fasher city in North
Darfur where he claims he was forced to clean and cook for the soldiers. He
was able to escape, left Sudan in August 2015 and made his way to the UK.

The respondent refused AA's claim in a decision dated 9 November 2017. The
respondent accepted that AA was a Darfuri but did not accept that he had
encountered problems with the Sudanese authorities.

On 6 November 2017, the First-tier Tribunal dismissed AA's appeal. The
First-Tier Tribunal found that the appellant had been detained as claimed
but only on the basis of his Darfuri ethnicity. It was not accepted that he
had suffered ill-treatment that amounted to persecution. The First-Tier
Tribunal referred to MM (Sudan) but found that the appellant had not shown
that he would be persecuted on return.

The appellant appealed against the decision of the First-Tier Tribunal and
on 8 February 2018 he was granted permission to appeal to the Upper
Tribunal.

In a decision dated 16 May 2018, the Upper Tribunal upheld the finding that
there had been no past persecution but found that the First-Tier Tribunal
had taken an incorrect approach to the Country Guidance cases of AA (Sudan)
and MM (Sudan)  and whether it would be unduly harsh for AA to relocate
internally within Sudan. The Upper Tribunal reserved the re-making of the
decision The case was subsequently identified as suitable for linking with
AAR to consider the question set out in paragraph 2 above.

    Further Background

Both appeals were listed for hearing in mid-August 2018. However, very
shortly after the error of law decisions, the respondent indicated that he
intended to conduct a fact-finding mission to Sudan between 10 and 17
August 2018. The purpose of the mission was to gather information about the
circumstances of Darfuris in Sudan, with a focus on Khartoum, and the
treatment of returnees generally. That mission formed the basis of a report
published in November 2018, entitled "Report of a fact-finding mission to
Khartoum, Sudan". We refer to this report as the "FFR".

Having been served with the FFR, the appellants jointly instructed three
experts to comment on it and provide their opinions on the question raised
in these appeals. The Tribunal was provided with reports from Dame Rosalind
Marsden, former British Ambassador to Sudan, from Ms Madeleine Crowther, Co-
Executive Director of Waging Peace, an NGO focussing on Sudan, and Mr Peter
Verney, an expert on Sudan who had provided reports in many Sudanese
appeals.

The appeals were heard on 12-14 February 2019. In addition to hearing
extensive oral evidence from the witnesses set out above, the Upper
Tribunal also heard oral evidence via video link from Khartoum from a civil
society activist in Sudan.

The witnesses provided evidence on the ongoing civil uprisings in Sudan
which had begun in November 2018 and increased during the following months.
It was uncontentious that the regime had attempted to supress the protests
by violent means and had carried mass arrests with widespread reports of
mistreatment of detainees.

The respondent submitted that the evidence on the protests and the
government's response did not show a sufficient specific interest in
Darfuris to impact on the question of a general risk on return for Darfuris
who had no profile other than their ethnicity and having claimed asylum in
the UK. The appellants argued that the behaviour of the Sudanese regime in
the face of the civilian protests showed that there remained a risk on
return for all Darfuris who had claimed asylum in the UK.

The Tribunal reserved its decision at the end of the proceedings on 14
February 2019.

The situation in Sudan remained volatile and, at times, deteriorated.
President Bashir was ousted by the military on 11 April 2019. The head of
the notoriously abusive National Intelligence Service (NISS), Salah Gosh,
resigned on 13 April 2019. A state of emergency was then declared for 3
months by the Transitional Military Council (TMC). The TMC stated that it
wanted to enter into a dialogue with civil society. Protestors remained on
the streets whilst discussions took place.

Towards the end of May 2019 and in June 2019 there were a number of attacks
on protestors across the country. The Rapid Support Forces (RSF), often
referred to as the Janjaweed, were deployed in Khartoum. The worst incident
appears to have been on 3 June 2019 when the main protest site in Khartoum
was attacked and at least 40 bodies were recovered from the Nile, having
been thrown there by the RSF. Protests intensified, reprisals continued and
the internet was shut down.

The Tribunal reconvened for a Case Management Hearing on 10 July 2019 to
hear submissions from the parties on the appropriate way forward in light
of the continuing upheaval in Sudan. The respondent provided a "Response to
an Information Request - Country: Sudan" dated 17 June 2019 which detailed
the events set out above.

The respondent submitted that the proceedings should be adjourned until
September 2019 when the situation in Sudan might be clearer. In the week
prior to the Case Management Hearing, for example, internet access had
restarted and there were signs that an agreement between the TMC and the
civilian opposition alliance would be reached.

The appellants maintained that the situation in Sudan remained
unpredictable such that adjourning for a further 3 months was not
appropriate and submitted that the Tribunal should proceed to determine the
appeals which had to be allowed where the situation in Sudan could not be
said to amount to the "very strong grounds supported by cogent evidence"
required for a Country Guidance case to be considered no longer
authoritative and set aside or replaced; SG (Iraq) v Secretary of State for
the Home Department  [2012] EWCA Civ 940 considered.

After some discussion, in light of the volatility of the situation in
Sudan, the absence of the cogent evidence needed to set aside existing
Country Guidance and in light of AAR and AA having waited for an extensive
period of time for a final determination of their protection claims, the
respondent conceded that a further delay was not appropriate and that the
appeals should be determined on the basis of the existing Country Guidance
cases. The respondent accepted that this meant that the appeals had to be
allowed where the appellant's profiles as Darfuris brought them within the
ratio of AA (Sudan) and MM (Sudan).  The Tribunal allows the asylum appeals
of AAR and AA on that basis.

The answer to the Country Guidance question that was originally asked in
these appeals is as follows. The situation in Sudan remains volatile after
civil protests started in late 2018 and the future is unpredictable. There
is insufficient evidence currently available to show that the guidance
given in AA (non-Arab Darfuris -  relocation) Sudan CG [2009] UKAIT 00056
and MM (Darfuris) Sudan CG [2015] UKUT 00010 (IAC) requires revision. Those
cases should still be followed.

Decision

The decisions of the First-tier Tribunal disclosed an error on a point of
law and are set aside.

The decisions are re-made as allowed on asylum grounds.

Signed: [pic]                           29 July 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
