


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Nkomo (Deportation: 2014 rights of appeal) [2016] UKUT 00285 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Stoke                                |Promulgated on               |
|29 January 2016                               |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                              VICTOR VUSI NKOMO
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Chaudhry, of Duncan Lewis Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeetie, Home Office Presenting Officer.

   1. The No 3 Commencement Order of the 2014 Act, SI 2014/2771, extends the
      new appeals provisions to identified persons, but the amendment of  it
      in  SI  2014/2928  further  extends  those  provisions  to  identified
      decisions.

   2. In consequence, a person against whom a deportation decision was  made
      in the period 10 November 2014 - 5 April 2015 may  have  no  right  of
      appeal if the decisions actually made  carry  rights  of  appeal  only
      under the new appeals provisions.  (Note: A further change was made to
      the commencement provision with effect from 2 March  2015,  which  did
      not fall for consideration on the facts of this case.)






                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a national of Zimbabwe, has permission to appeal against
    a determination of the First-tier Tribunal.  At the hearing  we  raised
    concerns about the effect of the decisions made in the appellant's case
    and the extent to which  they  gave  rise  to  rights  of  appeal.   Mr
    McVeetie took brief instructions and returned  to  tell  us  that  "the
    decision is correct".  In the circumstances  we  received  little  help
    from the parties: we do not intend that as a criticism.  As the  matter
    goes to jurisdiction, however, we must determine it.


 2. The appellant, as we have said, is a national of Zimbabwe.  He came  to
    the United Kingdom in 2003.  He claimed asylum.  He was recognised as a
    refugee.  In accordance with the practice in operation at that time, he
    appears to have  been  granted  indefinite  leave  to  remain:  we  say
    "appears", because although there must have been a grant of  some  sort
    of leave, there is no reference to such grant in any of  the  Secretary
    of State's documentation before us: on the other hand, it is  not  said
    that he was remaining in the United Kingdom without leave.

 3. The appellant has been convicted of numerous offences in this  country,
    including an offence of rape.  On 4 December 2009 he was  sentenced  to
    ten years imprisonment for that offence.  That conviction and  sentence
    brought the appellant within the definition of "foreign criminal" in  s
    32 of the UK Borders Act 2007.  He was liable to automatic deportation,
    subject to the operation of the exceptions  in  s  33.   One  of  those
    exceptions is that the person's deportation  would  breach  the  United
    Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee  Convention;  there  are  other
    exceptions, including an exception that the person's deportation  would
    breach the United Kingdom's obligations under the  European  Convention
    on Human Rights.

 4. On 8 May 2012, the Secretary of State wrote to the appellant indicating
    that she proposed to have him removed from  the  United  Kingdom.   She
    drew his attention to s 72 of the Nationality, Immigration & Asylum Act
    2002 and invited him to indicate  any  reason  why  he  should  not  be
    regarded as a person who had been convicted  by  final  judgment  of  a
    particularly  serious  crime  and  who  constituted  a  danger  to  the
    community of the United Kingdom.  The significance of that wording  and
    classification is that, if the appellant fell within that category,  he
    would not be  protected  by  the  Refugee  Convention  from  return  to
    Zimbabwe: see art 33.2 of the Refugee Convention.  Those acting for the
    appellant made extensive submissions in response, including submissions
    that the appellant's removal would breach articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR.

 5. On 30 October 2014 the Secretary of  State  issued  a  decision  headed
    "Cessation of Refugee Status".  It considers the  submissions  made  in
    the light of other material available to the Secretary  of  State  and,
    amongst other  things,  concludes  that  the  appellant  is  no  longer
    entitled to refugee status, there having been a change of circumstances
    within the meaning of article 1C(5) of  the  Refugee  Convention.   The
    letter also rejects the claims based on the ECHR.  The letter concludes
    as follows:

          "71. The Home Office is therefore satisfied  that,  subsequent  to
              obtaining refugee status in 2003, you can no longer,  because
              the  circumstances  in  connection  with   which   you   were
              recognised as a refugee have ceased  to  exist,  continue  to
              refuse to avail yourself of the protection of the country  of
              nationality.


          72. In light of the above, it  has  been  decided  to  cease  your
             refugee status in view of the fact that Article  1C(5)  of  the
             1951 Refugee Convention and subsequently Paragraph  339A(v)  of
             the Immigration Rules, now applies.   This  decision  has  been
             recorded as determined on the date of this letter  [30  October
             2014].


          73. You do not have a right of  appeal  against  the  decision  to
             cease your refugee status.  However, you will  be  afforded  an
             opportunity to  appeal  against  the  accompanying  immigration
             decision.


          74. As you are no longer a refugee, you should now surrender  your
             original grant of refugee status letter issued on 2 April 2003.
              This must be returned immediately.


          75. If you have not yet taken advice on  your  position,  you  are
             strongly advised to do so now."

 6. We have not heard of any "accompanying  immigration  decision"  of  the
    date of that letter or thereabouts.  The letter makes no  reference  to
    the appellant's position as a person with a grant of leave to remain.

 7. On 21 November 2014 a  deportation  order  against  the  appellant  was
    signed.  That order is specifically made under the provisions of  s  32
    of the 2007 Act: that is  to  say  under  the  "automatic  deportation"
    provisions.  As a deportation order, however, it had the effect under s
    5(1) of the Immigration Act 1971 of invalidating the appellant's leave.
     The order was served on him under cover of a letter dated 24  November
    2014.  The letter is headed "Decision  to  refuse  a  protection  claim
    and/or a human rights claim"; it  notes  the  representations  made  in
    response to the letter proposing to invoke s 72.   At  paragraph  8  it
    says:

          "On 30 October 2014 your refugee status was ceased and as at  that
          date, you have no legal status to remain in the United Kingdom."

 8. It then sets out the history and consideration of the appellant's  case
    in full, including submissions in relation to art 8.  Paragraphs 142 to
    147 are as follows:

          "142. Further to the reasons given within our  letter  of  4  June
              2014 and taking all relevant  factors  into  account,  it  is
              considered that objective evidence indicates that matters  in
              Zimbabwe have altered fundamentally and  durably  since  your
              departure in 2003.  You have not  established  a  claim  that
              your return to Zimbabwe would occasion treatment  that  would
              breach our obligations  under  the  1951  Refugee  Convention
              and/or Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR.


          143. The Home Office is therefore satisfied  that,  subsequent  to
              obtaining refugee status in 2003, you can no longer,  because
              the  circumstances  in  connection  with   which   you   were
              recognised as a refugee have ceased  to  exist,  continue  to
              refuse to avail yourself of the protection of the country  of
              nationality.


          144. In light of the above, it has  been  decided  to  cease  your
              refugee status in view of the fact that Article 1C(5) of  the
              1951 Refugee Convention and subsequently Paragraph 339A(v) of
              the Immigration Rules, now applies.  This decision  has  been
              recorded as determined  on  the  date  of  this  letter.  [24
              November 2014].


          145.  You do [sic] have a right of appeal against  this  decision.
              Further information as to your appeal rights is  set  out  in
              another section of this letter.


          146.  As you are no longer a refugee,  you  should  now  surrender
              your original grant of refugee  status  letter  issued  on  2
              April 2003.  This must be returned immediately.


          147.  If you have not yet taken advice on your position,  you  are
              strongly advised to do so now. "

 9. The following paragraphs consider and reject the article 8 claim.   The
    closing paragraphs of the letter are unnumbered.  The crucial ones  are
    as follows:

          "Decision


          As explained above, your protection and  human  rights  claim  has
          been refused.  As such, it is not accepted that  you  fall  within
          any of the exceptions to deportation  at  section  33  of  the  UK
          Borders Act 2007.   Therefore,  section  32(5)  of  the  same  Act
          requires the Secretary  of  State  to  make  a  deportation  order
          against you.  A deportation order has been made against you and is
          enclosed with this decision.


          Appeal


          You have the right to appeal against the decision to  refuse  your
          protection and human rights  claim  under  section  82(1)  of  the
          Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 from within the UK.


          Any appeal must be made on one or more of the following grounds:


               . that your  removal  from  the  UK  would  breach  the  UK's
                 obligations under the Refugee Convention;


               . that your  removal  from  the  UK  would  breach  the  UK's
                 obligations in relation to persons eligible for a grant  of
                 humanitarian protection;

               . that your removal from  the  UK  would  be  unlawful  under
                 section 6 of the Human Rights Act  1998  (public  authority
                 not to act contrary to Human Rights Convention).


          You must not appeal on grounds which do not  apply  to  you.   You
          must also explain the reasons that you are appealing  against  the
          decision and provide any supporting evidence that is available  to
          you in order to substantiate your grounds of appeal."

10. The letter continues by referring to an earlier notice served  under  s
    120 of the 2002 Act, confirming  that  the  appellant's  claim  is  not
    certified under s 94B of the same Act, indicating that the  appellant's
    removal will be to Zimbabwe, and noting that he is liable to detention.
     The final paragraph of the letter, above the  signature,  states  that
    the notice is given  "in  compliance  with  the  Immigration  (Notices)
    Regulations 2003".

11. The appellant's notice of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was against
    the decisions incorporated in that letter.

Statutory rights of appeal

12. Rights of appeal against immigration decisions are governed by  Part  5
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.   Decisions  which
    can be the subject of an appeal are listed in  s  82;  the  permissible
    grounds of appeal are listed in s 84.  However, ss 82 and  84  as  they
    have stood since the coming into force of  the  2002  Act,  with  small
    additions and  amendments,  are  entirely  replaced  by  s  15  of  the
    Immigration Act 2014.  Although, because of the impact of international
    conventions, there are certain central elements in common  forming  the
    rationale of both original and modified provisions, the two regimes are
    mutually exclusive in the sense that the decisions which the  2014  Act
    makes appealable are entirely new: none  of  the  decisions  appealable
    under the 2002 Act  as  originally  enacted  (or  subsequently  amended
    before 2014) survives the 2014 replacement.  Similarly, the grounds  of
    appeal have been reduced in number and rewritten.   As  a  result,  the
    allowable  grounds  of  appeal  are  different  from  those  previously
    available.   The  2014  Act  contains  a  number  of  other   important
    provisions.  We need to refer to only one of them: via  s  19,  new  ss
    117A - 117D are inserted into the 2002 Act.

13. The implementation of the provisions  of  the  2014  Act  and  the  new
    appeals provisions in particular, has taken a  rather  curious  course.
    The first event to which we need to make reference is that by virtue of
    the Immigration Act 2014 (Commencement No.  1,  Transitory  and  Saving
    Provisions) Order 2014 (SI 2014/1820), Section 19 of the 2014 Act  came
    into force on 28 July 2014.  One of the  inserted  provisions,  section
    117D, contains at sub-section 2 a definition of  a  "foreign  criminal"
    for the  purposes  of  the  newly-inserted  sections.   The  definition
    encompasses a person who is a foreign national who has  been  convicted
    of an offence and sentence to a term of at least 12 months imprisonment
    (there being certain exceptions which we  do  not  need  to  set  out).
    Although Part 5A is not  directly  relevant  to  our  decision,  it  is
    important, for reasons which will appear, to note that, the appellant's
    history being what it is, he became a  "foreign  criminal"  within  the
    meaning of section 117D(2) on the coming into force of that section  on
    28 July 2014.

14. The next instrument we need to mention  is  the  Immigration  Act  2014
    (Commencement No. 3, Transitional and Saving Provisions) Order 2014 (SI
    2014/2771).  This order was made  on  15  October  2014,  and  has  the
    function of bringing a number or provisions of the 2014 Act into  force
    on various dates in October, November and December 2014.  So far as the
    appeals provisions are concerned, it operates as  follows.   Article  2
    brings  section  15  of  the  2014  Act  (including  the  new   appeals
    provisions) into force on  20  October  2014,  subject  to  the  saving
    provisions in articles 9, 10 and 11.  Article 9 is as follows:


        "9. Notwithstanding the commencement of  the  relevant  provisions,
        the saved provisions [that is to say,  the  appeals  provisions  in
        Part V of the 2002 Act before amendment by the 2014  Act]  continue
        to have effect, and the relevant provisions  do  not  have  effect,
        other  than  so  far  as  they  relate  to  the  persons  set   out
        respectively in articles 10 and 11, unless  article  11(2)  or  (3)
        applies."


15. Article 11 sets out a category of persons constituting post-20  October
    2014 applicants for leave to remain as a Tier 4 Migrant or  the  family
    member of a Tier 4 Migrant. There are certain exceptions,  and,  rather
    alarmingly, paragraph (4) of the article is worded  as  though  it  has
    entirely general effect; fortunately we do not have to  decide  whether
    paragraph (4) applies outside the confines of article 11.  We shall not
    need to refer again to article 11 and the persons incorporated  in  it.
    Article 10, however, is as follows:

        "10. The persons referred to in article 9 are -
             (a) a person ("P1") who becomes a foreign criminal  within  the
               definition in section 117D(2) of the 2002 Act on or after 20
               October 2014; and
             (b) a person who is  liable  to  deportation  from  the  United
               Kingdom under section 3(5)(b) of the 1971 Act  because  they
               belong to the family of P1."

16. We shall not need to refer again  to  family  members.   Article  10(a)
    makes a clear distinction between those who  come  within  the  section
    117D(2) definition on  or  after  the  commencement  date  and  others.
    Typically, coming within the definition  after  the  commencement  date
    would be by being sentenced to a long enough term of imprisonment on or
    after that date.  We shall call such persons "new  foreign  criminals".
    Persons who fell within the definition before 20 October 2014 we  shall
    call "old foreign criminals".  (It may be noted that a  person  who  is
    already an old foreign criminal does not become a new foreign  criminal
    by receiving a sentence on or after 20  October  2014:  he  "became"  a
    foreign criminal before that date.)

17. Although we cannot of course know for  certain,  it  appears  that  the
    convoluted drafting of  the  No.  3  Commencement  Order  confused  the
    Secretary of State and her decision-makers as well  as  everybody  else
    who had to try to understand it.  Decisions were made in respect of old
    foreign criminals on the understanding that the new appeals provisions,
    rather than the old appeals provisions, would apply to them.   When  it
    was appreciated that that was wrong, a further statutory instrument was
    promoted, the Immigration Act 2014 (Transitional and Saving Provisions)
    Order 2014 (SI 2014/2928), made on 6  November  2014  and  coming  into
    force on 10 November.  The operative part is article 2, as follows:

        "2(1).   The saved provisions [that is, the old appeals provisions]
              continue to have effect, and the  relevant  provisions  [that
              is, the new appeals provisions] do  not  have  effect,  other
              than -
               (a) in accordance with articles 9 - 10 and 11 of [the No.  3
                  Commencement   Order];
               (b) in relation  to  a  deportation  decision  made  by  the
                  Secretary of State  on  or  after  10  November  2014  in
                  respect of -
                     (i)  a person ("P") who is a foreign  criminal  within
                        the definition in section 117D(2) of the 2002 Act;
                     (ii) a person who is liable to  deportation  from  the
                        United Kingdom under section 3(5)(b) of the 1971 Act
                        because they belong to the family of P.
          (2) In this article, "a deportation decision" means a decision  to
             make a deportation order, a decision  to  refuse  to  revoke  a
             deportation order, or a decision made under  section  32(5)  of
             the UK Borders Act 2007"

18. Thus, the new appeals provisions from 10 November 2014 now applied  not
    only to new foreign criminals, but also "in  relation  to"  deportation
    decisions made against both old and new foreign criminals.  There is no
    doubt about the purpose of that addition.  Under the old provisions,  a
    decision to make a deportation order carried a right of appeal.   Under
    the new provisions, a decision to make a  deportation  order  does  not
    carry a  right  of  appeal.   The  effect  of  SI  2014/2928  was  that
    deportation decisions made in  respect  of  those  within  the  section
    117D(2) definition carried, for the future, no right of  appeal.   What
    that order clearly  did  not  do,  however,  was  to  add  old  foreign
    criminals to the category of persons to whom the new appeals provisions
    applied.  Articles 9 to 11 of the No. 3 Commencement Order  extend  the
    new provisions to  two  categories  of  person;  the  subsequent  order
    extends the appeals provisions only to a category of decision.

19. The Immigration Act 2014 (Commencement No. 4, (Transitional and  Saving
    Provisions and Amendment) Order 2015 (SI 2015/371), made on 25 February
    2015 completes the picture.  So  far  as  the  appeals  provisions  are
    concerned, it operates by amending the provisions of article  9  ff  of
    the No. 3 Commencement Order.  The  overall  effect  is  that  the  new
    appeals provisions relate to all decisions made after 6 April 2015; the
    old appeals provisions continue to apply to decisions made before  that
    date and carrying a right of appeal,  and  to  certain  decisions  made
    after that date in response to applications before that date.

20. We return now to the  appellant's  position.   He  is  an  old  foreign
    criminal.  The Commencement No. 3 Order did not bring the  new  appeals
    provisions into force in respect of him as a  person.   The  subsequent
    order, however, brought  the  new  appeals  provisions  into  force  in
    respect of any deportation decision  made  against  after  10  November
    2014.  As we have said, there was  such  a  decision,  the  deportation
    order made on 21 November and served on 24  November.   That  decision,
    made under s 32 of the 2007 Act, incorporated  the  decision  that  the
    appellant was a person to whom s 32(5) applied: see JG (Jamaica) v SSHD
    [2015] EWCA Civ 410 at [36].  It would therefore have carried  a  right
    of appeal under  the  old  appeals  provisions,  but  the  new  appeals
    provisions apply to it by virtue of SI 2014/2928, with the effect  that
    there is no right of appeal against it.  The other  decisions  made  by
    the Secretary of State in  relation  to  the  appellant  are,  however,
    problematical.  The first is that made on 30 October 2014, revoking the
    appellant's refugee status.  That decision was correctly  characterised
    in the letter of 30 October as carrying no right of appeal.  A decision
    to revoke protection status is one of the types of decision carrying  a
    right of appeal under the changes introduced by the 2014 Act, but those
    changes were not in force in relation to the appellant on the  date  of
    that letter.  The old appeals provisions enable an appeal  against  the
    revocation of refugee status only under s 83A, in  circumstances  which
    do not apply to this appellant.

21. The letter of 24 November 2014 purports to make decisions of  precisely
    the type envisaged  as  appealable  decisions  under  the  new  appeals
    provisions, that is to say (according to the  heading  of  the  letter)
    decisions to refuse a protection claim and a human rights  claim,  and,
    according to the text at paragraphs 144 to 145, which we have  set  out
    above, a new appealable decision to revoke the  appellant's  protection
    status.  Even taking the letter  on  its  own  terms,  however,  as  an
    attempt to make decisions appealable under the new regime, and to  give
    lawful notice of them, the letter has difficulties, because it fails to
    set out the right of appeal against the revocation of protection status
    and the grounds upon which that appeal can be exercised.  As  such,  it
    fails to give such notice of  that  decision  as  is  required  by  the
    Immigration (Notices Regulation) 2003, invoked in the closing paragraph
    of the letter.

22. There is, however, a much graver difficulty with  the  letter.   As  we
    have explained, the appellant, being an old foreign criminal, is not  a
    person to whom the new appeals provisions applied in the period  before
    6 April 2015, save insofar as related to a deportation  decision.   The
    letter makes and notifies decisions of a sort that would be  appealable
    under the new appeals provisions, and sets out in  respect  of  two  of
    them the rights of appeal which  would  exist  under  the  new  appeals
    provisions; but it fails to observe that the new appeals provisions  do
    not apply to the appellant in respect of decisions in those categories.
     We cannot of course say that the Secretary of State was  not  entitled
    to make the decisions that she did.   None  of  them  was,  however,  a
    decision carrying a right of appeal under the old  appeals  provisions;
    and the new appeals provisions did not  apply.   It  follows  that  the
    appellant had no right of appeal against the decisions communicated  in
    the letter of 24 November 2014.  There was no right of  appeal  against
    the deportation order, because, by virtue  of  SI  2014/2928,  the  new
    appeals provisions applied to it; there was no right of appeal  against
    the other decisions, because the new appeals provisions did  not  apply
    to them.  The First-tier Tribunal  had  no  jurisdiction  to  hear  his
    appeals.

23. We reach that conclusion with no pleasure. The  position  is  obviously
    wholly   unsatisfactory.    The   decision-maker   appears   to    have
    misunderstood the  effect  of  the  Commencement  Orders,  probably  in
    particular that of SI 2014/2928, and to have made decisions in  respect
    of the appellant that were thought to carry a right of  appeal  but  in
    fact and in law did not do so.  It is not our job  to  decide  how  the
    appellant should now be treated; at a minimum, however, we  would  have
    thought that he is entitled to have  the  24  November  2014  decisions
    remade: if remade now they will carry the  right  of  appeal  that  was
    evidently intended.  So far as we are concerned, however, the  position
    is simply that we allow the appellant's appeal against  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's decision on  the  ground  that  it  was  made  without
    jurisdiction.










                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL



                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                           Date: 12 May 2016
