
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

R (on the application  of  Khurram)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department (effective service; 2000 Order) IJR [2016] UKUT 00281(IAC)


             IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

|Heard at Field House                          |                              |
|On 16 March 2016                              |                              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

             the queen (on the application of muhammad khurram)
                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Applicant:     Mr A Syed-Ali, instructed by Ropemakers Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs J Gray, instructed by the Government Legal
Department

   1. For the purposes of Art 8ZA(2) of the Immigration (Leave to Enter  and
      Remain) Order 2000 (SI 2000/1161)(as  inserted  by  SI  2013/174  with
      effect from 12 July 2013), a notice is not sent to  a  postal  address
      "provided for correspondence by the person" if the address is provided
      to the Secretary  of  State  by  a  third  party  such  as  a  sponsor
      educational institution unless the third party is the authorised agent
      of the person.


   2.  However,  where  no  postal   address   (or   e-mail   address)   for
      correspondence has been provided, an address provided by a third party
      may be the "last-known or usual place of abode" of the  person  within
      Art 8ZA(3)(a) to which a notice may be sent.



                                  JUDGMENT

JUDGE GRUBB:

 1. The applicant seeks to challenge by way of judicial review the decision
    of the Secretary of State taken on 30 July 2014 refusing him  leave  to
    remain based upon his private life in  the  UK  under  the  Immigration
    Rules (HC 395 as amended) and Art 8 of the ECHR.

 2. The applicant does not challenge  the  substance  of  the  respondent's
    decision.  Instead, the applicant contends that he  has  an  in-country
    right of appeal against that decision to the First-tier Tribunal.

The Claim

 3. The basis of that claim is as follows.  The applicant entered the UK on
    5 February 2013 with entry clearance (taking effect as leave to  enter)
    valid until 13 June 2014 as a Tier 4  (General)  Student  to  study  at
    Cranford College.

 4. The applicant claims that when he  made  his  application  for  further
    leave on 4 June 2014 that was before the expiry of his leave  to  enter
    and that, therefore, he had an in-country right of appeal under s.82(1)
    and 82(2)(d) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  (the
    "NIA Act 2002").

 5. The applicant contends that the respondent's decision  to  curtail  his
    leave with effect to 20 January 2014 set  out  in  a  letter  dated  21
    November 2013, based upon the applicant having completed  his  studies,
    was ineffective.

 6. The applicant contends that the respondent's letter of 21 November 2013
    was not sent in accordance with the provision of the Immigration (Leave
    to Enter and Remain) Order 2000 (SI 2000/1161 as  amended  by  SI/1749)
    (the  "2000  Order")  and  was  not,  therefore,  properly  "given"  in
    accordance with s.4(1) of the Immigration Act 1971.

 7. Whilst it is accepted that the letter was sent by recorded delivery  to
    an address provided by the applicant's  sponsor  to  the  Secretary  of
    State on request, the applicant contends that was not a  proper  method
    of service falling within Art 8ZA of the 2000 Order, in particular  Art
    8ZA of the 2000 Order.

 8. The applicant also contends, though somewhat more weakly, that -  even
    if the curtailment decision was sent in accordance with Art 8ZA -  the
    applicant had rebutted the presumption that notice  was  "given"  under
    Art 8ZB of the 2000 Order.

 9. It is not contended by the applicant that the curtailment decision  was
    other  than  a  lawful  decision  under  para  323A(a)(ii)(2)  of   the
    Immigration Rules on the basis that Cranford College had  informed  the
    Secretary of State on 4 September 2013 that the  applicant  had  ceased
    studying with them.

10. The only issue is whether that curtailment notice was  properly  served
    ("given") so as to lawfully  curtail  the  applicant's  leave,  by  its
    terms, to 20 January 2014.

11. If the curtailment was lawful and so effective, then the applicant  did
    not have leave thereafter and he has no right  of  appeal  against  the
    refusal of his leave on 30 July  2014.   By  contrast,  if  his  leave
    continued until  13  June  2014,  because  it  had  not  lawfully  been
    curtailed, then his application for further leave made on 6  June  2014
    was in time and the refusal to vary (by extension) his leave would give
    rise to a right of appeal under s.82(1) against an immigration decision
    falling within s.82(2)(d) of the NIA Act 2002.

Preliminary Matters

12. Two preliminary matters were raised by the Secretary of  State  in  the
    detailed grounds of defence and in the skeleton argument of  Mrs  Gray,
    who represented the respondent.

13. The first concern, the issue  of  the  timeliness  of  the  applicant's
    application for judicial review.  That matter arises in this way.   The
    decision to refuse the applicant  leave  was  made  on  30  July  2014.
    However,  the  claim  form  sought,  on  its  face,  to  challenge  the
    respondent's response on 1 September 2014 to the  pre-action  Protocol
    letter refusing to reverse her decision of 30  July  2014.   The  claim
    form was sealed by UTIAC  on  1  December  2014.   It  was,  therefore,
    outside the three month limit for challenging the decision of  30  July
    2014.

14. This was not a point raised by the respondent in the acknowledgement of
    service or at the oral renewal hearing on  10  September  2015  when  I
    granted permission to bring these proceedings.   The  matter  was  only
    raised by Mrs Gray in the detailed grounds of  defence  dated  "October
    2015" (and therefore subsequent to the oral renewal hearing) and in her
    skeleton argument for the substantive hearing dated 4 March 2016.

15. Before me, Mrs Gray accepted that she could not take the time point  at
    this stage of the proceedings.  She referred me to a  decision  of  the
    House of Lords in R v Criminal Injuries Compensation Board, ex parte  A
    [1999] 2 AC 330.  She accepted that the House of Lords, in  the  speech
    of Lord Slynn of  Hadley  (with  whom  the  other  Law  Lords  agreed),
    concluded that a timeliness issue,  and  in  particular  the  issue  of
    extending time, could not be considered  at  the  substantive  hearing.
    Lord Slynn said this:

         "If leave is given, then unless set aside, it does not fall  to  be
         re-opened at the substantive hearing on the basis that there is  no
         ground  for  extending  time  under  Order  53,  R4(1).    At   the
         substantive hearing there is no 'application for leave to apply for
         judicial review' leave having already been given."

16. Mrs Gray accepted that, in the light of this, it was not  open  to  the
    Secretary of State to now take the point that the applicant's claim was
    out of time and that time should not be extended.

17. That concession, in my judgment, disposes  of  this  point.   It  is  a
    matter of some regret that the  issue  of  timeliness  was  not  raised
    earlier  in  the  proceedings  and  was  only  raised,  in  effect,  in
    preparation for the  substantive  hearing  after  permission  had  been
    granted at the oral hearing.

18. I would simply  add  that,  applying  the  approach  to  the  issue  of
    extending time set out in SS (Congo) and Others v SSHD [2015] EWCA  Civ
    387, in particular at [93], I would consider this to be a  proper  case
    to extend time.  The delay of  a  month  is  substantial  and  I  would
    conclude that it is "serious" though not "significant".  There has been
    no explanation for the delay offered.  However,  there  is  little,  if
    any, prejudice to the respondent beyond the fact of the decision  being
    subject to challenge and the claim raises an  important  point  on  the
    proper application of the 2000 Order.  This would, I venture to say, be
    a proper case to extend time.  However, given the stance taken  by  Mrs
    Gray the issue of timeliness does not arise.

19. The second matter raised  by  Mrs  Gray  concerned  the  state  of  the
    applicant's grounds of claim.  At the  oral  renewal,  the  applicant's
    (then) Counsel sought to rely upon grounds different from those set out
    in the claim form.  Although there was no formal direction  to  prepare
    amended grounds reflecting the basis upon  which  permission  had  been
    granted, Mrs Gray (who represented the respondent at that hearing also)
    indicated that she had been expecting a set of amended grounds from the
    applicant's representatives.  None have, in the result, been filed with
    the Tribunal with the appropriate application to amend.

20. At the hearing, I suggested that a possible course  was  to  treat  the
    skeleton argument of Mr Syed-Ali (who now represented the applicant) as
    being the amended grounds.  Mrs Gray accepted  that  the  Secretary  of
    State had in her detailed grounds  of  defence  and  skeleton  argument
    anticipated the amended grounds and the basis of the applicant's  claim
    that the curtailment decision was ineffective,  that  being  the  basis
    upon which permission had been granted.  She  did  not  demur  from  my
    taking Mr Syed-Ali's skeleton argument as a set of amended grounds.   I
    am content to do so and grant the applicant  permission  to  amend  his
    grounds accordingly.  To do otherwise would elevate form over substance
    given the absence of any prejudice or misunderstanding as to the  basis
    of the applicant's claim in this case.

21. With those preliminary matters put aside, I turn to  the  substance  of
    the applicant's claim.

The Relevant Provisions

22. The relevant legal provisions concerned with the giving of  notice  are
    contained within s.4(1) of the Immigration Act 1971 and 2000  Order  as
    amended by the Immigration (Leave to Enter and Remain) Amendment  Order
    2013 (SI 2013/1749) with effect from 12 July 2013.   The  latter  deals
    with the provision of notice of decisions not subject to appeal to  the
    First-tier Tribunal under the NIA Act 2002 such as the decision in this
    case to curtail the applicant's leave but not  with  immediate  effect.
    The provisions are considered and analysed in my recent decision  in  R
    (Arslan Mahmood) v SSHD (effective service - 2000  Order)  IJR  [2016]
    UKUT 0057 (IAC) from which judgment I gratefully borrow what follows.

23. Section 4(1) of the Immigration Act 1971 requires notice in writing  to
    be given of a decision, inter alia, to  vary  a  person's  leave  under
    s.3(3)(a) of the 1971 Act.  So  far  as  relevant  s.4(1)  provides  as
    follows:

         "The power under this act to give or  refuse  leave  to  enter  the
         United Kingdom shall be exercised by immigration officers, and  the
         power to give leave to remain in the United Kingdom, or to vary any
         leave  under  section  3(3)(a)  (whether  as  regards  duration  or
         conditions), shall be exercised by the  Secretary  of  State;  and,
         unless otherwise allowed by or under this act, those  powers  shall
         be exercised by notice in writing given to  the  persons  affected,
         except that the powers  under  section  3(3)(a)  may  be  exercised
         generally in respect of any class  of  persons  by  order  made  by
         statutory instrument."

24. The power to vary an individual's limited  leave  to  enter  or  remain
    includes "restricting ... the limitation of its duration and  ..."  and
    thus encompasses the power to curtail an individual's  leave.   Section
    4(1) provides that "notice in writing" of  such  a  decision  shall  be
    "given" to the person affected.

25. Section 3A of the 1971 Act empowers the Secretary of State by Order  to
    make provision with respect  to  varying  leave  to  enter  in  the  UK
    (s.3A(1)) and, in particular, to provide for the "form  or  manner"  in
    which leave may be varied (s.3A(2)(a)).  Similar powers can be found in
    s.3B of the 1971 Act in respect of varying leave to remain.

26. Prior to 12 July 2013, there was no statutory  instrument  which  dealt
    with the giving of notice for non-appealable decisions.  The giving  of
    notice of decisions which were appealable to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    under the NIA Act 2002 was provided for in  the  Immigration  (Notices)
    Regulations 2003 (SI 2003/658 as  amended).   Non-appealable  decisions
    remained subject to the common law and, as the Upper Tribunal  held  in
    Syed (curtailment of leave - notice)  [2013]  UKUT  00144  (IAC),  the
    requirement that  the  decision  (there  a  non-appealable  curtailment
    decision) should be "communicated to the person concerned" (see  [28]).
    As a consequence, a notice served "to file" had  not  been  "given"  in
    accordance with s.4(1) of the 1971  Act  and  was,  as  a  consequence,
    ineffective to curtail an individual's leave.

27. As a consequence of Syed, the 2000 Order was amended with  effect  from
    12 July 2013 to contain provisions dealing with the  giving  of  notice
    and presumptions in respect of receipt  in  respect  of  non-appealable
    immigration decisions such as the curtailment decision  in  this  case.
    Those provisions are in Arts 8ZA and 8ZB of  the  2000  Order  and  are
    central to this case.

28. Article 8ZA sets out the methods and means by which a notice in writing
    may be "given":

         "Grant, refusal or variation of leave by notice in writing

         (1)  A notice in writing -

             (a)  giving leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom;

             (b)  refusing leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom:

             (c)  refusing to vary a person's leave to enter or  remain  in
                  the United Kingdom: or

             (d)  varying a person's leave to enter or remain in the United
                  Kingdom,

         may be given to the person affected as required by section 4(1)  of
         the Act as follows:

         (2)  The notice may be -

             (a)  given by hand;

             (b)  sent by fax;

             (c)  sent by postal service to a postal address  provided  for
                  correspondence   by   the   person   or    the    person's
                  representative;

             (d)  sent electronically to an  e-mail  address  provided  for
                  correspondence   by   the   person   or    the    person's
                  representative;

             (e)  sent by document exchange to a document  exchange  number
                  or address; or

             (f)  sent by courier.

         (3)  Where no postal or e-mail address for correspondence has  been
             provided, the notice may be sent -

             (a)  by postal service to -

                  (i)  the last-known or usual  place  of  abode,  place  of
                      study or place of business of the person; or

                  (ii) the last-known or usual  place  of  business  of  the
                      person's representative; or

             (b)  electronically to -

                  (i)   the  last-known  e-mail  address  for   the   person
                      (including at the person's last-known place of  study
                      or place of business); or

                  (ii)  the  last-known  e-mail  address  of  the   person's
                      representative.

         (4)  Where attempts to give notice in  accordance  with  paragraphs
             (2) and (3) are not possible or have failed, when the decision-
             maker records the reasons for this and places  the  notice  on
             file the notice shall be deemed to have been given.

         (5)  Where a notice is deemed to have been given in accordance with
             paragraph (4) and then subsequently the person is located, the
             person shall as soon as is practicable be given a copy of  the
             notice and details of when and how it was given.

         (6)  A notice given under this article may, in the case of a person
             who  is  under  18  years  of  age  and  does   not   have   a
             representative, be given to the parent,  guardian  or  another
             adult who for the time  being  takes  responsibility  for  the
             child."

29. Article 8ZB provides for certain rebuttable presumptions of when notice
    has "been given" when a notice is sent in accordance with Art 8ZA.   So
    far as relevant, it is in the following terms:

         "Presumptions about receipt of notice

         (1)  Where a notice is sent in  accordance  with  article  8ZA,  it
             shall be deemed to have been given  to  the  person  affected,
             unless the contrary is proved -

             (a)  where the notice is sent by postal service -

                  (i)  on the second day after it was sent by postal service
                      in which delivery or receipt is recorded if sent to a
                      place within the United Kingdom;

                  (ii) on the 28th day after it was  posted  if  sent  to  a
                      place outside the United Kingdom;

             (b)  where  the  notice  is  sent  by  fax,  e-mail,  document
                  exchange or courier, on the day it was sent.....".

30. The scope and application of these  provisions  was  considered  in  my
    recent decision of R (Arslan Mahmood) v SSHD.  At [37], I summarise the
    effect of Art 8ZA as follows:

         "As will be seen, Art 8ZA(2) provides a number of methods by  which
         a notice "may be given to  the  person  affected"  as  required  by
         s.4(1) of the 1971 Act.  Notice may be given by hand; sent by  fax;
         sent by post to the address  provided  by  the  individual  or  his
         representatives for correspondence or electronically by  e-mail  to
         the e-mail address given "for correspondence" by the individual  or
         his representatives.  Art 8ZA(3) provides that where no postal or e-
         mail correspondence address is given, the notice  may  be  sent  by
         post or electronically to a  number  of  other  possible  addresses
         relating to the applicant or his representatives such as  the  last
         known place of abode or  study  or  e-mail  address.   Finally,  by
         virtue of Art 8ZA(4) where attempts to give notice by these methods
         have failed or are not possible, then the decision  may  be  served
         "on file" and is deemed to  have  been  given.   Although  in  this
         latter situation, where the person is subsequently located he  must
         be given a copy of the  notice  as  soon  as  is  practicable  (Art
         8ZA(5))."

    In Mahmood, the central issue was whether a curtailment  decision  sent
    to an e-mail address provided by the individual in his visa application
    form had been "given" in accordance with s.4(1) and the 2000  Order  in
    circumstances where the individual claimed that he had no access to the
    e-mail account at that address.

31. In Mahmood, I concluded that a notice of decision was "given"  when  it
    was "sent" in accordance with a method set  out  in  Art  8ZA  and  was
    delivered to the  individual's  postal  or  e-mail  address  given  for
    correspondence according to that method.  I  concluded  that  Art  8ZB,
    when it applied, created rebuttable presumptions of both  delivery  and
    the date of delivery.  There was no  requirement  that  the  individual
    should  have  actual  knowledge  of  the  notice   or   its   contents.
    Consequently, subject to rebuttal, a  notice  of  curtailment  decision
    attached to an e-mail sent to an individual's  e-mail  (correspondence)
    address was "given" on the  day  it  was  sent  and  delivered  to  the
    individual's e-mail address.

32. In this claim, Mr Syed-Ali's principal point  is  that  the  notice  of
    curtailment sent to  a  postal  address  provided  by  the  applicant's
    sponsor institution was not, as required  by  Art  8ZA(2)(c),  sent  by
    postal service to a postal address "provided for correspondence by  the
    person" (my emphasis).

33. In my judgment, that submission is correct.  Article 8ZA(2)(c) does not
    contemplate the provision of a correspondence address to the  Secretary
    of State by an applicant through a third party in general.  That, in my
    judgment, is the natural and ordinary meaning of  the  words  "provided
    ... by the person".   As a matter of ordinary usage of language,  where
    the source of the address (postal or  e-mail)  is  not  the  individual
    themselves, it will not, in general,  be  provided  by  the  person  if
    provided to the Secretary of State by a  third  party.   It  is  rather
    provided by  the  third  party  and  that  does  not  fall  within  Art
    8ZA(2)(c).

34. Of course, if the third party is an authorised agent of the individual,
    for example his legal representatives, then provision by  them  of  the
    applicant's postal address can properly be said to be a postal  address
    provided for correspondence "by the person".  A sponsor institution  of
    a student cannot, without more, properly be said to be  acting  as  the
    agent of the student if it supplies  to  the  Secretary  of  State  the
    individual's address held by the sponsor for its purposes.

35. Mrs Gray sought to argue that the phrase encompassed the  provision  to
    the respondent of the individual's address by any third party  (subject
    to data protection concerns), but in particular by a Tier 4 sponsor  by
    reference to the report in Parliament of the legislative history of the
    amendment to the 2000 Order introducing Arts 8ZA and 8ZB.  She referred
    me to a passage in the statement made by the minister  for  immigration
    (Mark Harper) in a committee debate on the amendment to the Order on  3
    July 2013 (at tab 5, page 3-9) in the following terms:

         "If the migrant enters the country having been  issued  with  their
         visa overseas, it is likely that we  will  not  have  a  UK  postal
         address for the migrant on record. We can seek to serve the  notice
         via the migrant's representative, if they have one. If that is  not
         possible, or if it fails, we  try  to  serve  the  notice  via  the
         migrant's sponsor. In both cases, however, it is very hard to prove
         service of the notice on the individual. We  now  ask  sponsors  to
         provide the migrant's contact details with the notification, or  we
         write to the sponsor if no details have  been  provided.  That  has
         improved our ability to serve such notices, but the provision of an
         address does not guarantee service, as the address could be  false,
         defective or no longer in use by the migrant."

36. Mrs Gray submitted that it was  specifically  contemplated,  therefore,
    that the Order would by amendment  encompass  the  Secretary  of  State
    seeking a migrant's contact details from a sponsor.

37. Mrs Gray further placed reliance upon the Secretary of State's guidance
    to sponsors under the Tier 2, 4 and 5 Points-Based System (at  page  9)
    that a sponsor must keep a record  of:  "a  history  of  the  migrant's
    contact details (United Kingdom residential address, telephone  number,
    mobile telephone number).   This  must  be  updated  regularly."   That
    obligation, Mrs Gray relied upon, to support her  contention  that  Art
    8ZA(2)(c) should not be construed as if the words "to the Secretary  of
    State" were added to the words of the provision, namely that the notice
    was sent to a  postal  address  "provided  for  correspondence  by  the
    person".

38. As I have already indicated, the ordinary and natural  meaning  of  the
    words in Art 8ZA(2)(c) seem to me to require that  the  postal  address
    (or an e-mail address under Art 8ZA(2)(d)) be provided by the person to
    the Secretary of State, rather than through a third party  unless  that
    third party is the  individual's  authorised  agent.   Nothing  in  the
    minister's speech  or,  indeed  in  the  guidance,  mandates  that  Art
    8ZA(2)(c) must be construed so as to cover the situation where,  as  in
    this  case,  the  individual  has   not   personally   provided   their
    correspondence address to the Secretary of  State  but,  instead,  that
    address has  been  provided  by  the  sponsor  institution.   There  is
    undoubtedly good reason why a sponsor should retain contact details  of
    those persons studying at its institution and, to the extent requested,
    provide those details to the Secretary of State.  As the minister  made
    clear, where an individual has entered the UK on a visa it is  unlikely
    that they have provided a UK postal address.  If they  have  failed  to
    subsequently remedy that omission, it makes perfectly  practical  sense
    that the Secretary of State should be able to obtain that address  from
    the institution at which they have been studying.  That does not  mean,
    however, that notice given to that address falls within Art  8ZA(2)(c).



39. In fact, in such a situation contemplated by the minister  notice  sent
    to that address would fall within Art 8ZA(3)(a)(i).  In the absence  of
    any  postal  or  e-mail  address  given  for  correspondence   by   the
    individual, the notice may be sent by post to the "last-known or  usual
    place of abode".  The address provided by the sponsor is very likely to
    amount to the "last-known or usual place of abode" of the individual.

40. In truth, the provisions in Arts 8ZA(2), (3) and (4) provide a  panoply
    of mechanisms for giving notice by the Secretary of State.   There  is,
    in my judgment, no need to distort the ordinary and natural meaning  of
    Art 8ZA(2)(c) to include a situation where a third party (apart from an
    agent) has provided the individual's address to the Secretary of State.



41. First, the Secretary of State can send a notice  by  post  (1)  to  the
    address for correspondence provided by the person; or (2)  the  address
    of the person's representative.  It is clear to me that  "the  person's
    representative"  in   Art   8ZA(2)(c)   (and   (d))   refers   to   his
    representatives in immigration matters.  Art 1(2)  of  the  2000  Order
    defines "representative" as a person who:

             "appears to the decision-maker - (a) to be the  representative
             of the person referred to in Article 8ZA(1); and (b) not to be
             prohibited from acting as a representative by  section  84  of
             the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999".

42. Leaving aside the partial circularity of  the  definition,  the  person
    must be "representing" the individual and the  cross-reference  to  the
    1999 Act's prohibition on those who may provide "immigration advice  or
    services" clearly contemplates legal representatives who  provide  such
    advice or representation  in  litigation  and  are  "representing"  the
    individual.  It cannot encompass an educational institution which  does
    no more than provide educational services to an individual.

43. Secondly, notice can be given electronically by being sent  to  the  e-
    mail address provided for correspondence: (1) by the person themselves;
    or (2) by the person's representatives (Art 8ZA(2)(c) and (d)).

44. Thirdly, where no postal or e-mail address for correspondence has  been
    provided by the person or his representatives, the notice may  be  sent
    by post to, for example, the last-known or usual place of abode of  the
    individual, their place of study or their place of business or  may  be
    sent electronically to the last-known e-mail address of the  person  or
    their representative (see Art 8ZA(3)).

45. Finally, if none of those methods  are  possible,  the  notice  may  be
    served "to file" in accordance with Art 8ZA(4).

46. In a case such as the present where the applicant has not provided a UK
    postal address, and it was not suggested by either representative  that
    the applicant's address in Pakistan included on  his  visa  application
    was a "correspondence address", the Secretary of  State  may  send  the
    notice  electronically  by  e-mail  to  an  address  provided  by   the
    individual (as occurred in Mahmood) or, in its absence as in this case,
    to the individual's postal address provided by the sponsor on the basis
    that that amounts to his "last-known or usual place of abode".

47. Mrs Gray raised the difficulty that may be faced by  the  Secretary  of
    State if the facts were other than in  the  present  case  because  the
    applicant had, subsequent to arrival in  the  UK  perhaps  following  a
    further but earlier application for  leave  provided  a  correspondence
    address and, on inquiry from  the  sponsor,  a  different  address  was
    provided by the sponsor.  On the face of it, the correspondence address
    "provided by the person" would not appear to  be  the  most  up-to-date
    address.  But, on  the  proper  interpretation  of  Art  8ZA(2)(c)  the
    apparently more up-to-date address is not one to which the  notice  can
    properly be sent. Likewise, Art 8ZA(3)(a)(i) could not  apply  because,
    although the new address was likely to  be  the  "last-known  or  usual
    place of abode" of the individual, that provision could not apply as it
    was not a case where "no postal ...  address  for  correspondence"  had
    been provided by the applicant.

48. Clearly, in the  circumstances  as  I  have  baldly  stated  them,  the
    Secretary of State would be in some difficulty in the  sense  that  the
    only address to which a notice could be  properly  sent  would  be  the
    earlier (and apparently out of date) address provided by the applicant.
     To send it to that  address  might  well  not  seem  sensible  if  the
    underlying purpose is to provide effective notice to an  individual  of
    the adverse immigration decision.

49. However, the practical solutions in  general  are  clear.   First,  the
    applicant may well have provided an  e-mail  address  (as  occurred  in
    Mahmood) as a correspondence address.  In those circumstances,  sending
    the  notice  electronically  to  that  address  will  fall  within  Art
    8ZA(2)(d) as a proper method  of  sending  notice.   Secondly,  in  any
    event, whilst there appears to be  no  obligation  upon  an  individual
    subject to immigration control to notify the Secretary of  State  of  a
    change of postal or, indeed e-mail address as I pointed out in  Mahmood
    at [65]: "nevertheless any sensible individual who wishes to deal  with
    the Home Office bona fide would inform the Home Office of any  change."
    The fact that the notice would have to be directed to an apparently out
    of date address is a direct function of the applicant's failure to keep
    up-to-date, albeit voluntarily, his  correspondence  addresses  whether
    postal or electronic.

50. It remains a matter of some surprise to me, as I was  told  in  Mahmood
    (but on which Mrs Gray had no instructions in this case), that there is
    no obligation upon an individual  subject  to  immigration  control  to
    notify the Home Office of  a  change  of  address,  whether  postal  or
    electronic.  Given the very many obligations imposed on  those  subject
    to immigration control and sponsors, this obvious "gap" in  the  system
    could relatively easily be plugged without, it seems to me, imposing an
    unreasonable burden on an individual.  This is  a  matter  which  might
    well benefit from further consideration by the Secretary of State.

This Claim

51. Applying the above analysis to the applicant's circumstances, his claim
    cannot succeed.

52. First, it was not disputed by Mr Syed-Ali that the respondent  sent  by
    recorded delivery the curtailment notice to the address provided by the
    sponsor on 18 November 2013.  Secondly, whilst that was not  a  "postal
    address provided for correspondence" by the applicant (Art  8ZA(2)(c)),
    it was properly to be taken as the "last-known or usual place of abode"
    of the applicant (Art 8ZA(3)(a)(i)).  Thirdly, in the  absence  of  the
    applicant  providing  a  postal  or  e-mail  address,  notice  of   the
    curtailment decision was sent in accordance with Art  8ZA(3)(a)(i)  for
    the purposes of s.4(1) of the 1971  Act.  Fourthly  by  virtue  of  Art
    8ZAB(1), as it was sent by recorded delivery, unless  the  contrary  is
    proved, notice is deemed to have been "given" in  the  sense  of  being
    delivered on the second day after it was  sent  (Art  8ZB(1)(a)(i)  and
    Mahmood).

53. As I have said, Mr Syed-Ali did not dispute that the  notice  had  been
    sent by recorded delivery.  Indeed, it is not disputed that the  letter
    was received at the address as it was not returned  to  the  respondent
    undelivered.  In his submissions, Mr  Syed-Ali  informed  me  that  his
    instructions were that the applicant had  prior  to  21  November  2013
    moved from that address and had informed both the Home Office  and  the
    sponsor.  He accepted, however, that there was no evidence before me of
    that.

54. The basis of Mr Syed-Ali's instructions is not consistent with the fact
    that the sponsor retained the applicant's address on its files  as  his
    contact address at the time of its response to the Home  Office  on  18
    November 2013.  There is nothing in the Home Office's documentation  to
    support the Mr Syed-Ali's instructions.  The GCID record sheet (at page
    31 of the bundle) contains no  entry  suggesting  that  the  applicant,
    prior to 21 November 2013, informed the Home Office  of  a  change  of
    address.  Mr Syed-Ali sought to place some weight on the CID record  at
    page 29 which sets  out  a  different  address  for  the  applicant  in
    Buntingford.  However, that is clearly a "snapshot" taken on 13 October
    2015 of the then current details of the applicant.  It casts  no  light
    upon what the record showed in November  2013  and,  as  I  have  said,
    nothing in the  relevant  entries  supports  any  notification  by  the
    applicant of a new  address  prior  to  the  Home  Office  sending  the
    curtailment notice on 21 November 2013.

55. In my judgment, therefore, the Secretary of State has established  that
    the notice was sent through the postal service by recorded delivery  to
    the applicant's last-known or usual place of abode.  The presumption in
    Art 8ZB(1) applies that  it  was  delivered  two  days  later  and  was
    therefore "given" in accordance with  s.4(1)  of  the  1971  Act.   The
    applicant has failed to rebut the presumption that notice was  "given".
    Indeed, Mr Syed-Ali, in his submissions, expressly accepted that if the
    notice had been sent to a proper address under Art 8ZA  then,  applying
    Art 8ZB and its interpretation in Mahmood, it followed that notice  had
    been properly given.

56. Neither party's submissions addressed  at  length  whether  the  proper
    approach in this case was to apply public law principles, in particular
    Wednesbury principles, or to treat the issue of whether notice had been
    "given" as a question of 'precedent fact'.  In her  skeleton  argument,
    Mrs Gray submitted (at para 23)  that  the  issue  did  not  arise  for
    resolution in this case but, if it did,  Wednesbury  principles  should
    apply.   I referred to this issue in Mahmood at [70]-[71]  leaving  the
    point open.  It is not necessary for me to reach  a  decision  in  this
    case.  Whichever approach applies, the applicant  has  failed  to  make
    good his claim that lawful notice was not given of the  curtailment  of
    his leave in  the  letter  of  21  November  2013  to  take  effect  on
    20 January 2014.  That proper notice was "given" is, in  my  judgment,
    established on the evidence.

57. It follows, therefore, that the respondent's  decision  to  refuse  the
    applicant leave to remain on 30 July 2014 was not  a  decision  against
    which the applicant has an in-country right of appeal under  s.82(2)(d)
    of the NIA Act 2002 as he did not make an in-time application on 4 June
    2014.  The claim, therefore, fails.

Decision

58. For these reasons, the claim is dismissed.


                                                                      Signed




                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal


