
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

R (on the application of MG) v First-tier Tribunal (Immigration  and  Asylum
Chamber) ('fresh claim'; para 353: no appeal) IJR [2016] UKUT 00283 (IAC)


             IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

|Cardiff Civil Justice Centre                  |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 13 April 2016                              |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                          THE HON MR JUSTICE BLAKE
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                        R (ON THE APPLICATION OF MG)
                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

            FIRST TIER TRIBUNAL (IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER)
                                                                  Respondent
                                     and

                 THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                               Interested
Party
Representation:

For the Applicant:         Mr A Mackenzie instructed by Duncan Lewis,
Solicitors
For the Interested Party:  Ms Lisa Busch QC and Mr A Byass instructed by
                      Government    Legal Department

1. A decision that further submissions do not  amount  to  a  'fresh  claim'
  under para 353 of the Immigration Rules is not a  decision  to  refuse  a
  protection or human rights claim and so does not give rise to a right  of
  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  under  s.82  of  the  Nationality,
  Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended by s.15  of  the  Immigration
  Act 2014).

2.  Whilst  the  First-tier  Tribunal  must   determine   whether   it   has
  jurisdiction to entertain an appeal, it cannot decide whether a  decision
  that further submissions do not amount to a fresh claim  under  para  353
  was lawful or correct.  Such a decision can only be challenged on  public
  law principles in judicial review proceedings.


                                  JUDGMENT

      1. We make an anonymity order in  this  case  under  rule  14  of  the
         Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008  (SI  2008/2698  as
         amended), given the subject matter. The order requires that (i) any
         report of this decision shall refer to the applicant  by  initials;
         (ii) the parties  to  these  proceedings  shall  not  disclose  the
         applicant's  identity  to   any   person   unconnected   with   the
         proceedings. Any disclosure and breach of this order may amount  to
         a contempt of court.  This  order  shall  remain  in  force  unless
         revoked or varied by a Tribunal or Court.


      2. The applicant is a citizen of Iran.  In June 2012 he made  a  claim
         for  asylum  on  the  basis  of  his  activities  as  a  practising
         Christian. The claim was rejected and an appeal dismissed in August
         2012 on the  basis  that  his  interest  in  Christianity  was  not
         sincere.


      3. On 31 March 2015 his solicitors submitted  further  representations
         indicating that he had now been baptised into the  Christian  faith
         and he should now be granted  asylum.  It  was  contended  that  by
         reason of the fresh information this was a fresh claim  for  asylum
         within the meaning of rule 353 of the Immigration Rules.


      4. Those representations were considered and rejected by the Secretary
         of State on 1 May 2015. It was concluded:


          i. The applicant did not qualify for leave to remain on any basis;
         ii. The previous decision should not be  reversed  and  accordingly
             the applicant did not qualify for asylum;
        iii. There was no well-founded fear of persecution or serious harm;
         iv. The further representations were not  a  fresh  claim  as  they
             would not lead to any different outcome.


      5. The applicant lodged a notice of an appeal with  the  FtT  IAC.  He
         contended that he had made a protection claim that had been refused
         by the Secretary of State and as such he had a right of  appeal  to
         the Tribunal against such a decision by virtue of s.82(1)(a) of the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  as  amended  by  the
         Immigration Act 2014.


      6. The FtT judge considered this contention in  a  preliminary  ruling
         and rejected it because no notice of  an  appealable  decision  had
         been issued. It is common ground before us  that  the  reasons  for
         this decision were insufficient to inquire into whether  there  had
         been an appealable decision made. The interested party nevertheless
         contended that the FtT judge came to the right  conclusion  because
         no appealable decision had been made.


      7. Permission to challenge the decision by way of judicial review  was
         granted by Dove J on 28 January 2016. This is the  hearing  of  the
         substantive application.


      8. Mr  Mackenzie  is  conscious  that  the  same  subject  matter  was
         considered by the Upper Tribunal in the case of R  (Waqar)  v  SSHD
         [2016] UKUT 133 (IAC). In that  case  it  was  contended  that  the
         changes made to s.82 of the 2002 Act meant that there was  a  right
         of  appeal  from  any  refusal  of  a  protection  claim,  and  the
         distinction made in para 353 of the  Immigration  Rules  between  a
         claim and a fresh claim no longer had any effect. The UT  disagreed
         applying the judgment of Lord Neuberger MR in ZA  (Nigeria)  [2011]
         QB 722 notwithstanding the judgment of Lord Hope  in  BA  (Nigeria)
         [2010] 1 AC 444  which on one reading might be said to have decided
         that rule 353 was no longer determinative of  what  amounts  to  an
         asylum or human rights claim in statute.


      9. Permission to appeal the judgment of the  UT  was  refused  by  the
         Court of appeal successively by Underhill LJ (on  the  papers)  and
         Beatson LJ (following an oral hearing). We have had the benefit  of
         the reasons for both decisions. Although refusal of  permission  to
         appeal is not a judicial decision that is binding on  lower  courts
         and tribunals, where it is a reasoned decision after  argument,  we
         are entitled to give it considerable weight.


     10. In fact Mr Mackenzie was at pains to submit that his client took no
         issue with the decision of the UT in Waqar and  therefore  accepted
         that for present purposes s.82(1)(a) of the 2002 should be read  as
         meaning 'a  person  may  appeal  to  the  tribunal  where  (a)  the
         Secretary of State has decided to refuse a protection  claim  (that
         is a fresh claim within the meaning of para 353)  made  by  P'.  He
         submits that the issue in the present application  is  who  decides
         whether the claim is a fresh claim.


     11. Whereas the previous case law is clear that this is a question  for
         the Secretary of State  subject  to  the  supervision  of  judicial
         review (see R v SSHD, ex parte Onibiyo [1996] QB  768;   Cakabay  v
         SSHD (No 2) [1998] Imm AR 623; and ZA Nigeria itself), Mr Mackenzie
         contends that as a result of Parliament's decision to grant a right
         of appeal from a refusal of a protection claim, then the FtT  judge
         has jurisdiction to decide whether there has  been  a  decision  to
         refuse a protection claim.


     12. His argument proceeds as follows:-


          i. If there has been a refusal of a protection claim, there is  an
             appealable decision. If there has  not,  a  preliminary  ruling
             will conclude that there is no such decision and the FtT has no
             jurisdiction.
         ii. As the issue of whether the further representations are a fresh
             claim is an integral part of the  question  whether  there  has
             been a protection claim made and refused, it is  necessary  for
             the FtT judge to reach a view on that issue.
        iii. Whether or not the claim for protection is a fresh claim  is  a
             matter of fact for determination by the FtT judge in  the  same
             way as is a dispute as to whether  a  fee  had  been  paid  and
             accordingly whether a proper application had  been  made  is  a
             matter for the FtT judge to decide: see Basnet [2012] UKUT  113
             (IAC) and R (Khan) v SSHD [2015] UKUT 353 (IAC).


     13. Attractively as Mr Mackenzie has presented his submissions  to  us,
         we are unable to agree with them.


     14. In our view, notwithstanding the significant change in s.82 from  a
         right of appeal against an immigration  decision  on  a  protection
         ground to a right of appeal against a protection  decision  itself,
         Parliament  can  be  presumed  to  have  legislated   against   the
         background of satisfaction with the previous law as declared in  ZA
         Nigeria. There is no indication in the amendments made, that it was
         intended to transfer responsibility for the categorisation decision
         of whether a claim is a fresh claim to the FtT. Indeed the  general
         purpose  of  the  2014  amendments  was  to  reduce  the  appellate
         jurisdiction of the FtT.


     15. Second, we do not agree that an assessment of whether a  protection
         claim is a fresh claim is a question of jurisdictional fact  to  be
         determined by the FtT judge. In our judgment it remains a matter of
         assessment and evaluation by the SSHD  subject  to  supervision  in
         judicial review. Both the  High  Court  and  the  Court  of  Appeal
         decisions in  Cakabay  are  to  this  effect  and  nothing  in  the
         legislative changes suggests that a new approach must now be taken.
         We do not accept that these decisions are explained merely  because
         the  judicial  review  court  does  not  apply  the   approach   of
         jurisdictional fact rather than public law  review  on  rationality
         grounds.


     16. Third, we do not accept that  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  a
         protection claim when  she  rationally  concludes  that  the  claim
         before her is not a fresh claim. Mr  Mackenzie's  reliance  on  the
         decisions  in  Basnet  and  Khan  does  not  avail  him.   The   UT
         subsequently decided in the case of Ved [2014] UKUT 150 (IAC)  that
         a  decision  that  no  valid  application  has  been  made  and  no
         immigration decision is required to respond to it is not itself  an
         appealable decision, and there is no jurisdiction in the FtT  judge
         to examine the facts for himself  and  conclude  that  as  a  valid
         application had in fact been made  there  ought  to  have  been  an
         immigration decision in response to it.


     17. Here, the rationality of the Secretary of State's decision  is  not
         in issue. Mr Mackenzie does not in addition to the challenge to the
         FtT decision contend that the SSHD's  assessment  was  flawed;  the
         application rests on the proposition that a  new  decision  can  be
         made by the FtT judge on this issue. We  consider  that  this  case
         falls on the Ved side as opposed to the Basnet side of the line  as
         regards the limits of the FtT's ability to determine whether it has
         jurisdiction to determine an appeal.  In our view there can  be  no
         decision to refuse a protection claim where the representations are
         not recognised (rationally) to be a protection claim.


     18. For these three reasons we are satisfied that the FtT judge reached
         the right conclusion that there was no right of appeal to the  FtT,
         although for different  reasons  than  he  gave.  Accordingly  this
         application is refused.


                                                        Hon Mr Justice Blake
                                    Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal

