

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Ruhumuliza (Article 1F and "undesirable") [2016] UKUT 00284 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Stoke                                |Promulgated on               |
|28 January 2016                               |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             JONATHAN RUHUMULIZA

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

For the Respondent:    Mr A Pipe, instructed by Rashid & Co Solicitors

The fact that a person is excluded from the Refugee Convention does  not  of
itself mean that his presence in the UK is undesirable  within  the  meaning
of the Immigration Rules.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent to this appeal, whom we shall call "the claimant", is  a
    national of Rwanda.  He is an  Anglican  Bishop.   He  was  Bishop  Co-
    Adjutor in the Kigali Diocese in 1994,  and  subsequently  Diocese  and
    Bishop from 1995 to 1997.  He has also served in the United Kingdom  as
    an assistant Bishop in the Diocese of Worcester.


 2. The claimant came  to  the  United  Kingdom  in  2004.   He  had  entry
    clearance as a student and was granted further leave  to  remain  as  a
    student and subsequently as a Minister of Religion.  That leave expired
    on 30 September 2006.  No application for its renewal was made in time,
    but there was an out-of-time application on 4 October  2006  and  leave
    was granted from 3 November 2006 to 31 January 2007.  Towards  the  end
    of that period of leave he made an application for further  leave,  but
    that prompted an investigation into his history in Rwanda,  and  on  24
    June 2008 the application was refused on the ground that his character,
    conduct or associations made it undesirable for  him  to  have  further
    leave.   He  appealed  against  that  decision  and  the  decision  was
    withdrawn  at  a  case  management  review  hearing.   That  left   his
    application outstanding.  On 5 March 2009 he applied  for  asylum.   He
    was interviewed a number of times and further consideration  was  given
    to his record in Rwanda.  On 10 March 2011 a decision was taken that he
    was not entitled to refugee status, because  he  was  excluded  by  the
    provisions of article 1F(a) of the Refugee Convention.  He was  granted
    six months leave to remain solely on the basis  that,  if  returned  to
    Rwanda, he would not receive a fair trial and that  such  return  would
    accordingly  breach  his  rights  under  article  6  of  the   European
    Convention on Human Rights.

 3. During the course of that leave he  applied  for  further  leave  under
    article 8.  That application was refused on 20 March 2014.  It  is  the
    appeal against that decision  which  is  now  pending  before  us.   17
    January 2014 was the tenth anniversary of the claimant's first  arrival
    in the United Kingdom, and the claimant's response to a  s  120  Notice
    was that he is entitled to leave to remain under paragraph 276B of  the
    Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules, HC 395 (as amended), on  the
    ground of ten years' residence.

 4. Article 1F(a) of the Refugee Convention provides that:

          "The provisions of this convention shall not apply to  any  person
          with respect to whom there are  serious  reasons  for  considering
          that:
              (a) he has committed a crime against peace, a war crime, or a
                 crime against humanity, as  defined  in  the  international
                 instruments drawn up to a  provision  in  respect  of  such
                 crimes; ...".

 5. The decision of 10 March 2011 refusing him asylum was  motivated  by  a
    conclusion that his acts and omissions during the period of the Rwandan
    genocide gave serious reasons for considering that he was guilty of the
    crime of genocide.  The decision refusing him further leave  was  based
    on the same evidence, this time evaluated under paragraph S-LTR.1.6  of
    Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules.  As we have said, by the time  of
    that decision and the appeal against it, he further claimed entitlement
    on the basis of long residence.   It  is  convenient  to  set  out  the
    relevant provisions together:

        "Requirements for indefinite leave to remain on the ground of  long
        residence in the United Kingdom


        276B.  The requirements to be met by an  applicant  for  indefinite
        leave to remain on the ground  of  long  residence  in  the  United
        Kingdom are that:
              (i)  (a) [sic] he has had at least 10 years continuous lawful
              residence in the United Kingdom.
              (ii) having regard  to  the  public  interest  there  are  no
              reasons why it would be  undesirable  for  him  to  be  given
              indefinite leave to remain on the ground of  long  residence,
              taking into account his:
                    (a)     age; and
                 (b)    strength of connections in the United Kingdom; and
                 (c)     personal  history,  including  character,  conduct,
                    associations and   employment record; and
                 (d)  domestic circumstances; and
                 (e)  compassionate circumstances; and
                 (f)   any representations received on the person's  behalf;
                 and
              (iii)  the applicant does not  fall  for  refusal  under  the
              general grounds for refusal.
              (iv) the applicant has demonstrated sufficient  knowledge  of
              the English language and sufficient knowledge about  life  in
              the United Kingdom, in accordance with Appendix KoLL.
              (v) the applicant  must  not  be  in  the  UK  in  breach  of
              immigration laws except that any period of overstaying for  a
              period of 28 days or less will be disregarded,  as  will  any
              period of overstaying between  periods  of  entry  clearance,
              leave to enter or leave to remain of up to 28  days  and  any
              period  of  overstaying  pending  the  determination  of   an
              application made within that 28 day period."

 6. Section S-LTR of Appendix FM reads, so far as relevant, as follows:

        "S-LTR.1.1. The applicant will be refused limited leave  to  remain
        on grounds of suitability if any of paragraphs S-LTR.1.2.  to  1.7.
        apply.
        ...
        S-LTR.1.6. The presence of the applicant in the UK is not conducive
        to the public good because  their  conduct  (including  convictions
        which do not fall within paragraphs S-LTR.1.3. to 1.5.), character,
        associations, or other reasons, make it undesirable to  allow  them
        to remain in the UK."

 7. The claimant does not fall  within  any  of  the  general  grounds  for
    refusal  to  which  reference  is  made  in  paragraph  276B(iii).   In
    considering the claimant's application  under  article  8  outside  the
    rules,  the  Secretary  of  State  expressly  took  into  account   the
    provisions of paragraph S-LTR.1.6; and it appears to us as it  appeared
    to the First-tier Tribunal that those provisions are the same as  those
    which might serve to exclude  the  claimant  from  consideration  under
    paragraph 276B(ii)(c).  By the time the matter came before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, the claimant accepted that he did not qualify for asylum
    or  humanitarian  protection.   That  Tribunal  therefore   immediately
    proceeded to consider whether he  could  satisfy  the  requirements  of
    paragraph  276B(ii)  and   (iii)   and   paragraph   S-LTR.1.6.     Its
    determination is  directed  to  that  issue.   Although  the  principal
    submissions before it were in relation to  the  claimant's  conduct  in
    Rwanda during  and  immediately  after  the  genocide,  the  Tribunal's
    conclusion was that it was content for the purposes of determining  the
    appeal before it to take the respondent's case at its highest, that  is
    to say assuming the allegations  of  the  respondent  to  be  factually
    correct.  That assumption is made at paragraph 5 of its  determination.
    At paragraph 9 the First-tier Tribunal indicates that it  is  therefore
    determining the appeal before it on the basis that article 1F(a) of the
    Refugee Convention applies to the claimant.  The latter  conclusion  is
    of  itself  sufficient  to  exclude  the  claimant  from   asylum   and
    humanitarian protection.  The former conclusion  goes  rather  further,
    because it accepts not  merely  that  there  are  serious  grounds  for
    considering that the claimant to be guilty of  genocide  but  that  the
    assertions made on behalf of the Secretary  of  State,  which  go  well
    beyond what would  be  necessary  to  establish  serious  grounds,  are
    factually accurate.  We shall call this "the starting assumption".

 8. The First-tier Tribunal went on to note that whereas in  terms  of  the
    Refugee Convention article  1F  is  absolute,  the  provisions  in  the
    Immigration Rules require an applicant's history to be considered as  a
    whole:

        "What the appellant has done since 1994  is  relevant  and  carries
        weight.  It is not necessarily the case that somebody involved in a
        crime against humanity in  1994  is  an  undesirable  immigrant  in
        2015".

 9. The Tribunal then proceeded to consider  those  factors  and  concluded
    that:

        "There are no reasons why it would be undesirable for the appellant
        to be given indefinite leave to  remain  on  the  grounds  of  long
        residence",

    and that paragraph S-LTR.1.6 does not apply to him either.

10. Although the First-tier Tribunal did  not  specifically  refer  to  it,
    there is a problem in relation to the claimant's claim to  be  entitled
    to leave to remain under paragraph 276B.   That  problem  is  that,  as
    indicated in the chronology we set out,  he  had  no  leave  to  remain
    between 1 October and 3 November 2006: on the latter date  his  out-of-
    time application of 4 October was granted. That is a period of over  28
    days, which does not fall  for  condonation  under  paragraph  276B(v).
    There is, however, a published policy allowing  short  gaps  in  lawful
    residence "through making previous applications out-of-time by no  more
    than 28 calendar days" to be condoned when a person meets all the other
    requirements for lawful residence.  Despite the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    conclusions on paragraph 276B(ii), therefore, that was  not  sufficient
    to determine the appeal substantively in the  claimant's  favour.   The
    conclusion reached by the Tribunal was that the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision was not in accordance with the law, because  she  should  have
    considered the exercise of her discretion outside of the rules  but  in
    line with paragraph 276B  to  condone  the  short  period  of  presence
    without leave and grant indefinite leave to remain on the  ground  that
    the claimant met all the other requirements of paragraph 276B.

11. Permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Martin  on  the  ground
    that it was arguable that the First-tier Tribunal might have  erred  in
    concluding that the claimant's exclusion from  the  Refugee  Convention
    was not determinative of the issue raised by paragraph 276B(ii) of  the
    Immigration Rules.  That was a  response  to  wide-ranging  grounds  of
    appeal, asserting amongst other things that compliance with  that  sub-
    paragraph was a matter for the discretion of the  Secretary  of  State;
    that the Tribunal had failed to give reasons  for  differing  from  the
    Secretary of State's view that the claimant's presence  in  the  United
    Kingdom was undesirable;  that  the  Tribunal  had  acted  unfairly  in
    considering the issues under paragraph 276B(ii)  and  Appendix  FM  and
    that the Tribunal had failed to appreciate that the Secretary of  State
    had considered the claimant's presence undesirable for  a  considerable
    period of time.  Mr Wilding perhaps alluded to those grounds, on  which
    permission was not specifically granted, in opening his submissions  to
    us by asserting that the First-tier Tribunal "had got it all wrong"  in
    their assessment of the public interest.   We  are,  however,  entirely
    satisfied that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  focus  on  the  correct
    question.  The appeal before the Tribunal was not about the refusal  of
    the refugee status, which was not by then contested.   The  appeal  was
    essentially  about  whether  the  claimant's  character,   conduct   or
    associations rendered him unsuitable or ineligible for  further  leave.
    We agree also that those tests involve a consideration that goes beyond
    looking at the past.  Other provisions of the  immigration  rules  deal
    with the case where a person has been convicted  of  offences,  and  in
    some cases provide that such conviction  is  of  itself  sufficient  to
    require a person's exclusion or prevent his entry.  This,  however,  is
    not a case that falls under one of those provisions.

12. We also reject Mr Wilding's submission that the Tribunal had failed  to
    take into account the Secretary of State's case.  Although the decision
    letter sets out the facts in great detail, it is clear at paragraphs  7
    and 39 to 42 that the decisions in relation to leave are based  on  the
    claimant's exclusion from the Refugee Convention  rather  than  on  any
    additional factors.  At paragraph 7, not surprisingly,  the  claimant's
    exclusion from the Refugee Convention leads to the conclusion  that  he
    is not entitled to status  as  a  refugee.   Paragraphs  39-42  are  as
    follows:

        "39. It is considered that your previous conduct in Rwanda  leading
             to  your  exclusion  from  the  Refugee  Convention  makes   it
             undesirable to allow you to remain in the UK.  Your application
             to be granted limited leave to remain in the UK  on  Article  8
             grounds is refused under paragraph S-LTR.


         40.  I have also considered whether  your  application  raises  or
             contains any exceptional circumstances which,  consistent  with
             the right to respect for family life and private life contained
             in Article 8 of the ECHR, might warrant  consideration  by  the
             Secretary of State of a grant of leave to enter/remain  in  the
             United Kingdom.  Your circumstances have been assessed but  you
             have not  raised  any  factors  that  would  be  considered  as
             exceptional that  warrant  a  grant  of  leave  in  the  United
             Kingdom.


          41. As already indicated above you have  been  excluded  from  the
             protection of the Refugee Convention  under  Article  1Fa.   In
             order to protect the wider public interest, it is vital for the
             UK to  maintain  effective  immigration  control,  more  so  in
             respect of individuals who have committee acts deemed as  being
             undesirable.  In pursuit of that aim and having weighed up your
             interests, it is  believed  that  any  interference  with  your
             family and/or private life would be legitimate,  necessary  and
             proportionate and in accordance with law.  It is  not  accepted
             that Article 8 would be  breached  by  your  removal  from  the
             United Kingdom.


          42. Therefore you do not qualify for Discretionary Leave."

13. Although paragraph 39 refers to "your previous  conduct"  there  is  no
    assessment of it  other  than  its  result  in  terms  of  the  Refugee
    Convention.  Indeed, as both paragraph  41  of  the  letter  and  Judge
    Martin's grant of leave  indicate,  and  as  Mr  Wilding's  submissions
    underlined, the real question is whether it can ever be  right  to  say
    that a person who is excluded from the Refugee  Convention  by  article
    1F(a) can obtain a grant of leave to remain in the United Kingdom.  The
    First-tier Tribunal  tested  the  proposition  to  its  utmost  by  the
    starting assumption that the claimant was not merely properly excluded,
    but had indeed committed the acts alleged.  Against that background  it
    considered his character, conduct and associations as a whole.

14. The Tribunal  noted  that  the  claimant  himself  had,  in  the  years
    immediately following the genocide, returned to Rwanda in order to help
    with reconciliation, had resigned his See in the hope that  that  would
    assist further, had taken part in memorial  events  and  had  issued  a
    statement acknowledging his  failings  and  apologising.   Despite  the
    starting assumption, he had not  at  any  time  been  regarded  by  the
    Rwandan government  as  a  perpetrator  of  genocide,  had  never  been
    indicted, did not appear on any  of  the  lists  of  those  wanted  for
    genocide and was indeed looked upon by the Rwandan government as one of
    its leading expatriate citizens.  He has  had  a  number  of  important
    international posts, and whilst he has been in the United  Kingdom  has
    attended,  by  invitation,  significant  diplomatic  events   including
    official meetings with the president of Rwanda.  All these events  have
    taken place against a background of disclosure of, and  concern  about,
    the claimant's activities during the period  of  genocide.   Given  the
    level at which the claimant's status and position has been  recognised,
    it seems to us that it was amply open to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    conclude as they did that, despite his history, he was at  the  present
    time not a person whose character, conduct  and  associations  make  it
    undesirable to grant him indefinite leave.  That was  a  question  that
    had to be assessed in the light of all the facts and it appears  to  us
    that the First-tier Tribunal did assess it in  the  light  of  all  the
    facts.

15. We reject the submission that the wording of paragraph 276B(ii) imports
    a discretion.  The wording is not that of discretion:  it  is  that  of
    assessment.  The question before the First-tier Tribunal was (or at one
    stage was thought to be) whether the claimant met the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276B.  In order to determine that  question  (which  had  not
    previously been considered by the Secretary of State) the Tribunal  had
    to make its own assessment.  It committed no error of law in doing  so.



16. We appreciate that  the  result  was  not  a  foregone  conclusion.   A
    different Tribunal might have reached a different  result.   We  should
    say in addition that we do not  endorse  the  concept  of  "redemption"
    which the First-tier Tribunal  introduced  into  its  discussion.   Its
    doing so did not, however, import any error: its findings of  fact  and
    assessment in relation to the claimant's history as a whole were  amply
    sufficient to support the conclusion that it reached.  The fact (if  it
    be a fact) that a different Tribunal might  have  reached  a  different
    conclusion is not of itself sufficient to establish error.

17. Our final point is to note that the Tribunal did not allow  the  appeal
    outright: the position is that, following the decision of this Tribunal
    endorsing that of the First-tier  Tribunal  in  relation  to  paragraph
    276B(ii), it is for the Secretary of State to consider whether to apply
    the policy of condoning the short period without  leave  in  2006.   We
    very much doubt whether it would be right to  allow  considerations  of
    conduct to enter into that consideration, because the decision that the
    other requirements  of  paragraph  276B  are  met  has  now  been  made
    judicially.

18. For the foregoing reasons the Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.

















                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL



                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                         Date: 29 March 2016
