

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

         ST (Child asylum seekers) Sri Lanka [2013] UKUT 00292(IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On  30 April 2013                             |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                   THE PRESIDENT, THE HON MR JUSTICE BLAKE
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                          ST (Sri Lanka) (A minor)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Vaughan Counsel instructed by Luqmani Thompson
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


 1. Appeals can be brought under section 83 of the Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 (so called "upgrade" appeals") only on  the  grounds
    that removing the appellant from the United  Kingdom  would  breach  the
    United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention  (see  section
    84(3)) or that the appellant is entitled to humanitarian protection (see
    FA (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2010]  EWCA  Civ
    696).

 2. Such appeals are decided on the basis of a hypothetical  return  at  the
    date of the decision/ hearing.

 3.  The wider range of grounds permissible in appeals under section  82  of
    the Act is not available in section 83 appeals and the Tribunal  has  no
    power to entertain them.

 4. The "best interests of the child" are relevant  in  section  83  appeals
    only to the extent that they illuminate a claim that the appellant is  a
    refugee or entitled to humanitarian protection.

 5. The Tribunal is unlikely to be assisted by hearing  the  evidence  of  a
    child who is 12.  Whenever a judge is considering hearing evidence  from
    a child the issues  should  be  explored  with  the  advocates  and  the
    responsible adult accompanying the child and the guidance in the  Senior
    President's Practice Statement of 30 October 2008  'Circumstances  Under
    Which a Child Vulnerable Adult or Sensitive Witness  May Give  Evidence'
    applied.

 6. A judge should alert  the  advocates  where  minded  to  depart  from  a
    favourable assessment of credibility made by the UKBA (as noted  by  the
    AIT in WN (Surendran; credibility) DRC [2004] UKIAT 213.)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    We direct that the appellant be identified only by  the  initial  S  in
    connection with these proceedings

Introduction


   1. S is a child who is a national of Sri Lanka of  Tamil  ethnicity.  His
      date of birth is September 2001. He is thus aged 11 � at the  date  of
      the hearing before us.


   2. On 29 November 2011 he  claimed  asylum  at  the  Home  Office  having
      entered the UK irregularly.

   3. The core elements of his account  are as follows:-

        a. He came from a village in the north of  Sri  Lanka  that  was  a
           Tamil area where the LTTE had once been active.


        b. He had seen his father in the uniform of the LTTE  that  he  was
           able to describe. He had also been told by his mother  than  his
           father was in the LTTE.

        c. When he was very young the LTTE came to search  for  his  mother
           and she surrendered herself in place of his sister.

        d. Thereafter his care and that of elder sisters was  entrusted  to
           his paternal grandmother although time was spent with his  uncle
           when bombing made the area unsafe.

        e. S moved to the seaside as a result of the fighting  between  the
           LTTE and government forces. When a bomb landed nearby, he became
           separated from his grandmother and sisters. Someone called  Viki
           assumed responsibility for him. He relocated to Sammy Army  Camp
           where he lived for 10  months.  Calculating  backwards,  on  the
           information S provided to the Home Office it would seem that  he
           entered the camp some time around May 2009.

        f. Through a friend of his family, S  was  able  to  speak  to  his
           paternal aunt's husband who is in Switzerland with his family.

        g. He was helped to escape the base by a friend of  his  uncle  and
           then stayed with a Muslim family  in  Colombo  before  going  to
           Malaysia (March 2010) where he remained  for  18  months  before
           travelling through a number of countries to reach  the   UK   by
           coach in November 2011.

   4. Once he became known to the Home Office, he was assigned to  the  care
      of the local authority and started attending primary school within the
      London Borough of Croydon in December 2011. In February  2012  he  was
      allocated to a Tamil foster parent who we will call P.  After  that  a
      maternal aunt living in Liverpool came to light and we understand that
      following the decision below S has moved to live with her.


   5. The history of this claim may be summarised as follows:-

        a. On 12 December  2011  there  was  a  brief  screening  interview
           conducted through an interpreter in Tamil.


        b. On 10  January  S  completed  a  Self-Evaluation  Form  with  an
           accompanying witness statement that set out his experiences  and
           concludes:

             'I am terrified of being returned to Sri Lanka. I am  a  Tamil
             and I am very young and I am not in touch with any  family.  I
             do not think I would be safe.'


           That witness statement was produced with  the  assistance  of  a
           Tamil interpreter.

        c. The claim for asylum was considered and rejected on  20  January
           2012.  His age, identity, family history and essential narrative
           were not disputed but it was not considered that  he  was  at  a
           sufficient risk of harm on  return.  Essentially  two  questions
           were considered:


              i. Paragraphs 29 to 58 of the decision  letter  deal  with  an
                 assessment of risk as a Tamil child  of  parents  connected
                 with the LTTE. It was concluded that in light  of  his  age
                 such factors did not give rise to any well founded fear  of
                 persecution.


             ii. Paragraphs 59 to 66 considered current  conditions  in  Sri
                 Lanka for children without  parental  and/or  family  care.
                 Amongst the background materials referred to was  a  UNICEF
                 report noting that at the end of  2006  there  were  19,000
                 living in institutions in Sri Lanka and this was  the  most
                 common solution for children without  parental  care.   The
                 international community had  expressed  concerns  that  not
                 enough was being done to move away from institutional  care
                 for children. The decision  maker  noted  that  there  were
                 alternatives to institutional care and  particularly  noted
                 the work of organisations such as  SOS Children's  Villages
                 that had started operating in Sri Lanka  in  1980  and  now
                 through various programmes looked after 5,000  children  in
                 Sri Lanka and 78,000 children  world-wide.  The  conclusion
                 was reached that there  were  no  substantial  grounds  for
                 believing that S would be at risk on return to Sri Lanka.

            iii.  Paragraphs  67  to  69   briefly   assessed   humanitarian
                 protection and concluded that  there  were  no  substantial
                 grounds for believing that there is a real risk or  inhuman
                 or degrading treatment or punishment.

        d. On  the  23  January  2012  a  decision  was  made  to  grant  S
           discretionary leave to remain as  an  unaccompanied  child.  The
           duration of such leave was until 18  March  2015,  a  period  of
           three years, at the end of which he would still be only 14.


        e. S appealed against the  refusal  of  asylum  and  there  was  an
           initial hearing before the First-tier Tribunal on 5 March  2012.
           By that time S had produced a  second  witness  statement,  also
           made with the assistance of an interpreter; a witness  statement
           from P, and an expert report from Professor Good.


        f. A fresh refusal letter was issued on 19 March 2012. This revised
           letter primarily focused on the claimed risk as a Tamil child of
           LTTE parents and consideration of care facilities in  Sri  Lanka
           to accommodate unaccompanied children was omitted.

        g. However the letter did address  a  claim  to  be  a  refugee  by
           membership of  a  particular  social  group  and  addressed  the
           decision  of  LQ  (Age:  immutable  characteristic)  Afghanistan
           [2008] UKAIT 0055:

              i. There was no evidence to suggest  JT's  parents  were  both
                 dead
             ii. There were a number of facilities available to trace family
                 members in Sri Lanka, such as the Red Cross and the  family
                 tracing unit in Vavuniya.  UNICEF   also  sustained  family
                 tracing  work   undertaken  by   the   local   government's
                 probation service and in 2011 had  announced  that  it  was
                 expanding its work to the whole of  the north of Sri Lanka.
            iii. It was not accepted that the  claimant  was  an  orphan  or
                 would end up in an orphanage.

        h. On 18 June 2012 this  adjourned  appeal  came  on  before  Judge
           Clayton in the First-tier Tribunal. By that stage the  appellant
           had added the following to the material: a  second  report  from
           Professor Good dated 3 May 2012; a bundle of country information
           focusing on the risk of sexual abuse of children in Sri Lanka; a
           third report from Professor Good dated 14 June 2012; a statement
           from a maternal aunt, SV, who was  resident  in  Liverpool  with
           discretionary leave to remain, and a skeleton  argument  drafted
           by counsel with conduct of the case, Ms R Chapman.

Judge Clayton's decision

   6. Judge Clayton briefly heard from S and P.  Both  gave  their  evidence
      without an interpreter. It seems that S  was  called  at  the  Judge's
      request,  as  we  understand  that  Ms  Chapman  considered  that   as
      credibility was not in issue and S was still only 10 �,  it  was   not
      appropriate to call him to give evidence.

   7. In a decision promulgated a few days later  the  judge  dismissed  the
      appeal. She concluded:-

        a. The appeal was under s. 82(1) of the Nationality Immigration and
           Asylum Act 2002 (NIAA).


        b. Having considered the  evidence  as  a  whole,  the  appellant's
           asylum claim was found not to be credible.

        c. It was implausible that his  family  members  in  Liverpool  and
           Switzerland would have no knowledge of the appellant's  paternal
           grandmother.

        d. Although his claim was argued on the basis that he was a  member
           of a particular social group there was no question of his  being
           required to leave the UK at the present time.

        e. His maternal grandmother's whereabouts in Sri Lanka  were  known
           and although  she  was  68  and  had  high  blood  pressure  and
           associated problems this would not prevent a teenage boy  living
           with her.

        f. Although institutional care facilities in Sri  Lanka  were  poor
           and returning S now to face them would be unreasonable, he would
           not be returning immediately and when he  was  returned  in  the
           future,  he would not  be in  a  different   position  from  any
           other teenage boy in that country.


        g. There was no well-founded fear of persecution for  a  Convention
           reason.

        h. There were no substantial grounds for  believing  that  S  would
           face serious harm if returned to Sri Lanka.

        i.  Any  interference  with  Article  8  ECHR  was  justified   and
           proportionate in the circumstances.

   The appeal to the Upper Tribunal

   8. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  that
      alleged material errors of law in that:-


        a. The fact that the judge refused to permit S and  P  to  use  the
           services of a Tamil interpreter was irrational and flawed.


        b. The judge was wrong to reject the credibility  of  S's  evidence
           when this had not been put in issue by the Home  Office  and  no
           intimation had been given that such a course might be taken.


        c. The judge applied the wrong test in not  evaluating  the  asylum
           claim at the date of the hearing before her on the  basis  of  a
           hypothetical return of S to Sri Lanka.

        d. The judge was wrong to fail to consider the best interests of  S
           in her decision making.

   9. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  was  granted  on  20  July
      2012, when Judge Brunnen pointed  out  that  contrary  to  what  Judge
      Clayton had determined, this was in fact an  appeal  under  s.83  NIAA
      2002 and the issues for determination were, therefore, confined to the
      question of asylum only.


  10.  In due course, we had the benefit of a typed version of  the  Judge's
      notes and a short note summarising events at the hearing from her  and
      we also had a witness statement from Ms  Chapman  who  stood  down  as
      advocate in the appeal before us.

Error of Law

  11. It is clear to us and acknowledged by Mr.  Bramble  that  the  judge's
      decision reveals a number of legal  errors.  We  did  not  trouble  Mr
      Vaughan on this issue. We have had sight of his skeleton argument  and
      an earlier one by Ms Chapman but we conclude that the  judge's  errors
      were in some respects even more  fundamental  than  these  submissions
      indicate.

1. Scope of the Appeal

  12.  In our judgement, the first error was that noted  by  Judge  Brunnen.
      The judge was concerned and only concerned with an appeal  under  s.83
      NIAA, that is to say with an 'appeal  against  the  rejection  of  his
      asylum claim'. As a result of the decision of  the  CA  in  FA  (Iraq)
      [2010] EWCA Civ 696, [2010] 1 WLR 2545 the meaning of the word  asylum
      is to be taken to include subsidiary protection status  under  The  EU
      Qualification Directive 2004/83.


  13. However, the appeal is not otherwise against an  immigration  decision
      set out in s.82 (1) of NIAA. The present right of appeal was  confined
      to whether the appellant was entitled to asylum or humanitarian status
      or not.  The judge was not concerned with  independent  legal  issues,
      including whether any hypothetical removal would be would be  contrary
      to Article 8 ECHR or the discharge of the statutory duty under s.55 of
      the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.

  14. The point is emphasised by regard to s.84 of NIAA.  It provides that:


         'An appeal under section 82(1) against an immigration decision must
         be brought on one or more of the following grounds-
                    a) that the decision is not in accordance with the rules
              ....
     (c) that the decision is unlawful under section 6 of the  Human  rights
             act  1998  .....as  being  incompatible  with  the  appellant's
             Convention rights;
              .......
             (e) that the decision is otherwise not in accordance  with  the
                    law;
             (f) that the person taking the decision should  have  exercised
             differently a discretion conferred by immigration rules.'


      The point to note here is that none of these grounds of  challenge  is
      available in an appeal under s.83, which is solely concerned with  the
      status of someone who has already been granted leave to remain here.


  15. The point was accurately made by the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal
      in the case of LQ (Age: immutable characteristic) Afghanistan (above).
      The Tribunal noted at [2]:


         'The Immigration Judge took the view that "the 1951  Convention  is
         not engaged", because the appellant is adequately protected by  his
         leave to remain in the United Kingdom. It  was,  we  think,  common
         ground before us, and it is certainly the case, that  that  was  an
         error in law. The 1951 Convention goes to status. Section 83 of the
         2002 Act entitles an appellant to assert his status  as  a  refugee
         independently of any  risk  of  removal.  It  was  the  Immigration
         Judge's task to assess whether, at the date of the  hearing  before
         him, the appellant had the status of a refugee. His failure  to  do
         so amounts to a material error of law.'

  16.  As the appellant's skeleton argument points out, there is  some  link
      between consideration of whether a claimant is entitled to asylum  and
      the duties owed to him as a child. In our judgement, the impact  of  a
      child's best interests in a s.83 appeal is  limited  to  the  question
      whether a child is entitled to asylum or subsidiary protection status.
       This includes the issue of how the claim should  be  assessed  having
      regard to the fact that it is made by a child, and whether steps  have
      been taken to trace the child's parents pursuant to the  duty  on  the
      state under Article 19 (3) of the EU  Reception  Directive  (Directive
      2003/9/EC) to 'endeavour to trace the members of his or her family  as
      soon as possible': see AA (unattended children) Afghanistan CG  [2012]
      UKUT 16 (IAC) (01 February 2012) at paragraphs 23-25, 30-34.


  17. There is a need to treat with some caution what the Tribunal  in  that
      case said at paragraphs 26-29 of its decision about the application of
      ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4 to asylum adjudication as ZH  was  not  an
      asylum case.  Lady Hale, with whom the other members  of  the  Supreme
      Court agreed, asked "in what circumstances is it permissible to remove
      or deport a non-citizen parent where the effect will be that  a  child
      who is a citizen of the United Kingdom will also have to leave?"

  18. Neither this appellant nor his carers  were  being  refused  leave  to
      enter or remain or being removed. We recognise the Tribunal based this
      part of its reasoning on some of the  observations  of  the  Court  of
      Appeal in DS (Afghanistan) [2011] EWCA Civ 211.

  19.  The narrow focus of the Tribunal's jurisdiction under s. 83 does  not
      appear to have been discussed in either AA  (Unattended  children)  or
      indeed in the decision of the Court of Appeal in DS (Afghanistan). The
      subsequent decision of the Court of Appeal in HK (Afghanistan)  [2012]
      EWCA Civ 315 indicates that what was being  considered  is  the  nexus
      between the tracing duty and the claim  to  asylum.  The  government's
      contentions that there was no such link were rejected at [39] to  [40]
      per Elias LJ.

  20.  We accept that a failure to take reasonable  steps  to  endeavour  to
      trace a child's parents or carers could have an adverse impact on  the
      issue whether the child was at risk of harm in the country  of  origin
      as an unaccompanied child.  However, where this arises as an issue  it
      would be helpful for the claimant  and  his  legal  team  to  identify
      precisely what it is that is said should have been done. We observe:-

        a. The endeavour to trace depends on the  information  provided  by
           the claimant and co-operation between claimant and respondent.


        b.  International   organisations   like   the   Red   Cross,   the
           International Organisation for Migration (IOM),  and  UNICEF  do
           not act at the instigation of governments but at the request  of
           individuals. If a claimant wants the Home Office to approach  an
           international body for assistance, s/he will  probably  need  to
           sign a letter of authority to ask them to do so.

        c. Diplomats may be unable to enter a war zone and would need to be
           cautious about  contacting  the  authorities  of  the  state  in
           question where there is a risk to the life of the child  or  the
           relatives if such inquiries are made (as  Article  19(3)  itself
           makes clear).

        d. The Court of Appeal in  EU  (Afghanistan)  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  32
           observed at [10]  that  a  perception  of  self  interest  might
           provide a claimant with an incentive not to cooperate  with  the
           authorities or provide accurate information.

  21.  For completeness we indicate that we accept that the UN Convention on
      the Rights of  the  Child  and  other  child-based  instruments,  have
      relevance for the assessment of whether the harm that  a  child  might
      face  in  the  country  of  origin  is  serious   enough   to   engage
      international  protection  or  whether  any  well  founded   fear   of
      persecution is for a Refugee Convention reason.

  22.  We have no doubt that if a real risk of harm to S on return  is  made
      out in this case, either because of risk arising from the  conduct  of
      his parents or because S, or any child without family  or  friends  to
      turn to, was highly vulnerable to sexual abuse in one form or another,
      an asylum claim or a claim to humanitarian protection  could  be  made
      out. We accept that children can be a social group  and  face  a  real
      risk of persecution as such:  children under  one  year  old  in  King
      Herod's Bethlehem being an obvious case in point. That does  not  mean
      that any risk of serious harm that might happen to a child in  his  or
      her country of origin necessarily makes that child a refugee.

  23. Further, we recognise that the welfare of the child  is  an  important
      issue for the Secretary of State in  a  s.82  (1)  appeal  against  an
      immigration decision, particularly if the decision in question  is  to
      remove a child out of the jurisdiction. In this  case,  if  the  judge
      had indeed been properly considering that question, her decision would
      have been flawed for the reasons  given  in  the  grounds  of  appeal,
      namely that she has completely failed  to consider S's best  interests
      and welfare.

  24.  In a s.82 appeal, these factors would  be  weighty  ones  in  a  case
      concerning a 10 year old child.  The  duty  to  consider  them  arises
      directly under s.55 of the Borders, Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act
      2009 and indirectly under Article 8 in considering  the  justification
      for interference with  the  private  life  of  S.  The  law  has  been
      clarified at the highest  level  in  the  UK  (notably  ZH  (Tanzania)
      itself) and at Strasbourg (Maslov v Austria 2008 ECHR 1638/03) and  it
      is plain that an interference would not be justified if  the  criteria
      identified in other instruments of international law, notably  Article
      3 UN Convention on the Rights of the Child, are not  met.  We  do  not
      know what future decision will be taken in the case  of  S  if  it  is
      concluded that he is not entitled to asylum,  but  we  would  be  very
      surprised on the present  information,  if  in  2015  it  were  to  be
      concluded that removal to Sri Lanka was compatible with Article 8  and
      his best interests.

  25.   However  we  cannot  consider  a  contention  that  in  addition  to
      considering whether the appellant is entitled to the status of refugee
      or humanitarian protection, there is an independent duty  to  consider
      whether the reception arrangements on  return  are  sufficiently  well
      established to be in accordance with the  child's  best  interests  is
      compatible with the statutory regime applicable in a s.83 appeal. This
      is because there has been no decision to remove and no appeal  against
      such a decision. The grounds of appeal in  a  section  83  appeal  are
      limited to refugee or equivalent  status  and  do  not  encompass  the
      failure to comply with other duties including whether the decision  is
      in accordance with human rights reasoning or otherwise  in  accordance
      with the law.

  26. Although we understand, in the light of the  difficult  previous  case
      law why the judge  embarked  on  the  Article  8  assessment,  on  our
      analysis she was not entitled to do so in this class  of  appeal.  We,
      therefore, set aside her decision in this respect.

2. Material date


  27.  The judge's second error was in  respect  of  the  material  date  to
      assess risk on return. It is clear that the grant  of  the  status  of
      refugee cannot be evaded by  the  respondent  in  effect  saying  that
      although there is a risk of  ill-treatment  today,  the  Secretary  of
      State proposes to grant discretionary leave to remain until  the  risk
      has diminished. Where an asylum claim is  determined  substantive  and
      the criteria for the status are met, there is a right to  the  status,
      albeit one that can be made subject to the cessation clauses:  see  LQ
      (above).


  28. The Court of Appeal in Saad, Diriye and Osorio [2001]  EWCA  Civ  2008
      [2002] Imm AR 471 said very much the same thing at [65]. Further  that
      decision dealt in detail with the relevant date  for  fact-finding  in
      asylum cases. Although it was concerned  with  the  provisions  of  an
      earlier  statute,  its  conclusions  still  hold  good.  Following   a
      discussion we reproduce in Annex A to this determination it concluded:
        1. What emerges from this analysis is  that,  where  an  appeal  is
           brought under section 8(1), the appeal tribunal will necessarily
           have to determine the refugee status  as  at  the  date  of  the
           hearing of the appeal. It follows that such an appeal provides a
           satisfactory vehicle for mounting a challenge to  the  Secretary
           of State's rejection of an asylum claim.
        1. The same is true of an appeal under sub sections 8(3) and  8(4).
           In  each  case  the  decision  facing  the   tribunal   is   the
           hypothetical one of whether removal would  be  contrary  to  the
           Convention at the time of the hearing - i.e. on the basis of the
           refugee status of the appellant at that time.'
  29. The judge was therefore wrong to respond to the  submission  that  the
      appellant was entitled to refugee status because of  present  risk  by
      concluding that any risk of harm to the child would be  diminished  at
      the unspecified time in the future when the child  (or  former  child)
      might actually return. What is required is an assessment  of  risk  on
      the hypothesis that the child is being returned at  the  time  of  the
      decision on appeal.  Her decision on the substantive asylum  claim  is
      therefore flawed and must be set aside.




3. Credibility

  30. The third error made by the judge was to revisit  the  credibility  of
      the account of the appellant when that had not been raised by the Home
      Office in the  decision  letter.  We  accept  that  if  there  was  an
      evidential basis to do so,  the  judge  would  not  be  bound  by  the
      approach of the decision maker. However, a  long-established  body  of
      Tribunal case law has made clear that before a  positive  Home  Office
      assessment of  credibility  is  departed  from   by  the  judge,   the
      claimant  or  his/her  legal  team  must  be  alerted  and  given  the
      appropriate opportunity to address any concerns  that  the  judge  may
      have had.  Guidelines were first given by Mr Justice  Collins  in  the
      case of Surendran in 2000 annexed to the decision in MNM v SSHD [2000]
      INLR 576. In the case of WN (Surendran; credibility) DRC [2004]  UKIAT
      213 the Tribunal reaffirmed these guidelines with  some  modifications
      to enable immigration judges to avoid the opposite error of being  too
      intrusive in the primary investigation  of  the  facts  of  the  case.
      Ouseley J President said:

        33. Where guideline five applies because no matters of  credibility
        have been raised in  the  refusal  letter,  and  there  is  no  new
        material before the Adjudicator, the Adjudicator should  raise  any
        issues which concern him, as guideline  five  says.   But  as  with
        guideline four, it is proper for the issue  to  be  raised  by  the
        Adjudicator himself directly in questions of a witness, subject  to
        the same caveats as to timing, content,  manner  and  length.   The
        Adjudicator must here be especially careful not to invent  his  own
        theory of  the  case  and  must  deal  with  what  are  significant
        problems, not minor points of detail.  In  this  situation,  it  is
        much less  likely  that  an  Appellant  would  be  aware  that  his
        credibility was under consideration if it were not raised with him,
        and it is unlikely to be fair for the issue to  be  raised  in  the
        determination for the first time.


  31. It is plain from the record of proceedings that this was not done.  We
      recognise that in the case of a child of this age, any concerns  would
      have to be expressed to the advocate and we consider below whether the
      child should have been called as a witness at all. Nor can we see  any
      rational basis of concern arising from the evidence submitted  by  the
      appellant since the Home Office decision.  If  the  Judge  would  have
      welcomed the chance to hear the paternal aunt in Liverpool  in  person
      she could have said so, but nothing said or  done  by  this  appellant
      could support a  conclusion  that  his  account  fundamentally  lacked
      credibility, that is to say was incapable  of  belief.  Again  we  set
      aside the finding of the judge as to credibility.

4. Lack of interpreter


  32. The fourth error made by  the  judge  was  the  manner  in  which  the
      appellant came to give evidence. From the materials before us it seems
      that the decision was taken to dispense with  the  interpreter  before
      the appellant was asked to give evidence. If so, we find  this  to  be
      very surprising decision.


  33. There were four documents indicating  that  the  appellant  wished  to
      speak through an interpreter: his SEF form where he said he only spoke
      Tamil, his two witness statements, and the response to directions.  It
      was particularly important for care to be exercised as to  the  manner
      in which a child gives evidence. It was  not  open  to  the  judge  to
      ignore this material at  the  outset.  If  in  the  course  of  giving
      evidence it  was  apparent  that  a  witness's  English  was  so  well
      developed that an interpreter was unnecessary the  position  might  be
      different, but as we understand Ms Chapman's evidence the  interpreter
      had been dispensed with before the case was assessed.

  34. We find no such error in the judge's approach to P's evidence. He  was
      settled in this country, worked in a garage here and was an accredited
      foster carer. His witness statement was made without any reference  to
      translation or interpretation and there  was  no  suggestion  that  he
      required an interpreter before the hearing on 18  June.  He  told  the
      judge he was nervous  but  that  did  not  mean  he  had  insufficient
      understanding of English to speak in the  language  of  his  place  of
      residence and nationality. On investigation the  judge  was  satisfied
      that his comprehension was perfectly good and nothing has been  placed
      before us to doubt that conclusion.

5. Evidence of a child

  35. For completeness we indicate that there was a further error of law  in
      the judge's decision-making. We cannot understand  how  the  appellant
      came to be in the witness box at all.  He was 10 �. He  had  not  been
      interviewed on his claim by the Home  Office.  His  experienced  legal
      team were not proposing to tender him.  There was no ambiguity in  his
      evidence that required clarification or amendment.  The judge did  not
      explain that despite the approach of the Home Office she  proposed  to
      doubt the claimant's credibility.

  36. Although there can be  no  hard  and  fast  rule,  we  would  be  very
      concerned if children below the  age  of  12  were  expected  to  give
      contentious  evidence  in  an  asylum  or  other  immigration  appeal,
      without the express consent and support of their parent or guardian or
      appropriate adult. We acknowledge the fact that children younger  that
      this age have given evidence before the criminal courts, but in  these
      cases there have been extensive  arrangements  to  support  the  child
      before, during and after the testimony in question. Such  arrangements
      are outside the resources and the procedures adopted by the First-tier
      or Upper Tribunal and very careful  consideration  would  need  to  be
      given to the child's best interests  and  welfare  before  a  Tribunal
      judge of his or her own motion asked such for an appellant to go  into
      the witness box.


  37. The criteria are in fact set out in the  Senior  President's  Practice
      Statement of 30  October  2008  'Circumstances  Under  Which  a  Child
      Vulnerable Adult or Sensitive Witness May Give Evidence'. The Practice
      Statement                 is                 found                  at
      http://www.justice.gov.uk/tribunals/practice/practice-directions   and
      is also annexed to Presidential Guidance Note No  2  of  2010  on  the
      issue as Annex B.



  38.  Paragraph 2  of the Senior President's Practice  Statement  puts  the
      matter succinctly:

        'A child... will only be required to attend as a witness  and  give
        evidence at a  hearing  where  the  tribunal  determines  that  the
        evidence is necessary to enable the fair hearing of  the  case  and
        their welfare would not be prejudiced by doing so.'


  39.  Paragraphs 3 and 4 of the Direction state that  a  judge  considering
      such a course must  consider  representations  from  the  parties  and
      interested persons. The record suggests that the judge did not  raise,
      either with Ms Chapman as advocate or P as responsible adult,  whether
      it was necessary for S to give evidence at all.  Nor  did  she  invite
      representations on the welfare arrangements to enable her  to  do  so.
      The questions asked of S were negligible and overall  we  can  see  no
      reason why it was necessary for him to give evidence.


  40. This does not mean that whenever a  child  of  tender  years  makes  a
      witness statement, the Home  Office  or  the  judge  must  accept  its
      accuracy. However careful thought needs to be given  to  the  question
      why a child of such age  should  be  called.  If  it  was  because  of
      concerns about credibility that had not been  taken  in  the  decision
      letter, this should prompt the judge to ask whether it was appropriate
      to ventilate those concerns at all, and whether if so there were other
      means of doing so.

  41. For all these reasons we find each of the errors of law, set aside the
      decision in its totality and start again.

Re-making the decision

  42. When we indicated that the judge's factual findings  were  to  be  set
      aside, Mr Vaughan submitted that we should remit  the  case  to  start
      again before the First-tier Tribunal. He pointed out the terms of  the
      Senior President's Practice Statement of 25 September 2012  broadening
      the class of case where the Tribunal might remit an appeal for a fresh
      hearing.


  43. It states:

       '7.1 Where under section 12(1)  of  the  2007  Act  (proceedings  on
       appeal to the Upper Tribunal) the  Upper  Tribunal  finds  that  the
       making of the decision concerned involved the making of an error  on
       a point of law, the Upper Tribunal may set aside the  decision  and,
       if it does so, must either remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal
       under section 12(2)(b)(i) or proceed (in  accordance  with  relevant
       Practice  Directions)  to  re-make  the   decision   under   section
       12(2)(b)(ii).

       7.2 The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to proceed to
       re-make the decision, instead of remitting the case  to  the  First-
       tier Tribunal, unless the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

         (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
         First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that
         party's case to be put to and considered by the First-tier
         Tribunal; or

         (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is
         necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is
         such that, having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it
         is appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

       7.3 Re-making rather than remitting will nevertheless constitute the
       normal approach to determining appeals where  an  error  of  law  is
       found, even if some further fact finding is necessary.'


  44.  We have that statement well in mind, but do  not  consider  that  the
      present case should be remitted to the First-tier.   We  consider  the
      overriding objective in  rule  2  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
      Tribunal) Rules 2008  and  reach  our  conclusion  for  the  following
      reasons:-

        a. We propose to adopt the same  course  as  the  Home  Office  and
           presume that the appellant's statements are or may be  true.  We
           do not intend  to  invite  S  to  give  evidence  or  doubt  his
           credibility.  There  is  no  need  for  a   fresh   fact-finding
           assessment on that issue, by contrast with the normal  class  of
           case mentioned in the SPT's Practice Statement.


        b. The real issues in the case are an evaluation of the documentary
           evidence  placed  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  as  to  the
           prospects of risk to the appellant on  the  hypothesis  that  he
           were to be returned to Sri Lanka  at the time of the hearing.

        c. There are some challenging legal questions arising  out  of  the
           way the appellant has put his case, in  the  witness  statements
           and  skeleton  arguments.   It  is  appropriate  for  the  Upper
           Tribunal to deal with these matters.

        d. We consider that expedition in decision-making  is  particularly
           important where the future of a young child  is  concerned.  Ten
           months have passed since the decision was taken  in  the  First-
           tier and an authoritative decision is needed to be reached.

        e. Remitting the matter to the First-tier with the risk that it may
           return to the Upper Tribunal in the future is neither  necessary
           nor proportionate and would  contribute  to  delay  rather  than
           avoiding it.


  45.  We therefore will re-make the decision for ourselves.










   Adjournment for further evidence


  46. Mr Vaughan then submitted that having decided that there was an  error
      of law we should adjourn the case for further evidence to be  adduced.
      In opening his appeal and in a response  to  a  request  from  us,  he
      identified four heads of further evidence:


        a. Evidence about fresh information received from  the  appellant's
           relatives that his parents had been located alive  and  well  in
           India.


        b. Further information that may be available from his paternal aunt
           in Liverpool as to the state of health of his maternal  aunt  in
           Sri Lanka.

        c. A  report  from  an  expert  in  child  trafficking  as  to  the
           mechanisms by which children without adequate social  protection
           can fall into the clutches of  traffickers or other  abusers  of
           children.

        d. A fourth report from Professor Good dealing with any  change  of
           circumstances that may have taken place in Sri Lanka.


  47. By the end of the hearing, having taken us with care through  all  the
      documentary material relied on in support of the  appeal,  and  having
      taken instructions  from his very experienced  solicitor  he  did  not
      pursue the first  three  applications,  but  limited  himself  to  the
      fourth.


  48. He reminded us of the Ravichandran principle  (see  Annex  A  Saad  at
      [50]) that the appellate authority acts on the up to date  information
      about country conditions pertaining at the  time  of  the  appeal.  We
      accept that, but nobody has suggested that there has been any material
      change in circumstances as to the risks faced by young children in Sri
      Lanka between June 2012 and today.

  49. Mr Vaughan did not suggest there had been any such change  but  wanted
      to instruct an expert to  make  sure  whether  there  had  been.  Thus
      additional cost and delay would result but on the speculative basis of
      a possibility.  Although Mr Bramble did not oppose the application  we
      do not consider that such a course was necessary or in  the  interests
      of justice.

  50. We noted that the directions for  hearing  this  appeal  included  the
      standard directions that any evidence that was intended to be  adduced
      in the event of re-making should be produced in advance of the appeal.
       Mr Vaughan submitted that the Legal Aid authority does not  authorise
      further expenditure on experts' reports  until  it  is  known  that  a
      decision is to be remade.  We cannot comment on the funding  practices
      of the present authority, but consider it would be unfortunate if they
      were to frustrate the way in which the Tribunal  delivers  justice  in
      accordance with the overriding objective once permission to appeal has
      been granted.  There is  a  risk  that  if  cases  cannot  be  re-made
      summarily by adding to the data already available they will result  in
      greater costs and delay in the form of  fresh  claims  and  subsequent
      litigation.  We  doubt  that  production  of  an  expert's  report  is
      necessary to discover whether there  is  a  reasonable  likelihood  of
      changed circumstances.

  51.  The real issue in the case was identified  and  explored  at  hearing
      before us. In our judgment this was not whether sufficiently  suitable
      child care arrangements had been identified by the Secretary of  State
      on the hypothetical basis that the appellant was to be returned at the
      date of the hearing, but whether the appellant was  at  real  risk  of
      serious harm if (hypothetically) he were to be returned at the date of
      the hearing because he  was  an  unaccompanied  child.  Much  of  what
      Professor Good had previously reported on seemed to be directed to the
      former rather than the latter issue.

  52. We also explored at the hearing the proposition that the appellant was
      at risk because he was a Tamil child of parents  who  had  joined  the
      LTTE, but it was apparent that this had understandably not formed  the
      main part of the appellant's case below.  There  was  no  evidence  to
      suggest that he had been ill-treated in Sri Lanka for this reason even
      though he had spent 10  months  in  a  military  camp  for  protection
      reasons at the height of the final battle. He was not of an  age  when
      anybody could reasonably suspect he had been recruited by the LTTE  as
      a child soldier. There was no evidence that children as young as  this
      appellant is had been ill-treated inside or on return to Sri Lanka for
      this reason.  No further evidence or argument was  needed  to  address
      that contention.

  53.  We, therefore, did not consider that  further  factual  material  was
      necessary to  properly  determine  this  appeal.   It  had  been  very
      thoroughly and professionally prepared for the previous hearing before
      the First-tier. There was no reason  to  believe  that  the  risks  to
      unaccompanied young children had  increased  or  the  assistance  that
      could be offered by the state  agencies  or  others  to  assist  young
      children had changed.

  54.  In announcing our decision on this question, we did indicate that the
      re-made decision would not be promulgated for 21  days  following  the
      hearing and if any written information were supplied on behalf of  the
      appellant that might change the picture as presented to  us  we  would
      consider it before reaching our decision.

  55.  On 17 May we received by fax a fourth report from Professor Good  and
      a short skeleton argument expanding the  appellant's  submissions.  We
      comment on these below.

   Re-making the appeal

   Ill treatment as a Tamil


  56. For the reasons set out at [52] above we consider  that  there  is  no
      reasonable degree of likelihood that the appellant would be at risk of
      harm because of his Tamil ethnicity and the actions  of  his  parents.
      The Home Office decision carefully examined the risk factors addressed
      in previous  Country  Guidance  decisions  and  we  agree  with  those
      assessments. Professor Good's point was that no regard had been had to
      the fact that young children do not have identification  documentation
      issued to them. We are satisfied this is not a  source  of  risk.  The
      decision maker indicates that were the appellant to be  returned  some
      form of documentation would be  obtained  to  satisfy  the  Sri  Lanka
      authorities. In any event, if, in Sri Lanka, no child of 10  years  of
      age is eligible for a national identification card, its absence cannot
      be the basis of suspicion or ill treatment.


   Ill treatment as an unaccompanied child


  57.  The appellant's core claim was his vulnerability to sexual  abuse  if
      he were hypothetically returned to Sri Lanka at  present.  Mr  Vaughan
      submitted first:-


        a. He has lost touch with his parents, siblings  and  the  paternal
           aunt who looked after him when his mother handed herself  in  to
           the LTTE.


        b. There is a maternal grandmother who lives in the  north  of  the
           island but the information from SV is that she  is  elderly,  in
           poor health and not fit enough to care for S. This  is  not  the
           grandmother who looked after S before he went in to the military
           camp. Her village was  devastated  during  the  war  and  living
           conditions are harsh there.

        c. It would not be practicable or reasonable to expect the aunt  to
           make a journey to Colombo to collect S.

  58. Mr Vaughan then referred us to the documentary information  showing  a
      serious problem of the sexual abuse of children in  Sri  Lanka.  Young
      boys it seems have been the targets  of  the  unwelcome  attention  of
      foreign paedophiles and/or trafficking gangs.  Unaccompanied  children
      who are street children and live off their own resources are likely to
      be the victims of such predators whether unwittingly or not.


  59.  Although there were state orphanages and institutional care  for  Sri
      Lankan orphans and children who had become lost  or  abandoned  during
      the conflict, Mr  Vaughan  submitted  that  the  documentary  evidence
      demonstrated that the international community  and  others  considered
      these homes were unsuitable. There was some evidence that young  girls
      had been sexually abused whilst resident in them.

  60.  Mr Vaughan drew attention to Professor Good's  critical  comments  on
      SOS Children's Villages and the fact that the villages  already  built
      were in the Sinhalese rather than Tamil areas and to assign  S  to  an
      institution in the wrong linguistic condition would deprive him of his
      rights  to  cultural  heritage.  Professor  Good   quoted   from   the
      organisation's web site to note that it  had  run  an  emergency  care
      centre in the north of Sri Lanka and had moved  children  into  rented
      houses in Jaffna pending completion of a new village there.

  61.  We acknowledge the references in  the  documentary  material  to  the
      risks of sexual abuse faced by young  boys  in  Sri  Lanka.   A  press
      report in the  'Peace and Conflict Monitor'  dated  20  February  2012
      gives a general flavour of this material (Bundle B1):

         "According to UNICEF's estimate, over half of the 30,000 child  sex
         workers in Sri Lanka are boys. Hope for the Nations, a  non  profit
         organisation working in Asia, goes further to say that as  many  as
         30,000 boys are involved in Sri Lanka's sex trade. Many  are  known
         as 'beach boys' because they are often forced to work by those  who
         own property along the coastline. Child sex tourism  in  Sri  Lanka
         involves young boys who are offered to European, American and Asian
         tourists, sometimes as part  of  vacation  packages.  It  has  been
         reported that the number of child abuse cases has  increased  every
         year over the past decade. Children's rights activists are quick to
         warn that thousands of  cases  go  unreported.  With  approximately
         40,000 child prostitutes - more than half of them boys - Sri  Lanka
         has been described as 'a  paedophile's  pleasure  centre'.  Extreme
         poverty and years of civil war have left many children homeless and
         easy prey for sexual predators and traffickers. Sometimes boys  and
         girls as young as three years old are captured. Others are sold  to
         pimps for a few dollars by  their  desperately  poor  guardians  or
         family members".

  62.  We also note the view of the National Child Protection Agency  (NCPA)
      recorded in a BBC report of 9 September 2011 (Bundle  B  6)  that  all
      children's homes should be shut down. There are 20,000 children in 470
      institutions throughout the country, most of which are  privately  run
      and 22 are government run.  The  commentator  noted  a  case  where  a
      guardian of a care home was charged with sexual  abuse  of  under  age
      girls in his care. The NCPA had raided a number  of  children's  homes
      suspected of child abuse.  It wanted  to  move  towards  a  system  of
      foster care and it  is  reported  that  130  children  in  Mannar  and
      Killinochi who had been placed in homes had been moved to foster care.


  63. We note without repetition or further description the  other  passages
      to which Mr Vaughan took us in the bundle,  in  particular  paragraphs
      21.01 to 22.05 of the UK Country of Origin Report of March 2012 on Sri
      Lanka, concerned with children and trafficking.

  64. We have had regard to the 4th Report of Professor  Good  dated  9  May
      2013. Despite its 85 paragraphs and the addition of further pieces  of
      information   we  do  not  consider  it  substantially   changes   the
      evidential picture before us at the time of the  hearing:-

        a. Paragraphs 7 to 19 deal with the adequacy  of  state  orphanages
           and  give  some  examples  of  children  who  were  engaged   in
           prostitution and placed on remand or in  certified  schools  for
           rehabilitation running away.


        b. Some mutual hostility between the NCPA and the probation service
           was noted.

        c. The author noted that it was difficult to comment on the quality
           of the care offered by NGOs in Sri Lanka.

        d.  Paragraphs  20  to  39  deal  with  the  general  situation  in
           Killinochi and the surrounding area.

        e. Whilst there were improvements to restoration of infrastructure,
           there was a significant military presence and some  evidence  of
           commercial activities to the  detriment  of  Tamil  farmers  and
           traders.

        f. Paragraphs 40 to 63 deal with the position of  single  women  in
           the north and the risk of sexual violence to women and children.

        g. Paragraphs 64 to 85 deal with  absence  of  prosecution  against
           child traffickers and sexual exploiters of children.

   Refugee status

  65.  We accept that where a child or young person has a well-founded  fear
      of being trafficked or exposed to sexual abuse,  this  is  a  form  of
      serious harm sufficient to engage international protection and can  be
      evidence of a fear of persecution for  a  Convention  reason:  usually
      membership of a particular social group, vulnerable to  such  form  of
      harm.


  66. In LQ (above) in a brief decision based on the findings of fact of the
      First- tier judge the Tribunal was satisfied that an Afghan orphan who
      was  under 18 but over the age of 12 who had nobody  to  turn  to  for
      protection was at a real risk of sexual abuse in Kabul, and that  risk
      was in respect  of  his  membership  of  a  particular  social  group,
      orphaned children, age at the time of vulnerability to persecution  is
      the kind of distinguishing characteristic that makes  a  social  group
      for the purpose of the Refugee Convention: see Shah and  Islam  [1999]
      UKHL 20; [1999] 2 AC 269  and  K and Fornah [2006] UKHL   46;   [2007]
      AC 412.

  67. However, LQ was not a country guidance case in Kabul stating that  all
      children in Afghanistan are a social group (see  the  observations  of
      the Court of Appeal in HK (Afghanistan) at [8]  to  [9]  and  [36]  to
      [38]). It is even less  permissible  to  move  from  a  finding  in  a
      particular case to a general proposition that any  child  anywhere  in
      the world is a member of a social group and  at  risk  of  child-based
      forms of persecution.

  68.  In assessing social group persecution, we remind ourselves  of   Lord
      Hoffman's observations in Shah and Islam that questions of  particular
      social group and  persecution for  a  convention  reason  need  to  be
      assessed against the particular social context  and  the  question  of
      discriminatory denial of protection:
       'To what social  group,  if  any,  did  the  appellants  belong?  To
       identify a social group, one must  first  identify  the  society  of
       which it forms a part. In this case, the society is plainly that  of
       Pakistan. Within that society, it seems to  me  that  women  form  a
       social  group  of  the  kind   contemplated   by   the   Convention.
       Discrimination against women in matters of fundamental human  rights
       on the ground that they are women is plainly in pari  materiae  with
       discrimination on grounds of race. It offends against  their  rights
       as human beings to equal treatment and respect'
.       and
       'What is the reason for the persecution which the  appellants  fear?
       Here it is important to notice that it is made up of  two  elements.
       First, there is the threat of violence to Mrs Islam by  her  husband
       and his political friends and to Mrs Shah by her husband. This is  a
       personal affair, directed against  them  as  individuals.  Secondly,
       there is the inability or unwillingness of the State to do  anything
       to protect them. There is nothing personal about this. The  evidence
       was that the State would not assist them because they were women. It
       denied them a protection against violence which it would have  given
       to men. These  two  elements  have  to  be  combined  to  constitute
       persecution within the meaning of  the  Convention.  As  the  Gender
       Guidelines  for  the  Determination  of  Asylum  Claims  in  the  UK
       (published  by  the  Refugee  Women's  Legal  Group  in  July  1988)
       succinctly puts it (at p. 5): "Persecution  =  Serious  Harm  +  The
       Failure of State Protection.'
  69. It is also well established that state protection does not have to  be
      so effective as to eliminate the risk of harm on which the  claim  for
      refugee protection is founded: see Horvath [2000] UKHL 37; [2001] 2 AC
       489 per Lord Hope:
       'I consider that the obligation to afford refugee status arises only
       if the person's own state is unable or unwilling to discharge its
       own duty to protect its own nationals. I think that it follows that,
       in order to satisfy the fear test in a non-state agent case, the
       applicant for refugee status must show that the persecution which he
       fears consist of acts of violence or ill-treatment against which the
       state is unable or unwilling to provide protection. The applicant
       may have a well-founded fear of threats to his life due to famine or
       civil war or of isolated acts of violence or ill-treatment for a
       Convention reason which may be perpetrated against him. But the
       risk, however severe, and the fear, however well-founded, do not
       entitle him to the status of a refugee. The Convention has a more
       limited objective, the limits of which are identified by the list of
       Convention reasons and by the principle of surrogacy.'
  70.   It  is  also  clear  that  a  similar  approach  to  sufficiency  of
      protection applies to a risk of harm under article 3 of the ECHR : see
      Bagdanavicius [2005] UKHL 38;  [2005] 2 AC 668 per Lord Brown at [24]:

       'The plain fact is that the argument throughout has been  bedevilled
       by a failure to grasp  the  distinction  in  non-state  agent  cases
       between on the one hand the risk of serious harm and  on  the  other
       hand the risk of treatment contrary to article 3. In cases where the
       risk "emanates from  intentionally  inflicted  acts  of  the  public
       authorities in the receiving country" (the language of para 49 of  D
       v United  Kingdom  24  EHRR  423,  447)  one  can  use  those  terms
       interchangeably: the intentionally inflicted acts would without more
       constitute  the  proscribed  treatment.  Where,  however,  the  risk
       emanates from non-state bodies, that is not so: any  harm  inflicted
       by non-state agents will  not  constitute  article  3  ill-treatment
       unless in addition  the  state  has  failed  to  provide  reasonable
       protection. If someone is beaten  up  and  seriously  injured  by  a
       criminal gang, the member state will not be in breach of  article  3
       unless it has failed in its  positive  duty  to  provide  reasonable
       protection against such criminal acts.'

  71.  From the information before us, the  situation  of  children  in  Sri
      Lanka is materially different from that of children in Kabul.  On  the
      evidence noted in LQ, HK  and  AA,  about  Afghanistan  there  was  no
      programme of orphanages for children over 12, and a cultural tradition
      of sexual abuse  of  adolescent  boys.  The  governmental  authorities
      appeared at best either indifferent to the need for  or  powerless  to
      take any effective measures to counteract the risk of abuse.

  72. In Sri Lanka there is a significant community of children caught up or
      vulnerable to being ensnared in sexual acts with adults whether  on  a
      commercial basis or by abuse of trust. This is not a problem unique to
      Sri Lanka, and concerned commentators could well point to  significant
      examples of exploitation and abuse of children in  care  and  in  care
      homes in parts of the United Kingdom.

  73.  In  our  judgement,   there  are  four  answers  to  the  appellant's
      submissions in support of his claim to refugee status:-

        a. He is not an orphan or an abandoned child.  He  has  a  maternal
           grandmother aged 68 in the north of Sri Lanka with whom  contact
           has been made. Her health and the social conditions is which she
           lives may well be poor, but in our  judgement  not  sufficiently
           extreme to make transfer of this appellant to her care amount to
           a  source  of  serious  harm  that  entitles  the  claimant   to
           international protection. In any event the  grandmother  in  Sri
           Lanka is not alone. On the hypothesis of his return to Sri Lanka
           he has another aunt  in  Liverpool  and  an  uncle  in  aunt  in
           Switzerland whom he has contact with who are in  a  position  to
           contribute to his material support and care.


        b. The authorities in Sri Lanka do not appear to be indifferent  or
           unwilling to  take  action  against  those  who  abuse  children
           whether as foreign tourists or disreputable care home guardians.
           The problem may be a significant  one  but  raids,  arrests  and
           prosecutions  may  follow.  There  seem  to  be  a   number   of
           institutions to receive unprotected children in the  event  that
           family or foster care was not feasible, some may be  of  a  poor
           standard but not all are, and  the  homes  and  centres  run  by
           international organisations seem alert to the challenges  facing
           children and committed to make some  difference.  Moreover,  the
           concern of the international community  about  over-reliance  on
           institutional care is being reflected by some of the initiatives
           of the NCPA to move to foster care. This does not appear to be a
           discriminatory denial of protection, although we recognise  that
           present means of prevention and  protection  may  be  less  than
           sufficient to eradicate the risk of  abuse,  and  there  may  be
           examples of corruption where  the  authorities  have  not  acted
           against child prostitution in brothels.

        c. The appellant does not appear to fit any of the profiles of  the
           most vulnerable children who may be at risk in Sri Lanka. He has
           family here and abroad who appear to care for and  be  concerned
           about his welfare. He was assisted  and  protected  rather  than
           abused  and  ill-treated  during  the  time  that  he  lost  the
           protection of his paternal aunt with the bombing in  the  north.
           We have taken no account of the information given to us  at  the
           hearing that recently it has been established that  his  parents
           are alive and in south India, but if this is  indeed  the  case,
           this is another source of assistance and support from S.

        d. If the Home  Office  were,  hypothetically,  to  return  him  to
           Colombo Airport at the present time, it would be doing so  under
           a legal regime of UK law that imposed a duty  to  safeguard  him
           and protect him whilst he was under their jurisdiction.  At  the
           least this would require the provision of a suitable escort  for
           the appellant on his journey to Colombo. It would  also  require
           suitable liaison with the High Commission,  any  willing  family
           members, international organisations or local social services on
           his arrival. He would not just be dumped at the airport  or  the
           nearest beach.

  74. Mr. Vaughan sketched out a scenario where the appellant may end up  in
      an unsuitable care home in Sri Lanka from which he ran away  and  then
      fell unwittingly  into  the  clutches  of  traffickers.   The  further
      written submissions of the appellant seek to develop this argument  by
      cross reference to the fourth report of Professor Good.


  75.  We consider this was a speculation on a somewhat remote  possibility.
      It is inconsistent with the factors  we  have  noted  at  [73]  above.
      Although S has been through  some  dramatic  experiences  for  one  so
      young, we note that on his account he was out  of  the  protection  of
      family or formal carers from May 2009 to November 2011 but there is no
      suggestion that he was either ill treated  or  sexually  exploited  in
      this period or that he ran away from institutional care.  He  has  not
      committed any offence and we see no reason why he would  be  committed
      to a reform school or some institutional  equivalent  if  returned  to
      Colombo. By contrast with Afghanistan there was no local  practice  of
      sexual exploitation of young boys by local residents; in Sri Lanka the
      risk  of  sexual  exploitation  of  boys  comes   predominately   from
      foreigners.  To qualify for international protection a  risk  of  harm
      must have a reasonable degree of likelihood.


  76. We therefore conclude that on the hypothesis we are required  to  make
      that any fear of persecution or serious harm is  not  well-founded  or
      based on substantial  grounds.  Any  risk  of  harm  is  adventitious,
      speculative and remote from the circumstances of the appellant as they
      are known to us and the circumstances that would govern any return.

  77. We have not engaged in an exercise  of  evaluating  whether  S's  best
      interests and welfare  are  better  served  as  between  the  care  he
      receives in the UK and Sri Lanka. That is not the task we are required
      to perform on a section 83 appeal, although it would be one  if  there
      was an actual decision to remove  that  gave  rise  to  a  section  82
      appeal. We consider much of the data in Professor Good's four  reports
      is directed at this issue rather than persecution per se.  We  do  not
      consider that the further data about living conditions in the north of
      Sri Lanka  establishes  a  new  basis   of  risk  and  note  that  the
      appellant's supplementary submission do not suggest as much.

  78. Nor are we engaged in the task of requiring the  respondent  to  prove
      precisely the circumstances for  his  removal  and  reception  in  Sri
      Lanka. This would be unnecessary in a case  where  the  issue  is  not
      general welfare assessment on removal but whether the appellant on the
      known  facts  is  entitled  to  refugee  status.  As   a   matter   of
      practicality, it would be absurd to require  detailed  evidence  of  a
      removal plan: which home will the claimant be admitted to, how will he
      get there, who will meet him and the like when it is not  proposed  to
      remove him at all.  We conclude that  it  is  sufficient  for  present
      purposes to note the general legal obligations  on  the  Secretary  of
      State (that is to say s.55 of the 2009 Act and Article 3 UNCRC) in the
      event that the fictional hypothesis on which the appeal is  predicated
      were to be implemented.

Humanitarian protection:

  79.  Humanitarian protection under Council Directive 2004/83/EC should  be
      granted where there are substantial grounds for fearing a real risk of
      serious harm, even if such harm is unrelated to a  Refugee  Convention
      reason.  In the alternative  to  his  submissions  under  the  Refugee
      Convention, Mr Vaughan submits that the appellant falls within Article
      15 (b) 'degrading treatment' in the country of  origin.  The  duty  to
      grant this status arises where a claimant faces a risk  equivalent  to
      those set out in Article 3 ECHR  and  the  exclusion  clauses  do  not
      apply.


  80. The material distinction between Article 3 ECHR and Article 15 (b)  of
      the Qualification Directive is that Article  3  does  not  necessarily
      require the grant of a residence  status  merely  the  prohibition  of
      expulsion whereas a Article 15 (b) does  require  such  status  to  be
      granted (Article 18).


  81.  However for the same reasons as have been set  out  in  the  previous
      section of this decision, we conclude that there  are  no  substantial
      grounds to fear a real risk of such harm if S were to  be  removed  to
      Sri Lanka.



Conclusions

  82.  The judge's decision contained errors of law. We set it aside and re-
      make it for ourselves in the  light  of  the  materials  received  and
      submissions made.


  83.  We dismiss the appeal under s.83 NIAA against the refusal  of  asylum
      and humanitarian status.




                  Signed


                  Date 23 May 2013


                  Chamber President of the Upper Tribunal


                               ANNEX A


      EXTRACT FROM SAAD, DIRIYE AND OSORIO [2001] EWCA CIV 2008


        1. 'In the case of an appeal under section 8(1) against  a  refusal
           of entry, the effect of those provisions appears at first  blush
           to be as follows. It is the duty of the special  adjudicator  to
           consider whether  the  decision  to  refuse  entry  was  not  in
           accordance with the law on the ground that the applicant  was  a
           refugee and, if he considers that the applicant was  a  refugee,
           to hold that the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  was  not  in
           accordance with the law and to allow  the  appeal.  The  special
           adjudicator must then give such directions to the  Secretary  of
           State as he thinks requisite. By that mechanism, on the face  of
           the provisions, the applicant who is wrongly  refused  entry  on
           the ground that he was not a refugee, when in fact  and  law  he
           was, can obtain appropriate redress and have his refugee  status
           (with its attendant Convention rights) recognised.
        1. However the decision of this court in Ravichandran  v  Secretary
           of State for the Home Department [1996] Imm AR  97  demonstrates
           that the position is not quite so simple.  In  Ravichandran  the
           court was considering appeals under section  8(1).  One  of  the
           grounds upon which it was sought to challenge decisions  of  the
           special adjudicator and the IAT was that their jurisdiction  was
           confined to considering the facts at the time of  the  Secretary
           of State's decision and that it was not open  to  them  to  rely
           upon improvements in the situation in  Sri  Lanka  between  1993
           when the appellants were refused  asylum  and  1995  when  their
           appeals  were  finally  dismissed.  This  court  rejected   that
           submission.
        1. Simon Brown LJ, with  whom  Staughton  and  Nourse  LJJ  agreed,
           recognised (at p 112) that the language of  section  19  of  the
           1971 Act, and indeed the reasoning in earlier  non-asylum  cases
           relying upon it, supported the  conclusion  that  the  appellate
           process was simply one of review of the original  decision,  but
           expressed his conclusion thus (at pp 112-3):
                 "I have reached the conclusion that  in  asylum  cases  the
                 appellate structure as applied by the 1993  Act  is  to  be
                 regarded as an extension of the decision-making process.  I
                 am, I think, entitled to reach that conclusion as a  matter
                 of construction on the basis that the prospective nature of
                 the question posed by section 8 of the 1993  Act  overrides
                 the retrospective approach ordinarily required (implicitly)
                 on a section 19 appeal. Section 8, after  all,  could,  but
                 does not, identify the ground of appeal as being  that  the
                 appellant's removal "would have been" (rather  than  "would
                 be")  contrary   to   the   United   Kingdom's   Convention
                 obligations. Moreover, section 8(1) refers to a  particular
                 class of appeals and section 19 to appeals in  general.  It
                 would be a strong thing to say that the general was to over-
                 ride the particular."
        1. Simon Brown LJ then referred to policy considerations which make
           asylum appeals different from other appeals  and  observed  that
           the position might have changed for the better or for the  worse
           since the refusal of entry and concluded that  in  either  event
           the appellate authorities were not bound to ignore such  changes
           but should take them into account.
        1. Both Simon Brown and Staughton LJJ  stressed  that  the  express
           words of section 8(1) look to the future. Thus  the  sub-section
           provides that the appellant may appeal "on the ground  that  his
           removal in consequence of the refusal would be contrary  to  the
           United  Kingdom's  obligations  under  the   Convention".   (Our
           emphasis). It was thus held in Ravichandran that it is the  duty
           of the appellate authorities to consider the position as at  the
           time of the hearing of the appeal.
        1. The Secretary of State's  "Detailed  Statement  of  Grounds"  in
           support of the application for judicial  review  in  the  Afghan
           hijacking case made the following submission in respect  of  the
           wording in the 1999 Act which, so far as here  relevant,  echoes
           that of section 8 of the 1993 Act:
                 "All  asylum  appeals  are  hypothetical.  They   are   all
                 concerned with the removal  that  has  not  in  fact  taken
                 place. This is recognised by the  wording  of  s  69(1)-(4)
                 which in each case refer to a removal  that  the  Appellant
                 claims "would be " contrary to the Convention. It is to  be
                 noted that the statute does not  say  "will  be".  Although
                 that is not this case, "would be"  includes  the  situation
                 where no removal is in fact contemplated."
        1. In Arif v Secretary of State for the Home Department [1999] INLR
           327, where the appellant  was  not  granted  refugee  status  in
           circumstances in which he should have been and the question  was
           whether by the time of the appeal to the special adjudicator and
           indeed to the IAT the situation in Azad Kashmir had  changed  so
           that the Convention no longer applied to him in accordance  with
           Article 1C(5),  which  is  quoted.  This  court  held  that  the
           evidential burden of proving that the appellant ceased to  be  a
           refugee was on the Secretary of State. Simon Brown  LJ  put  the
           point thus at page 331, after quoting a passage  from  paragraph
           12.58 of the 4th edition  of  Macdonald's  Immigration  Law  and
           Practice:
                 "The sentence  I  would  particularly  emphasise  there  is
                 'Proof that  the  circumstances  of  the  persecution  have
                 ceased to exist would fall upon the receiving state'. It is
                 true that because of  the  notoriously  long  delays  which
                 attend our system of asylum hearings the appellant here was
                 never granted refugee status, even though until the  change
                 of government in Azad Kashmir in 1996 it is now assumed  on
                 all  sides  that  he  was  strictly  entitled  to  it.   It
                 nevertheless seems to me that by analogy, on the particular
                 facts of this case, there is now an  evidential  burden  on
                 the Secretary of State to  establish  that  this  appellant
                 could safely be returned home."
        1. That passage  draws  attention  to  the  course  that  appellate
           proceedings are likely to follow. The  appellant  is  likely  to
           focus on the circumstances  prevailing  at  the  time  that  the
           Secretary of State refused his application  for  asylum.  If  he
           demonstrates that at that time he was a refugee, the  evidential
           burden will shift to the Secretary of State to demonstrate  that
           circumstances have changed  so  that  he  has  ceased  to  be  a
           refugee.


