
[pic]

BM and Others (returnees - criminal and non-criminal)  DRC  CG  [2015]  UKUT
00293 (IAC)

Upper Tribunal
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London                  |Determination Promulgated:   |
|On 02, 03, 04, 12 and 13 March 2015           |                             |
|and 28 April 2015                             |                             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

       The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey, President of the Upper Tribunal
                         Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan

                                   Between

                           BM, DS, BBM, DK AND AA
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

BM:  Ms S Naik and Ms R Stickler (both of Counsel),  instructed  by  Michael
             McGarvey Immigration Solicitors

DS:  Mr R Toal and Ms A Smith (both of Counsel), instructed by  Sutovic  and
             Hartigan Solicitors

BBM: Mr R Toal and Ms Shazia Khan (both  of  Counsel),  instructed  by  Ison
             Harrison Solicitors

DK:  Mr R Toal and Mr A Eaton (both of Counsel), instructed  by  Irving  and
             Co Solicitors
AA:  Ms S Naik and Ms H Short (both of Counsel), instructed by  Kate  Ormsby
             of GMIAU

Respondent:   Ms N Lieven QC, Mr  D  Blundell  and  Mr  R  Moules  (both  of
             Counsel), instructed by the Government Legal Department


 1. A national of the Democratic Republic of Congo ("DRC") who has acquired
    the status of foreign national offender in the United Kingdom  is  not,
    simply by virtue of such status, exposed to a real risk of  persecution
    or serious harm or treatment proscribed by Article 3 ECHR in the  event
    of enforced return to the DRC.

 2. A national of the DRC whose attempts to acquire refugee status  in  the
    United Kingdom have been unsuccessful is not, without more, exposed  to
    a real risk of persecution or  serious  harm  or  proscribed  treatment
    contrary to Article 3 ECHR in the event of enforced return to DRC.

 3. A national of the DRC  who has a significant and visible profile within
    APARECO (UK) is, in the event of returning to his country of origin, at
    real risk of persecution for a Convention reason  or  serious  harm  or
    treatment proscribed by Article 3 ECHR by virtue of falling within  one
    of the risk categories identified by the Upper  Tribunal  in  MM  (UDPS
    Members - Risk on Return) Democratic Republic of Congo CG [2007]  UKAIT
    00023.  Those belonging to this category include persons  who  are,  or
    are perceived to be, leaders, office bearers or  spokespersons.   As  a
    general rule, mere rank and file members are unlikely  to  fall  within
    this  category.  However,  each  case  will  be  fact  sensitive,  with
    particular attention directed to the likely knowledge  and  perceptions
    of DRC state agents.

 4.  The DRC authorities have an interest in certain types of convicted  or
    suspected offenders, namely those who have unexecuted prison  sentences
    in the DRC or in respect of whom there are unexecuted  arrest  warrants
    in the DRC or who allegedly committed  an  offence,  such  as  document
    fraud, when departing the DRC.   Such  persons  are  at  real  risk  of
    imprisonment for lengthy periods and, hence, of treatment proscribed by
    Article 3 ECHR.



ANONYMITY

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
an anonymity order is made in respect of each  of  the  Appellants.   Unless
the Upper Tribunal or other competent Court orders otherwise, no  report  of
any of the proceedings herein or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall,
directly or indirectly, identify any of  the  Appellants.  This  prohibition
applies to, amongst others, all parties.
                              GLOSSARY OF TERMS


PARTIES AND OTHERS


.    BM:          The first Appellant.

.    DS:          The second Appellant.

.    BBM:         The third Appellant.

.    DK:          The fourth Appellant.

.    AA:          The fifth Appellant.

.    BB:          Husband of the Appellant AA.

.    JM:          APARECO office bearer.

.    PL:          Executive National Secretary of APARECO.

.    XY: A person identified in the evidence of two witnesses who  testified
                  on behalf of the Appellant AA.


OTHER

.    ADFL:        Alliance of Democratic Forces for the Liberation of  Congo

                  (Alliance des Forces D�mocratiques pour la  Lib�ration  du
Congo).

.    AI:          Amnesty International.

.    ANR:         The DRC National Intelligence Agency.
                  (Agence National de Rensignements)

.    APARECO: Alliance de Patriotes pour la Refondation du  Congo  (Alliance
                  of Patriots for the Re-establishment of the Congo).

.    BHC:         British High Commission, Nairobi, Kenya.

.    COI:              County of Origin Information.

.    DGM:      Direction  Generale  de  Migration  (Directorate  General  of
                  Migration) of the DRC.

.    DRC:              Democratic Republic of the Congo.

.    ETD:              Emergency travel document .

.    FAS:              Failed Asylum Seeker.

.     FCO:               Foreign  and  Commonwealth  Office  of  the  United
Kingdom.

.    FDLR:        Democratic Forces for the  Liberation  of  Rwanda  (Forces
                       d�mocratiques de liberation du Rwanda).

.    FFM:              Fact Finding Mission of the FCO.

.    FNO:         Foreign National Offender.

.    HRW:         Human Rights Watch.

.    IGC:              Intergovernmental Conference (an EU agency).

.    IOM:              International Organisation for Migration.

    . JF:          Justice First.

.     LANM:         Les  Amis  de  Nelson  Mandela  (A  DRC   human   rights
organisation).

.    OGN:         Operational Guidance Note.

.    PNC:         Police Nationale du Congo (The DRC National Police).

.    UDPS:        Union for Democracy and Social  Progress  (Union  pour  la
D�mocratie                 et le Prog�s Social).

.    UKBA:        United Kingdom Border Agency.

.    UN:          United Nations.





                                    INDEX


Chapter number                      Paragraph numbers

   I. Introduction                       1 - 5

  II. The Democratic Republic of Congo       6 - 10

 III. Previous DRC CG Decisions of the
     Upper Tribunal                          11 - 14

  IV. The Main Evidence Summarised       15 - 43

   V. The Expert Evidence                         44 - 49

  VI. APARECO:  Further Evidence             50 - 58

 VII. The County and Expert Evidence:
    Discussion and Findings                 59 - 87

VIII Country Guidance                   88 - 89

IX   The Individual Appellants

     i) DS                              90 - 91
    ii) BBM                             92 - 93
   iii) DK                              94 - 95
    iv) BM                              96
     v) AA                              97 - 100

X    The Individual Appellants: Conclusions  101 - 115



    Appendix: Source Materials





   I. INTRODUCTION

    1.   These five appeals  have  been  selected  and  conjoined  for  the
        purpose of determining the legality of the actions  of  the  United
        Kingdom Government whereby certain persons are returned  from  this
        country to the Democratic Republic of Congo ("DRC"), their  country
        of origin.  All five Appellants are DRC nationals.  There  are  two
        groups of Appellants:


          a) The members of the first group are the second, third and fourth
             Appellants DS, BBM and DK, who are united by the characteristic
             that each is a foreign national offender subject  to  automatic
             deportation to the DRC. In the case of  BBM  only  one  of  the
             permitted grounds of appeal is Article 8 ECHR.


          b) The first and  fifth  Appellants,  BM  and  AA,  who  challenge
             decisions to remove  them  to  the  DRC,  have  in  common  the
             characteristic that each is a failed asylum seeker.   We  shall
             examine  in  due  course  the  significance  of   one   further
             characteristic of the Appellant AA,  namely  her  role  in  the
             organisation APARECO.

            In all five cases the Secretary of State for the Home Department
            (the "Secretary of State"), the Respondent to these appeals, has
            initiated action to deport or remove the Appellants to the DRC.


         2. The assorted ingredients  identified  above  give  rise  to  the
            following country guidance issues:


            (i)   Is a national of the DRC who is proposed  for  deportation
                  or removal to his country of origin exposed to a real risk
                  of persecution or serious harm or treatment proscribed  by
                  Article 3 ECHR by virtue of having been  convicted  of  an
                  offence in the United Kingdom?


            (ii)  Is a national of  the  DRC  proposed  for  deportation  or
                  removal to his country of origin exposed to a real risk of
                  persecution or serious harm  or  treatment  proscribed  by
                  Article 3 ECHR or in need of  humanitarian  protection  by
                  virtue of having  claimed  asylum  unsuccessfully  in  the
                  United Kingdom?


            (iii) Is a national of  the  DRC  proposed  for  deportation  or
                  removal to his country of origin exposed to a real risk of
                  persecution or serious harm  or  treatment  proscribed  by
                  Article 3 ECHR or in need of  humanitarian  protection  by
                  virtue of having  claimed  asylum  unsuccessfully  in  the
                  United Kingdom and/or by virtue of having a prominent role
                  in the organisation "APARECO"?








         3. All of  the  Appellants  challenged  the  Secretary  of  State's
            decisions by exercising their statutory right of appeal  to  the
            First-tier Tribunal ("FtT").  Their appeals were dismissed.   In
            all of the appeals permission was  secured  to  appeal  to  this
            Tribunal  which,  by  its  earlier  decisions,  ruled  that  the
            determinations of the FtT must be set aside as they are vitiated
            by error of law pursuant to section 12(2)(a) of  the  Tribunals,
            Courts and Enforcement Act 2007. In all of the appeals the Upper
            Tribunal has held that the FtT erred in  its  consideration  and
            determination of the central issue of risk to the Appellants  in
            the event of their  enforced  return  to  DRC.   The  individual
            errors of law consisted of applying the wrong test,  failing  to
            take   into   account   material   facts   and    factors    and
            misunderstanding the evidence.  In the case  of  BBM  only,  the
            determination of the FtT has  been  set  aside  on  the  further
            ground of error of law concerning  his  claim  under  Article  8
            ECHR.  We held that the approach of the FtT  to  the  issues  of
            risk on return and Article  8  was  unsustainable  in  law.  The
            decisions of the FtT are  hereby  re-made,  in  accordance  with
            section 12(2)(b)(ii).


         4. The fundamental  question  for  this  Tribunal  is  whether  the
            deportation or removal of any of the Appellants from the  United
            Kingdom to  the  DRC  would  expose  them  to  a  real  risk  of
            persecution within the framework of the  Refugee  Convention  or
            serious harm within the compass of the  Qualification  Directive
            or a breach of Article 3 of the  European  Convention  on  Human
            Rights and Fundamental Freedoms ("ECHR").  If this Tribunal were
            to conclude that either of these risks is demonstrated in any of
            the Appellants' cases, the individual appeal  would  succeed  as
            the Secretary of State's decision to  deport  would  not  be  in
            accordance with the law, being  in  contravention  of  the  ECHR
            and/or the Refugee Convention.  The Appellants contend that such
            a risk exists by virtue of their status of failed asylum  seeker
            or foreign national offender without more.   In  the  particular
            case of the fifth Appellant,  AA,  reliance  is  placed  on  the
            additional factor of activity within and  association  with  the
            organisation APARECO.

         5. These appeals were presented and argued  by  reference  to  four
            main categories of evidence.  Belonging to  the  first  category
            was a reasonably substantial volume of evidence emanating from a
            broad spectrum of sources relating to the conditions  prevailing
            in the DRC.  The second category consists of various strands  of
            evidence  relating  to  the  APARECO  organisation  and  certain
            members and office bearers  thereof.   The  third  category,  in
            contrast, has but a single component, namely the  report  of  an
            expert witness,  Dr  Erik  Kennes,  upon  which  all  Appellants
            relied.  Finally, we have considered  evidence,  both  oral  and
            documentary,  bearing  on  each  Appellant   individually.    In
            essence, our determination of these appeals is  based  upon  our
            evaluation of all of this evidence in the round.




II.  THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO

         6. In common with certain other  African  nations  the  DRC  has  a
            turbulent history.  In the more distant past  of  the  19th  and
            early 20th centuries, it was a colony of the Kingdom of  Belgium
            whose sovereign, King Leopold, pillaged its natural resources as
            he  accumulated  vast  personal  wealth.   This  was,  famously,
            denounced in a report by the Irish patriot Roger Casement,  then
            a United Kingdom diplomat.  This is documented in the  memorable
            work of Nobel Prize Winner Mario  Vargas  Llosa,  El  Sueno  del
            Celta (The Dream of the Celt).  The barbarism and  brutality  of
            the  colonial  power  were  manifested  in  the  most  appalling
            atrocities perpetrated against the indigenous  population.   The
            seeds were thus sown for many decades of  instability,  violence
            and abuse of power.


         7.  The  country,  then  named  the  Belgian  Congo,  secured   its
            independence in 1960, when it became the Republic of the  Congo.
            Its names since then have included Zaire, which rose briefly  to
            global fame by competing in the  football  World  Cup  in  1974.
            Independence  was  followed  by  political   convulsions.    DRC
            occupies a vast expanse of land in  central  Africa  and  has  a
            population estimated in excess of 60 million.  Its capital  city
            is Kinshasa, where some 10% of the population  resides.   Within
            the population there are over 200 African ethnic groups.  French
            is the official language and  the  dominant  religion  is  Roman
            Catholicism.  Notwithstanding its  vast  natural  resources  and
            mineral wealth, DRC is one  of  the  poorest  countries  in  the
            world.  Food insecurity affects one third of the population  and
            life expectancy is amongst the lowest in the world.   Corruption
            is considered to be rampant.

         8. Independence in 1960 was  followed  by  some  three  decades  of
            dictatorship under Colonel Mobutu, giving way  to  a  degree  of
            democratic reform between 1990 and  1993.   The  following  four
            years were marked by the crisis in  neighbouring  Rwanda,  civil
            war and the seizure of power by President Laurent Kabila and his
            party "AFDL" in 1997.  A further war, in which the  participants
            included  the  neighbouring  countries  of  Rwanda  and  Uganda,
            ensued.  Some four  years  later,  in  2001,  President  Laurent
            Kabila  was  assassinated.    A   power   sharing   transitional
            government was installed and  Joseph  Kabila,  the  son  of  the
            deceased self-proclaimed former president, assumed the office of
            presidency ten days later. When a peace agreement was eventually
            negotiated in 2002,  it  was  estimated  that  more  than  three
            million  had  been  killed.   A  new  constitution  was  adopted
            following a referendum in 2005 and  national  elections  ensued.
            President Joseph Kabila retained  power.   The  government  then
            executed a peace  agreement  with  22  armed  groups.   However,
            hostilities between government  sources  and  the  FDLR  militia
            group continued.  This escalated in 2009 during a  joint  DRC/UN
            military operation.   The  UN  peace  keeping  force  ultimately
            withdrew from the DRC in 2011.


         9. The country continued to suffer from the activities of militias,
            bandits and its official army.  Widespread  violence  continued.
            By   the   same   year,   2011,   President   Joseph    Kabila's
            constitutionally permitted term of office of five years expired.
             The UN General Assembly reported that the "overall human rights
            situation" in the DRC continued  to  be  "of  serious  concern".
            There were grave human rights violations  by  armed  groups  and
            members of the national security forces.  These included acts of
            arbitrary  execution,  rape,  arbitrary  arrest  and  detention,
            torture, looting and cruel,  inhuman  and  degrading  treatment.
            This was especially prevalent in the eastern  provinces  of  the
            country.  State security forces were acting with impunity.

        10. In very brief compass, the year 2011 was marked by elections  in
            which President Joseph Kabila was victorious and the period 2011
            - 2015  has  been  characterised  by  a  relative  cessation  of
            military and other  hostilities,  social  unrest  and  political
            instability.  One of the major  issues  which  has  materialised
            concerns the permitted presidential term  of  office  under  the
            2006 Constitution, which is five years multiplied by two  terms.
            The President has evinced a determination to continue in  office
            and various mechanisms for achieving  this  ambition  have  been
            canvassed.  Taking into account both history and context, it may
            not be inaccurate to describe the present overall  situation  in
            the DRC as one of relative peace  and  stability.   One  quickly
            grafts on  to  this  relatively  bare  analysis  the  undisputed
            factors of enduring human rights violations,  which  include  in
            particular the repression of  political  opposition,  deplorable
            prison conditions, the lack of accountability  of  state  agents
            and a weak judiciary.  These are all heavily documented  in  the
            extensive evidence.  In short, the DRC is a state in  which  the
            rule of law is both fragile and fickle.

III. PREVIOUS COUNTRY GUIDANCE DECISIONS OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

        11. There are several reported decisions of the Upper Tribunal which
            have considered conditions  in  the  DRC  and  the  legality  of
            returning its nationals from the United Kingdom.  All  of  these
            decisions belong to the period 2004 - 2007.   In  the  first  of
            these decisions, VL (Risk:  Failed  Asylum  Seekers)  Democratic
            Congo CG [2004]  UKIAT  00007,  the  issue  considered  was  the
            question whether a FAS, by virtue  of  this  status  alone,  was
            exposed to a real risk of serious harm upon return to  the  DRC.
            The Tribunal decided that there  was  no  such  risk.   In  thus
            concluding, it placed particular weight on the evidence relating
            to the policies and practices  of  other  countries,  EU  member
            states in particular:  see  [57]  -  [70].   This  decision  was
            affirmed three years later in BK (Failed Asylum Seekers) DRC  CG
            [2007] UKIAT 00098.


        12. In a trilogy of decisions, the  Upper  Tribunal  considered  the
            question of the risk  pertaining  to  members  of  a  particular
            political party, the Union for  Democracy  and  Social  Progress
            ("UDPS"), a group which is opposed to president Kabila's regime:
            see AB and DM Democratic  Republic  of  Congo  CG  [2005]  UKIAT
            00118, MK DRC CG [2006] UKIAT 00001 and MM (UDPS Members -  Risk
            on Return) Democratic Republic of Congo CG [2007]  UKAIT  00023.
            These decisions identified the following risk categories:

         (a)  Persons with a nationality or perceived nationality of a state
             regarded as hostile to the DRC and  in  particular  those  who
             have or are presumed to have Rwandan  connections  or  are  of
             Rwandan origins.

         (b)  Those who are or are perceived to be Tutsis.

         (c)  Those  having  or  being  perceived  to  have  a  military  or
             political profile in opposition to the government.

         Bearing in mind the additional factor raised in  the  case  of  the
         Appellant AA, we draw attention to two discrete passages in AB  and
         DM (Risk Categories Reviewed - Tutsis  Added)  DRCCG  [2005]  UKIAT
         00118.  In [45], the Tribunal stated:

             "We would  emphasise  first  of  all  that  use  of  the  word
             'profile' highlights the fact that this category  is  intended
             to mark out  those  whose  actual  or  perceived  military  or
             political  activities  or  involvements  are  likely  to  have
             brought them or to bring them to the adverse attention of  the
             Kabila regime.  Mere membership  of  an  opposition  political
             party will not demonstrate that a person has such a profile."

              [Our emphasis]

         The Tribunal elaborated on this in [51](iii):

             "We also confirm as an existing risk category those having  or
             being perceived to have a military  or  political  profile  in
             opposition  to  the  government.   The  risk   fluctuates   in
             accordance with the political situation On the  basis  of  the
             evidence before us, the current position is  as  follows.  The
             Tribunal accept that there is a real risk at present for  UDPS
             activists.   In the eyes of the authorities in  Kinshasa  UDPS
             supporters are assimilated with  supporters  of  the  RDC/Goma
             movement because of the alliance reached in 2003 even if later
             officially ended.  At present there is a lesser risk for  PALU
             members.    There is a potential risk for DSP members who  are
             considered as potential or actual collaborators for  JP  Bemba
             and his MLC movement.   The risk for those associated with the
             Mobutu regime has considerably lessened.  It is clear from the
             background  evidence  that  close  relatives  of  Mobutu  have
             returned to the DRC from exile:  CIPU report paragraph  6.110-
             2.    It is reported that those not suspected of collaboration
             with the rebels would no longer be at risk and affiliation  to
             the MPR would not  normally  involve  the  risk  of  political
             persecution.  No repression has been  organised  against  PDSC
             members since the death of Laurent Kabila."

     This approach was re-affirmed  in  MM  at  [250],  where  the  Tribunal
         adverted to the factor of the knowledge of state agencies:

             "Mindful of the risk categories as identified  in  AB  and  DM,
             confirmed in MK and now re-affirmed by us,  we  recognise  that
             had we found the  Appellant  to  be  credible,  we  would  have
             concluded that as a person who had a role in the UDPS  and  who
             was known to the authorities and who had been detained and ill-
             treated by them for his political opinion and who  had  escaped
             from detention, he would  arguably,  not  least  to  the  lower
             standard  of  proof,  be  at  risk  on  return  to   the   DRC.
             Conversely, he would not be at real risk on return, if we found
             the Appellant to be no more than a mere member of the UDPS."

        13. The specific issue of prison conditions in the DRC has  featured
            in the Upper Tribunal's previous decisions.  In  particular,  in
            BK, the following concession was recorded, in [177]:


             "[Counsel]  ....  confirmed  that  it  was  conceded  by   the
             Respondent that for the purposes of this appeal conditions  in
             DRC prisons and detention centres were contrary to  Article  3
             [ECHR]."


         At this  juncture,  it  is  appropriate  to  outline  a  comparable
         concession made by Ms Lieven QC on behalf of the Secretary of State
         in the present appeals.  This was to the effect that  a  period  of
         detention in a DRC  prison  exceeding  approximately  1  day  would
         violate the detained person's rights  under  Article  3  ECHR.   We
         accept this concession, as it is clearly warranted  by  substantial
         and compelling evidence.


        14. We are mindful of the passage of time since the various  country
            guidance decisions of the Upper Tribunal  relating  to  the  DRC
            were promulgated.  We are alert to our duties to  consider  with
            care all of the evidence adduced in these appeals  and  to  make
            appropriate findings, taking into account the  passage  of  time
            and any material  altered  conditions  and  circumstances.   Our
            findings  will  dictate  whether  the  previous  decisions  have
            enduring force and, if so, in what respects and to what extent.

III. THE MAIN EVIDENCE SUMMARISED

        15. As indicated above, these appeals have  generated  a  reasonably
            substantial quantity of evidence relating to conditions  in  the
            DRC,  emanating  from  diverse  sources.   What  follows  is  an
            outline, or summary, of this evidence with a particular focus on
            its  salient  features.   We  would  emphasise  that   we   have
            considered the evidence in its totality. In this context we draw
            attention to the various reports and sources enumerated  in  the
            Appendix to this judgment.


    The DRC Ambassador's Statements


        16. We begin with this evidence, upon which  all  Appellants  placed
            substantial reliance.  This was confirmed in the  submission  of
            Mr Toal representing three of the Appellants, in response  to  a
            question from the panel.  Mr Toal stated that the  core  of  the
            Appellant's cases was composed of this evidence,  together  with
            the FFM report  (see  [18]-[23]  infra).   We  add  the  further
            comment that this evidence was obviously a  major  influence  in
            the decision in R (P&R, DRC) - v - Secretary of  State  for  the
            Home Department [2013] EWHC 3879 (Admin), (Phillip J).


        17. By letter dated  11  July  2012,  Mary  Glindon  MP,  expressing
            concern about the deportation of any failed asylum seeker to the
            DRC, stated:

                  "Last week I attended a meeting organised by the All Party
                  Parliamentary Group, which was addressed by the Ambassador
                  ....  I raised the issue of  the  failed  asylum  seekers'
                  plight.  He type cast all of these people saying they have
                  come to this country as members of the  former  oppressive
                  regime in the DRC, are here because we have a good benefit
                  system  and  having  committed  terrible  crimes  in  this
                  country have to be suitably punished when they  return  to
                  the  Congo.   As  Ambassador,  he  signs  the  deportation
                  papers!"

             In  a  later  passage,  the  correspondence  claims  that   the
             Ambassador "... clearly has made up his mind about  the  asylum
             seekers en masse".  The DRC Ambassador wrote to Ms Glindon  the
             following month, by letter  dated  16  August  2012,  in  these
             terms:


                  "It has come to my attention that I  was  misquoted  on  a
                  statement I made during a meeting with some members of the
                  APPG in Parliament that you  attended.   As  a  matter  of
                  fact, at your question  regarding  the  return  of  asylum
                  seekers to the Democratic Republic of Congo who  allegedly
                  are arrested, tortured  and  humiliated,  I  responded  by
                  saying that it was not the case.  Congolese  citizens  who
                  failed  to  acquire  asylum  in  the  United  Kingdom  are
                  reunited with their families upon  arrival.   The  British
                  Embassy  in  Kinshasa  does   witness   this   at   times.
                  Nevertheless, people who are  being  deported  for  having
                  committed crimes in the UK  are  held  in  custody  for  a
                  period of time to allow the Congolese  justice  system  to
                  clarify their situation."

              [Emphasis added]

             The third piece of this discrete evidential jigsaw consists of
             the Ambassador's letter dated 15 May 2013 to Lord  Avebury,  a
             member of the House of Lords:


                  "After reading your letter dated April 3rd, I realise that
                  the same way my statements were misquoted, once again  you
                  misunderstood what I meant in my letter  to  Mrs  Glindon.
                  For clarity, the policy for people who are being  deported
                  from the United Kingdom back to the Democratic Republic of
                  Congo, officials have to determine, case by case, what led
                  to that deportation.   For  that  purpose,  deportees  are
                  interrogated upon arrival in the  Democratic  Republic  of
                  Congo to allow the Congolese  justice  system  to  clarify
                  their  situation.   You  will  appreciate  that,   if   an
                  individual is deported from the United Kingdom for  having
                  committed a crime, the Congolese justice system  will  not
                  just  let  him  enter  the  country  without  taking   the
                  necessary  measures  to  prevent  him  from  his  criminal
                  activities. Needless to say that people who are sent  back
                  to the Democratic Republic of Congo  simply  because  they
                  failed to qualify as refugees in  the  UK  are  more  than
                  welcome back home. Finally, may I bring to your  attention
                  that often officials from the British Embassy in  Kinshasa
                  as well as representatives from human rights organisations
                  are present at the airport when those people arrive in the
                  Democratic Republic of Congo."

             The  Ambassador  begins  this  letter  by  referring  to  Lord
             Avebury's letter, which did not form part of the evidence.

    The UKBA FFM Report

        18. This report was prepared by the United  Kingdom  Borders  Agency
            (UKBA) in November 2012 following  a  fact  finding  mission  to
            Kinshasa conducted between 18 and 28 June 2012.  The information
            contained in this report is culled from a range of  sources  and
            providers. It is unnecessary to identify these contributors  and
            we decline to do so in their interests.   The  purpose  of  this
            exercise was described in these terms:


                  "The purpose of the  mission  was  to  gather  information
                  about the treatment of  Congolese  nationals,  about  non-
                  asylum  migrants  and  failed  asylum  seekers,  who  have
                  returned voluntarily or by  force  to  the  DRC  from  the
                  United Kingdom (UK) and other western European states."


           The specific topics of enquiry were the numbers of DRC nationals
           returned  to  their  country  of   origin,   the   "process   of
           return/treatment" at Kinshasa airport, the subsequent monitoring
           of such persons by western governments, UN  Agencies  and  other
           organisations,  the  treatment  of  returnees   and   "the   DRC
           Government's perception of  returning  Congolese".   The  report
           continues:


                  "The FFM delegation sought to interview a broad  spectrum
                  of  informed  sources  in  order  to   obtain   accurate,
                  relevant, balanced, impartial and up to date  information
                  ...."


        19. The report documents conflicting  information  relating  to  the
            consequences of deploying a false or otherwise invalid  passport
            in departing the DRC.  Some sources suggested  that  this  could
            give rise  to  the  detention  of  some  persons,  while  others
            asserted  that  this  sanction  would  not  arise.   There   was
            consistent evidence that returning nationals are interviewed  by
            the DRC migration agency, the DGM,  at  Kinshasa  airport.   One
            source suggested the existence of a "black list" of "people  who
            make demonstrations and disturb the DRC authorities in  Europe".
            There was a substantial body  of  evidence  that  there  are  no
            detention  facilities  at  the  airport.   On  behalf   of   the
            Appellants, particular emphasis was placed  on  the  information
            provided by an organisation which we shall  describe  as  "LANM"
            ("Les Amis de Nelson Mandela").  This  agency  receives  advance
            notification of  flights.   It  described  how  nationals  being
            returned are in possession of an emergency travel  document  and
            are interviewed at the airport by the DGM, following  which  the
            ANR  (the  DRC  national  intelligence  agency)   then   becomes
            involved.  Returnees are transported to the main ANR  prison  in
            Kinshasa.  The source continued:


                  "It is very dangerous to send  back  people  from  the  UK
                  because it is known that Congolese in the UK  are  against
                  the government.  The group of 'combatants' started in  the
                  UK ..................


                  The organisation does not monitor returnees yet  but  they
                  can do if there is a specific request ...................


                  Those FAS (failed asylum seekers) who are arrested do  not
                  necessarily have a specific profile.   Just  the  fact  of
                  having been in Europe.  If someone has been in Europe, the
                  authorities think the person actively opposes the  current
                  Government and are very much  wanted  by  the  authorities
                  here. If they do not have an influential  person  to  help
                  them, they are going to be mistreated.  If the authorities
                  find anything against the Government  (even  a  print  out
                  from the internet), this can be a problem.  When irregular
                  migrants return from Europe it is assumed they have money.
                  It is also assumed that because they left in the way  they
                  did, they are looking to side with the opposition so  they
                  are going to be ill treated...............


                  If the DGM find a photo of President Kabila in a  person's
                  luggage and that person says Kabila is good, the person is
                  not ill treated ....................


                  A  person  who  returns  with  a  criminal  record  or  an
                  outstanding arrest warrant will be arrested straight away.
                   People in this position make a lot of noise in order  not
                  to be returned.  Those who return from the UK are more ill
                  treated than others. It is known there is more liberty  of
                  expression and stronger opposition to  Kabila  in  the  UK
                  than in Belgium or France."


           This source further suggested that the DRC Government  perceives
           DRC nationals who claimed asylum abroad as  traitors.   He  also
           described the leader of APARECO as an "enemy of the State".


        20. Another organisation, which provides care  to  people  who  have
            been mistreated, distinguished between a  "mere"  failed  asylum
            seeker and  a person of this status who is "wanted" by  the  DRC
            authorities, for example on account of anti-government political
            activism.  Only the latter type of failed asylum  seeker  is  at
            risk of detention.  The  organisation  had  no  reports  of  any
            failed asylum seeker or other returnee experiencing difficulties
            at the airport.  Its representative continued:


             "Returnees with a criminal record  or  an  outstanding  arrest
             warrant go straight to prison - the DGM do not waste  time  on
             an interview, they just take them there straight away .....


             Returnees from Europe are sent to detention."


           The representative  opined  that  the  organisation  APARECO  is
           viewed by the DRC Government as its enemy.


        21. The FFM report also records that the British Embassy in Kinshasa
            does  not  routinely  monitor  returnees.    Embassy   officials
            sometimes observe events at the airport.  They reported  nothing
            untoward.  Furthermore:


                  "The British Embassy is accessible to FAS.   It  would  be
                  possible to phone, email or just turn up if  there  was  a
                  problem.  Genuine complaints will be heard.   There  is  a
                  multiplicity of local and internal NGOs  in  Kinshasa  and
                  elsewhere who specialise in human rights issues who  would
                  take up the cases of returning Congolese nationals if they
                  experience problems ......


                  The British Embassy is only aware of reports of  returnees
                  facing  difficulties  in  the  UK  regional  media.    The
                  official was  not  aware  if  those  reports  covered  the
                  situation at the airport and if the problems  occurred  at
                  the  airport  or  after.   The   Embassy   is   aware   of
                  unsubstantiated reports of returnees being detained."


         Notably, this official had heard of  one  case  (only)  of  alleged
         detention and mistreatment of a returnee, elaborating:


                  "This  is  the  only  case  which  has   been   expressly
                  communicated to  the  FCO  in  the  18  months  that  the
                  official has been at the Embassy .....


                  The Embassy is not aware of any returnees being  detained
                  ......  and had no knowledge of the  treatment  faced  by
                  irregular migrants  or  failed  asylum  seekers  who  are
                  returned."


            Another  Embassy  official  confirmed  that  there  is  specific
            monitoring of persons returned  from  the  United  Kingdom  upon
            their arrival at  the  airport.   Nothing  untoward  was  either
            observed or  alleged.   The  Embassy  is  available  to  receive
            reports or allegations from returnees or their family members.


        22. Also recorded in the FFM report is the suggestion of another DRC
            human rights organisation that most returnees who  are  detained
            belong  to  the  so-called  "black  list":  such  as  "political
            militants who  were  abroad  and  had  disturbed  the  Congolese
            authorities while in the UK." This organisation carries out some
            monitoring at the airport and is accessible to  returnees.   Its
            representative was unable to provide  any  illustration  of  the
            alleged ill treatment of a returnee.  This was also the position
            of another organisation whose  representative  was  interviewed.
            This representative continued:


                  "Those returnees who are detained and/or ill  treated  at
                  the airport have a specific profile.  ANR agents  are  on
                  social  media  and  have  managed  to  infiltrate   those
                  networks (such as Facebook and Twitter)  where  political
                  opponents exchange messages.  ANR agents can  easily  get
                  information on people's profiles ....


                  With regards to how various groups are treated  at  [the]
                  airport, there is not much difference  between  irregular
                  migrants and failed asylum seekers because  they  do  not
                  know who is who.  When people arrive, ANR  want  to  know
                  why people are returned, they take money from them."


           The representative added that charter flights are viewed by  the
           security and other related agencies as a good source of  illicit
           income.  So-called "combatants" are considered to  emanate  from
           the United Kingdom and  France.   The  French  Embassy  official
           confirmed that the only convicted offenders of interest  to  the
           DRC authorities are those known to have committed a very serious
           offence in the DRC.  Its representatives monitor events  at  the
           airport.  The official continued:


                  "Returnees are well treated and the Embassy could not see
                  what type of difficulties there could be."


           If anyone desires to do so, reports can be made to  a  range  of
           human rights and comparable organisations.


        23. The Kinshasa city police  commander  informed  the  interviewers
            that both DGM and ANR operate at the airport.  He suggested that
            simple questions are asked  of  returnees  for  the  purpose  of
            identifying  Congolese  nationals  returning  from  London   and
            Europe.  He provided examples of the broad spectrum  of  reasons
            why Congolese nationals might depart their country.   Finally  a
            separate  interview  with  the  International  Organisation  for
            Migration ("IOM") recorded the following:


                  "Many returnees are detained for 24/48  hours,  but  those
                  with a criminal background would be detained  longer.  DGM
                  may detain for migration problems, but IOM were not  aware
                  who would detain people in other circumstances ...


                  IOM were not aware how migrants and returnees  other  than
                  the voluntary ones it assists,  different  ethnic  groups,
                  returnees with criminal records or  those  returning  from
                  the UK are treated at the airport."

             In passing, we draw attention to the terminology  "a  criminal
             background" upon which we shall comment infra.  Returnees  who
             interact with IOM receive financial assistance,  ranging  from
             �500 to �2,500.



The Amnesty International Report

        24. Amnesty International ("AI") prepared what is  described  as  an
            "independent, expert opinion" in a litigation report,  dated  13
            February 2015, commissioned by the solicitors  representing  the
            Appellant DK.  Each  of  the  three  foreign  national  offender
            Appellants relied  on  this  report.   Its  author  is  one  Tom
            Southerden, who describes himself as a member  of  the  "Refugee
            Programme - Amnesty International UK".


        25.  Setting  the  scene,  the  report  documents  that  in  2003  a
            government of national unity was formed  in  the  DRC  following
            several  years  of  armed  insurgency,  invasion  and   numerous
            attempted coups.  The preceding conflict had been conducted in a
            brutal  and  indiscriminate  manner  by  all  sides,  generating
            several million  fatalities.   Enduring  concerns  about  sexual
            violence,  including  rape,  afflicting  both  men  and   women,
            perpetrated by state security sources, are expressed.   The  use
            of torture as a weapon against civilians, particularly detainees
            and prisoners, is a further concern.  The  security  forces  are
            described as inadequately monitored and  largely  undisciplined.
            The phenomena of theft and bribes are mentioned.   The  judicial
            and penal systems do not satisfy international  standards.   The
            government is described  as  "an  authoritarian  regime  gravely
            concerned by perceived  threats  to  its  position  and  chronic
            underinvestment (both in  financial  and  human  terms)  in  the
            organs of the Congolese state".  One of the consequences of this
            is "a tendency to use judicial and penal procedures as tools for
            punishing and silencing perceived government critics".


        26. The report also describes "the prevalence  of  arbitrary  arrest
            and detention of perceived regime opponents,  perceived  critics
            of the security forces  and  those  perceived  as  connected  to
            criminal activity".  The government agencies  engaged  in  these
            activities are the national police, the  intelligence  services,
            the national army and the migration  police.   Their  activities
            include  arbitrary  arrests  and  the  extortion  of  civilians.
            Corruption within these and other government agencies is one  of
            the recurring themes of this report and others.  The victims  of
            arbitrary arrests  have  included  perceived  opponents  of  the
            regime, particularly during the post-electoral period  in  2012.
            Some  of  these  arrests  have  given  rise  to  allegations  of
            incommunicado detention and torture.  The regime is described as
            fundamentally undemocratic  and  determined  not  to  relinquish
            power.  The report suggests the existence of "a pervasive  sense
            of  arbitrariness  and  impunity".    In  [42]  one  finds   the
            following encapsulation:

                  "The years  of  extreme  violence  and  mass  displacement
                  across the country, resulting in  economic  crisis  and  a
                  failure in human and social development, have  created  an
                  environment in which the rule of law is to a large  extent
                  absent."

            Many,  though  not  all,   of   the   concrete   instances   and
            illustrations provided in the report are of some  two  to  three
            years vintage.

        27. The report addresses the specific issue of the likely fate of  a
            returned foreign national offender.  It acknowledges that it  is
            "... difficult to speak with  confidence  about  what  procedure
            would occur  in  the  hypothetical  scenario  of  an  FNO  being
            returned".  AI's "understanding" of the prevailing procedures is
            expressed thus:


                  ".....   A  person  is  likely  to   be   interviewed   by
                  immigration officials on  return  in  order  to  ascertain
                  their identity, their residence and their  family  details
                  ...  If that information  is  not  already  known  to  the
                  authorities as part of the deportation process,  they  are
                  likely to be asked why they are being  returned,  if  they
                  have a criminal record or any criminal convictions in  the
                  UK  .....   Such  interviews  are  intended  to   be   for
                  administrative  purposes  and  (that)  a  deportee  should
                  therefore be released to their family once they have  been
                  completed. However, in view of the level of corruption and
                  arbitrary conduct described above, Amnesty considers there
                  to be a possibility that a person may be  detained  and/or
                  potentially mistreated in such a context, either  for  the
                  private gain of the officers concerned or as part  of  the
                  authority's wider law enforcement or political agenda."


              The  next  section  of  the  report  is  prefaced  with  this
    statement:


                  "This being said, Amnesty is particularly concerned at the
                  prospect of deportees with certain  particular  categories
                  of offence and profile being returned to the  DRC  at  the
                  present time, owing to  specific  developments  that  have
                  occurred in the DRC over the past 18 months."


             The first element of  this  concern  relates  to  a  concerted
             police operation in 2014 against organised street gangs in  an
             endeavour to eradicate all kinds of  street  crime,  known  as
             "Operation Likofi".  This gave rise to several hundred arrests
             and  detentions  and  the  reported  summary,   extra-judicial
             execution of at least nine men in  Kinshasa.   No  action  was
             taken against the suspected police perpetrators.   It  appears
             that this particular  operation  had  three  separate  phases.
             Having described it in extenso, the comment in the  AI  report
             is of note:


                  "It is in light of these events that Amnesty  would  raise
                  serious  concerns  regarding  the  prospect  of   criminal
                  deportees with relevant categories of offence, gender  and
                  age being returned to the DRC at the present time."


            Elaborating, the author suggests that relevant offences would be
            those which  "....  could  be  characterised  as  street  crime,
            including drugs, robbery and some forms of violence".


        28. The AI report expresses the following main concerns:


                  "In  light  of  the  background  human  rights  conditions
                  described in the previous section, in Amnesty's  view  any
                  detention by the DRC authorities carries with  it  a  real
                  risk of serious  mistreatment  or  other  conditions  that
                  violate the standards required by Article 3  of  the  ECHR
                  ....................


                  Moreover, Amnesty considers that  there  is  a  likelihood
                  that such individuals would be monitored by DRC police and
                  other  security  agencies,  as  the  DGM  (the   Congolese
                  Immigration  Service)  will  have  noted  their   criminal
                  history  and  informed  the  authorities  of  a   criminal
                  arriving in Kinshasa ....


                  In this regard  we  would  emphasise  the  declaration  by
                  Interior Minister Muyej of the government's  intention  to
                  expand Operation Likofi into a third phase."


             The author acknowledges  the  inability  of  AI  to  ascertain
             whether this operation or something  equivalent  has  in  fact
             been instigated.  Finally,  in  its  omnibus  conclusion,  the
             report states:


                  "[83]    In conclusion, after careful consideration  based
                      upon our expert understanding of the  situation  that
                      prevails in the DRC and the patterns of human  rights
                      violations recorded by our organisation  and  others,
                      Amnesty  International  wishes  to  express   serious
                      concerns as to the prospect of certain categories  of
                      foreign national offender being deported to  the  DRC
                      at this time.

                  [84] In the considered opinion of our  organisation,  such
                      individuals would face a real risk of serious harm or
                      other  ill-treatment  including   arbitrary   arrest,
                      incommunicado detention, torture  and  extra-judicial
                      killing  should  they  be  returned   to   the   DRC.
                      Furthermore, detention conditions  are  dire  and  in
                      themselves amount  to  cruel,  inhuman  or  degrading
                      treatment."


                  [Emphasis added:  and see [27] supra]


             The   report   ends   with   an   acknowledgement    of    the
             responsibilities of expert witnesses.


    The HRW Evidence


        29. The AI report,  summarised  above,  quotes  extensively  from  a
            report of Human Rights Watch ("HRW") published in November  2014
            relating to "Operation  Likofi".  There  is  also  some  written
            evidence emanating from HRW in January 2015.  This documents the
            use of government force in response to protests against proposed
            electoral law changes which, if implemented,  could  permit  the
            incumbent President, Mr Kabila, to extend his presidency  beyond
            the mandated two terms.  The adoption of this law  reform  would
            require a national census  in  advance  of  the  scheduled  next
            elections in  2016.   The  HRW  report  documents  at  least  21
            fatalities perpetrated by shooting by government security forces
            during demonstrations.  It also records the arbitrary arrest  of
            certain  opposition  leaders  and  others   in   January   2015,
            apparently linked to the  protests  and  demonstrations.   Other
            evidently unaccountable abuses by members of the security forces
            are also described. Comparable evidence is contained in a report
            of The Guardian newspaper, dated 20 January 2015.


    The Observer Newspaper Report


        30. This newspaper report is dated 15 February 2014.  Its  theme  is
            expressed in the opening paragraph in these terms:


                  "A top secret document circulating among senior police and
                  security  chiefs  in  the  Democratic  Republic  of  Congo
                  suggests that individuals deported from Britain  may  face
                  torture on their return to their home country."


             The document is described as "highly sensitive".  It  is  said
             to contain an instruction from the Ministry of the Interior to
             the national intelligence agency, the ANR:


                  "...   to  track  down  and  arrest   opponents   of   the
                  government,  including  members  of  the  main  opposition
                  party, the Union For Democracy and  Social  Progress,  and
                  suggests torture could be used with 'discretion'. Emphasis
                  is placed on targeting political activists living  in  the
                  UK and other parts of Europe who are forcibly  removed  to
                  the Congolese capital, Kinshasa.  They are referred to  as
                  'combatants',  or  traitors  considered  to  be   fighting
                  against the government".


             According  to  the  report,  the  UK  Government,  during  the
             previous two  years,  had  deported  only  a  handful  of  DRC
             nationals to their home country "due  to  concerns  about  the
             risk  of  torture".   However,  it  was  believed   that   the
             deportation of larger numbers was being planned.


    The Freedom from Torture Report


        31. Freedom from Torture  ("FFT"),  a  United  Kingdom  based  human
            rights organisation, published a report in  June  2014  entitled
            "Rape as Torture in the DRC".   The material on which the report
            is  based  is  34   medico-legal   reports   prepared   by   the
            organisation,  relating  to  women  who  claimed  to  have  been
            tortured in the DRC from 2006.   These  women  claimed  to  have
            suffered sexual violence  following  detention.   The  majority,
            according to the report -


                  "...  were targeted for detention as  a  result  of  their
                  political profile, or that of a member of their family, as
                  members or supporters of a legitimate political  or  civil
                  society organisation .....


                  23  of  the  34  women  were  detained  because  of  their
                  political  profile  or  that  of  a  family  member.   The
                  majority of these were associated with  the  Movement  for
                  the Liberation of Congo (MLC).  Other named  organisations
                  included the  Union  for  Democracy  and  Social  Progress
                  (UDSP) and Allianz of Patriots for the Refoundation of the
                  Congo (APARECO)".


             All of the women reported that they had been detained by state
             military, police or  intelligence  services,  arbitrarily  and
             without due  process.   They  described  very  poor  detention
             conditions.  All but one of them claimed to have been raped in
             detention and all of them alleged brutality.   They  recounted
             that they had previously campaigned for  the  organisation  to
             which  they  belonged,  recruited  new  members,  stored   and
             distributed publicity materials, attended  demonstrations  and
             protests and interacted with women in various ways.


    UKBA COI Report of March 2012


        32. In March 2012  the  UK  Border  Agency  ("UKBA")  published  its
            Country of Origin ("COI") report to DRC.  This  states,  in  its
            preface:


                  "The report provides general background information  about
                  the issues most commonly  raised  in  asylum/human  rights
                  claims made in the United Kingdom .....


                  The report is compiled wholly from material produced by  a
                  wider range of recognised external information sources and
                  does  not  contain  any  UKBA  opinion  or  policy.    All
                  information in the report is  attributed,  throughout  the
                  text, to the original source materials ....."


            In a later passage, the information  sources  are  described  as
            "reliable".  The report documents,  inter  alia,  the  political
            parties of the DRC, including the opposition parties.  It  makes
            no mention of the APARECO  organisation.   It  records  enduring
            concerns about the "overall  human  rights  situation"  in  DRC,
            continuing human rights abuses perpetrated by the state security
            sources and the  impunity  within  which  they  were  acting  is
            recorded.  These include  arbitrary  arrests  and  detention  in
            substandard incarceration facilities.  Human  rights  violations
            against opposition party members and supporters in the year 2011
            were noted.   The  composition  of  the  state  security  forces
            consists of  the  DRC  national  police  ("PNC"),  the  national
            intelligence agency ("ANR"), the armed forces ("FARDC") and  the
            border control agency  ("DGM").   The  lack  of  discipline  and
            training of the state security forces is highlighted.


        33. The report contains the following brief information relating  to
            the return of refugees to DRC:


                  "The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
                  noted ..... [in a 2011 publication] ....  'In January 2011
                  there were 107,900 returnee  refugees  (whose  country  of
                  origin was DRC) in the country  of  which  UNHCR  assisted
                  10,900.  In December 2011  there  were  145,500  of  which
                  UNHCR assisted 145,500.'"


             It also contains some information relating to  the  return  of
             failed asylum seekers, quoting from a report:


                  "The candidate does not get any assistance from the public
                  services.  Generally, he is not prosecuted unless  he  has
                  earlier committed a  crime  for  which  he  has  not  been
                  pardoned or  amnestied.  However,  the  candidate  can  be
                  hassled by agents willing to take some  of  his  goods  or
                  personal effects."


            Information  provided  by  the  Belgian   and   French   country
            information agencies contained no details of  ill  treatment  of
            failed asylum seekers.   However, one NGO documented the case of
            one returnee who apparently went underground  and  whose  family
            was subjected  to  surveillance.   Furthermore,  the  "Guardian"
            newspaper reported that two  returnees  had  been  detained  and
            tortured.  The International Organisation for Migration  ("IOM")
            in DRC reported that it had no information  concerning  the  ill
            treatment of returned  unsuccessful  asylum  seekers.   Ditto  a
            human rights organisation which specifically  supervised  events
            at the airport and reported only occasional extortion,  such  as
            the  forced  removal  of  belongings  from  returnees.   Another
            organisation suggested that suspected activists are the  subject
            of close attention from the state security services and  are  at
            risk  of  ill   treatment   or   prosecution.    These   include
            particularly "political opponents who made no  secret  of  their
            political position in European cities".


        34. The  COI  report  also  summarises  a  report  prepared  by  the
            organisation Justice First ("JF"), a United  Kingdom  NGO  which
            interacts with unsuccessful asylum claimants.   The  report  was
            published in November 2011.  It is the product of an examination
            of the cases of (inter alios) 15 adult returnees.  It states:


                  "The returnees in this report  were  perceived  or  actual
                  political opponents of the current DRC regime."


             Two of the 15 persons concerned were members of APARECO.  Some
             six were allegedly arrested at the airport, two were  arrested
             having left the airport, one was arrested  after  leaving  the
             British Embassy in Kinshasa and three were arrested  at  home.
             Some alleged ill treatment and sexual abuse  in  prison.   The
             report  also  contains  information  provided  by  "CRIP",   a
             collective organisation which operates as a  network  of  NGOs
             for   the   collection   of   information   on   reintegration
             possibilities  for  putative  returnees.   This   organisation
             reported that previous  illegal  departure  from  DRC  has  no
             negative consequences, except in the case of those who left to
             avoid prosecution or (apparently) those convicted  of  serious
             crimes. Furthermore, those who have been convicted  of  crimes
             in foreign countries are not at risk of prosecution.




    UKBA Operational Guidance Note of May 2012


        35. In May 2012 UKBA published its Operational Guidance Note ("OGN")
            relating to DRC. This contains a discrete section addressing the
            topic of suspected members of current or former rebel groups and
            treatment of perceived Government collaborators by rebel groups,
            which ends with this advice to case workers:


                  "Case owners must assess the level of any  involvement  of
                  the  applicant  with  any  rebel  group/group  member  and
                  whether such involvement would  now  attract  the  adverse
                  interests of the DRC authorities given the integration  of
                  many groups into the DRC armed forces."


             While this issue is not directly in point in these appeals,  we
             draw  attention  to  it  nonetheless  as  it  illustrates   the
             importance of periodic reassessment of different types of  risk
             and risk categories in changing circumstances with the  passage
             of time.  The OGN  also  considers  the  organisation  APARECO.
             This (based  on  its  website)  is  described  as  a  political
             opposition organisation with various  branches  throughout  the
             world, including the United Kingdom -


                  "...... A political  framework  for  dialogue  and  action
                  between political parties, NGOs and Congolese key  figures
                  who share the same patriotic vision."


             The  report  notes  that  there  is  no  evidence   that   the
             organisation has an office in Kinshasa, inviting  the  comment
             "....  Therefore it is difficult to ascertain  what  they  are
             trying to achieve in  practice  in  the  DRC".  There  was  no
             information suggesting that the organisation had  been  banned
             or that its members had suffered human rights  abuses  by  the
             security forces.  The report further observes:


                  "As regards political activity in the UK no evidence could
                  be  found  to  support  the  allegations  that   the   DRC
                  authorities have either the capacity or capability in  the
                  UK to monitor low  level  political  opponents,  including
                  those participating in anti-Government rallies in the UK."


            Finally, the report notes this Tribunal's decision  in  MM  that
            the level of risk to those  having,  or  perceived  to  have,  a
            political profile in opposition to the  DRC  Government  is  one
            which fluctuates in accordance with the political situation and,
            further, that low level members and/or sympathisers are  not  at
            real risk upon return.


        36. The OGN also addresses the issue of prison  conditions  in  DRC.
            It records concerns emanating from reliable sources  that  there
            is severe over crowding, a  lack  of  medical  facilities,  poor
            maintenance, ill treatment and  no,  or  inadequate,  sanitation
            facilities.   These  severe  shortcomings  embrace  both   large
            prisons and smaller detention centres which  have  evolved  from
            short  term  detention  to  prolonged  incarceration.   This  is
            summarised in the following passage:


                  "Prison conditions in the DRC are severe and  taking  into
                  account  the  severely  decayed  infrastructure,  lack  of
                  meaningful control by the authorities, torture and  abuses
                  of  inmates  and  extremely  poor  health  facilities  and
                  sanitary conditions, prison and  detention  facilities  in
                  the DRC are likely to reach the Article 3 threshold .....


                  Where individual applicants are able to demonstrate a real
                  risk of imprisonment on return to the  DRC  and  exclusion
                  [under Article  1F  of  the  Refugee  Convention]  is  not
                  justified, a grant of humanitarian protection is likely to
                  be appropriate."


             In this context and at this juncture, it is apposite to advert
             to the concession on behalf of the  Respondent  documented  in
             [13] above.

    UKBA COI Bulletin of February 2013


        37. In February 2013 UKBA published the  "Bulletin:  Statistics  and
            Information on the Treatment of Returns (to Kinshasa)".  This is
            a short report containing data relating to  the  return  of  DRC
            nationals to  their  country  of  origin  from  certain  western
            European states, Canada and Australia.  It draws on, inter alia,
            information provided by the  Inter  Governmental  Conference  on
            Migration, Asylum and Refugees ("IGC").  This organisation is an
            amalgam of 17 participating states, the UNHCR, the IOM  and  the
            European Commission.  The data relates to the period 2009 - 2012
            and was collated by the IGC in its survey of April 2012.  Eleven
            of the participating states reported that they were  unaware  of
            any reports or allegations that voluntary  or  forced  returnees
            had "faced difficulties and/or been mistreated"  upon  returning
            to  Kinshasa.   The  report  records  that,  pursuant  to  inter
            governmental agreement, the emergency  travel  document  ("ETA")
            issued  by  the  DRC  Embassy  in  the  transmitting  state   is
            acceptable to the  DRC  authorities.   Furthermore,  the  United
            Kingdom does not disclose whether those  returning  are  foreign
            national offenders or  unsuccessful  asylum  claimants.   Active
            monitoring by British Embassy officials at Kinshasa Airport  had
            disclosed nothing of an untoward nature.


        38. The COI bulletin also documents information provided by AI  (see
            [24] - [28] supra).  This information confirmed that AI does not
            have an office in DRC and,  further,  is  in  possession  of  no
            specific information about the ill  treatment  of  returned  DRC
            nationals.  The researcher was aware of the allegations  of  ill
            treatment contained in the JF  Report  (noted  in  [34]  above).
            There is a brief reference to UNHCR:

                  "Officials  should  note  that  the  UNHCR  supports   the
                  repatriation of 'refugees' to the DRC  predominantly  from
                  neighbouring African countries, not western Europe."

         It  also  notes  the  information  provided  by   HRW   that   this
         organisation, due to resource constraints, had not been  monitoring
         the treatment of  returned  DRC  nationals.   Finally,  the  report
         attaches a letter from the British Embassy in Kinshasa  documenting
         the unremarkable events at the  airport  following  the  return  of
         three "enforced returnees" from the United Kingdom.


    UKBA Country Policy Bulletin Number 2 of 2014


        39. In October 2014 the Home Office published  "Democratic  Republic
            of Congo (DRC) Policy Bulletin 2/2014"  ("the  Bulletin").   The
            purpose of this publication is expressed in the following terms:




                  "......  To update  the  policy  of  the  Home  Office  on
                  returns to the [DRC] in light of the judgment in R v SSHD,
                  ex parte P (DRC) and R v SSHD ex parte R (DRC) in December
                  2013 and the  further  information  referred  to  in  this
                  document."


            This report further states that it provides "up to  date  policy
            guidance", superseding the February 2014  report.   It  contains
            some of the most recent evidence of its kind available  to  this
            Tribunal.


        40. The Bulletin documents that various European  and  other  states
            continue to return DRC nationals to their country of origin.  It
            contains the following summary:


                  "These countries stated that they have  no  evidence  that
                  returnees are mistreated solely on the  ground  that  they
                  are returnees, or because of  where  they  have  travelled
                  from.  However, returnees might be  questioned  and  there
                  may be a short period  of  detention  as  part  of  normal
                  immigration controls."


             It continues:


                  "The information  from  IGC  states  also  noted  that  on
                  arrival returnees to the DRC, as  with  other  travellers,
                  might be subject  to  harassment,  including  attempts  at
                  extortion,  but  there  is  no  evidence  of  any  serious
                  mistreatment."


             ["IGC" denotes Inter Governmental Conference, an EU agency.]


             And in the next passage:


                  "The information provided by Belgium through the  IGC  and
                  to the DRC fact finding mission of June 2012 is especially
                  important as this is the former colonial  power  for  DRC,
                  with continuing strong links to the country.  The  Belgium
                  immigration authorities have returned significant  numbers
                  of Congolese FAS, have had allegations of mistreatment  of
                  returns which have been investigated and no  substance  to
                  the claims have [sic] been found."


            This bulletin further contends, based on the evidence  provided,
            that foreign national offenders returning to the DRC are not  at
            risk qua  this  status  and  that  those  returning  arouse  the
            interest of the DRC authorities only if they  are  suspected  of
            criminality in DRC or are the subject of  an  unexecuted  arrest
            warrant there.


        41. As regards the JF report of 2011, the Home Office maintains  its
            earlier stance, summarised thus:


                  "....  The report, when  considered  in  the  totality  of
                  country information, did not demonstrate that FAS  per  se
                  were at risk of ill treatment on return  to  the  DRC  and
                  therefore did not support the report's recommendation that
                  the Home Office needed to revise its policy on returns  to
                  the DRC."


            Annexed to the report are the various requests  for  information
            addressed to  the  participating  states  and  their  responses.
            These disclose nothing untoward.


        42. The Bulletin also  documents  the  British  High  Commission  of
            Nairobi's record of its meeting with the Director of the DGM  in
            January 2014.  In response to specific questions,  the  Director
            stated, inter alia:


            (a)    As  the  DGM  is  concerned  only  with  nationality  and
                  identity,  the  questioning  of  arriving  returnees   was
                  confined accordingly.


            (b)   There are no recorded  cases  of  the  DGM  detaining  any
                  returning DRC nationals.


            (c)   There is no record of any returning DRC national who had a
                  warrant outstanding in the country.


            (d)   Any criminal conviction outside DRC is irrelevant: this is
                  of no interest to DGM.


            (e)   The entirety of the process of identifying  the  returning
                  national, beginning with interviews in the United  Kingdom
                  and embracing document verification and the issue of  ETDs
                  in Kinshasa, is carried out by DGM.  The DRC Ambassador in
                  the United Kingdom has no role in this process.


            This  report  also  annexes  a  further  interview  of  the  DGM
            Director, in September 2014, together with a record of a meeting
            with a London based Congolese DGM official, to like effect.






    British Embassy (Kinshasa) Evidence: November/December 2014


        43. The first striking feature of  this  evidence  is  its  vintage.
            Having been generated in November/December 2014, it  constitutes
            the  most  recent  evidence  available  to  this  Tribunal.  The
            constituent elements of this evidence, all of it emanating  from
            the  British  Embassy  in  Kinshasa,  are  multiple,  which   we
            summarise thus:


            (i)   On 14 November 2014, an  Embassy  official  monitored  the
                  return of a DRC national  at  Kinshasa  airport.   Nothing
                  untoward occurred and follow up  enquiries  were  entirely
                  positive.


            (ii)  On 18 November 2014 first hand  information  was  obtained
                  from the Belgium Embassy relating to the return of 23  DRC
                  nationals  by  air  from   Belgium   to   Kinshasa.    The
                  information  supplied,  which  is  impressively  detailed,
                  yielded nothing untoward.  The official described "a  very
                  transparent relationship with both the DGM and ANR", added
                  to which no family members had communicated  any  concerns
                  or complications. Belgium had returned 172  DRG  nationals
                  since 2012, without any known problems.  The informant was
                  unaware of any harassment, detention or ill  treatment  of
                  APARECO members.  The interest of the DRC  Government  was
                  confined   to   "combatants".   We   interpose   here   an
                  observation: it is apparent from this report and others  -
                  and we so find - that the term "combatants" denotes  those
                  who have actively opposed the regime both historically and
                  by their activities overseas.


            (iii) On 20  November  2014  the  British  Embassy  in  Kinshasa
                  documented a discussion with  the  IOM  Chef  de  Mission.
                  "IOM" is the principal intergovernmental  organisation  in
                  the sphere of migration, established in 1951 to manage and
                  facilitate the resettlement of  an  estimated  11  million
                  migrants in Western Europe.  It was confirmed that the IOM
                  has  a  scheme  for  monitoring  voluntary  returning  DRC
                  nationals,  involving  observations  at  the  airport  and
                  embracing all types of returnees.  The informant reporting
                  nothing  untoward.   IOM  also  undertakes  contact   with
                  returning nationals subsequently.  It provides support  to
                  some returnees. This discrete report continues:


                      "The DRC authorities are not interested in whether  a
                      returnee is a FAS.  They  maybe  more  interested  in
                      whether a returnee has committed  a  crime  overseas,
                      but they do not request  this  information  from  IOM
                      ....  Sometimes when a person has committed a  crime,
                      the authorities want  to  know  its  nature  and  the
                      returnees are questioned by ANR .....


                      That process may take one to several hours, but  they
                      are released after being questioned.  As far  as  IOM
                      knows and from all information it has  received  from
                      informal sources at the airport,  returnees  are  not
                      put in a detention facility."


                  Finally, the Chef de Mission confirmed  that  IOM  has  no
                  evidence  of  the  ill  treatment  of  any  returning  DRC
                  national with whom IOM interacts as a result of  providing
                  reintegration assistance.


             (iv)  Next,  the  "Swiss   Premier   Collaborateur"   provided
                  information to the  British  Embassy  in  Kinshasa  on  20
                  November  2014.   This  official  had  responsibility  for
                  migration and human rights and had occupied his post since
                  June 2013. He reported:


                      "The DRC authorities have an interest  in  those  who
                      pose a political  risk,  or  who  are  a  high  level
                      activist  ...   He  did  not  think  that   the   DRC
                      authorities had an interest in those who  had  simply
                      applied for asylum and he  was  unsure  whether  they
                      would be interested in those who are FNOs as they had
                      never asked him for these details."


                  He  confirmed  that  all  DRC  nationals  returning   from
                  Switzerland are met by an embassy official,  normally  the
                  Consul, at Kinshasa airport, where there  was  appropriate
                  liaison with the DGM officials.


             (v)  On 02 December 2014 the French Immigration Officer  based
                  at the French Embassy  in  Kinshasa  since  2012  provided
                  information  to  the  British  Embassy  in  Kinshasa.   He
                  reported that during the period 2012  -  2014  France  had
                  returned some 150 DRC nationals to Kinshasa.   Information
                  relating  to  such  persons  is  provided   to   the   DRC
                  authorities only if they have been  convicted  of  serious
                  crimes  such  as  murder  or  rape.   Otherwise,   foreign
                  national offenders and failed asylum  seekers  are  of  no
                  interest to the DRC authorities.  The French Embassy  does
                  not monitor events at the airport and has no substantiated
                  evidence of ill treatment.


             (vi) On 10 December 2014 the Embassy compiled a  report  of  a
                  discussion with the Executive Director of a Kinshasa based
                  human rights organisation which promotes and defends human
                  rights and democracy in DRC.  This  organisation  monitors
                  the return of DRC  nationals  to  Kinshasa  airport.   The
                  interviewee described a level of  co-operation  with  DGM.
                  Airport  monitoring  was  carried  out  on  two  or  three
                  occasions in 2013.   Some  interviewed  returnees  may  be
                  extorted by DGM or ANR officials.  The Executive  Director
                  considered that the DRC  authorities  have  no  particular
                  interest in failed  asylum  seekers  or  foreign  national
                  offenders.   Their  interest  would,  rather,  relate   to
                  returning  nationals  in  respect  of  whom  there  is  an
                  unexecuted arrest warrant.  DGM maintains a  "black  list"
                  of persons who are subjected to further questioning by the
                  ANR.  The black listed categories are persons  in  respect
                  of whom there are unexecuted arrest warrants  in  DRC  and
                  "opposition political activists, for example those who had
                  plotted a coup against the Government or who were believed
                  to  have  been  involved  in  attacks  against   Congolese
                  authorities  whilst  visiting  overseas."   The  Executive
                  Director was not aware  of  any  returning  failed  asylum
                  seeker or foreign  national  offender  having  experienced
                  problems upon arrival.  He provided a brief description of
                  the arrest and detention of  three  persons  who  did  not
                  belong to these categories. He described "rare"  instances
                  of returning  nationals  who  contacted  his  organisation
                  subsequently to report that ANR was displaying an interest
                  in them.  Finally,  he  suggested  that  the  organisation
                  APARECO operates clandestinely in DRC and that some of its
                  members were amongst those who had recently been granted a
                  pardon by the President.


             (vii)    There is a further British Embassy (Kinshasa)  report
                  dated 12 December 2014 of a  meeting  with  the  UN  Human
                  Rights Co-ordinator who had been in  DRC  for  two  years.
                  Asked whether the DRC authorities  have  any  interest  in
                  returning  failed  asylum  seekers  or  foreign   national
                  offenders, he replied in the negative.   While  there  had
                  been some reports of subsequent arrest  or  harassment  of
                  returning nationals, none of these  persons  had  emanated
                  from the United Kingdom.  The  interviewee  believed  that
                  the interest of the DRC authorities was focused on  "those
                  linked to  radical  opposition  political  parties".   His
                  organisation had no substantiated reports of ill treatment
                  of any returning DRC nationals.  It  does  not  carry  out
                  monitoring at the airport.  He confirmed that APARECO does
                  not operate openly in DRC and believed  that  one  British
                  national of DRC origin had been arrested while on  holiday
                  in DRC on the ground that he was a member of some  radical
                  opposition party.


             (viii)   This collection of British Embassy (Kinshasa) reports
                  is completed by one relating to  a  person  who  had  been
                  returned to DRC from the United Kingdom in  October  2014.
                  This  person  returned  under  the  "Facilitated   Returns
                  Scheme".  Prior to returning he had been interviewed by  a
                  DRC official in  the  United  Kingdom  and  had  disclosed
                  information about his offending there, together with other
                  personal  and  family  data.   Upon  arrival  at  Kinshasa
                  airport he underwent an evidently  routine  DGM  interview
                  and experienced no problems.  Since returning neither  DGM
                  nor ANR had displayed any interest in him.

V.   EXPERT EVIDENCE

        44. The Appellants relied on a report of Dr Erik Kennes, which bears
            the date 27 October 2014, updated on 04 February  2015.   In  an
            accompanying witness statement, Dr Kennes explains that  he  was
            unable to engage his first choice researcher.  In his place,  he
            recruited a researcher whom  he  describes  as  "experienced  in
            research  about  APARECO  and  other  issues".    This   witness
            statement was compiled in the wake of a case management  hearing
            when the Tribunal criticised Dr Kennes' failure to  produce  his
            report on time.


        45. Chapter 3 of Dr Kennes' report is  devoted  to  the  subject  of
            failed asylum seekers returning to DRC.  The author acknowledges
            several difficulties in assembling qualitative and  quantitative
            data  on  this  topic.   He  recounts  that  the  mechanism   of
            "undercover research" was used for compiling a previous  report,
            during the period November to December 2009.  Thus it is now  of
            over five years vintage. The  author  further  acknowledges  the
            inherent weaknesses in this research  methodology.   He  asserts
            that the researcher is an  expert  in  his  field,  one  of  the
            leading political scientists in  DRC.   Those  interviewed  were
            officials of DGM, ANR and ordinary functionaries at the airport.

        46. Dr Kennes opines  that,  as  regards  returning  nationals,  the
            attention of the DRC authorities is focused  on  those  who  are
            "currently  perceived  as  a  threat".   This  will   fluctuate,
            according  to  changing   circumstances.    If   a   person   is
            "specifically targeted for judicial or for political reasons, or
            both", detention upon return is likely.  If not, liberty will be
            guaranteed by the payment of a bribe.   DGM  officials  receive,
            identify and verify the  travel  tickets,  identity  papers  and
            resident's permits of those arriving.  They work in tandem  with
            the ANR. Bribery is to the forefront of  the  officials'  minds.
            There is no evidence of ill treatment connected with questioning
            at the airport.  Officials ascertain whether  the  name  of  the
            interviewee is on "a list of persons  wanted  by  the  Country's
            Justice or Security Services".  This will include those who were
            prohibited  from  leaving  the  country.   There  is  a  further
            discrete group of those who used  false  documents  when  either
            leaving or entering the country, thereby committing  an  offence
            which can result in detention and prosecution.  The  authorities
            will also have an interest in identifying any returning national
            who had escaped from prison.  Persons who commit the offence  of
            false testimony are also at risk of prosecution.


        47. Dr Kennes also provides the example of a national who publicised
            state secrets and then fled abroad.  A  further  discrete  group
            which he identifies is that of "trouble makers in  Europe".   He
            gives the further example of a participant  in  a  demonstration
            abroad who "..... uses  violence,  destroys  property  or  harms
            other persons": such persons are at  risk  of  prosecution  upon
            returning to DRC.  Another discrete group  of  persons  at  risk
            upon return are those who have engaged in  attempted  or  actual
            attacks against  visiting  Congolese  Government  officials,  or
            others perceived as supporters of the  Government,  abroad.   In
            this context, the author describes the  Congolese  community  in
            the United Kingdom as  "very  active  and  aggressive",  without
            particulars.  Based on this unparticularised premise, he asserts
            that  such  persons  are  "very  thoroughly  interrogated"  upon
            returning to DRC, without  any  supporting  evidence.   He  also
            discloses an article in  a  pro-Congolese  Government  newspaper
            suggesting that in February 2011  armed  assailants  originating
            from the Congolese diaspora attempted to kill the Head of State.
             Strikingly, Dr  Kennes  acknowledges  that  this  is  the  only
            example of its kind.


        48. Dr  Kennes  also  provides  information  and  expresses  certain
            opinions relating to the APARECO organisation, or movement.   He
            suggests that it is perceived  as  "a  serious  threat"  to  the
            President as it is very influential  in  shaping  the  political
            opinion of the Diaspora and public opinion abroad.  The movement
            was founded in 2005  by  the  former  security  advisor  to  the
            deposed  President.   The  author  suggests  that  the  movement
            advocates a radical nationalism.   It  is  difficult  to  assess
            whether the organisation has any "nuisance" capacity in DRC.  It
            campaigns  relentlessly  against  the   present   regime.    The
            organisation is believed to have infiltrated  the  security  and
            defence services, although this cannot be substantiated.  At DRC
            ports of entry there are lists of APARECO activists  in  Europe.
            Dr Kennes opines that APARECO  members  and  militants  who  are
            returned to DRC as failed asylum seekers -

             "....  ranked among the category of people who run the highest
             level of risk for detention, arrest  and  cruel,  inhuman  and
             degrading treatment during interrogations."

            While this passage apparently refers to circumstances prevailing
            in 2009, the author adds that this  is  "....   still  the  case
            today and the situation seems to be worse now": notably, without
            elaboration or particulars.  Dr Kennes suggests that  ANR  holds
            data relating to the  office  holders  of  APARECO  and  kindred
            organisations and thinks it "likely" that  there  is  also  data
            about individual members.  He is unable to provide any  evidence
            to substantiate this belief.  He refers to  the  arrest  of  two
            APARECO militants who had demonstrated against  the  arrival  in
            Kinshasa of President Sarkozy.  This occurred in 2009.  The most
            recent newspaper excerpts in Dr Kennes' report are  dated  2011.
            In a later passage in his report, Dr  Kennes  repeats  that  the
            "most important" office bearers in APARECO are registered by the
            ANR.  We note  that  this  does  not  encompass  rank  and  file
            members.

        49. The ANR  and  DGM  officials  interviewed  (in  2009)  described
            APARECO as "the most dangerous opposition movement abroad".  The
            report continues:


                  "According to all interviewed persons, it  is  very  risky
                  for APARECO members or militants to return to the DRC as a
                  failed returned asylum seeker.   They  are  considered  as
                  dangerous and will be arrested on return to  get  as  much
                  information as possible about the movement, its membership
                  and activities.  I have been asked whether  this  is  just
                  the case  for  prominent  members  or  whether  low  level
                  members would also be at risk. APARECO involvement  proven
                  with pictures of participation in demonstrations  or  with
                  formal membership is always a risk.   The  DRC  Government
                  evidently wants to neutralise this movement and  needs  to
                  have as much information as possible."


             Dr Kennes acknowledges that it is impossible to ascertain  how
             many failed asylum seekers have been arrested or  detained  in
             DRC on account  of  their  actual  or  alleged  membership  of
             APARECO.   While  the  ANR  claimed  to  have  arrested   some
             "militants" who attempted to  enter  through  other  ports  of
             entry for  the  purpose  of  organising  undercover  political
             activities inside DRC, there is no  example  of  a  comparable
             arrest or ensuing  detention  following  arrival  at  Kinshasa
             airport from any foreign state.  Having regard to  Dr  Kennes'
             answer to  one  of  the  questions  posed  on  behalf  of  the
             Respondent, it would appear  that  his  most  recent  research
             concerning APARECO dates from early 2012.

VI.  APARECO: FURTHER EVIDENCE

        50. It is convenient to note at this juncture  the  feature  of  the
            fifth Appellant, AA, which distinguishes  her  appeal  from  the
            other four, namely her asserted  role  in  APARECO  (UK).   This
            Appellant makes the case that she has been a member  of  APARECO
            (UK) since 2010 and  has  held,  within  the  organisation,  the
            portfolio of "womens' representative" or "womens' adviser" since
            2012.  We  shall  consider  in  greater   detail   the   various
            ingredients of her case in Chapter VIII infra.  We have outlined
            above those aspects of the reports already digested which  touch
            on the topic of APARECO:  see  [18],  [20],  [43](iv)  and  (vi)
            [indirectly] and [48].  There is  a  separate  body  of  APARECO
            evidence, constituted by and related to the  testimony  received
            from two witnesses during the appeal hearing.  We consider  this
            further evidence in the  immediately  following  paragraphs.  We
            also draw attention to our summary of the  written  evidence  of
            the Appellant AA, in [97] - [98] infra.


        51. The Tribunal heard evidence from a person whom we shall identify
            as JM, who had previously made two witness statements,  in  July
            2012, in  support  of  AA's  first  instance  appeal  and,  more
            recently, in January 2015.  It is not in dispute that  JM  is  a
            national of DRC and was granted asylum in the United Kingdom  in
            January 2012. He avers that he has been involved in APARECO  for
            several years and has been an office bearer of the organisation.
             He asserts that he has known the fifth Appellant since mid-2010
            and she became a member of the organisation quickly  thereafter.
            She  has  attended  monthly  meetings  in  her  region  and  has
            participated in various APARECO  events  throughout  the  United
            Kingdom.  JM has been President of the North West  Region  since
            May 2012, at which  stage  he  appointed  this  Appellant  to  a
            committee  post  of  "Womens'  Representative",  which  embraces
            recruitment responsibilities.  The organisation has  five  urban
            regions in the United Kingdom.  JM describes this Appellant as a
            committed member who mobilises women in the DRC  United  Kingdom
            Diaspora, encourages new  members  and  raises  awareness  about
            events in their country.  AA and a team of other  women  members
            organise events and meetings,  which  includes  the  display  of
            banners and the distribution of information leaflets.   Attached
            to one of JM's witness statements is a  schedule  purporting  to
            demonstrate that the Appellant AA participated in several public
            APARECO events in the United Kingdom in 2013 and  2014  and  has
            also attended various internal committee leader's meetings.   JM
            also describes the Appellant's spouse as a committed and  active
            member of the organisation and someone whom he appointed as  his
            North West Vice President.


        52. In his evidence to  the  Tribunal,  JM  asserted  that  the  DRC
            Government mistrusts APARECO and that  anyone  identified  as  a
            member of the organisation is arrested and  imprisoned:  without
            elaboration or particulars.  APARECO operates underground in DRC
            and is supported by  its  United  Kingdom  branch.   It  has  no
            membership list in DRC.  In the United Kingdom, the organisation
            has an elevated  security  awareness,  manifested  by  the  non-
            publication of  certain  office  bearers'  names,  estimated  at
            between  10  and  20   persons.    He   described   an   APARECO
            demonstration at the Savoy Hotel,  London  on  20  October  2014
            which was attended by infiltrators (or "spies")  from  President
            Kabila with the intent of attacking members, resulting in two or
            three arrests by the police. This witness referred to a  letter,
            dated 21 November 2011, signed by a person describing himself as
            the President of  APARECO  (UK).   This  takes  the  form  of  a
            testimonial  relating  to  the  fifth  Appellant,  AA.   It  was
            evidently connected with AA's claim for asylum, made at the same
            time.  Stated succinctly,  this  testimonial  corroborates  many
            aspects of AA's  claims  relating  to  her  involvement  in  the
            organisation.

        53. JM also claimed that the President of the Maryland (USA)  branch
            of APARECO had been attacked by President  Kabila's  guards  and
            injured upon attempting to erect a protest poster. He  explained
            that the organisation is cautious about admitting  new  members,
            for security reasons. There is a vetting  process.   Previously,
            the procedure entailed the completion  of  an  application  form
            with photograph and the issue of a  membership  card.   In  2013
            membership cards were discarded and, thenceforth, membership was
            simply recorded in internal census records.  Only office bearers
            such as this witness are in possession  of  this  material.   He
            claimed that both the Appellant AA  and  her  husband  would  be
            identified upon return to DRC because their photographs  are  on
            the APARECO website and on YouTube.   He  confirmed  that  their
            names are not published anywhere on  the  APARECO  website.   He
            claimed to be unaware of the outcome of the  asylum  application
            of AA's husband.  He was unable to say whether AA was a  speaker
            at any of the public  events  allegedly  attended  by  her.   He
            suggested that APARECO members can be identified  by  spying  or
            infiltration and from website photographs.   He  was  unable  to
            provide details, even an estimate, of the  numerical  membership
            of APARECO  in  the  United  Kingdom.   He  suggested  that  the
            organisation has  a  larger  presence  in  the  French  speaking
            countries of Belgium and France.  He  confirmed  that  decisions
            about what is posted on the website are  taken  with  care,  for
            security reasons, by headquarters in France.

        54. In what was to become the centrepiece of his  evidence,  JM,  in
            the context of  claiming that the DRC authorities do not  permit
            APARECO members to return to their country of  origin,  asserted
            that the "last example" was the arrest of a male  member  on  02
            October 2009, who was secretary of the  UK  Midlands  Committee.
            [This person is identified as Mr "XY" henceforth.]  JM testified
            that he learned of this only two days previously  and  that  the
            source of his information was the Executive National  Secretary,
            whom we shall identify as  PL.   He  also  referred  vaguely  to
            receiving some limited information from  an  APARECO  member  in
            DRC.  He testified that the 2009 episode is  not  documented  in
            any record.

        55. Another witness, whom we shall  describe  as  PL,  also  made  a
            witness statement and  gave  evidence  to  the  Tribunal.   This
            witness is the person described in the evidence  of  JM  as  the
            Executive National Secretary of APARECO (UK).  He gave  evidence
            relating to XY, whom he  said  was  Secretary  of  the  Midlands
            Branch of APARECO (UK) at a  time  when  this  witness  was  its
            President.  He asserted that  XY  was  arrested  at  his  United
            Kingdom home in September 2009 and deported to DRC on 02 October
            2009.  On returning to DRC  he  was  arrested  by  the  ANR  and
            detained in Mahala Prison, from which  he  escaped,  fleeing  to
            Paris where he was granted either asylum or indefinite leave  to
            remain. He described XY as an  important,  very  active  member,
            whose  name  was  not  published  on  the  APARECO  website.  He
            suggested that any "active" member of APARECO is in danger.

        56. Under cross examination, PL, elaborating, asserted that  XY  had
            contacted him from Paris about two months after his  deportation
            from the United Kingdom, informing him  of  his  arrest  at  the
            airport upon return  to  DRC.   When  asked  why  this  was  not
            recounted in his witness statement, he replied that  he  "wasn't
            asked" about this.  He claimed that "everyone in  APARECO"  knew
            about XY's case.  In response to questions from the Tribunal, PL
            stated that he had known JM since 2011, describing him as a very
            active member of the organisation.  He  testified  unequivocally
            that he did not provide JM with  information  about  XY's  case,
            which he reiterated was a "very notorious"  one.   He  confirmed
            that the Savoy Hotel protest had been directed to both President
            Kabila and the Rwandan President, Mr Kagame, both of  whom  were
            described in a banner as "War Criminals".  He agreed that  those
            arrested could have been expatriate Rwandan nationals.

        57. As the hearing progressed, a statement in the name of Mr XY was,
            belatedly, produced.  The Tribunal admitted both this  statement
            and  a  new  bundle  of  Respondent's  materials  generated   in
            response.   We  summarise  his  witness  statement   thus.    XY
            describes himself as an unsuccessful asylum applicant who  lived
            in the United Kingdom from 2003 to 2009.  He  was  Secretary  of
            the APARECO West Midlands Urban  Committee  for  several  years,
            during the Presidency of PL.  He believes that his name  was  at
            no time published on the APARECO website.  On 02 October 2009 he
            was deported from the United Kingdom to Kinshasa, where  he  was
            escorted from the plane by  ANR  officials.   During  subsequent
            interrogation they described him  as  an  active  combatant  and
            claimed that they had intelligence about him and others.  He was
            removed from the airport, following which  he  was  tortured  in
            Makala Prison, where he was detained for  some  two  weeks.   He
            escaped from prison with help from friends and, in  due  course,
            flew out of Kinshasa.  He claimed asylum upon arrival  in  Paris
            at the end of 2009.  The French authorities granted him asylum.

        58. There was no opportunity to probe XY's evidence as  he  did  not
            attend the hearings.  It is  appropriate  at  this  juncture  to
            outline  the  Respondent's  response  to  this  aspect  of   the
            Appellants' case. It was emphasised in argument that there is no
            documentary corroboration  whatsoever  of  either  the  relevant
            parts of the testimony of  JM  or  PL  or  the  belated  witness
            statement of XY.   The  documents  produced  by  the  Respondent
            confirm that XY entered the United Kingdom on 14  December  2003
            and applied for asylum the following  day,  unsuccessfully.   On
            appeal, the Adjudicator found his claim of arrest, ill treatment
            and escape from detention in DRC implausible.   The  Asylum  and
            Immigration Tribunal made the same conclusion.   It  is  further
            documented that XY's spouse also claimed asylum  in  the  United
            Kingdom, unsuccessfully and her  appeal  was  dismissed  by  the
            Adjudicator. Her account was considered  to  be  untruthful  and
            unreliable.  In July 2010 her solicitors made  detailed  written
            representations to UKBA on her behalf.  One aspect of these  was
            her asserted active membership of APARECO and a letter from  the
            organisation was provided.   These  representations  and  letter
            post-dated XY's alleged arrest and torture in DRC by  some  nine
            months.  These events are nowhere mentioned, notwithstanding the
            specific contention by XY's spouse that by virtue of her APARECO
            membership and activities she would be at risk  of  torture  and
            death if returned to DRC.  Mrs XY was granted  indefinite  leave
            to remain in the United Kingdom and, subsequently,  in  February
            2012  applied  for  naturalisation.   In  her  application   she
            provided details  of  her  husband,  including  his  address  in
            France.

VII. THE COUNTRY AND EXPERT EVIDENCE: DISCUSSION AND
     CONCLUSIONS

        59. In [5] above we stated that our determination of  these  appeals
            is based upon our evaluation of all of the evidence  adduced  in
            the round.  The Tribunal is  concerned  fundamentally  with  the
            relative  strength,  reliability,  cogency,  persuasiveness  and
            vintage of the various  components  of  the  evidential  jigsaw.
            That this is the central task for the Tribunal is  confirmed  by
            the submissions, both written and oral, of the parties.  We have
            considered these in full and intend no disservice  to  able  and
            industrious Counsel by not reproducing them in extenso.  In very
            brief compass, the main  sparring  in  the  parties'  respective
            submissions related to the accuracy, independence,  reliability,
            objectivity,    adequacy   of   methodology,   consistency   and
            corroboration  of  the  various  strands  of  evidence  and  the
            providers thereof.  See TK (Tamils - LP Updated)  Sri  Lanka  CG
            [2009] UKAIT 00049, at [5] and NA - v - United Kingdom [2009] 48
            EHRR 15, at [132] - [135].


        60. At this juncture, it is convenient to consider the  decision  of
            the Administrative Court in R (P and R - DRC) - v - Secretary of
            State for the Home Department [2013] EWHC  3879  (Admin).   This
            involved two combined applications for judicial  review  whereby
            the Claimants challenged clearly unfounded certifications by the
            Secretary  of  State  under  section  94  of  the   Nationality,
            Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the "2002 Act"), in the case of
            P and, in the case of R, a decision under paragraph 353  of  the
            Immigration  Rules  whereby  further  representations  were  not
            considered to constitute a fresh human rights or  asylum  claim.
            The  two  Claimants  were,  respectively,  a  foreign   national
            offender (P) and a failed asylum applicant (R).  The claim of  P
            succeeded, whereas that of R was dismissed. Notably, Phillips  J
            highlighted the desirability of a country guidance  decision  of
            this Tribunal on the subject of returns to DRC.

        61. We agree with Ms Lieven QC that  the  narrow  juridical  context
            within which the P case was decided must be recognised.   We  do
            not need to embark upon an extensive analysis of whether [53]  -
            [55] of the judgment of Phillips J are obiter.  We  consider  it
            more important to acknowledge  the  litigation  context  and  to
            highlight the obvious and substantial  differences  between  the
            evidential matrix in Re P and R and  its  counterpart  in  these
            combined appeals.  Furthermore, this Tribunal does  not  operate
            within the shackles of the purely  supervisory  jurisdiction  of
            the Administrative Court.  Rather, we are in the  shoes  of  the
            FtT, re-making its decision in each of  the  conjoined  appeals.
            We observe further that Re P and R entailed the  application  of
            the clearly unfounded standard. For these  reasons,  insofar  as
            any of the Appellants contended that the outcome of any of these
            appeals is dictated by the decision in Re P and  R,  we  do  not
            agree.   We  have  also   considered   the   decision   of   the
            Administrative Court in R (BCT) - v - Secretary of State for the
            Home Department [2014] EWHC 4265.  This decision highlights  the
            intrinsically  fluctuating  nature  of  cases   in   which   the
            conditions prevailing in certain foreign countries at any  given
            time fall to be considered by a court or  tribunal.   Correctly,
            none of  the  parties  suggested  that  either  of  these  first
            instance decisions is binding on this expert Tribunal.


        62. We turn to consider the expert evidence of  Dr  Kennes  at  this
            juncture.  The expertise and credentials of this witness are not
            in  dispute.   While  it  was  pointed  out  on  behalf  of  the
            Respondent  that  his  evidence  and  opinions  have  not   been
            universally accepted by the Upper Tribunal in previous  appeals,
            we consider that this does not detract from his expertise in the
            field in question.  Notwithstanding, we have concluded that  his
            report does not qualify to be accorded  substantial  weight  and
            lacks the force and cogency of other evidence, which we  prefer,
            for the following reasons.

        63. We take into account that Dr Kennes was not available for  cross
            examination and that his sources are  impossible  to  test.   We
            note in particular that significant  portions  of  his  evidence
            relate to research which was carried out as long  ago  as  2009.
            In the fluid and fluctuating conditions in  DRC,  this  research
            can only be considered outdated.  Furthermore, we are  concerned
            that Dr Kennes failed to  make  this  clear  in  his  report  or
            accompanying witness statement:  the  marked  antiquity  of  the
            research emerged only in response to a specific  question  posed
            by the Respondent in accordance with the Tribunal's  directions.
            We are obliged to comment that this is unacceptable.   Next,  Dr
            Kennes fails to deal with the post-2012 evidence, of which there
            is a substantial quantity.  There is no apparent reason for this
            failure.  Insofar as Dr Kennes was unaware of this evidence, his
            expertise is undermined.  Alternatively, if he was aware of  the
            evidence, the strength of his  report  is  compromised  by  this
            failure.

        64.  A  further  notable  feature  of  Dr  Kennes'  report  is   the
            proliferation of, in  short  hand,  "risk  opinions"  which  are
            unsupported by empirical or other evidence and amount to  little
            more than bare assertion and/or  subjective  opinion.   This  is
            illustrated by his claim,  unsupported  by  any  evidence,  that
            failed returned asylum seekers  are  (seemingly)  identified  as
            such upon return and are handcuffed, followed by questioning  at
            the airport. Another illustration is  the  author's  failure  to
            evaluate critically the February  2011  report  in  a  newspaper
            considered to be pro-Government.   Neither  the  source  of  the
            claim broadcast therein (that there was an armed attempt to kill
            the  President)  nor  any  supporting  evidence   is   provided.
            Furthermore, Dr Kennes' ensuing claim that  since  this  article
            was published "the situation has not changed"  is  made  without
            particularisation or elaboration. In addition, significantly, Dr
            Kennes provides no supporting evidence whatsoever of  his  claim
            that all members of APARECO are at risk upon returning  to  DRC.
            His tried,  trusted  and  experienced  researcher  uncovered  no
            evidence whatever of this. This is not a criticism of either the
            author  or  the  researcher.   It  is,  rather,   an   objective
            evaluation which undermines the  strength  and  cogency  of  the
            report.   Furthermore,  the  Tribunal  has  no   hesitation   in
            accepting one of the central  themes  of  Dr  Kennes'  evidence,
            namely that the focus of the DRC authorities will be on  persons
            who are, at the relevant moment  in  time,  perceived  to  be  a
            significant threat to the  regime.  However,  one  of  the  main
            weaknesses  of  the  report  is  the  absence  of  any  evidence
            supporting the thesis that all,  or  certain,  foreign  national
            offenders and all, or certain, failed asylum seekers  belong  to
            this broad category.


        65.  Next,  we  turn  to  consider  the  evidence   concerning   the
            pronouncements of the DRC Ambassador to the United Kingdom:  see
            [16]-[17] above.  The Appellants place substantial  reliance  on
            the  content  of  the  Member  of  Parliament's   letter.    Our
            evaluation of this discrete package of evidence is as follows:-

              a) There is no indication that the meeting in question  had  a
                 formal agenda.


              b) Considered in isolation, the  comments  attributed  to  the
                 Ambassador appear to be impromptu  statements,  laced  with
                 some hyperbole and puff.


              c) There is no agreed record of the  meeting:  in  particular,
                 the Ambassador was not given the opportunity to respond  to
                 any note or record thereof.


              d) The Ambassador's letter of 16 August 2012 to the Member  of
                 Parliament  has  the  character  of  a  swift  response  to
                 something coming to  his  attention,  arising  out  of  the
                 meeting, which he was anxious to correct speedily.


              e) The pre-penultimate sentence  of  the  Ambassador's  letter
                 adverts to those deported from the United  Kingdom  to  DRC
                 "for having committed a crime".  While this terminology  is
                 somewhat cryptic and the clause "to prevent  him  from  his
                 criminal  activities"  requires  interpretation,   we   are
                 satisfied that in this passage the Ambassador is  referring
                 to  the  administrative  migration  checks  in  respect  of
                 everyone, conducted by DGM officials at  Kinshasa  Airport,
                 about  which  there  is  an  abundance  of  consistent  and
                 credible evidence (see our summary in  Chapter  IV  above).
                 Furthermore, in  this  respect,  the  Ambassador  expressed
                 himself in entirely consistent terms  in  the  two  letters
                 written by him.


              f)        Generally,  the  Ambassador's  written  response  is
                 consistent with a not insubstantial  quantity  of  evidence
                 pertaining  to  the  issues  which  it  addresses:  see  in
                 particular [39]-[43] above.


              g)  There  is  no  evidence  that  the  Member  of  Parliament
                 rejoined, challenging the Ambassador's letter.


              h) Approximately nine months later, when the  occasion  arose,
                 the Ambassador formally repeated his correction,  again  by
                 letter and the analysis in (d) - (f) above applies.


        66. Summarising, there are two  conflicting  versions  of  what  the
            Ambassador stated on the occasion in  question,  in  July  2012.
            The Tribunal,  as  arbiter  of  fact,  takes  into  account  the
            analysis set out above.  We also weigh  the  consideration  that
            neither of the two protagonists concerned gave evidence  or  was
            cross examined in these proceedings.   Having  regard  to  other
            evidence, we are also alert to the risk that the Ambassador  may
            have been truthful in his initial  remarks  and  has  sought  to
            cover his tracks subsequently.  However, there is  an  abundance
            of evidence, credible and consistent, which indicates that  even
            if the Ambassador expressed himself at the meeting in the  terms
            alleged, his  words  were  inaccurate  and/or  exaggerated,  for
            whatever reason.  If spoken, we  consider  it  likely  that  his
            remarks were directed to persons who fled justice when they left
            DRC, in circumstances where they had been convicted of  or  were
            suspected of grave crimes.  Plainly,  the  Ambassador  does  not
            sign the "deportation papers" in respect of any DRC national: if
            he did claim to do so,  this  was  pure  fiction.   Thus  if  he
            uttered these words, they attract no  weight.   We  consider  it
            more likely, however, that he was referring to the role  of  the
            DRC United Kingdom Embassy in the provision of travel  documents
            to proposed deportees.  Finally, we note the consistency between
            the Ambassador's subsequent letters and certain  other  evidence
            to which we propose to attach substantial  weight,  particularly
            that digested in [37]-[43] above.


        67. For the reasons elaborated above, we conclude that the  evidence
            relating  to  the  Ambassador's   alleged   statement   at   the
            Parliamentary  meeting  in  July  2012  does  not  advance   the
            Appellants' cases.

        68. We consider next the AI report, summarised at  [24]-[28]  above.
            Whilst addressing the risks facing a returning foreign  national
            offender this report acknowledges that it is difficult to  speak
            'with confidence' about a hypothetical FNO being returned.   Its
            view is accordingly tentative.   We  are  not  restricted  to  a
            consideration of a hypothetical return because there is evidence
            before us of  actual  returns.   AI's  "understanding"  must  be
            viewed in this light.  Their opinion (we  emphasise  this  word)
            that a  person  is  likely  to  be  interviewed  by  immigration
            officials on return in order to ascertain their identity,  their
            residence and their family details has to be weighed against the
            fact that returnees (where necessary)  will  already  have  been
            provided with travel documentation which will have  been  issued
            in the United Kingdom by the DRC  authorities  which  would,  we
            infer, have been issued only after sufficient checks  have  been
            made. AI accepts these are  'for  administrative  purposes',  in
            other words, for the legitimate purpose of checking  information
            without thereby implying a sinister motive that might lead to an
            individual being placed at risk. Whilst there is corruption  and
            arbitrary conduct, this does  not  amount  to  a  real  risk  of
            serious harm and the possibility of detention  and  mistreatment
            is insufficient to violate an individual's Convention rights but
            is, in any event, not supported by the evidence to which we will
            turn in due course that there  is  little  or  not  evidence  of
            recorded examples of this occurring.


        69. We turn at this juncture  to  consider  the  discrete  issue  of
            "Operation Likofi".  This features with some prominence  in  the
            AI Report. In its report, AI advances a thesis.  This is to  the
            effect  that,  having  regard  to  Operation  Likofi,  returning
            foreign  national  offenders   who   have   committed   offences
            comparable to those of  the  DRC  criminals  against  whom  this
            police operation was directed are at risk  of  serious  harm  or
            other ill treatment.  This is how we  construe  the  terminology
            "deportees with certain particular  categories  of  offence  and
            profile" quoted in [27] above.  We reject this  thesis  for  the
            following reasons.


        70. The evidence concerning "Operation Likofi" makes clear that this
            was a crackdown, accompanied by  significant  violence,  carried
            out in a concerted police operation in  2014  against  organised
            street gangs in an endeavour to eradicate all  kinds  of  street
            crime.  Having studied the  background  material,  it  does  not
            surprise  us  that  the  DRC  authorities  acted  in  this  way.
            However,  it  is  not   possible   to   extrapolate   from   the
            circumstances of this  operation  a  risk  faced  by  returnees,
            whatever their background.   It  was  clearly  directed  against
            criminal  gangs  then  operating  and  did  not  entail  a  more
            widespread campaign against  all  those  with  a  past  criminal
            record.  AI has devised a  thesis,  or  has  formulated  a  mere
            opinion, which, in our view, fails to engage  with  the  nature,
            purpose, vintage and duration of this discrete police operation.
             We reject this thesis accordingly.


        71. We further consider that the AI evidence  suffers  from  readily
            identifiable  frailties: the lack of  detail,  particularisation
            and concrete evidence of individual cases; the failure to engage
            with  the  post-2012  evidence;  the  vintage  of  the  specific
            instances and illustrations provided; the candidly  acknowledged
            shortcomings in some of the opinions expressed;  the  prevalence
            of pure opinion and the absence  of  supporting  substantiation;
            and the disharmony  between many of the assertions and  opinions
            expressed  (on  the  one  hand)  and  the  frameworks   of   the
            Appellants' cases (on the other).  We take into account  further
            that those assertions and  opinions  in  the  AI  report  which,
            superficially, support the Appellants' cases are undermined  and
            confounded by more recent evidence to which we  have  determined
            to accord substantial weight.


        72. As we have noted above, certain HRW evidence is incorporated  in
            the AI report.  This  barely  featured  in  the  submissions  on
            behalf of the Appellants and  we  find  nothing  in  it  lending
            support to their cases.  Equally, we place no measurable  weight
            on the report in The  Observer,  digested  in  [30]  above.   We
            consider this to be eclipsed  by  more  persuasive  evidence  of
            recent vintage, especially that reviewed in [37]-[43] above,  to
            which the tools of judicial analysis and evaluation can be  more
            readily applied.  Furthermore, it  is  uncorroborated  by  other
            evidence.


        73. We have summarised the UKBA FFM report in  [18]-[23]  above.  As
            noted,  this  report  is  composed  of  material  drawn  from  a
            collection  of  sources.   We  find  it  largely   unpersuasive.
            Properly analysed, we consider that the material consists mainly
            of opinions and unsubstantiated assertions.  We further consider
            that the persuasiveness and value of this report are limited  by
            its vintage (November  2012),  together  with  further  evidence
            which is of considerably more recent vintage and, intrinsically,
            qualifying for greater weight (infra).  We  are  satisfied  that
            this report does not provide an adequate  evidential  foundation
            for any wider claim, for essentially the same reasons  as  those
            expressed in [71] above. Stated succinctly, we consider that the
            disparate sources of evidence on which this report is  based  do
            not establish, persuasively or at all, that those who  have  the
            status of failed asylum seeker or foreign national offender are,
            ipso facto, at risk of persecution or serious harm or  treatment
            proscribed by Article 3 ECHR.


        74. In one specific respect we find the UKBA FFM report  persuasive.
            We accept the thesis of the report that returning DRC  nationals
            who are either "wanted" or are considered to be "combatants" are
            likely to attract the interest of the  state  security  agencies
            and, in consequence, are at risk  of  persecution  and/or  other
            forms of treatment proscribed by international law.  This thesis
            has the value of consistency as it emanates from several of  the
            providers of the material upon which the report is  constructed.
            It also finds some support in  certain  of  the  narrower,  less
            ambitious claims made by Dr Kennes, which  we  are  disposed  to
            accept: see [46] - [47] above.  It gains further  credence  from
            the information provided by the Executive Director of a Kinshasa
            based human rights organisation: see [43](vi) above.

        75. Subject to  [74]  above,  we  find  the  evidence  of  the  non-
            governmental organisations and other  agencies  upon  which  the
            Appellants  relied  (cf.  [18]-[19]  and  [21]  above)   largely
            unimpressive and unpersuasive, for essentially the same  reasons
            as those rehearsed in [71] and [73] above.  In addition  to  the
            critique contained in those two paragraphs, we observe that  the
            sources  upon which it is based  are  unattributed  and,  hence,
            immune from appropriate  scrutiny.   In  addition,  within  this
            evidence there is much assertion and conjecture but no  concrete
            proof or substantiation.  We contrast this with  the  considered
            and focussed evidence of JF, digested in [34]  above,  which  we
            accept.


        76. Fundamentally, there is no substantiated allegation of arbitrary
            arrest or ill treatment of any DRC  national  who  is  a  failed
            asylum seeker or a foreign national offender returning to his or
            her country of origin.  We add  that  there  is  no  suggestion,
            direct or inferential, that some or all of these  agencies  are,
            for whatever reason, incapable of providing concrete evidence of
            this kind.   Moreover,  insofar  as  the  evidence  of  any  NGO
            supports superficially any of the Appellants' cases, we must not
            overlook that it emanates from organisations who are unlikely to
            have an entirely neutral or unbiased agenda,  having  regard  to
            the realities of government and politics in the DRC. To this  we
            add that such evidence is undermined and  contradicted  by  more
            recent evidence  to  which  we  propose  to  attach  substantial
            weight, particularly that considered in [37]-[43]  above.  Where
            there are conflicts between the two broad  competing  bodies  of
            evidence, we have no hesitation in preferring the latter.


        77. The evidence which we find most persuasive  and  upon  which  we
            place substantial weight emanates from the IOM, a series of  IGC
            states who co-operated actively in the  recent  survey  and  the
            British Embassy  in  Kinshasa.   Having  examined  all  of  this
            evidence critically we find it cogent, consistent and persuasive
            and readily prefer it to the body of evidence  espoused  by  the
            Appellants.  We have summarised this superior body  of  evidence
            in [37]-[43] above.  We are satisfied that it is  not  tarnished
            by bias, conjecture or  inattention.  It  builds  a  picture  of
            reliability and consistency. It is unglossed and unvarnished. It
            suffers from no objectively  demonstrable  inaccuracy  or  other
            material flaw.  We also consider that  this  assessment  applies
            fully to the British Embassy, one  of  the  contributors,  whose
            contribution we have examined with  particular  scrutiny,  given
            its links with the Respondent  in  these  proceedings.   We  are
            impressed by the survey which the Embassy devised and  proceeded
            to carry out  amongst  various  respondents  and  interlocutors.
            There is no evidence warranting a finding that  the  methodology
            of information collation suffers from any significant flaw.   We
            consider that this body of evidence as a whole does  not  suffer
            from any material imperfections.


        78. We comment at this juncture on one specific aspect of  the  UKBA
            FFM report.  This relates to  the  first  part  of  the  passage
            quoted in [23]  above,  which  attributes  to  IOM  the  twofold
            suggestion that many returning DRC nationals  are  detained  for
            24/48 hours and  those  with  a  criminal  background  would  be
            detained for longer.  We do not accept this claim, save  insofar
            as it is capable of being construed in a manner harmonious  with
            our finding in [74] above or our further finding, based  on  all
            the evidence, that the  DRC  authorities  have  an  interest  in
            returning nationals in respect of  whom  there  are  uncompleted
            prison sentences, unexecuted arrest warrants  or  the  suspected
            commission of criminal offences, such as  document  fraud,  when
            leaving  the  country.   This  claim  is  unparticularised   and
            unsubstantiated,  as  we  have   emphasised   in   our   general
            observation in [76] above.  Furthermore, it cannot be  based  on
            monitoring by IOM representatives at Kinshasa Airport since  IOM
            does not carry out this activity.  Finally, it is irreconcilable
            to the evidence which the Tribunal  finds  most  persuasive  and
            upon which we have determined to place substantial weight.


        79. We have subjected the evidence emanating from the DGM  to  close
            scrutiny, given the potential for bias  and  distortion  of  the
            truth.  We find that this evidence is  supported  by  the  other
            body of evidence to which we have referred. Furthermore, much of
            this evidence lends support to our  earlier  assessment  of  the
            weight to be attributed to the alleged public statements of  the
            DRC Ambassador in the United Kingdom: see [65] -[67] above.  One
            aspect of this  body  of  evidence  which  is  striking  is  the
            information provided  to  the  Embassy  by  a  foreign  national
            offender  who   returned   to   DRC   on   11   December   2014.
            Notwithstanding that  this  person  had  disclosed  to  the  DRC
            authorities in London, pre-departure, his criminal  history  and
            was accompanied by two escorts throughout the journey and during
            the  first  phase  post-arrival,  his  passage  thereafter   was
            entirely  uneventful.   The  state  agencies  operating  at  the
            airport had no interest in  his  previous  criminality,  he  has
            attracted no unwanted attention  subsequently  and,  indeed,  it
            appears that he was not  even  required  to  pay  a  bribe  upon
            disembarking.


        80. We juxtapose this evidence, which we accept, with  that  of  the
            eleven IGC states who participated in the  survey  and  provided
            "returns" data in respect of the years 2012, 2013 and 2014 which
            we also consider  persuasive.   Making  due  allowance  for  the
            manner in which the data has  been  compiled  and  provided,  it
            seems uncontroversial to find that in excess of 700 persons have
            been returned from the states in question to DRC during a period
            of just under three years, up to late 2014.  We have  no  reason
            to find that the states in question were other than assiduous in
            providing  the  figures  and,  indeed,  the  contrary  was   not
            suggested.   The  significance  of  this  discrete  segment   of
            evidence is that only one complaint was made out of this  cohort
            of returning nationals.  The recipient state  was  Belgium  and,
            upon  investigation,  no  substantiation  was  established.   We
            consider it compelling that there is no  substantiated  evidence
            that any member of this large group has been persecuted  or  ill
            treated or arbitrarily detained.  The consistency of  experience
            of the eleven IGC states concerned is a matter of obvious moment
            and, further,  entirely  harmonious  with  the  data  and  other
            information provided by the United Kingdom.


        81. In our evaluation of this body of evidence, we take into account
            also that the two states who returned the highest number of  DRC
            nationals, Belgium and France, both contain  a  substantial  DRC
            diaspora, for historical and other reasons.  We find nothing  in
            the evidence to counter the suggestion that the members of these
            groups in particular would be expected to  communicate  relevant
            complaints to the communities to  which  they  belonged  in  the
            returning  states  and/or  the  Embassies  of  those  states  in
            Kinshasa. While we note  that  Dr  Kennes  disagrees  with  this
            assessment, it appears to us logical, realistic  and  consistent
            with the evidence  of  high  levels  of  activity,  much  of  it
            organised and concerted, among members of the DRC diaspora.


        82. In their critique of the evidence emanating from the IOM and the
            IGC states highlighted immediately above,  the  Appellants  draw
            particular attention  to  the  limited  monitoring  of  returned
            nationals which is carried out  and  the  intrinsic  limitations
            thereof.  This submission is well made.  However,  there  is  no
            counter  punch.   We  consider  that  this  submission   neither
            mitigates the frailties in the  Appellants'  preferred  evidence
            which we have identified nor undermines our  assessment  of  the
            Respondent's body of evidence which we prefer.  While we  accept
            the evidence that the IOM is  involved  only  in  the  cases  of
            voluntarily returning DRC nationals,  we  find  nothing  in  the
            evidence to support the submission that the DRC authorities  pay
            attention to the distinction between those nationals who  return
            voluntarily and those who do so under compulsion, subject to the
            limited exceptions  of  those  who  have  an  unexecuted  prison
            sentence  or  an  outstanding  arrest  warrant  in  DRC  or  who
            committed an offence such as document fraud  when  leaving  DRC:
            see our finding in [74] above.

        83. While we take into account that the various  interlocutors  (see
            para [43])  did  not  answer  the  various  questions  posed  in
            absolutely identical  terms,  we  have  identified  no  material
            inconsistency. Furthermore, we construe certain aspects  of  the
            Appellants' submissions as tantamount to  the  proposition  that
            there is an onus on the  Respondent  to  establish  that  failed
            asylum seekers and foreign  national  offenders  have  not  been
            subjected to persecution or proscribed treatment following their
            return to DRC.  This we consider misconceived.

        84. The submission on behalf of the Appellants DS, BBM and  DK  that
            it is "astonishing" that the Respondent has not adduced evidence
            from the DRC Ambassador to the United Kingdom or some other  DRC
            government  spokesperson  is,  in  our  estimation,   positively
            hyperbolic and unrealistic.  This Tribunal, with its feet firmly
            rooted on the ground of the  prevailing  real  world,  does  not
            share this astonishment.  We have, rather, chosen to subject the
            actual evidence emanating from DRC  government  sources  to  the
            most careful scrutiny. In so doing, we have  noted  the  various
            distinctions between the state  agencies  concerned  -  the  DRC
            Ambassador, the ANR and  the  DGM.   While  these  are  distinct
            agencies, there is much evidence of a  sufficiently  cogent  and
            reliable nature to support the finding that they do not  operate
            in hermetically sealed compartments: rather, quite the  reverse.
            To this we add that we find nothing in the evidence relating  to
            Operation Likofi which fortifies the cases of  these  particular
            Appellants, confounds  the  evidence  on  which  the  Respondent
            relies or undermines  the  evaluative  assessments  of  all  the
            evidence which we have set out above.  The  nexus  which  it  is
            sought to make between Operation Likofi and the foreign national
            offender Appellants is, in our estimation,  flimsy,  speculative
            and fallacious.


        85. Finally, we return to the evidence of the witnesses  JM  and  PL
            relating to the "XY issue": see [49] -  [55]  above.    We  find
            this  aspect  of  the  testimony  of  these   witnesses   wholly
            unpersuasive. It is quite  implausible  for  the  assortment  of
            reasons contained in the Respondent's riposte, as elaborated  in
            the submissions of Ms Lieven QC, which we have digested in  [58]
            above.  We concur fully with the  Respondent's  critique.   This
            assessment and conclusion do not necessarily contaminate certain
            other aspects of the evidence of these two witnesses,  to  which
            we shall return infra.

        86. In this context and at this juncture, it is appropriate to  make
            certain findings in relation to the  organisation  APARECO.   We
            have devoted a specific section of this judgment - Chapter VI  -
            to this organisation and we refer also to [18], [20], [43], (iv)
            and (vi) and [48] above.


        87. We address the discrete  question  of  risk  to  those  who  are
            considered to be opponents of the Kabila  regime  by  reason  of
            their sur place activities in the United Kingdom.  In addressing
            and determining this question, we make  the  following  specific
            findings:

            (i)   APARECO is a cohesive, structured organisation  which  has
                  its main base in France and strong basis in certain  other
                  European countries, including the United Kingdom.  It also
                  operates in Canada and the United States.

           (ii)   APARECO is implacably opposed to the regime of  President
                  Kabila which has governed DRC during the past decade.  Its
                  overarching aims are the defeat of this regime and the re-
                  establishment of the state on a different basis.

           (iii)  APARECO has no overt presence in DRC, where  it  operates
                  underground.

           (iv)   The external  opposition  of  APARECO  to  the  governing
                  regime of DRC is overt and visible.  Its  highest  profile
                  activities unfold in public  places,  accessible  to  all.
                  Activities of  this  nature  are  accompanied  by  advance
                  publicity.

           (v)    In common with many  comparable  regimes  throughout  the
                  world, both present and past, the  DRC  Government  has  a
                  strong interest  in  opposition  organisations,  including
                  APARECO.  Such organisations are  monitored  and  data  is
                  recorded.  This includes information about the  identities
                  of the most prominent members of such organisations,  that
                  is to say their leaders, office holders and spokespersons.



              vi) The monitoring of APARECO (UK) is likely to be undertaken
                  by and on behalf of the DRC Embassy in London.   This  is
                  the agency with the most obvious motivation to carry  out
                  and co-ordinate such scrutiny.   Such scrutiny is  likely
                  to generate periodic reports to the  DRC  Government,  in
                  particular its ANR and DGM agencies.

           (vii)  It  is  likely  that  the  leaders,  office  bearers  and
                  spokespersons of APARECO (UK) are  known  to  the  DRC  UK
                  Embassy and the DRC Government, in particular ANR and DGM.


VIII.    COUNTRY GUIDANCE


        88. Giving effect to the analysis, findings and  conclusions  above,
            by this decision we provide the following  country  guidance  in
            respect of DRC nationals returning from the  United  Kingdom  to
            their country of origin.

              i)  Those who have been convicted of offences  in  the  United
                 Kingdom are not at real risk  of  being  persecuted  for  a
                 Refugee Convention reason  or  serious  harm  or  treatment
                 proscribed by Article 3 ECHR.


             ii) Those who have unsuccessfully claimed asylum in the  United
                 Kingdom are not at real risk of persecution for  a  Refugee
                 Convention reason or serious harm or  treatment  proscribed
                 by Article 3 ECHR.


            iii) Persons who have a significant and visible  profile  within
                 APARECO  (UK)  are  at  real  risk  of  persecution  for  a
                 Convention reason or serious harm or  treatment  proscribed
                 by Article 3 ECHR by virtue of falling within  one  of  the
                 risk categories identified by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  MM
                 (UDPS Members - Risk  on  Return)  Democratic  Republic  of
                 Congo CG [2007] UKAIT  00023..   Those  belonging  to  this
                 category include persons who are, or are perceived  to  be,
                 leaders, office bearers and spokespersons.   As  a  general
                 rule, mere rank and  file  members  are  unlikely  to  fall
                 within this category.  However,  each  case  will  be  fact
                 sensitive, with particular attention directed to the likely
                 knowledge and perceptions of DRC state agents.


             iv)  The  DRC authorities  have an interest in certain types of
                 convicted or suspected offenders,  namely  those  who  have
                 unexecuted prison sentences in DRC or in  respect  of  whom
                 there are unexecuted  arrest  warrants  or  who  supposedly
                 committed  an  offence,  such  as  document   fraud,   when
                 departing DRC. Such persons are at risk of imprisonment for
                 lengthy periods and, hence, treatment proscribed by Article
                 3 ECHR.


IX.  THE INDIVIDUAL APPELLANTS


       (i)    The Appellant DS

        89. This Appellant, together with the Appellants BBM and  DK,  makes
            the case that his compulsory return to DRC would expose him to a
            real risk of persecution for a Convention  reason  or  treatment
            proscribed by Article 3 ECHR by reason of the fact that  he  has
            been convicted of offences during  his  sojourn  in  the  United
            Kingdom.   Each  of  these  three  Appellants   possesses   this
            characteristic.  This is the sole ground upon which these  three
            cases are advanced.


        90. This Appellant, who is aged 28 years, entered the United Kingdom
            in 1993, accompanied by his sisters,  where  they  joined  their
            mother who made an unsuccessful asylum  claim.   Her  subsequent
            appeal was dismissed.  In 2001 all of the  family  members  were
            granted indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom and the
            others subsequently became naturalised as British citizens.   In
            2003 and 2006 this Appellant was  convicted  of  two  counts  of
            robbery,  one  of  possession  of  an  imitation   firearm   and
            conspiracy to commit robbery with intent  to  conflict  grievous
            bodily harm.  For the first group of sentences, he was  punished
            by  four  years  imprisonment  and  for  the  last  offence  the
            punishment was an indeterminate  sentence  of  imprisonment  for
            public protection with a minimum term of four years. In 2010 the
            Respondent intimated to this Appellant that  he  was  liable  to
            suffer automatic deportation under the UK Borders Act 2007.   In
            2012 he responded by claiming asylum, unsuccessfully and in 2013
            a decision was made to deport him to DRC.   His  ensuing  appeal
            was dismissed by the  FtT  in  December  2013.   Having  secured
            permission to appeal, in February 2014 the Upper Tribunal  found
            that the FtT had erred in law by failing to engage  sufficiently
            with the background evidence relating to the Article 3 ECHR risk
            applying to foreign national offenders returning to DRC.


       (ii)   The Appellant BBM


        91. The Appellant BBM, a national of DRC aged 42 years, entered  the
            United  Kingdom  in   September   2003   and   claimed   asylum,
            unsuccessfully.  His appeal against the asylum refusal  decision
            was dismissed.  Subsequently, a fresh asylum claim was rejected,
            on 16 October 2006.  In 2008 this  Appellant  was  convicted  of
            possessing a false identity document and was  sentenced  to  six
            months imprisonment, suspended  for  two  years.  His  case  was
            reported in a local newspaper which disclosed his identity,  his
            nationality, his failed asylum application and his offence.   In
            January 2010 having been convicted of three  further  comparable
            offences, this Appellant received a total sentence of 16  months
            imprisonment and the sentencing Judge  recommended  that  he  be
            deported.


        92. In February 2010 this Appellant was  formally  notified  by  the
            Respondent that he was liable to be deported on account  of  his
            offending.   This  signalled  the  beginning  of  a  regrettably
            protracted period during which the Appellant made a fresh asylum
            claim which was refused, the Respondent made a decision to  make
            a deportation order and this Appellant's appeal to the  FtT  was
            dismissed.  Permission to appeal  having  been  granted,  on  12
            March 2015 this constitution of the Upper Tribunal set aside the
            decision of the FtT on the basis that it had erred in law on the
            two grounds advanced, namely its assessment and  conclusions  in
            respect of (a) the issue of risk upon return to DRC and (b) this
            Appellant's case under Article 8 ECHR.   As noted above, Article
            8 arises in this Appellant's appeal only.

       (iii)  The Appellant DK

        93. This Appellant, a DRC national aged 42 years, entered the United
            Kingdom in 1992.  He submitted an asylum application  which  did
            not yield any determination.  Following the grant  of  temporary
            admission, in 1999 he was granted indefinite  leave  to  remain.
            Between 2006  and  2011  this  Appellant  was  convicted  of  an
            eclectic mix of offences, mainly summary in nature:  failing  to
            surrender to custody, theft by shop lifting, assaulting a police
            officer, racially aggravated common  assault  and  breach  of  a
            community order.   His  offending  then  escalated  somewhat  to
            possession of heroin and,  ultimately,  intimidating  a  witness
            (his former partner), an indictable offence  for  which  he  was
            punished by 15 months imprisonment.


        94. In April 2012 this Appellant claimed asylum.   In  January  2013
            the Respondent rejected this claim and, simultaneously,  made  a
            deportation order against the Appellant. His ensuing  appeal  to
            the FtT was dismissed in June  2013.   Following  the  grant  of
            permission to appeal, in August 2013 the Upper Tribunal  decided
            that the FtT had erred in law on the issue of risk  upon  return
            to DRC, specifically as regards Article 3 ECHR.

       (iv)   The Appellant BM

        95. This Appellant, a DRC national aged 40 years, entered the United
            Kingdom in July 2013 and promptly claimed asylum.  He based  his
            claim on his  asserted  membership  of  one  of  the  opposition
            political parties in DRC, the Union  for  Democracy  and  Social
            Progress ("UDPS").  In September 2013 the Respondent refused his
            claim.  On appeal, the FtT found that this  Appellant's  claimed
            membership of UDPS and the related aspects of his story had been
            invented.  On appeal he made no challenge to these findings.  In
            March 2014 the Upper Tribunal ruled that the FtT  had  erred  in
            law in its treatment of the Appellant's alternative case,  which
            was that in the event of compulsory return to DRC  he  would  be
            exposed to a real risk of persecution for  a  Convention  reason
            and/or treatment proscribed by Article 3 ECHR solely on  account
            of being an unsuccessful asylum claimant.


       (v)    The Appellant AA


        96. As  we  acknowledged  at  the  outset  of  this  judgment,  this
            Appellant has two relevant characteristics.  The first  is  that
            she has unsuccessfully claimed asylum in the United Kingdom. The
            second is that she has engaged in sur place  activities  in  the
            United Kingdom as an active member  and  office  bearer  of  the
            organisation APARECO. Thus prefaced, our resum� of the  material
            facts bearing on her appeal follows.  In common with  the  other
            four Appellants, many of these facts are uncontentious.  Insofar
            as any factual issue is controversial, we shall resolve this  by
            specific findings.


        97. This Appellant, accompanied by her husband ('BB'),  entered  the
            United Kingdom in 2009.  Her husband made an asylum claim  which
            was refused and his ensuing appeal was dismissed by the FtT,  in
            May 2010.  In  November  2011  this  Appellant  claimed  asylum,
            unsuccessfully.  In two successive FtT  determinations,  between
            which was sandwiched an  error  of  law  finding  by  the  Upper
            Tribunal, her appeal was dismissed. There were specific findings
            that this Appellant had joined APARECO (UK) in  July  2010  and,
            subsequently, participated in APARECO activities.  The FtT noted
            the absence of any evidence of the Appellant's name appearing on
            the  APARECO  website  as  an  official  of  the   organisation.
            Similarly, there was no evidence indicating any awareness of her
            activities by the DRC authorities.  There was a specific finding
            that these activities were "at a relatively low  level".   There
            were  no  specific  findings  about  certain  aspects   of   the
            Appellant's asserted APARECO activities or  her  claim  to  have
            been appointed to a position in one of the regional  committees,
            as "women's representative".  Ultimately, by its decision  dated
            30 July 2013, the Upper Tribunal found that the FtT had erred in
            law in its consideration of the issue of  risk  on  return.  The
            FtT's findings of fact were preserved.


        98. This Appellant's appeal has generated  a  substantially  greater
            quantity of evidence than the appeals of the other Appellants in
            combination.  This is unsurprising, given  that  this  Appellant
            has a rather longer and more detailed story  to  tell.  We  have
            considered  the  extensive  documentary  evidence,  the  witness
            statements of  this  Appellant  and  others,   the  photographic
            evidence  and  the  paper  descriptions  of  "YouTube"   videos,
            together with the oral testimony  of  the  witnesses  called  on
            behalf of this Appellant, JM and PL.  In [51] -  [55]  above  we
            have summarised some of the salient aspects of the testimony  of
            these two witnesses.  In  [57]  we  have  conducted  a  critical
            evaluation of their evidence in relation to the  discrete  issue
            relating to  XY.   Further,  in  [78],  we  have  made  findings
            rejecting the evidence of these two witnesses on this issue.

        99. We have considered the totality of the evidence relating to  AA.
            We have also taken into account what seems  to  us  a  far  from
            vigorous challenge on behalf of the Respondent to this sphere of
            the evidence.  Having conducted this exercise, we consider  that
            there is a consistent and convincing body of  evidence  relating
            to this Appellant's activities on behalf of and designated  role
            in APARECO.  We tabulate our specific findings thus:


            (i)   This Appellant, following a considered  vetting  exercise,
                  became a member of APARECO in 2010.


            (ii)  Thereafter, she held a membership card  until  2013,  when
                  membership  cards  were  replaced  by   the   new   census
                  mechanism.


            (iii) Neither this Appellant's name nor her  photographic  image
                  has been published on the APARECO website at any time.


            (iv)  The APARECO website is accessible in the DRC.


            (v)   This Appellant has at all material times been a  dedicated
                  and active member of APARECO.


            (vi)  Reflecting (v) above, in 2012, she became a member of  the
                  APARECO North West Committee, having  been  allocated  the
                  specific portfolio of womens' adviser (or representative).




            (vii) This portfolio is an active one,  involving  (inter  alia)
                  proselytising  activities,  promoting  the   organisation,
                  recruiting new members and, as the  photographic  evidence
                  demonstrates, having a visible profile at  public  events.
                  It extends to the hosting of  all  of  the  organisation's
                  events in the North West region.


            (viii)     While this Appellant's membership  of  and  portfolio
                  within the organisation have had a public  dimension  from
                  time to time, quantitatively these entail a greater number
                  of  internal  activities,  such  as  committee  and  other
                  meetings, not visible externally.


            (ix)  This Appellant continues to hold her portfolio.


X.   THE INDIVIDUAL APPELLANTS: CONCLUSIONS

     DS, BBM AND DK

       100. We decide the appeals of all five Appellants on the basis of our
            evaluation of the country and expert evidence, together with the
            undisputed material facts pertaining to their  individual  cases
            and the further findings  which  we  have  made  above.   Giving
            effect thereto, we conclude that the appeals of DS, BBM and  DK,
            the three foreign national offenders, must fail.  We decide that
            there is no real risk that DRC nationals who have been convicted
            of offences in the United Kingdom and  are  to  be  returned  to
            their country  of  origin  will  be  persecuted  for  a  Refugee
            Convention reason or exposed  to  a  risk  of  serious  harm  or
            subjected to  treatment  proscribed  by  Article  3  ECHR.   The
            interest which the  DRC  government  has  in  certain  returning
            nationals does not extend to persons belonging to this category.
             It matters  not  whether  the  relevant  agencies  of  the  DRC
            government have  knowledge  that  such  persons  have  committed
            offences in the United Kingdom.


       101. Thus the question - one of law - whether such persons  could  be
            expected or required, upon return, to  prevaricate  about  their
            offending  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  an  attempt  to   avoid
            persecution or ill treatment does not arise.   We  find  in  any
            event that there is no  likelihood  of  such  questioning  being
            undertaken since  the  issue  of  foreign  offending  is  of  no
            interest to the DRC authorities.  In the alternative, and in any
            event, the responses  to  questioning  of  this  kind  will  not
            generate  a  real  risk  of  persecution   or   ill   treatment.
            Accordingly, the debate about the impact of the decision of  the
            Supreme Court in RT (Zimbabwe) - v - Secretary of State for  the
            Home Department [2013] 1 AC 152 is purely theoretical.  We would
            merely add that, as the findings of the FtT in the appeal of BBM
            in particular demonstrate, resort to substantial  and  elaborate
            mendacity could well  occur  without  any  form  of  compulsion,
            propelled by strong self interest and self survival motivation.






       BBM: Article 8 ECHR


       102. This Appellant's appeal under Article 8 ECHR  requires  separate
            consideration.   The  uncontentious  facts  relating   to   this
            Appellant include his age, now 42 years and the duration of  his
            sojourn in the United Kingdom, now approaching  12  years.   His
            relationship with his spouse, HM, dates from 2006 and they  were
            married in 2012, after she had completed her university studies.
             His wife is pregnant, expecting to give birth to a girl in  the
            near  future.   This  Appellant  claims  to  have  a  degree  in
            mechanical engineering.  In  recent  years  he  has  engaged  in
            charitable activities, including acting as a volunteer  for  the
            British Red Cross, assisting immigrants.  We have considered the
            several positive testimonials submitted on his behalf.  We  note
            that some of the authors make no mention   of  this  Appellant's
            convictions.


       103. In January 2010 this Appellant  was  imprisoned  for  12  months
            having pleaded guilty to three offences, namely possession of an
            identity  document  with  intent,  dishonestly  making  a  false
            representation to make gain for himself and dishonestly  failing
            to   disclose   information   to   make   gain   for    himself.
            Simultaneously, the Court activated a suspended sentence of four
            months imprisonment imposed on 30 September 2008 for the offence
            of document fraud.  It is clear that the  three  index  offences
            were closely associated with each other, all of them  linked  to
            the Appellant's acquisition of a  driving  licence  in  a  false
            name.  This enabled him to work unlawfully during  a  period  of
            some three years,  acquiring  total  wages  of  around  �14,000.
            During  this  period  the  Appellant   continued   to   receive,
            illicitly, basic living allowance and vouchers and his wife  had
            her own income as  an  events  manager.   The  sentencing  Judge
            evidently accepted that the Appellant's central  motive  was  to
            secure employment, something which the Appellant repeated in his
            evidence to us. When cross examined, he sought to  downplay  the
            gravity of his offending, refused to accept  that  his  offences
            were crimes of dishonesty and insisted that he had committed one
            offence only.  While his claim that he had apologised  in  court
            was not challenged, we are bound to conclude that  he  displayed
            no real insight into his offending and no true remorse. While it
            is common case that  the  Appellant's  convictions  will  become
            "spent" within 10 years viz by 2020, he will, of course, have to
            disclose them to possible employers in the interim.


       104. In common  with  the  FtT,  we  heard  evidence  from  both  the
            Appellant and his spouse.   It is clear that  he  concealed  his
            offending from her.  She first discovered  it  when  the  police
            arrived to arrest him at home.  Furthermore, he did not disclose
            his immigration status to her until their relationship had  been
            of some two years duration, in 2008.   His  spouse  acknowledged
            that from then she has been aware of  the  possibility  of  this
            Appellant's deportation/removal from the  United  Kingdom.   The
            evidence points decisively to the availability of strong  family
            support for the Appellant's spouse and we find accordingly.

       105. We accept that the Appellant and his spouse are in a  committed,
            stable and loving relationship.   We  further  accept  that  the
            Appellant is likely to be a loving and responsible  father  and,
            if permitted to work, will do his utmost to  secure  employment.
            We balance this with the undisturbed findings of the FtT that in
            both the pursuit of his asylum claim  and  his  offending,  this
            Appellant  practiced  continuous  deception,  considered  to  be
            "engrained in his personality  and  character  and  unlikely  to
            stop":  [66].   This,  linked   to   his   refusal   to   accept
            responsibility for his criminal behaviour and the findings which
            we have made in [97] above, underpins the further finding of the
            FtT that there is a real  risk  of  the  Appellant  reoffending:
            [67].  We further concur with the FtT that the providers of  the
            testimonials "... sought to see the good in him but do not  have
            the full picture of his background  and  behaviour":  [68].   We
            note also the  specific  finding  that  the  Appellant's  spouse
            "would be at real risk of coming to physical harm in  the  DRC":
            [70].  This predictive judgment underpinned the FtT's evaluative
            assessment that it would not be appropriate to  require  her  to
            leave the United Kingdom and that this  Appellant's  deportation
            "will inevitably destroy the family life  he  has  with  [her]":
            [71].


       106. In both his written and oral evidence  this  Appellant  asserted
            that he had obtained a degree in mechanical  engineering  during
            his sojourn in the United Kingdom.  This issue  was  highlighted
            specifically by one of the panel judges at  the  hearing.   This
            stimulated  a  direction  that  the  Appellant  provide  written
            evidence of this matter.  This in turn generated a  letter  from
            his solicitors confirming that the Appellant  does  not  possess
            this qualification.  The letter suggests that  he  simply  began
            the course at some unspecified institution and discontinued  his
            studies on  account  of  the  withdrawal  of  NASS  support  and
            accommodation and the need to pay foreign  student  fees.   This
            issue was raised specifically and clearly  during  the  hearing.
            The Appellant could not conceivably have misunderstood  it,  not
            least because of his plainly excellent command  of  the  English
            language.  The truth was not disclosed until  approximately  one
            week later, under compulsion.  We find, without hesitation, that
            this Appellant brazenly attempted to deceive the Tribunal on  an
            issue of some significance.  He told  a  deliberate,  calculated
            and  blatant  lie.   This  is  consistent  with   and   confirms
            everything recorded in [103] and [105]  above.   To  the  extent
            that his credibility was not already decimated by what is  there
            recorded its destruction is now complete.

       107. The parties' submissions,  appropriately,  focused  on  the  new
            regime in the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,
            recently introduced by the Immigration Act 2014.  This  provides
            the framework for our findings and conclusions:

              i) Section 117B(1): the starting point in the exercise is  the
                 Parliamentary declaration that the maintenance of effective
                 immigration controls is in the public interest.


             ii) Section 117B(2): the Appellant is clearly fluent in English
                 and is well integrated in United Kingdom society.  However,
                 we acknowledge Mr Moules' submission that this  talent  was
                 misused by the Appellant in the commission of his offences.
                 It is not disputed  that  his  convictions  complicate  his
                 prospects of employment during the next five years.  In the
                 longer term, he will  predictably  continue  to  experience
                 difficulties in this respect,  not  least  because  of  our
                 finding  of  mendacity  above.  Thus   there  is   a   real
                 possibility that he  will  be  a  burden  on  taxpayers  by
                 reliance on public benefits during a  substantial  part  of
                 this period.


            iii) Section 117B(3): the Appellant  has  not  been  financially
                 independent during  most  of  his  sojourn  in  the  United
                 Kingdom. During the most recent phase, of some  five  years
                 duration, he has been dependent exclusively on  his  wife's
                 income. As regards the future, we repeat our finding above.


             iv) Section 117B(4): it is undisputed that this  Appellant  has
                 had limited leave to remain in the United Kingdom since his
                 arrival in September 2003.   In  this  sense  and  to  this
                 extent,  the  relationship  established  with  his  spouse,
                 dating from 2006, began and continued when his presence was
                 lawful. We accept the submission of Mr Toal that there is a
                 distinction between unlawful presence - in section  117B(4)
                 - and precarious immigration status, in section 117B(5).


              v) Section 117B(5): we find that this Appellant's  immigration
                 status in the United Kingdom  was  at  all  material  times
                 precarious.  All of his attempts  to  establish  a  stable,
                 secure status in the United Kingdom were unsuccessful.   It
                 follows that the private life which he has developed in the
                 United Kingdom qualifies  for  the  attribution  of  little
                 weight.


             vi) Section 117C: as regards subsection (2), Mr Toal  submitted
                 that the gravity of the Appellant's  offending  belongs  to
                 the lower, rather than the upper,  level  of  the  notional
                 scale.  It was further contended that, per subsection  (5),
                 "Exception 2" applies since the  Appellant's  spouse  is  a
                 qualifying  partner  (being  a  British   citizen),   their
                 relationship is genuine and subsisting and  the  effect  of
                 the Appellant's deportation on her will be unduly harsh.

           Mr Toal's  overall  submission  was  that  the  public  interest
           favouring the expulsion of the Appellant is  positioned  towards
           the bottom of the imaginary scale.


      108. We give effect to the findings and  evaluative  assessments  set
           out in the foregoing paragraphs as  follows.   It  is  now  well
           established that the public interest favouring  the  deportation
           of foreign offenders is  a  potent  one,  having  the  stamp  of
           Parliamentary  approval   and   being   enshrined   in   primary
           legislation: see in particular SS (Nigeria) - v  -  SSHD  [2013]
           EWCA Civ 550.  We balance this with  the  various  findings  and
           factors rehearsed above.  Some of these are favourable to  those
           asserting their rights under Article 8 ECHR  viz  the  Appellant
           and his  spouse,  while  others  are  not.  We  begin  with  the
           Appellant's  offending,  which  we  consider  to  have  been  of
           intermediate gravity, given especially the factor of the  extant
           suspended sentence, which did not deter him from reoffending.


       109. Given the invocation of "Exception 2", we must assess the likely
            impact of the Appellant's deportation on his spouse.   In  order
            for the exception to apply, the impact must qualify  as  "unduly
            harsh".   We  consider  that   this   does   not   equate   with
            uncomfortable, inconvenient, undesirable,  unwelcome  or  merely
            difficult and challenging.  Rather, it poses a considerably more
            elevated threshold.  "Harsh", in this context, denotes something
            severe, or bleak, the antithesis  of  pleasant  or  comfortable.
            Furthermore, the addition  of  the  adverb  "unduly"  raises  an
            already elevated standard still  higher.   The  members  of  the
            family unit  in  question  are  but  two.   We  acknowledge  the
            likelihood of this changing  in  the  very  near  future,  while
            adding  that  section  55  of  the   Borders,   Citizenship   an
            Immigration Act 2009 has no application to a child en ventre  sa
            m�re.

       110. We accept that life will be very difficult for a  young,  single
            mother who will have  the  additional  burden  of  grieving  her
            husband's departure abroad in circumstances where the  prospects
            of future reunification are  unfavourable.   However,  these  we
            consider to be typical effects of a  husband's  deportation  and
            Parliament has decreed that cases of this kind are  insufficient
            to outweigh the  public  interest.  Furthermore,  we  take  into
            account  the  availability  of  strong  family  support  to  the
            Appellant's spouse, as we have found above. To this we add  that
            she is a graduate who has evidently been in  regular  employment
            and it is, therefore, predictable  that  she  will  be  able  to
            support herself and her child. We do not overlook  the  duration
            of this relationship or its various qualities, all of  which  we
            have acknowledged above.  However, our conclusion is,  balancing
            all of the relevant facts and factors, that the statutory public
            interest  must  prevail  by  some  measure.   Accordingly,  this
            Appellant's appeal under Article 8 ECHR fails.


       The Appellant BM


       111. In light of a belated and overdue submission received on  behalf
            of this Appellant, a further hearing directed exclusively to the
            factual issue of whether this Appellant  made  use  of  a  false
            passport in departing the  DRC  will  be  convened.  A  separate
            determination or a supplement to this determination will then be
            issued.


       The Appellant AA


       112. We turn, finally, to the appeal of AA.  The stand out feature in
            this Appellant's case  is  her  association  with  and  position
            within APARECO (UK).  As  appears  from  our  findings  in  [78]
            above, we have found  the evidence of two  witnesses  called  on
            behalf of this Appellant, JM and PL, unpersuasive in relation to
            what we shall describe as the "Mr  XY  issue".   This,  however,
            does  not  per  se  render  other  aspects  of  their   evidence
            unreliable.  Both  witnesses  gave  evidence  relating  to  this
            Appellant's role and activities in the APARECO organisation.  We
            have considered this evidence in tandem  with  this  Appellant's
            written evidence, the photographic and related evidence and  the
            findings of the FtT.  Having done so, we accept the claims  made
            by and on behalf of this Appellant concerning her membership of,
            role in and activities on behalf of APARECO (UK).  We  refer  to
            our specific findings in [88] above.

       113. We must also give effect to our further findings in  [87]  above
            relating to APARECO.  This Appellant is not one of  the  leaders
            or main office bearers of the organisation and, hence,  we  find
            that her identity is not published on its website.  Nor is she a
            spokesperson.  However, she is no mere rank and file member.  We
            find  that  she  holds  an  important  portfolio   (as   womens'
            representative, or adviser) in the  organisation  and,  further,
            that she discharges the duties of this post with enthusiasm  and
            energy.  She has been overt and visible  in  her  conduct.   The
            central theme and rationale of this  conduct  is  its  trenchant
            opposition to the prevailing DRC regime.

       114. In this context, the APARECO protest outside  the  Savoy  Hotel,
            London on 20/21 October 2014 assumes significance.  We find that
            this was a meticulously organised and well publicised event in a
            public place.  The mechanics of the event, as  the  photographic
            evidence  demonstrates,   included   large,   striking   posters
            broadcasting clearly legible slogans  which  identified  APARECO
            (UK) as the organiser and President Kabila as a main  target  of
            the protest.   This  Appellant  is  prominent  in  many  of  the
            photographs.  She is one of  the  most  visible  protesters  and
            clearly had a leading role.  The  immediate  stimulus  for  this
            protest was the attendance of  President  Kabila  at  the  world
            leaders energy summit in London.  The protest was of  sufficient
            profile and importance to attract security  measures,  including
            the presence of police  officers  and  the  erection  of  police
            barriers.


       115. We consider it highly likely that this event  was  monitored  by
            agents of the DRC government.   Such  monitoring  will  probably
            have resulted in this Appellant being identified, or  confirmed,
            as a leading APARECO (UK) activist - or, in the  language  found
            in many places scattered throughout the documentary evidence,  a
            "combatant". We thus find on  the  basis  of  all  the  material
            evidence: her prominence in the various photographs, the APARECO
            website contents and the Google Search in  particular.   We  are
            satisfied that the DRC Government does not make fine and  subtle
            distinctions relating  to  roles,  designations  and  portfolios
            within the organisation.  Its main interest is those members and
            associates who appear to and/or are perceived  to  threaten  the
            DRC regime and who occupy positions of  prominence.   Substance,
            rather than form, is what matters  in  this  context.   We  must
            graft onto these findings certain other pieces of evidence which
            we accept.  These include photographs which depict the Appellant
            in prominent positions at certain APARECO (UK) meetings.   There
            is also the print out of the first page  of  the  Google  search
            results in respect of this Appellant, which links her to a  high
            profile petition  accusing  President  Kabila  of  (inter  alia)
            crimes against humanity and demanding appropriate  international
            action against him.  Furthermore, there  is  evidence  that  the
            APARECO website, accessible to  all,  contains  photographs  and
            videos of this Appellant attending demonstrations  and  meetings
            of the organisation's leadership. To all  of  this  we  add  our
            findings in [87] and [99] above.  None of the evidence which  we
            have summarised above is seriously challenged and we  find  that
            it is both plausible and credible.


       116. Taking into account all of the foregoing, we  make  the  further
            specific finding that the identity of this Appellant is probably
            known to the relevant agencies of the DRC  Government,  DGM  and
            ANR and that its agents will  identify  her  upon  or  following
            return to the country. Further, this Appellant is perceived as a
            threat to the DRC Government.  She  is  precisely  the  kind  of
            person who will attract the interest and attention of its agents
            with the likely adverse  consequences  flowing  therefrom.   The
            conclusion that she will be at real risk of  persecution  for  a
            Convention reason and/or treatment proscribed by Article 3  ECHR
            follows inexorably.

       117. It follows that the appeal of AA succeeds. This is based on  the
            significant and visible profile which she holds in APARECO (UK).
             Her status of unsuccessful asylum applicant is  also  relevant,
            but only to the limited extent that this is the impetus for  her
            return to the DRC  which,  in  turn,  is  likely  to  alert  the
            relevant  DRC  agencies,  specifically  DGM  and  ANR,  to   her
            presence.  This Appellant, by  virtue  of  having  and/or  being
            perceived to have a political profile in opposition to  the  DRC
            government, falls within one of the risk  categories  identified
            by the Upper Tribunal in MM: see [12](c) supra.


    Footnote

       118.  Finally,  we  take  the  opportunity  to  remind   Judges   and
            practitioners of the  following  statement  in  R  (SG  Iraq)  v
            Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ  940,
            at [46] - [47]:


                 "The system  of  country  guidance  determinations  enables
                 appropriate resources, in terms of the  representations  of
                 the parties to the  country  guidance  appeal,  expert  and
                 factual  evidence  and  the  personnel  and  time  of   the
                 tribunal, to be applied to the determination of  conditions
                 in, and therefore the risks of return for persons  such  as
                 the Appellants in  the  country  guidance  appeal  to,  the
                 country in question.  The procedure is aimed at arriving at
                 a  reliable  (in  the  sense  of  accurate)   determination
                 ............


                 It is for these reasons, as well  as  the  desirability  of
                 consistency, that decision makers and tribunal  judges  are
                 required  to  take  country  guidance  determinations  into
                 account and to follow  them  unless  very  strong  grounds,
                 supported by cogent evidence, are adduced justifying  their
                 not doing so."


         We also draw attention to this Tribunal's overview of  the  status
           and effect of country  guidance  judgments  in  MOJ  and  Others
           (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC) at  [8]
           and the reporting arrangements for country guidance judgments in
           Upper Tribunal Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber  Guidance  Note
           Number 2 of 2011, at [9].


       Omnibus Conclusion


       119. The country guidance enshrined in this decision is as follows:


              i)  DRC nationals who have been convicted of offences  in  the
                 United Kingdom are not at real risk of being persecuted for
                 a Refugee Convention reason or serious  harm  or  treatment
                 proscribed by Article 3 ECHR in the event of  returning  to
                 their country of origin.


             ii) DRC nationals who have unsuccessfully claimed asylum in the
                 United Kingdom are not at real risk of  persecution  for  a
                 Refugee Convention reason  or  serious  harm  or  treatment
                 proscribed by Article 3 ECHR in the event of  returning  to
                 their country of origin.


            iii) DRC nationals who have a significant  and  visible  profile
                 within APARECO (UK) are, in the event of returning to their
                 country of origin,  at  real  risk  of  persecution  for  a
                 Convention reason or serious harm treatment  proscribed  by
                 Article 3 ECHR by virtue of falling within one of the  risk
                 categories identified by the Upper  Tribunal  in  MM  (UDPS
                 Members - Risk on Return) Democratic Republic of  Congo  CG
                 [2007] UKAIT  00023.   Those  belonging  to  this  category
                 include persons who are, or are perceived to  be,  leaders,
                 office bearers and spokespersons.  As a general rule,  mere
                 rank and file members  of  APARECO  are  unlikely  to  fall
                 within this category.  However,  each  case  will  be  fact
                 sensitive, with particular attention directed to the likely
                 knowledge and perceptions of DRC state agents.


             iv)  The  DRC authorities  have an interest in certain types of
                 convicted or suspected offenders,  namely  those  who  have
                 unexecuted prison sentences in DRC or in  respect  of  whom
                 there are unexecuted  arrest  warrants  or  who  supposedly
                 committed  an  offence,  such  as  document   fraud,   when
                 departing DRC. Such persons are at risk of imprisonment for
                 lengthy periods and, hence, treatment proscribed by Article
                 3 ECHR.


       120. In the result, we remake the decisions in each of the five cases
            in the following way:


                 (a)  the appeals of  DS, BBM and DK are dismissed  on  all
            grounds;


                 (b)  the appeal of AA is allowed on asylum and  Article  3
                      ECHR grounds; and


                 (c)       the appeal of BM will be completed in  accordance
                      with[111] above as soon as possible.

                                                                       [pic]




                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

          PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                                                          Date:  30 May 2015


                         Appendix: Source Materials


                 Source Materials before the Upper Tribunal

|Date       |Source                 |Description                           |
|                                                                          |
|Unspecified / Various Dates                                               |
|Undated    |Print out of the first |Results for 'AA', which include a link|
|           |page of Google search  |to the petition of Marie Therese      |
|           |                       |Nlandu entitled 'Mise en accusation du|
|           |                       |president Joseph Kabila'              |
|Undated    |Print out of the first |Results for 'BB', which include a link|
|           |page of Google search  |to the petition of Marie Therese      |
|           |                       |Nlandu entitled 'Mise en accusation du|
|           |                       |president Joseph Kabila'              |
|Undated    |Extract from the       |Accessed by clicking on the link that |
|           |petition 'Mise en      |comes up when searching for AA or BB  |
|           |accusation du president|on Google, along with translation into|
|           |Joseph Kabila'         |English.                              |
|Undated    |Emails form National   |FOA BB offering condolences following |
|           |President (NP) Honeore |the death of his mother               |
|           |Ngbanda                |                                      |
|Undated    |PIRS                   |The International Organisation for    |
|           |                       |Migration's Personal Identification   |
|           |                       |and Registration System               |
|2011-2014  |Photographs (annotated)|Reflecting AA's and BB's activities in|
|           |                       |the UK                                |
|                                                                          |
|2005                                                                      |
|June 2005  |APARECO                |Who are we? Resistance until Freedom  |
|           |                       |(English translation of French        |
|           |                       |Article)                              |
|4 June 2005|APARECO                |Social Project                        |
|           |                       |(English translation of French        |
|           |                       |Article)                              |
|                                                                          |
|2008                                                                      |
|25 Nov 2008|Human Rights Watch     |We Will Crush You: The Restriction of |
|           |                       |Political Space in the Democratic     |
|           |                       |Republic of Congo [Excerpt(s)]        |
|                                                                          |
|2009                                                                      |
|27 May 2009|The Guardian           |Britain sending refused Congo asylum  |
|           |                       |seekers back to threat of torture     |
|23 June    |Foreign Office         |Letter in relation to allegations of  |
|2009       |                       |detention of two returnees in May 2009|
|12 Dec 2009|Australian Government  |Country Advice Democratic Republic of |
|           |Refugee Review Tribunal|Congo                                 |
|14 Dec 2009|Refugee Documentation  |Democratic Republic of Congo -        |
|           |Centre (Legal Aid      |Treatment of BDK including if any     |
|           |Board, Ireland)        |differentiation between ordinary and  |
|           |                       |active members; Treatment of          |
|           |                       |BDK/anyone who escapes prison         |
|                                                                          |
|2010                                                                      |
|8 March    |Second joint report of |On the situation in the Democratic    |
|2010       |seven United Nations   |Republic of the Congo                 |
|           |experts                |                                      |
|4 Oct 2010 |BBC News Online        |DR Congo: Joeseph Kabila critic's     |
|           |                       |'suicide' doubted                     |
|8 Oct 2010 |U4 Anti Corruption     |Overview of corruption and            |
|           |Resource Centre        |anti-corruption in the Democratic     |
|           |                       |Republic of Congo                     |
|12 Oct 2010|APARECO                |DRC: Armand Tungulu's "legacy" to the |
|           |                       |Congolese people, Honore              |
|           |                       |Ngbanda-Nzambo ko Atumba              |
|28 Nov 2010|APARECO                |Reconciliation between APARECO &      |
|           |                       |Kantangan gendarmes (Tigers) Audio:   |
|           |                       |Message from H Ngbanda to the         |
|           |                       |Congolese                             |
|           |                       |(English translation of French        |
|           |                       |Article)                              |
|                                                                          |
|2011                                                                      |
|29 Mar 2011|Saturday               |RDC Ambassador returns to Brazzaville:|
|           |                       |Kin-Brazza condemned to peaceful      |
|           |                       |coexistence, L'Avenir                 |
|           |                       |(English translation of French        |
|           |                       |Article)                              |
|6 April    |Immigration and Refugee|Democratic Republic of the Congo:     |
|2011       |Board of Canada        |Information on the Bundu dia Kongo    |
|           |                       |(BDK) movement                        |
|16 April   |The People's Party for |France asks pseudo warriors and       |
|2011       |the Reconstruction of  |crypto-fighters to halt their violence|
|           |Democracy (PPRD)       |                                      |
|           |                       |(English translation of French        |
|           |                       |Article)                              |
|29 Sept    |Digital Congo website  |Body of Ambassador Mira Ndjoku        |
|2011       |                       |returned to Kinshasa on Tuesday       |
|           |                       |(English translation of French        |
|           |                       |Article)                              |
|9 Nov 2011 |US Department of State |2012 Country Reports on Human Rights  |
|           |                       |Practices: Democratic Republic of the |
|           |                       |Congo 19/04/2013 [Excerpt(s)]         |
|9 Nov 2011 | Office of the United  |Report of the United Nations Joint    |
|           |Nations High           |Human Rights Office on Human Rights   |
|           |Commissioner for human |and Fundamental Freedoms during the   |
|           |Rights (OHCHR)         |pre-electoral period in the Democratic|
|           |                       |Republic of Congo                     |
|24 Nov 2011|Justice First          |Unsafe Return                         |
|                                                                          |
|2012                                                                      |
|9 March    |Home Office UK Border  |Democratic Republic of Congo: Country |
|2012       |Agency                 |of Origin (COI) Report                |
|1 May 2012 |Home Office UK Border  |Operational Guidance note: Democratic |
|           |Agency                 |Republic of Congo                     |
|15 June    |Kongo Times            |Liberation of the DRC: Joint statement|
|2012       |                       |UDPS - APARECO - ARP                  |
|           |                       |(English translation of French        |
|           |                       |Article)                              |
|July 2012  |Foreign Office         |Information for British Nationals     |
|           |                       |imprisoned in the DRC                 |
|7 July 2012|Letter                 |From Marie Therese Nlandu             |
|Nov 2012   |Home Office            |Country Policy Bulletin: Democratic   |
|           |                       |Republic of Congo (Nov 2012 version)  |
|1 Nov 2012 |Home Office UK Border  |Democratic Republic of Congo: Report  |
|           |Agency                 |of Fact Finding Mission to Kinshasa   |
|           |                       |conducted between 18 and 29 June 2012 |
|3 Dec 2012 |APARECO website        |Nouvelle Mise en Place Generale de    |
|           |                       |L'Apareco a partir du 3 Decembre 2012,|
|           |                       |accessed 03 Feb 2015, giving details  |
|           |                       |of the current leaders of APARECO     |
|           |                       |including APARECO UK                  |
|                                                                          |
|2013                                                                      |
|2013       |Amnesty International  |Democratic Republic of the Congo      |
|           |Report 2013            |                                      |
|2013       |United States          |Country Report on Human Rights        |
|           |Government             |Practices for 2013 Democratic Republic|
|           |                       |of the Congo                          |
|Feb 2013   |Home Office UK Border  |Democratic Republic of Congo:         |
|           |Agency                 |Bulletin: Statistics an Information on|
|           |                       |the Treatment of Returns (to Kinshasa)|
|Mar 2013   |United Nations Joint   |Report on Deaths in Detention Centres |
|           |Human Rights Office    |in the Democratic Republic of Congo   |
|May 2013   |Amnesty International  |The State of the World's Human Rights |
|           |                       |(extracts)                            |
|15 May 2013|Immigration and Refugee|Democratic Republic of the Congo: The |
|           |Board of Canada        |Alliance of Patriots for the          |
|           |                       |Refoundation of the Congo (APARECO) in|
|           |                       |Kinshasa                              |
|23 May 2013|Amnesty International  |Annual Report 2013: Democratic        |
|           |                       |Republic of the Congo                 |
|5 June 2013|Letter                 |from APARECO UK                       |
|29 July    |Article from the       |Appointment and promotions within     |
|2013       |APARECO website        |FARDC (the armed forces of the        |
|           |                       |Democratic Republic of Congo): a      |
|           |                       |reward from "Kabila" for disloyalty,  |
|           |                       |impunity and cronyism, Candide Okeke, |
|           |                       |L'Oeil Du Patriote                    |
|           |                       |(English translation of French        |
|           |                       |Article)                              |
|3 Oct 2013 |Justice First          |Unsafe Return II                      |
|Dec 2013   |Report by the United   |On the violations of Human Rights and |
|           |Nations Joint Human    |Fundamental Freedoms committed during |
|           |Rights Office          |the Electoral Period in the Democratic|
|           |(Monusco-Ohchr)        |Republic of the Congo, as well as on  |
|           |                       |the actions taken by Congolese        |
|           |                       |Authorities in response to these      |
|           |                       |violations: October 2011 - November   |
|           |                       |2013                                  |
|                                                                          |
|2014                                                                      |
|2014       |The Fund for Peace     |Fragile States Index 2014             |
|2014       |Transparency           |Corruption by Country / Territory     |
|           |International          |                                      |
|2014       |Freedom House Report   |Congo, Democratic Republic of         |
|           |                       |(Kinshasa)                            |
|14 Jan 2014|Digital Congo Website  |Targeted attacks on 30th December     |
|           |                       |2013: a connection between the        |
|           |                       |'Ngbanda-Mbumba-Mukungublia' trio?    |
|           |                       |(English translation of French        |
|           |                       |Article)                              |
|21 Jan 2014|Human Rights Watch     |World Report                          |
|Feb 2014   |Home Office            |Country Policy Bulletin: Democratic   |
|           |                       |Republic of Congo (Feb 2014 version)  |
|6 Feb 2014 |UN Human Rights Council|Summary prepared by the Office of the |
|           |                       |United Nations High Commissioner for  |
|           |                       |Human Rights for the Working Group on |
|           |                       |the Universal Periodic Review:        |
|           |                       |Democratic Republic of Congo          |
|15 Feb 2014|The Guardian           |Congolese asylum seekers face 'torture|
|           |                       |with discretion' after removal from UK|
|27 Feb 2014|US Department of State |2013 Human Rights Report: Democratic  |
|           |                       |Republic of the Congo                 |
|April 2014 |Office Francais de     |Report of a mission to the Democratic |
|           |protection des refugies|Republic of Congo, 30 June to 7 July  |
|           |et apatrides (OFPRA)   |2013 (translated extracts)            |
|21 April   |Digital Congo Website  |List of first fifty beneficiaries of  |
|2014       |                       |amnesty law announced!                |
|           |                       |(English translation of French        |
|           |                       |Article)                              |
|23 April   |Press Release from     |"Amnisties" in the name of APARECO are|
|2014       |APARECO                |"unknown" to Nganda's group:          |
|           |                       |Manipulation of Amnesty lists exposed,|
|           |                       |FSDDC                                 |
|           |                       |(English translation of French        |
|           |                       |Article)                              |
|30 April   |Juene Afrique website  |DRC: Who are the 100 new beneficiaries|
|2014       |                       |of the amnesty law?                   |
|           |                       |(English translation of French        |
|           |                       |Article)                              |
|1 June 2014|Freedom From Torture   |Rape as Torture in the DRC            |
|2 June 2014|Le Potential Online    |Kablia deems the resurgence of the    |
|           |                       |defunct CIAT (International           |
|           |                       |Transistion Support Committee)        |
|           |                       |unacceptable                          |
|           |                       |(English translation of French        |
|           |                       |Article)                              |
|5 June 2014|Reuters                |US envoy urges Congo's Kabila to      |
|           |                       |respect law, step aside in 2016       |
|7 July 2014|UN Human Rights Council|Report of the Working Group on the    |
|           |                       |Universal Periodic Review: Democratic |
|           |                       |Republic of Congo                     |
|22 July    |Eye of the Patriot     |Joseph Kabila begins a huge operation |
|2014       |                       |of purification in the DRC army       |
|           |                       |(English translation of French        |
|           |                       |Article)                              |
|7 Aug 2014 |US Time Online         |Congo's Presidential Entourage        |
|           |                       |Investigated for Beating Protesters in|
|           |                       |US                                    |
|8 Aug 2014 |APARECO website        |The APARECO firmly condemns the brutal|
|           |official statement     |assault of Jacques Miango             |
|18 Aug 2014|Direct DC: commentary  |Entitled 'Jacque Miango, the man who  |
|           |on video               |lost six teeth in his assault by      |
|           |                       |Kabila Guards, discusses the facts'   |
|22 Aug 2014|Freedom House          |Freedom in the World 2014 - Congo,    |
|           |                       |Democratic Republic of (Kinshasa)     |
|Sept 2014  |Home Office            |Foreign National Offender returns     |
|           |                       |statistics                            |
|1 Sept 2014|United Nations High    |Report on the Human Rights situation  |
|           |Commissioner for Human |and the activities of her Office in   |
|           |Rights                 |the Democratic Republic of Congo      |
|12 Sept    |Afrique                |DRC: One year in prison for           |
|2014       |                       |Jean-Bertrand Ewanga                  |
|           |                       |(English translation of French        |
|           |                       |Article)                              |
|24 Sept    |United Nations         |Report of Secretary General on the    |
|2014       |                       |implementation of the Peace, Security |
|           |                       |and Cooperation Framework for the     |
|           |                       |Democratic Republic of Congo          |
|           |                       |[S/2014/679]                          |
|25 Sept    |United Nations         |Report of the Secretary General on the|
|2014       |                       |United Nations Organisation           |
|           |                       |Stabilisation Mission in the          |
|           |                       |Democratic Republic of Congo          |
|           |                       |[S/2014/698]                          |
|Oct 2014   |United Nations Joint   |Report on Human Rights violations     |
|           |Human Rights Office    |committed by agents of the Congolese  |
|           |                       |national police during operation      |
|           |                       |Likofl in Kinshasa between 15 November|
|           |                       |2013 and 15 February 2014             |
|16 Oct 2014|Foreign Office         |Human Rights Report: DRC country of   |
|           |                       |concern                               |
|20 Oct 2014|The Voice of Congo     |Video: Exclusive Story: Pro-Kagame    |
|           |                       |Rwandans arrested for possession of   |
|           |                       |knives in London                      |
|           |                       |(English translation of French        |
|           |                       |Article)                              |
|22 Oct 2014|Home Office            |Country Policy Bulletin: Democratic   |
|           |                       |Republic of Congo                     |
|Nov 2014   |Home Office            |Migration Data Tables: Democratic     |
|           |                       |Republic of Congo                     |
|Nov 2014   |Home Office            |Witness Statements filed on behalf of |
|           |                       |the Secretary of State for the Home   |
|           |                       |Department in the case of BCT v SSHD  |
|           |                       |(CO/4012/2014)                        |
|Nov 2014   |Human Rights Watch     |Operation Likofi: Police Killings and |
|           |                       |Enforced Disappearances in Kinshasa,  |
|           |                       |Democratic Republic of Congo          |
|14 Nov 2014|Foreign Office         |Letter in relation to return of 13    |
|           |                       |November 2014                         |
|18 Nov 2014|Foreign Office         |Letter of interview with Belgian      |
|           |                       |Embassy official                      |
|20 Nov 2014|Foreign Office         |Letter of interview with Swiss Embassy|
|           |                       |official                              |
|20 Nov 2014|Foreign Office         |Letter of interview with IOM          |
|Dec 2014   |Intergovernmental      |Request for information from the UK on|
|           |Consultation on        |monitoring by DRC authorities         |
|           |migration, asylum and  |                                      |
|           |refugees               |                                      |
|Dec 2014   |Intergovernmental      |Removal of DR Congo Foreign National  |
|           |Consultation on        |Offenders                             |
|           |migration, asylum and  |                                      |
|           |refugees               |                                      |
|8 Dec 2014 |Foreign Office         |Letter in relation to return of 5     |
|           |                       |December 2014                         |
|10 Dec 2014|Foreign Office         |Letter of interview with domestic NGO |
|11 Dec 2014|Foreign Office         |Letter of interview with DRC FRS      |
|           |                       |returnee                              |
|11 Dec 2014|Foreign Office         |Letter of interview with French       |
|           |                       |Embassy official                      |
|11 Dec 2014|Home Office            |Facilitated Return Scheme statistics  |
|12 Dec 2014|Foreign Office         |Letter of interview with UNJHRO       |
|           |                       |official                              |
|30 Dec 2014|United Nations         |Report of the Secretary General on the|
|           |                       |strategic review of the United Nations|
|           |                       |Organisation Stabilisation Mission in |
|           |                       |the Democratic Republic of Congo      |
|           |                       |[S/2014/956]                          |
|30 Dec 2014|United Nations         |Report of the Secretary General on the|
|           |                       |strategic review of the United Nations|
|           |                       |Organisation Stabilisation Mission in |
|           |                       |the Democratic Republic of Congo      |
|           |                       |submitted pursuant to paragraph 39 of |
|           |                       |the Security Council resolution 2147  |
|           |                       |[S/2014/957]                          |
|                                                                          |
|2015                                                                      |
|Jan 2015   |Human Rights Watch     |World Report 2015: Democratic Republic|
|           |                       |of Congo                              |
|Jan 2015   |United Nations High    |2015 UNHCR country operations profile:|
|           |Commissioner for       |Democratic Republic of Congo          |
|           |Refugees               |                                      |
|6 Jan 2015 |Cedoca (Belgian        |Response to country of origin         |
|           |Government Country of  |information (COI) request in relation |
|           |Origin Information Unit|to APARECO                            |
|20 Jan 2015|BBC                    |Deadly DR Congo clashes over Joseph   |
|           |                       |Kabila's future                       |
|20 Jan 2015|The Guardian           |Protests in Congo over President's    |
|           |                       |future                                |
|22 Jan 2015|UN News Service        |DRC Congo: Ban urges calm in Kinshasa;|
|           |                       |peacekeeping chief backs gradual      |
|           |                       |drawdown of UN mission                |
|23 Jan 2015|United Nations News    |UN human rights office urges probe    |
|           |Centre                 |into excessive use of force in DR     |
|           |                       |Congo protests                        |
|24 Jan 2015|Human Rights Watch     |Deadly Crackdown on Protests          |
|25 Jan 2015|International Crisis   |DRC Protests: The Government's        |
|           |Group                  |Election Law Must be Revised - or     |
|           |                       |Withdrawn                             |
|26 Jan 2015|Screen shots of        |These screen shots correspond to the  |
|           |websites featuring     |ULRs set out in the list of activities|
|           |photos of AA and BB    |in the witness statements of EB and JD|
|           |(annotated).           |and also the statements of Mr Maklilo |
|           |                       |and Mr Mpanie                         |
|29 Jan 2015|Human Rights Watch     |World Report 2015 (Events of 2014)    |



