
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Ortega (remittal; bias; parental relationship) [2018] UKUT 00298 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 26 June 2018                            |                                 |
|                                           |.................................|
|                                           |......                           |

                                   Before

                  THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

                            Mr victor omar ortega
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss C Charlton of Bhogal & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


 1. In an Upper Tribunal error of law decision that remits an appeal to the
    First-Tier Tribunal, a clear indication should be given if  the  appeal
    is to be re-made de novo. If that is not the case,  the  error  of  law
    decision should set out clearly the issues which require re-making  and
    any preserved findings of particular relevance to the re-making of  the
    appeal.

 2. As set out in BW (witness statements by advocates)  Afghanistan  [2014]
    UKUT 00568 (IAC) at paragraph (v) of the headnote of  that  case:  "(v)
    Where an advocate  makes  a  witness  statement  in  the  circumstances
    outlined above, a change of advocate may be necessary, since the  roles
    of advocate and witness are distinct, separated by  a  bright  luminous
    line.  An advocate must never assume the role of witness."
 3. As stated in paragraph 44 of R (on the application of RK)  v  Secretary
    of  State  for  the  Home  Department   (Section   117B(6):   "parental
    relationship") IJR [2016] UKUT 00031 (IAC), if a non-biological  parent
    ("third party") caring for a child claims  to  be  a  step-parent,  the
    existence of such a relationship will depend upon all the circumstances
    including whether or not there are  others  (usually  the  biologically
    parents) who have such a  relationship  with  the  child  also.  It  is
    unlikely that a person will be able to establish they have taken on the
    role of a parent when the biological parents continue to be involved in
    the child's life as the child's parents.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against the decision issued on 24  November  2017  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge G Jones QC which refused the Article  8  ECHR
    appeal of Mr Ortega.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Ecuador and was born on 1 June 1979.   He
    claims to have come to the UK in January 2001  using  a  false  Spanish
    passport.  Having entered illegally he  remained  unlawfully  until  he
    made an application for leave to remain on Article 8 ECHR grounds on 14
    January 2015. The application was  based  on  a  relationship  akin  to
    marriage with Ms Jexi Falcones, a British  national,  and  her  British
    daughter, A, born on 14 October 2006.

 3. On 16 March 2015 the appellant was convicted of  possessing/controlling
    an identity document with intent.  He  was  sentenced  to  a  suspended
    imprisonment of six months and a requirement to undertake  unpaid  work
    for 120 hours.

 4. On 5 May 2015  the  respondent  refused  Mr  Ortega's  Article  8  ECHR
    application.

Respondent's Decision dated 5 May 2015

 5. In the decision refusing the Article 8 ECHR claim, the respondent found
    that the Immigration Rules were not met. Firstly, the appellant did not
    meet  the  suitability  requirements  of  Appendix   FM,   specifically
    paragraph S-LTR.1.6. as the appellant's conviction  and  illegal  entry
    and residence amounted to conduct such that it was undesirable for  him
    to be allowed to remain in the UK.

 6. Secondly, as he  fell  for  refusal  under  paragraph  S-LTR.1.6.,  the
    appellant  could  not  meet  the  relationship   requirements   of   R-
    LTRP.1.1(c)(i) or (d) (i) of Appendix  FM  to  the  Immigration  Rules.
    Further, the appellant indicated that he and Ms Falcones had  begun  to
    cohabit only in November 2014.  They  had  therefore  not  been  living
    together in a relationship akin to a marriage for two  years  prior  to
    the  application  in  January  2015  and  could  not   meet   paragraph
    GEN.1.2.(iv) of Appendix FM. Failure to meet those  requirements  meant
    that the appellant was not entitled to the benefit of paragraph EX.1 of
    the Immigration Rules.

 7.  Thirdly,  the  appellant's  relationship  with  A  did  not  meet  the
    requirements for leave as a parent. The appellant's inability  to  meet
    the suitability requirements prevented him from doing so. A was not his
    child so he could not meet paragraph E-LTRPT.2.2 of Appendix FM. In any
    event, he did not have sole responsibility for A and cohabited with her
    mother, precluding the  requirements  of  paragraph  E-LTRPT.2.3.  from
    being met. He could not come within the definition of a parent set  out
    in paragraph 6 of the Immigration Rules as, even if his claim to be A's
    stepfather was accepted, her biological father was still alive.

 8. The respondent also found that  paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration
    Rules was not met as the appellant did not have the requisite number of
    years of residence and  could  not  show  that  the  "very  significant
    obstacles" to re-integration test from  paragraph  276ADE(vi)  was  met
    given that he lived in Ecuador until the  age  of  22  and  would  have
    retained social, cultural and familial ties.

 9. In the Article 8 ECHR assessment outside the Immigration Rules, as  the
    appellant had only been living with Ms Falcones and A for  six  months,
    it was not found that he had developed such strong bonds with them that
    they would experience unjustifiably harsh consequences if  he  were  to
    leave the UK.  Ms  Falcones  could  be  expected  to  provide  for  A's
    welfare, with state support if  necessary.   Any  difficulties  for  Ms
    Falcones and A were outweighed by the applicant's conduct  in  entering
    and remaining in the UK illegally and his criminal conviction.

First-tier Tribunal Decisions

10. The  appellant's  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  initially
    dismissed in a  decision  issued  on  10  October  2016  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Amin.  In that decision First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Amin
    did not find the  appellant's  relationship  with  A  was  sufficiently
    strong to meet the provisions of the  Immigration  Rules  or  that  the
    appellant's return to Ecuador would affect  her  best  interests  which
    were to be with her mother and retain contact with her natural  father.
    It was accepted that the appellant had a relationship with Ms  Falcones
    but not one that met the provisions of the Immigration Rules or  showed
    that it would be  disproportionate  for  the  appellant  to  return  to
    Ecuador where the relationship was formed at a  time  when  the  couple
    knew that Mr Ortega was in the UK illegally.

11. Permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  against  the  decision  of
    Judge Amin was granted in a decision dated 8 February 2017.

12. In a decision issued on 20 April 2017,  the  Upper  Tribunal  found  an
    error of law and remitted the appeal to be re-made  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The Upper Tribunal decision identifies in paragraph  8  that
    an error of law arose as the First-tier Tribunal had proceeded  on  the
    mistaken basis of the appellant's conviction being  for  possession  of
    controlled drugs and placed  significant  weight  on  that  factor.  In
    paragraph 9 the Upper Tribunal found a second error as  the  First-tier
    Tribunal referred to the appellant being returned to Jamaica.  A  third
    material error of law was found in paragraph 10  where  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  expressed  doubts  about  the  appellant  having  a   genuine
    relationship with Ms Falcones but accepted elsewhere  in  the  decision
    that he had established a family life in the UK with her and A, the two
    findings being contradictory.

13. The remitted appeal came before the First-tier  Tribunal  again  on  14
    November 2017, on this occasion  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  G
    Jones QC. In his decision issued on 24 November 2017 he found that  the
    appellant had not shown that the Immigration Rules  could  be  met  and
    that it was proportionate for the appellant to return to Ecuador.

14. The appellant again applied for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal. Permission was granted in a decision dated  4  January  2018.
    Thus the hearing came before us on 26 June 2018.

Grounds of Appeal

15. The appellant brought four grounds of appeal against  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal.

16. Ground 1 maintained  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    disclosed bias.

17. Ground 2 maintained that the First-tier Tribunal had not taken a lawful
    approach to the best interests assessment of A.

18. Ground 3 alleged procedural unfairness where  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    had been asked to watch an interview of A discussing  her  relationship
    with the appellant which had been recorded onto a CD but  the  decision
    showed that he had only read a  transcript  of  that  interview.   This
    ground also argued procedural error arose as  the  First-Tier  Tribunal
    had relied on matters from the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Amin which had been set aside and not treated the appeal as de novo.

19. Ground 4 concerned a failure  to  give  adequate  reasons  for  placing
    little weight on the independent social work report.

20. Ground 5 maintained that the Article 8 ECHR proportionality  assessment
    was infected by the errors of law contained in grounds 1 to 4 and  also
    objected to a comparison of the separation from A as a  result  of  the
    appellant's removal to Ecuador being similar to separation from a child
    arising from the imprisonment of a criminal offender.

21. The respondent  provided  a  rule  24  letter  dated  29  January  2008
    maintaining that the allegation of  bias  was  not  made  out  and  the
    grounds were really only a  disagreement  with  an  adverse  but  fully
    reasoned decision.  The judge treated the appeal as de novo,  made  his
    own assessment of the evidence and did not adopt the  findings  of  the
    previous judge. It was open to him take into account evidence  recorded
    in the previous First-tier Tribunal decision.  The approach to the best
    interests of the child was not, in substance, erroneous.

Discussion

    Ground 1

22. The Upper Tribunal decision of Alubankudi (Appearance of  bias)  [2015]
    UKUT 00542  sets  out  in  paragraphs  6  to  8  the  "Governing  Legal
    Principles" to be applied when considering an allegation of bias:

         6.   Every litigant enjoys a common law right to  a  fair  hearing.
             This  entails  fairness  of  the   procedural,   rather   than
             substantive,  variety.   Where  a  breach  of  this  right  is
             demonstrated, this will  normally  be  considered  a  material
             error of law warranting the setting aside of the  decision  of
             the FtT: see AAN (Veil) Afghanistan [2014] UKUT 102 (IAC)  and
             MM (Unfairness; E&R) Sudan [2014] UKUT  105  (IAC).  The  fair
             hearing principle may be viewed as the unification of the  two
             common law maxims audi alteram partem and nemo judex in  causa
             sua, which combine to form the doctrine of natural justice, as
             it was  formerly  known.   These  two  maxims  are,  nowadays,
             frequently  expressed  in  the  terms  of  a   right   and   a
             prohibition, namely the litigant's right to a fair hearing and
             the prohibition which precludes a Judge from adjudicating in a
             case in which he has an interest.

         7.    Further  refinements  of  the  fair  hearing  principle  have
             resulted in the development of the concepts of  apparent  bias
             and actual bias.  The  latter  equates  with  the  prohibition
             identified immediately above.   In  contrast,  apparent  bias,
             where invoked, gives rise to a somewhat more sophisticated and
             subtle challenge.  It entails the application of the following
             test:

                  'The question is whether the fair-minded observer,  having
                  considered the facts, would conclude that there was a real
                  possibility that the tribunal was biased.'

             See Porter v Magill [2001] UKHL 67, at [103].

             In Re Medicament  [2001]  1  WLR  700,  the  Court  of  Appeal
             provided  the  following  exposition  of  the  task   of   the
             appellate, or review, court or tribunal:

                  'The Court must  first  ascertain  all  the  circumstances
                  which have a bearing on the suggestions that the Judge was
                  biased.  It must  then  ask  whether  those  circumstances
                  would lead a fair minded and informed observer to conclude
                  that there was a real possibility that  the  Tribunal  was
                  bias.   The  material  circumstances  will   include   any
                  explanation given by the Judge  under  review  as  to  his
                  knowledge or appreciation of those circumstances.'

             In Lawal v Northern Spirit [2003] UKHL 35, the House of  Lords
             reiterated   the   importance   of   first   identifying   the
             circumstances which are said to give rise to apparent bias."


         8.   The authorities place due emphasis on the requirement that the
             hypothetical  reasonable  observer  is  duly  informed.   This
             connotes that the observer is in possession  of  all  material
             facts.  See, for example, Taylor v Lawrence  [2002]  EWCA  Civ
             90, at [61] - [63].  Furthermore, the hypothetical fair minded
             observer is a person of balance and temperance,  "...  neither
             complacent nor unduly sensitive or suspicious", per Lord Steyn
             in Lawal at [14].  Finally, it  is  appropriate  to  emphasise
             that the  doctrine  of  apparent  bias  has  its  roots  in  a
             principle of some longevity and indisputable pedigree,  namely
             the requirement that justice not only be done  but  manifestly
             be seen to be done: see,  for  example,  Davidson  v  Scottish
             Ministers [2004] UKHL 34. "

23. Our task is therefore to place ourselves in the  position  of  a  "duly
    informed" hypothetical reasonable observer in order to  assess  whether
    the First-tier Tribunal  decision  discloses  an  absence  of  judicial
    impartiality or real possibility of such. To assist in  that  task,  in
    addition to the decision and grounds of appeal, we were  provided  with
    the view on the allegation of bias of Judge Jones QC, incorporated into
    a Memorandum dated 21  February  2018.  The  burden  of  proof  in  the
    allegation rests on the appellant to the standard  of  the  balance  of
    probabilities.

24. Ground 1  maintained,  firstly,  that  it  was  obvious,  even  in  the
    preliminary parts of the decision, that the judge had formed an adverse
    opinion which "set the tone for the rest  of  the  determination".   We
    were referred to the paragraph 6 of the decision which was a summary of
    the Upper Tribunal error of law decision.  Detailed  reference  to  the
    error of law decision was considered necessary as a  preliminary  issue
    as it was not found that it was sufficiently clear as to the extent  of
    the re-making that was required.

25. Judge Jones QC stated as part of the summary of  the  Upper  Tribunal's
    reasoning:

         "... it is difficult to understand why a conviction for an  offence
         which involves  dishonesty  should  impact  less  when  credibility
         and/or proportionality are being considered than a  conviction  for
         possessing a controlled drug."

26. We did not find that this statement was capable of showing  bias  or  a
    material inclination against the appellant. The judge's  comment  that,
    in his view, a drugs offence does not necessarily  weigh  more  heavily
    than an offence of dishonesty does not form part of his  assessment  of
    the appellant's offence. It is merely an unnecessary  critique  of  the
    reasoning of the Upper Tribunal in the error of law  decision.   It  is
    immaterial to the judge's assessment  later  in  the  decision  of  the
    correct offence committed by the appellant. The grounds allege bias but
    do not particularise how this comparison  of  the  two  offences  shows
    impartiality. The grounds also, quite properly, do not  seek  to  argue
    that the First-tier Tribunal was  not  entitled  to  place  significant
    weight on  the  applicant's  offence  of  using  a  false  passport  to
    facilitate illegal entry and a long period of  illegal  residence.  The
    comment in paragraph 6 may be otiose but it does not disclose bias.

27. We are mindful that this part of the challenge to the decision  of  the
    First-Tier Tribunal arose from a perceived lack of clarity in the error
    of law decision of the Upper Tribunal on the extent of  the  error  and
    exactly what it was that required re-making. In an Upper Tribunal error
    of law decision that remits an appeal to  the  First-Tier  Tribunal,  a
    clear indication should be given if the appeal  is  to  be  re-made  de
    novo. If that is not the case, the error of law decision should set out
    clearly the issues which require re-making and any  preserved  findings
    of particular relevance to the re-making of the appeal.

28. Ground 1 goes on to criticise  the  description  of  the  appellant  in
    paragraph 45 of the decision as  displaying  "criminal  tendencies  and
    lack of moral fibre". The comment was made as part of the assessment of
    A's best interests, the view of the First-tier Tribunal being that they
    were not well-served by being exposed to someone with  the  appellant's
    profile. The grounds maintain that this wording was  a  "very  personal
    attack" and "indicative of the overt bias" of the First-tier Tribunal.

29. Judge Jones QC comments on this submission in the  third  paragraph  of
    the Memorandum, stating:

         "I do not  understand  the  complaint  that  my  entirely  apposite
         observations about the appellant, contained in paragraph 45  of  my
         Determination, are capable of demonstrating bias.   They  are,  and
         were  intended  to  be,  robust   condemnatory   observations   and
         commentary upon the appellant.  The facts entirely justified  those
         observations.  If it is "bias" for  a  judge  to  make  robust  but
         accurate adverse observations about an appellant, then  so  be  it.
         If that is the case then it seems that many a judge sitting in  the
         Crown Court will be guilty of bias when making  sentencing  remarks
         which point  out  a  defendant's  adverse  character  and  criminal
         predilections.

         My comments were nothing like those in Alubankudi, given that  they
         were not of a general nature, but were specifically tailored to and
         critical of this individual appellant, based upon evidence that led
         inexorably to my conclusions about him."

30. Albeit it might be preferable for criticism  of  the  appellant  to  be
    expressed in more temperate language, in our  judgment  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was entitled to find the  appellant's  profile  to  be  highly
    negative and for this to be a legitimate factor in the  best  interests
    assessment. It is not disputed that  it  was  open  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to form an adverse view of the appellant as a  result  of  his
    offending and immigration history. That the judge did so and  expressed
    this finding in "robust" language is not something capable  of  showing
    bias.

31. Ground 1 also maintained that bias was shown  in  the  finding  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal in  paragraph  39(x)  that  Ms  Falcones  had  used
    deception when obtaining her British citizenship. Judge Jones  QC  said
    this at paragraph 39(x):

         "I find that Jexi Falcones used deception  to  obtain  her  British
         citizenship in that she maintained the pretence that she  was  then
         in a genuine and subsisting (de facto) marriage with her  erstwhile
         husband, notwithstanding that, as she belatedly said before  me  in
         evidence, she had not lived with him in this country for more  than
         three months after her return from Ecuador.  If the respondent  had
         been aware that the marital relationship had broken  down  so  that
         Jexi and her erstwhile husband were then only married de  jure  and
         not de facto, it  is  unlikely  that  her  application  would  have
         succeeded.  I have little doubt that that was understood  by  Jexi;
         hence her willingness to keep the truth from the authorities."

32. The grounds of appeal maintain that there was "absolutely no  evidence"
    to allow such a conclusion to be reached and that the reasoning on  the
    issue was therefore "unclear".

33. We did not find that this submission had merit. Firstly, the manner  in
    which the ground was put did not  appear  to  us  to  set  out  a  bias
    challenge but was an argument that the finding on the use of  deception
    was irrational,  being  unsupported  by  evidence  or  that  procedural
    unfairness arose as the point was not  put  to  the  appellant  and  Ms
    Falcones at the hearing.

34. Secondly, it  not  correct  that  there  was  no  evidence  capable  of
    supporting the finding of the First-tier Tribunal judge on Ms Falcones'
    use of deception. On page 2 of 9 of the refusal letter dated 5 May 2015
    the respondent set out inconsistencies in the couple's  evidence  about
    their history. The application maintained  that  they  had  been  in  a
    relationship since 2011. At the same time,  Ms  Falcones  submitted  an
    application for indefinite leave to remain as the spouse of  a  British
    citizen in November 2011 which was granted in March 2012.  She  made  a
    naturalisation application in April  2013  and  submitted  her  British
    spouse's passport in support of that application.

35. Further, as recorded in paragraph 27 of the decision, Ms  Falcones  was
    cross-examined at the hearing about how she obtained settlement in 2012
    and naturalisation in 2013 on  the  basis  of  marriage  to  a  British
    national but now maintained that she had been in  a  relationship  with
    the appellant since 2011. Her evidence initially was that she had  only
    lived with her British husband in Ecuador, prior to coming to the UK in
    2009. She then gave a  different  account  of  having  lived  with  her
    British husband for 3 months after coming to the UK.

36. The conclusion drawn from this evidence by Judge Jones QC in  paragraph
    39(x) was a legitimate one. It was open to him to find  that  the  oral
    evidence showed material reliance on  a  relationship  with  a  British
    national at the same time that Ms Falcones and the appellant claimed to
    be in a relationship. There is no suggestion  that  any  objection  was
    made to the cross-examination on this aspect of  Ms  Falcones  history.
    The potential implications of the evidence given by the  appellant  and
    Ms Falcones were sufficiently obvious for their legal representative to
    be  expected  to  deal  with  them  either  in  re-examination  or   in
    submissions. A judge is not required to  put  every  potential  adverse
    credibility finding to an applicant or other  witnesses  in  order  for
    them to have the opportunity for it to be addressed, particularly where
    the point is relatively obvious, as here. Again,  albeit  expressed  in
    robust terms, the First-tier Tribunal was entitled to draw  an  adverse
    inference on Ms Falcones' character and the reliability of her evidence
    and the grounds  do  not  show  that  bias  played  any  part  in  that
    assessment. We also did not find that the reasoning was  irrational  or
    disclosed procedural error.

37. For these reasons we did not find  that  the  allegations  of  bias  in
    Ground 1 were made out.  Putting  ourselves  in  the  position  of  the
    hypothetical observer,  duly  informed,  the  decision  does  not  show
    improper impartiality but conclusions which, albeit strongly expressed,
    were legitimately open to the judge on the material before him.

    Ground 2

38. Section 55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009
    provides:

         "(1) The Secretary of State must  make  arrangements  for  ensuring
             that

             (a)  the functions mentioned in subsection (2) are  discharged
                  having regard to the need to  safeguard  and  promote  the
                  welfare of children who are in the United Kingdom."

    This duty to have  regard  to  the  welfare  of  children  when  making
    immigration decisions is commonly referred to as a  requirement  for  a
    "best interests assessment" to be conducted and is an entirely standard
    feature in Article 8 ECHR claims involving children.

39. Ground 2  objects  to  the  comments  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
    paragraph 36 of the decision on  the  correct  legal  approach  to  the
    assessment of A's best interests.

40. Judge Jones QC says this at paragraph 36:

         "Two problems arise.  The first is whether or  not  an  application
         under Article 8 ECHR is a function of the Secretary  of  State  'in
         relation  to  immigration,  asylum   or   nationality'.    Strictly
         speaking, it seems to me that it is not  such  a  decision  and  so
         Section 55 of the 2009 Act has no application in the instant  case.
         However, I have little doubt that that might be seen  as  a  heresy
         because the interest of children must always be taken into  account
         in this kind of situation.  Thus, although  I  think  it  does  not
         strictly apply, I will proceed as if Section 55 of the 2009 Act  is
         in play.  The second difficulty is that  that  statutory  provision
         does not require the 'best interests' of children  to  be  a  first
         consideration.   It  quite  specifically  requires  that  when  any
         function of  the  Secretary  of  State  of  State  in  relation  to
         immigration,  asylum  or  nationality  is  being   discharged   the
         Secretary of State of State must discharge  that  function  'having
         regard to the need to safeguard and promote the welfare of children
         who are in the United Kingdom.'  That is rather  different  and  is
         not quite such a high threshold as giving the best interests  of  a
         child or children primary consideration.  I prefer  to  follow  the
         statutory words rather than the inaccurate gloss which  appears  to
         have been placed upon it by some courts."




41. We accept that it is not correct for a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  to
    prefer a different interpretation of the statute to that  set  down  by
    the superior courts, for example, the Supreme Court in ZH (Tanzania)  v
    SSHD [2011] UKSC 4 and Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC  74,  both  providing
    that the best interests of a child rank as a primary  consideration  in
    decisions concerning the child.

42. However, notwithstanding the judge's objection in paragraph 36  to  the
    guidance of the superior courts  on  the  primacy  of  a  child's  best
    interests, he went on to conduct a substantive assessment of  A's  best
    interests in paragraph 44:

         "44. I am acutely aware that it might be said that the  Section  55
             (sic) should be my starting point  and  not  something  to  be
             afforded subsequent consideration.  I have had  that  in  mind
             and it is no more than convenience that I  specifically  refer
             to it at this stage in my  Determination.   I  do  not  accept
             that, even if Section 55 of the 2009  Act  is  applicable,  it
             could  possibly  be  said  that  A's  welfare  would  not   be
             safeguarded.  She will either  continue  to  reside  with  her
             mother in this country or she will reside with her mother  and
             stepfather in Ecuador.  That will  not  involve  any  want  of
             safeguarding or her welfare.  I appreciated that it  might  be
             said, as it was by Miss Charlton, that her welfare will not be
             promoted if the appellant is required  to  depart  the  United
             Kingdom.  I accept that her welfare is nurtured by her  living
             in a household with her mother and stepfather, but only  to  a
             modest extent, given my finding (above) that there has been  a
             significant degree of exaggeration in the  evidence  given  by
             the appellant and his wife, with  a  view  to  bolstering  the
             prospect of the appellant achieving the result he desires from
             this appeal."

43. The judge also commented in paragraph 45 that A's best  interests  were
    not  well-served  by  exposure  to  someone  of  the  appellant's  poor
    character, those comments being discussed above at [28] to [30].

44. The decision therefore shows that the First-Tier Tribunal  conducted  a
    best interests assessment. The  conclusion  was  that  the  appellant's
    removal was not a significant factor capable of  undermining  A's  best
    interests which were to continue to be cared for by her mother  in  the
    UK. An assessment of A's best interests did form part of the Article  8
    balancing exercise, therefore. If there was a failure to take them as a
    primary consideration, as is  indicated  by  the  judge's  comments  at
    paragraph 36, that was an error. It was not a material error,  however,
    as, weighing A's best interests as a primary factor  could  not  assist
    the appellant since those interests did not lie in his remaining in the
    UK.

    Ground 3

45. Ground 3 comprises two limbs.  The  first  concerns  a  dispute  as  to
    whether the First-tier Tribunal Judge agreed that after the hearing and
    prior to making the decision he would watch a CD of an interview with A
    discussing her relationship with the appellant.  The material before us
    shows a clear disagreement as to what was said on this  matter  at  the
    hearing. The judge sets out at paragraph 32:

         "I was also invited to read, and have read, a transcript of answers
         given by A to prepared questions.  They appear in the  Supplemental
         Bundle at pages 6-9.  I also had a CD of her being interviewed  but
         it was agreed by all concerned that the transcript was  a  faithful
         reproduction of the questions and answers recorded on  the  CD  and
         that, in those circumstances, I need not view  it.   Accordingly  I
         have not done so."

46. Judge Jones QC is equally clear on the second page  of  the  Memorandum
    under the heading "Ground 3" that the  agreement  at  the  end  of  the
    hearing was not that he should view the CD but that he should read  the
    transcript, that he did so and made a note to that effect. We consulted
    the record of proceedings which shows that note on page 6,  "Transcript
    SB 6-9 READ A's Ev (sic)".

47. We also noted that the Tribunal file contains an application  from  the
    legal representatives  prior  to  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal requesting that video facilities be made  available  in  order
    for the CD to be viewed. We accept that this provides some  support  to
    the grounds arguing that the CD was considered to be an important piece
    of evidence which the judge should see.

48. There is no record of proceedings or witness statement from  the  legal
    representative  for  the  appellant  before  the  First-tier   Tribunal
    hearing. Accordingly, in light of the clear comments by the  First-tier
    Tribunal judge and his note in the  record  of  proceedings,  there  is
    insufficient evidence to  support  the  argument  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal agreed to view the video and did not  do  so.  The  submission
    that a procedural error arose as a result cannot have merit, therefore.




49. The material part played in this decision by the absence of  a  witness
    statement from the appellant's legal representative before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal shows the continuing relevance of  the  guidance  on  the
    importance of giving consideration to the provision of such a statement
    when bias or procedural error is alleged as  set  out  in  BW  (witness
    statements by advocates) Afghanistan [2014] UKUT 00568  (IAC)  and  the
    indication at paragraph (v) of the headnote of that case that:

         "(v)  Where  an  advocate  makes  a  witness   statement   in   the
         circumstances  outlined  above,  a  change  of  advocate   may   be
         necessary, since the roles of advocate and  witness  are  distinct,
         separated by a bright luminous line.  An advocate must never assume
         the role of witness."

50. The second limb of Ground 3 concerns references by Judge  Jones  QC  to
    the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Amin which was set aside
    to be re-made.  It is undisputed that the judge clarified at the outset
    of the hearing that the appeal before him was de novo;  see  paragraphs
    12 and 13. It is argued for the  appellant  that  this  prohibited  the
    First-tier Tribunal from referring to that decision and to the evidence
    given at the original hearing. The appellant objects in  particular  to
    the references to the previous decision in paragraphs  5,  6,  17,  and
    paragraphs 39 (viii), (ix) and (xiii).

51. On examination, it did not appear to us that any of these references to
    the decision the first hearing before the First-tier Tribunal could  be
    said to show that the hearing before Judge Jones QC  and  the  decision
    were not made de novo or  that  improper  reference  was  made  to  the
    earlier decision.  As above, a clear  indication  was  given  that  the
    appeal was to be decided de novo. Nowhere do  the  grounds  identify  a
    finding from the earlier decision that was followed or adopted  by  the
    judge here.

52. The reference at paragraph 5 to the "Devaseelan principles" was  merely
    a record of the submission of the appellant's representative that those
    principles did not apply  here.  The  reference  in  paragraph  6  only
    identifies the error in the earlier decision concerning the appellant's
    conviction. In paragraph 17 the judge refers to the earlier appeal as a
    "failed appeal".  That is simply statement of  fact  on  which  nothing
    turns. The same is so regarding the reference in paragraph 39(xiii)  to
    the marriage of the appellant and Ms Falcones taking  place  six  weeks
    after the decision of Judge Amin.

53. In paragraph 39(viii) and (ix) Judge Jones QC says this:

         "(viii) At paragraph 10 of the Determination of  Immigration  Judge
             Amin, she records that Jexi gave evidence before  her  that  A
             (at that time) saw her father (who lived in London) every  two
             weeks, albeit that she had no  great  inclination  to  do  so.
             That was not divulged before me, nor, in fairness, was it  put
             to any of the witnesses.  Nonetheless, I take the view that it
             is wholly improbable that Jexi would have lied to  Immigration
             Judge Amin on that issue when she gave evidence  in  September
             2016.  It follows that I reject  the  evidence  given  by  the
             appellant when, in cross-examination, he asserted that  A  had
             last seen her father in 2013.  When he  made  that  assertion,
             although  he  was  not  referred  to  paragraph  10   in   the
             Determination, he was referred to the paragraph at page  4  of
             the respondent's Refusal Letter dated 05 May 2015 where it  is
             asserted that he had reported that A continued  to  have  some
             contact with  her  natural  father.   The  appellant  made  no
             response when that was put to him.  I  am  entirely  satisfied
             that  the  lack  of  response  was  because,  once  more,  the
             appellant had been lying when  he  said  that  A  had  had  no
             contact with her natural father since 2013.

         (ix) Jexi Falcones' evidence was that A had last  seen  her  father
             'two years ago' which would put that last contact some time in
             2015, well prior to when she gave evidence before  Immigration
             Judge  Amin.   I  again  refer  to  paragraph   10   of   that
             Determination.  I am satisfied that Mrs Falcones did not  give
             truthful evidence before me on that issue."

54. The appellant's relationship with A is the high point of his case.  The
    role played by A's biological father  was  an  important  part  of  the
    assessment of whether the appellant could be said to have a substantive
    relationship with her.

55. As stated in paragraph 44 of R (on the application of RK)  v  Secretary
    of  State  for  the  Home  Department   (Section   117B(6):   "parental
    relationship") IJR [2016] UKUT 00031 (IAC), if a non-biological  parent
    ("third party") caring for a child claims  to  be  a  step-parent,  the
    existence of such a relationship will depend upon all the circumstances
    including whether or not there are  others  (usually  the  biologically
    parents) who have such a  relationship  with  the  child  also.  It  is
    unlikely that a person will be able to establish they have taken on the
    role of a parent when the biological parents continue to be involved in
    the child's life as the child's parents.

56. The grounds do not suggest that the record of the evidence  from  Judge
    Amin's decision concerning contact with A's  biological  father  relied
    upon in the decision of Judge Jones QC was in any way  inaccurate.  The
    judge was therefore entitled to take into account all of  the  evidence
    that was before him on that issue including  that  given  before  Judge
    Amin as long as he made an independent decision on that evidence.  That
    independent reasoning is  manifestly  present  here  in  paragraphs  39
    (viii) and (ix).

57. It was therefore our conclusion that Ground 3 had no merit.

    Ground 4

58. Ground 4 maintains that First-tier Tribunal Judge Jones  QC  failed  to
    give adequate reasons for rejecting the  evidence  of  the  independent
    social worker, Hannah Prince.  Judge  Jones  QC  comments  on  this  at
    paragraph 34:

         "Reference was made to a privately commissioned report from  Hannah
         Prince which appears at Section C in the Appellant's Bundle.  It is
         dated 12 January 2015.  It has to be  read  with  caution  because,
         just like a  report  prepared  by  a  psychiatrist,  it  is  highly
         dependent upon what has been said or reported to the social worker.
          It is apparent from reading her report that she simply accepted at
         face value everything that was asserted to her.  I have been unable
         to ascertain to what extent, if any, she approached such assertions
         with an enquiring mind.  She states her conclusion is being that it
         is her opinion that "it is in the best interests of Mr  Ortega,  Ms
         Falcones and A that Mr Ortega remains  in  the  United  Kingdom  to
         allow him to continue with his caring role he has for  A,  maintain
         the family links and social connections he has made with the  local
         community as well as the life the family had  made  for  themselves
         here in the United Kingdom." I have little doubt  that  the  phrase
         "best   interests"   was   deliberately   chosen   based   on   the
         misunderstanding that it is the requirement in Section  55  of  the
         2009 Act.  That statutory revision  is  often  mischaracterised  as
         requiring the 'best interests' of children to be taken into account
         when an immigration decision is taken."

59. Judge Jones QC goes on in paragraph 39(xi) to state as follows:

         "So far as the reports from the social workers are concerned,  and,
         more particularly, that prepared by Hannah Prince,  I  am  entirely
         satisfied that it is based on self-serving evidence and  assertions
         made to her by the appellant and Jexi.  It  is  not,  in  any  true
         sense, an expression of expert  opinion  formed  after  considering
         objectively ascertained facts.  It is rather like a report  from  a
         psychiatrist which will often be substantially dependent  upon  the
         truthfulness and/or accuracy of information provided by the subject
         of the report although it's close to him/her."

60. This assessment of the independent social worker report  of  Ms  Prince
    was made in the context of the evidence as  a  whole.  Judge  Jones  QC
    found that the  appellant  and  Ms  Falcones  had  given  significantly
    inconsistent and unreliable  evidence  on  the  history  of  their  own
    relationship, on Ms Falcones' relationship with her first  husband,  on
    the appellant's relationship with A and her contact with her biological
    father.  The appellant's reliability as a witness was also found to  be
    undermined by his history of illegal entry and residence in the UK  and
    reliance on a false passport.

61. We find that the judge was entitled to assess the social  work  reports
    and the evidence given to Ms Prince in  the  context  of  those  other,
    adverse aspects of the evidence and to find that  Ms  Prince's  report,
    albeit prepared in good  faith  by  a  professional  witness,  did  not
    attract weight. Nothing indicates that  Ms  Prince  was  aware  of  the
    discrepant history of the relationship between  the  appellant  and  Ms
    Falcones, Ms Falcones' immigration history or the inconsistent evidence
    on A's contact with her biological father.  Other than a  reference  to
    "the absence of her biological father" on page 9, Ms Prince's report is
    silent on the question of A's relationship with her biological  father,
    an important factor when assessing her relationship with the appellant;
    see again R (on the application of RK).

62. We therefore found that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  gave  adequate  and
    rational reasons for placing little weight on the social work evidence.



    Ground 5

63. Ground 5 maintains that the Article 8 ECHR proportionality assessment:

         "... is wholly inadequate and the reference in paragraph 44 to  the
         significant degree of exaggeration" is a direct reflection of Judge
         Jones' findings regarding credibility. It is submitted  that  going
         behind his own decision to hear the appeal de novo has contaminated
         all of the findings of the Judge therefore rendering it  impossible
         to undertake a lawful and sustainable proportionality exercise."

    We have set out above why we do not find that Grounds 1 to 4 show  that
    the First-tier Tribunal showed bias,  took  an  incorrect  approach  to
    evidence given before Judge Amin or erred in finding the appellant  and
    his partner to be unreliable witnesses. We do not find the reference to
    "significant exaggeration" in paragraph 44 takes any of  those  grounds
    any further.

64. Ground 5 also  objects  to  the  comparison  in  paragraph  45  of  the
    appellant's separation  from  A  on  his  removal  to  Ecuador  to  the
    separation of a child from a parent  serving  a  prison  sentence.  The
    grounds argue that the analogy was incorrect  and  acted  to  "blur  an
    already extremely confused proportionality assessment.

65. It is not our judgement that the comparison  drawn  was  inaccurate  or
    confusing. Judge Jones QC  goes  on  to  explain  the  purpose  of  the
    comparison. stating:

         "I mention that only to bring home the point that  this  very  much
         again involves a balancing exercise."

    That is unobjectionable. He was indeed required to conduct a  balancing
    exercise between the public interest  in  removal  and  the  Article  8
    rights of the appellant, Ms Falcones  and  A.  This  is  a  very  well-
    understood principle in an Article 8 proportionality assessment so  the
    comparison does not appear to have been necessary but it  did  not,  in
    our view, demonstrate an incorrect approach or  lack  of  clarity  that
    could amount to an error of law.

66. We therefore did not find that Ground 5 had merit.

    Conclusion

67. It is  therefore  our  conclusion  that  the  grounds  challenging  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal do not show a material error of law.

Notice of Decision

68. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not  disclose  a  material
    error on a point of law and shall stand.


Signed: [pic]                                         Date: 30 July 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
