
                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

R (on the application of HA & Others) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department (Dublin III; Articles 9 and 17.2) [2018] UKUT 00297 (IAC)

                                                                 Field House
                                                                      London

                                                               28 March 2018


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE rintoul
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                                   HA (1)

                                   AA (2)

                                   NA (3)

                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Applicants

                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Ms C Kilroy and Ms M Knorr instructed by Migrant's Law Project Islington
Law Centre appeared on behalf of the Applicants.
Ms H Masood, instructed by the Government Legal Department appeared on
behalf of the Respondent.


(1) Article 9 provides:

Where the applicant has a family member, regardless of  whether  the  family
was previously formed in the country of origin,  who  has  been  allowed  to
reside as a beneficiary of international protection in a Member State,  that
Member  State  shall  be  responsible  for  examining  the  application  for
international protection, provided  that  the  persons  concerned  expressed
their desire in writing.


The  phrase  "who  has  been  allowed  to  reside  as   a   beneficiary   of
international protection" in Article 9 of Dublin III is in effect  the  same
as the phrase formerly used in paragraph 352D of the Immigration  Rules  and
following ZN (Afghanistan) [2010] UKSC 21 at [35].  Acquisition  of  British
citizenship by a family member does not  alter  the  fact  that  he  was  in
receipt of international protection and so article 9 would still apply.

(2)  Article 17.2 of Dublin III does not set any specific criteria, but  the
Dublin Regulations themselves and the CFR provided  the  general  parameters
within which decisions must be taken, albeit  that  the  general  provisions
set out in articles 21 and 22 do not apply.  There is,  we  accept,  a  wide
discretion available to the respondent under the  article,  but  it  is  not
untrammelled, it is for the  respondent  to  consider  an  application  made
under article 17.2 through the lens of article 7 CFR and/or article 8  ECHR,
taking account also of the best interests of  a  child.   That  approach  is
consistent with the normative provisions in article 16 that where there  are
issues of dependency within a family life  context,  the  family  should  be
brought together.


(3) The decision impugned in this case was one arising from the exercise  of
a discretion conferred on the  respondent.  On  that  basis,  and  following
Padfield v Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and  Food  [1968]  AC  997,  a
court should not compel any authority to do more than consider the  exercise
of a power which is merely permissive and does not impose an  obligation  to
act.




                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                                  JUDGMENT

                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -




    INTRODUCTION




 1. The applicants who have been anonymised challenge 3  decisions  of  the
    respondent to refuse to accept a take charge request  ("TCR")  made  by
    the Republic of Greece  pursuant  to  Article  17.2  of  EU  Regulation
    604/2013 ("Dublin III"). Permission for judicial review was granted  by
    the President of the Upper Tribunal, Mr Justice Peter Lane,  and  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Dawson on 19 February 2018.  The  applicants  have  been
    granted anonymity, given the age of the  youngest,  and  the  sensitive
    nature of their circumstances. This is a decision of the Upper Tribunal
    to which both members of the panel have contributed.




    Background:




 2. The factual matrix  which  gave  rise  to  the  application  is  highly
    unusual, if not unique, and is unlikely  to  occur  again.   There  are
    three applicants, HA, AA and NA whom we refer  to  as  A1,  A2  and  A3
    respectively. A1 and A2 married in January 2005; A3 is their child.  A1
    is a British Citizen; A2 is a  stateless  Bidoon  from  Kuwait  seeking
    asylum in Greece with A3 who, it is the applicants' case, is a  British
    Citizen.




 3. A1 was originally a stateless Bidoon from Kuwait. Prior to  his  flight
    from Kuwait in 2005, he married A2 who is also a stateless Bidoon.   On
    arrival in the United Kingdom A1  applied  for  asylum.  Although  that
    claim was rejected he was granted Humanitarian  Protection  in  October
    2005 for a period of three years. Subsequent to that, and a  successful
    application for ILR  granted  in  2011,  he  was  on  25  January  2013
    naturalised as a British Citizen.   He then returned to Kuwait where he
    was reunited with A2. The couple's first  child,  A3  was  born  on  15
    December 2013. By operation of section 2 of the British Nationality Act
    1981, A3 appears to be a British Citizen although that issue is as  yet
    unresolved.



 4. In April 2014 A2 and A3 travelled to Lebanon where they made  an  entry
    clearance application to the United Kingdom for family reunion with  A1
    on the basis that  A1  was  a  refugee.  The  respondent  refused  that
    application on the basis that  A1,  having  been  naturalised,  was  no
    longer a refugee.



 5. In 2015, an application was made for a British passport  for  A3.  That
    application was refused on the basis that the documents  provided  were
    insufficient to show her entitlement to British citizenship.



 6. In June 2017, A2 and A3 travelled to Greece, initially overland through
    Turkey.  They then crossed from Turkey to Greece by  sea,  arriving  in
    Chios.  That journey was traumatic, given that water  surged  into  the
    boat, and they feared they would drown.  It is  the  applicants'  case,
    relying on the report of Dr Manolesou, that the current diagnoses  that
    both A2 and A3 suffer from PTSD result from that event.



 7. On 6 July 2017, A2 and A3 claimed asylum in Greece. Subsequent to that,
    the Greek authorities made a TCR to the British Government on 21 August
    2017. That  application  was  refused  on  26  September  2017  in  the
    following terms:



      Directorate of Immigration - GREECE

                                        Date: 26th September 2017

      Dear Colleagues,

      COUNCIL REGULATION (EU) No. 604/2013 of 26th June 2013

      Re: Ms A[..] A[...]  Stateless Person (Article 1 of 1954 Convention)
        24 December 1978 & dependant

      A[...] N[...] - 15/12/2013

      You have requested that the United Kingdom take charge of the above
        named and her dependant under the terms of Council Regulation (EU)
        NO.604/2013 of 26th June 2013.

      We have examined your request dated 21/08/2017, under Article 17(2)
        and have noted the following:

      . The claimed husband, A[...] H[...], of the above name applicant
        became Naturalised British Citizen on 5th November 2012, and
        therefore not a beneficiary of International protection.


      . Persons wishing to enter the United Kingdom to be re united with a
        relative who has residence in the UK can obtain the relevant Entry
        Clearance.


      . You have not shown conclusive evidence that this avenue was not
        available to the UK relative as part of your request.



      I regret to inform you that your request to take charge of the above
        named is respectfully denied.

      Yours faithfully

      R[...] B[...]

      European Intake Unit





 8. That refusal was followed on  16  October  2017  by  a  reconsideration
    request by the Greek government pursuant to article 5 of the Dublin III
    Implementing Regulation 1560/2003.  That  request  was  refused  on  24
    October 2017 in the following terms:

       Secretary of State's Decision dated 24th October 2017

      Directorate of Immigration - GREECE

                                        Date: 24th October 2017

      Dear Colleagues,

      COUNCIL REGULATION (EU) No. 604/2013 of 26th June 2013

      Re: Ms A[...] A[...] Stateless Person (Article 1 of 1954 Convention)
        24 December 1978 & dependant

      A[...] N[...] - 15/12/2013

      You have requested that the United Kingdom take charge of the above
        named and her dependant under the terms of Council Regulation (EU)
        NO.604/2013 of 26th June 2013.

      We have re examined your request dated 16th October 2017, and noted
        the relevant documents sent with your request under Article 17(2).

      You have sent evidence of refusal paperwork of the family
        reunification visa Rule 352A of the Immigration Rules.  As the
        applicant is a British Citizen he is entitled to make a spouse visa
        Rule 281 of Immigration Rules.

      We do not consider that the applicant's case warrants an exceptional
        circumstance in line with Article 17(2).

      I regret to inform you that your request to take charge of the above
        named is respectfully denied.

      Yours faithfully

      S[...] K[...]

      European Intake Unit



 9. The first step taken by the applicants to challenge the  decisions  was
    the service on  31  October  2017  of  a  pre-action  protocol  letter,
    annexing  a  number  of  documents  including  copies  of  the  refusal
    decisions referred to above, and drawing the respondent's attention  to
    the fact that A1 had been granted Humanitarian Protection in  2005.  It
    was also pointed out that A1  had  been  granted  Indefinite  Leave  to
    Remain in 2011. The pre-action protocol letter was copied to the  Greek
    Government's Dublin Unit.



10. There was no substantive response to the pre-action protocol letter and
    on 6 December 2017, this application was lodged, containing  a  request
    for expedition which was refused on the same day.



11. On 22 December 2017, the  applicants'  representatives  served  on  the
    respondent a copy of a DNA test confirming that  A1  and  A2  were  the
    biological parents of A3.



12. On 19 January 2018, the applicants' solicitors made a  further  request
    for expedition supported by a psychiatric report  on  A2  and  A3.  The
    report was copied to the respondent's lawyers.



13. On 24 January 2018, the respondent made a further decision refusing  to
    take charge of A2 and A3's asylum applications.

      Directorate of Immigration - GREECE

                                        Date: 24th January 2018

      Dear Colleagues,

      COUNCIL REGULATION (EU) No. 604/2013 of 26th June 2013

      Re: Ms A[...] A[...] Stateless Person (Article 1 of 1954 Convention)
        24 December 1978 together with her minor child: N[...] [...]  15
        December 2013

        You have provided further information requesting the reconsideration
        of the UK's refusal of your request to take charge of the above
        named and her minor child under the terms of Council Regulation (EU)
        No. 604/2013 of 26th June 2013.

        You have stated that the husband of the above named - H[...] A[...]
        - is a British Citizen.  As such they are neither recipients of or
        requesting international protection.  They are therefore outside the
        Dublin III Regulation and thus Articles 9 and 10 are not engaged.

        As the spouse of a British Citizen it is for the above named to
        utilise the Entry Clearance process; you have provided evidence that
        the application was made and subsequently denied because it was made
        under the wrong article.  Further applications can be made by the
        above named under the correct scheme (Reunion with a British
        Citizen) with every chance of success.

        No further evidence has been provided to show why Article 17.2
        should be engaged in this case.

        Consequently, I regret to inform you that your request to take
        charge of the above named remains, respectfully, denied.

      Yours sincerely,

      J[...] B[...]

      European Intake Unit

      UK Visas and Immigration



14. The applicant's grounds have been amended with permission to  challenge
    that decision also.



15. For the avoidance of doubt, except for anonymising those involved, what
    is set out above reproduces the letters in their original form with all
    the errors they contain.




16. It is, we consider, appropriate to set out the decisions in full, given
    that the respondent has elected not to provide  any  further  evidence,
    save for the brief CID notes submitted only on the date of hearing.




Summary of Grounds of Challenge and response

17. The applicants submit that the decisions are unlawful  on  the  grounds
    that the respondent acted unlawfully in:




      1) Failing to address the best interests of the child (A3);

      2) Taking into account irrelevant considerations:  A1's  status  as  a
         British Citizen; the possibility of making an application for entry
         clearance; and, in referring to provisions of  Immigration  Law  no
         longer in force;

      3) Failing to take into account material factors,  in  particular  the
         circumstances in which the applicants find themselves  and  A2  and
         A3's mental ill-health;

      4) Failing to comply with her obligations and duties under Dublin III,
         the European Charter of Fundamental Rights  and  Freedoms  ("CFR"),
         and, article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights;  and  in
         applying an improper test  in  assessing  the  latter,  incorrectly
         requiring exceptional circumstances;

      5) Taking a decision inconsistent with other decisions.




18. The respondent resists these  assertions,  arguing  that  although  she
    accepts that Dublin III and CFR are engaged, the application should  be
    dismissed as the respondent:




     1) Has a wide discretion within Dublin III under reg 17(2) as it is  a
        derogation from article 3(1) and was entitled  to  ask  herself  if
        there were exceptional circumstances justifying  an  assumption  of
        responsibility for asylum applicants for whom the United Kingdom is
        not strictly responsible;

      2) Was not obliged to take  into  account  material  not  provided  by
         Greece, in this case  the  psychiatric  report  and  the  DNA  test
         results;

      3) Was entitled to conclude that there were no humanitarian reasons to
         take charge.

      4) Is not under a continuing  obligation  to  keep  under  review  the
         applicant's position, nor is there an ongoing refusal




19. The respondent contends also that even if the decision  were  unlawful,
    the appropriate remedy would be by way  of  a  declaration  and  not  a
    mandatory order.



20. Following directions  issued  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Dawson,  this
    application was listed before the President of the Upper  Tribunal,  Mr
    Justice Peter Lane, and Upper Tribunal  Judge  Dawson  on  19  February
    2019. They granted  permission  and  the  hearing  of  the  substantive
    application was listed to be heard on 28 March 2018 before us.



21. The grant of permission, so far as is relevant, states:



    'In our view the Respondent has arguably erred in law in  not  engaging
    sufficiently or at all with  relevant  matters  that  is  to  say,  the
    position of the second and third applicants by reference to  Article  8
    of the ECHR, the corresponding provisions in the Charter of Fundamental
    Rights of the European Union and insofar  as  the  third  applicant  is
    concerned by reference to her best interests, as  also  underpinned  by
    the Charter.

    The Respondent's pressures in decision-making are  well-known  and  are
    accepted.  We have noted what Miss Masood has said in  that  regard  in
    considering the terms used in the letters.  We have  to  say,  however,
    that it is arguable that the defects we have  identified  are  arguably
    present.  Insofar as the Respondent's stance has been to rely upon  the
    ability of the  second  and  thirds  [sic]  applicants  to  make  entry
    clearance applications,  we  see  the  arguable  force  of  Ms  Knorr's
    submission that this cannot be done in isolation but  has  to  be  done
    through the prism of  the  instruments  to  which  we  have  just  made
    reference.




    We therefore grant permission and we will hear submissions on the issue
    of expedition and if there is to be expedition what the  timescale  may
    be'.



THE LAW

22. Dublin III provides in its recitals:

    (13) In accordance with the  1989  United  Nations  Convention  on  the
    Rights of the Child and with the Charter of Fundamental Rights  of  the
    European Union, the best interests of the child  should  be  a  primary
    consideration of  Member  States  when  applying  this  Regulation.  In
    assessing the best interests of the child,  Member  States  should,  in
    particular, take due account  of  the  minor's  well-being  and  social
    development, safety and security considerations and the  views  of  the
    minor in accordance with his or her age and maturity, including his  or
    her  background.  In  addition,  specific  procedural  guarantees   for
    unaccompanied minors should be laid down on account of their particular
    vulnerabilities


    (14) In accordance with the European Convention for the  Protection  of
    Human  Rights  and  Fundamental  Freedoms  and  with  the  Charter   of
    Fundamental Rights of the  European  Union,  respect  for  family  life
    should be a primary consideration of Member States when  applying  this
    Regulation


    (19) In order to guarantee effective protection of the  rights  of  the
    persons concerned, legal safeguards  and  the  right  to  an  effective
    remedy in respect of decisions regarding transfers to the Member  State
    responsible should be established, in accordance, in  particular,  with
    Article 47 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European  Union.
    In order to ensure that international law is  respected,  an  effective
    remedy against such decisions should cover both the examination of  the
    application of this Regulation and of the legal and  factual  situation
    in the Member State to which the applicant is transferred


    (39) This Regulation respects the fundamental rights and  observes  the
    principles which are acknowledged, in particular,  in  the  Charter  of
    Fundamental  Rights  of  the  European  Union.  In   particular,   this
    Regulation seeks to ensure full  observance  of  the  right  to  asylum
    guaranteed by  Article  18  of  the  Charter  as  well  as  the  rights
    recognised under Articles 1, 4, 7, 24 and 47 thereof.  This  Regulation
    should therefore be applied accordingly



23. These are reflected in the following articles of Dublin III:


    Article 6


    The best interests of the child shall be a  primary  consideration  for
    Member States with respect to  all  procedures  provided  for  in  this
    Regulation


    Article 9


    Where the applicant has a family  member,  regardless  of  whether  the
    family was previously formed in the country of  origin,  who  has  been
    allowed to reside as a beneficiary of  international  protection  in  a
    Member State, that Member State shall be responsible for examining  the
    application for international protection,  provided  that  the  persons
    concerned expressed their desire in writing.


    Article 17 Discretionary Clauses


    17.2. The Member  State  in  which  an  application  for  international
    protection is made and which is carrying out the process of determining
    the Member State responsible, or the Member State responsible, may,  at
    any time before a first decision  regarding  the  substance  is  taken,
    request another Member State to take charge of an applicant in order to
    bring together any family relations, on humanitarian grounds  based  in
    particular on family or cultural considerations, even where that  other
    Member State is  not  responsible  under  the  criteria  laid  down  in
    Articles 8 to 11 and 16.  The  persons  concerned  must  express  their
    consent in writing.


    The request to take charge  shall  contain  all  the  material  in  the
    possession of the requesting Member State to allow the requested Member
    State to assess the situation. The requested Member State  shall  carry
    out any necessary checks to examine the humanitarian grounds cited, and
    shall reply to the requesting Member State within two months of receipt
    of the request using the 'DubliNet'  electronic  communication  network
    set up under Article 18  of  Regulation  (EC)  No  1560/2003.  A  reply
    refusing the request shall state the reasons on which  the  refusal  is
    based.


24. Dublin III are subject to the EU Implementation  Regulations  1560/2003
    (as amended by EU Regulations 118/2014). These, amongst other  matters,
    set out the forms to be used and the means of proof by which the  State
    responsible for examining an application for  international  protection
    is determined.




25. Given the provisions of recital (39) we consider it appropriate to  set
    out articles 7, 24 and 47 of the CFR:



    Article 7 Respect for private and family life

    Everyone has the right to respect for his or  her  private  and  family
    life, home and communications.

    Article 24 - The rights of the child


     1. Children shall have the right to such protection  and  care  as  is
        necessary for  their  well-being.  They  may  express  their  views
        freely. Such views shall be taken  into  consideration  on  matters
        which concern them in accordance with their age and maturity.

     2.  In all actions relating  to  children,  whether  taken  by  public
        authorities or private institutions,  the  child's  best  interests
        must be a primary consideration.


     3. Every child shall have the right to maintain on a regular  basis  a
        personal relationship and direct  contact  with  both  his  or  her
        parents, unless that is contrary to his or her interests

    Article 47 - Right to an effective remedy and to a fair trial


    Everyone whose rights and freedoms guaranteed by the law of  the  Union
    are violated has the right to an effective remedy before a tribunal  in
    compliance with the conditions laid down in this Article.  Everyone  is
    entitled to a fair and public hearing within a reasonable  time  by  an
    independent and  impartial  tribunal  previously  established  by  law.
    Everyone shall have the possibility  of  being  advised,  defended  and
    represented. Legal aid shall  be  made  available  to  those  who  lack
    sufficient resources in so far as  such  aid  is  necessary  to  ensure
    effective access to justice.

26. As noted above, the respondent accepts that this is an  application  to
    which Dublin III and the CFR apply. As we are  thus  applying  European
    law, we take a purposive approach to interpretation in the light of the
    recitals.




27. Article 17.2 does  not  set  any  specific  criteria,  but  the  Dublin
    Regulations themselves and the  CFR  provided  the  general  parameters
    within  which  decisions  must  be  taken,  albeit  that  the   general
    provisions set out in articles 21 and 22 do not apply.   There  is,  we
    accept, a  wide  discretion  available  to  the  respondent  under  the
    article, but it is not untrammelled. As was said  in  ZT  Syria  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 810 at [85]:



    85. A further  reason  for  rejecting  Mr  Eadie's  submission  in  its
    absolutist form is Article 17 of the Dublin III Regulation.  Since  the
    relevant officials in the second Member  State  have  power  to  assume
    responsibility in a case in which the Regulation assigns it to  another
    Member State, it cannot be said that it is never open to an  individual
    to request that state to do that. Mr Eadie suggested, or came close  to
    suggesting, during the course of the hearing that a refusal to exercise
    the power under Article 17 was not justiciable. That, in  my  judgment,
    is unsound in principle and also finds no support in  the  authorities.
    Abdullahi v Bundesasylamt recognised only that the second Member  State
    has  a  wide  margin  of  discretion  in  deciding  whether  to  assume
    responsibility pursuant to the provision in the  Dublin  II  Regulation
    that is the equivalent of  Article  17.  In  a  context  in  which  the
    exercise of power relates to relations between two Member States as  to
    the  operation  of  a  treaty   arranging   for   the   allocation   of
    responsibility for examining applications  for  asylum  between  Member
    States, this is clearly correct. There will be a wide range of relevant
    considerations for the decision-maker to take into account: see all the
    factors that the Upper Tribunal stated were relevant to the  assessment
    of proportionality. But subject to  the  effective  scope  of  judicial
    review being narrower for this reason, the exercise by the Secretary of
    State  of  her  discretion  is  subject  to  the  ordinary  public  law
    principles of propriety of purpose, relevancy  of  considerations,  and
    the longstop Wednesbury unreasonableness category and, because  of  the
    engagement of  ECHR  Article  8,  the  intensity  of  review  which  is
    appropriate  in  the  assessment  of   the   proportionality   of   any
    interference with Article 8 rights.




    Ground (i) Best interests of the child




28. We begin our analysis of the decisions in considering  first  the  best
    interests of the child.  We  bear  in  mind  that  if  she  is,  as  is
    contended, a British Citizen, then Dublin III cannot apply  to  her  as
    she is not a third country national. That is, not, however material  as
    in assessing the position of A2, the respondent's duty is still to take
    A3's best interests into account as a primary consideration. It is  not
    contended that she could be separated from her mother.




29. Ms Masood submitted that in assessing any public law error, it  was  to
    be borne in mind that A1's status as a British Citizen, meant that  the
    alternative  route  to  family  reunion  through  an  entry   clearance
    application was open to them, and still would  be  even  were  the  TCR
    made. It was not, however, conceded that the application would succeed.
    It  would  be  for  the  applicants  to  show  in  an  entry  clearance
    application that there were insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life
    that could not be overcome and, in this case,  that  EU  Free  Movement
    rights could not be exercised. This, it  was  submitted,  is  what  was
    meant by "exceptional circumstances"  in  the  second  refusal  letter.
    Those were, however, to be  distinguished  from  the  very  exceptional
    circumstances identified in ZT (Syria). It was implicit in the decision
    that the best interests of the child were taken into account, but  that
    said, this does not necessarily mandate accepting the TCR.



30.  While we accept the respondent's submission that the best interests of
    A3 cannot "trump" other considerations, there is no evidence either  in
    the decision letters or in the CID notes provided that there  had  been
    any assessment of the child's best interests. As  the  initial  request
    expressly  referred  to  a  minor,  and   referred   to   compassionate
    circumstances, that is a significant defect.  We consider that this was
    a failure to take into account a relevant matter.




    Grounds (ii) and (iii)




Irrelevant matters




31. The sole basis for refusal in the first letter  -  failure  to  provide
    conclusive evidence that entry clearance could not be obtained - is not
    one which is adequately explained in the context, nor does it flow from
    Dublin III.  As we observed during submissions, a TCR under  article  9
    would be susceptible to the same argument as regards (as  is  the  case
    here) pre-flight spouses and children of  those  granted  international
    protection in the United Kingdom as they could  always  request  family
    reunion.




32. There is, we accept, a difference between article 17 and articles 7  to
    16 in that the provisions are not discretionary, albeit that article 16
    permits of exceptions.  We accept that it  is  for  the  respondent  to
    consider an application made under article 17.2  through  the  lens  of
    article 7 CFR and/or article 8 ECHR, taking account also  of  the  best
    interests of a child.  That approach is consistent with  the  normative
    provisions in article 16 that where  there  are  issues  of  dependency
    within a family life context, the family should be brought together.




33. The respondent's argument, based on her policy, is  that  only  if  (in
    summary) it could be shown that there were insurmountable obstacles  to
    family unity, in essence an article 7 or 8 case, that an  Article  17.2
    application should be entertained. In effect, it would only be  acceded
    to in a situation where a viable article 8 application could  be  made.
    The submission that an application could be rejected on the basis  that
    such an application could be made is a circular argument.  Further,  if
    a proper consideration of article 7/article 8 and the best interests of
    the child requires discretion to be exercised to accede to  a  request,
    then whether an application for entry clearance could be  made  is  not
    relevant if it precludes overall/further  consideration  under  Article
    7/8.



34. Whether or not an application could be made  in  Greece  at  all  is  a
    matter  on  which  we  have   received   post-decision   evidence   and
    submissions. We conclude that there is no legal bar to  an  application
    being made, albeit that there may be requirement to pay  a  fee  (which
    may or may not be waived). Further, the application that would be  made
    would be to join A1 in the United Kingdom with a view,  presumably,  to
    settlement, is for a different purpose from that behind Dublin III.



35. The respondent sought to persuade us also that it would be open  to  A1
    to use his right of free movement to live with his  family  in  Greece,
    and on that basis, there would be no obstacles  to  them  being  united
    during the asylum determination process. We find that  an  unattractive
    argument. There is nothing to suggest that A1 could exercise  his  free
    movement rights to reside in Greece. He  is  not  seeking  a  job,  and
    moreover, there appears to be no prospect  of  him  finding  employment
    given his limited skills and inability to speak Greek. On the basis  of
    Dano v Jobcentre Leipzig [2014] EUECJ C-333/13,  he  has  no  right  of
    residence in Greece.  We observe also that the purpose of  Dublin  IIIs
    is not  just  ensuring  family  unity  but  also  (recital  (15))  that
    decisions taken in respect of the members of one family should be taken
    by a single member state to  ensure  consistency.  In  any  event,  the
    duration of the process is not  an  issue  on  which  we  received  any
    evidence, and that would make A1's  staying  in  Greece  precarious  at
    best.



36. Accordingly, we accept Ms Kilroy's submission that in  concluding  that
    an application for entry clearance could be made,  the  respondent  has
    taken into account an irrelevant matter.




(iii) Failure to take into account relevant matters.



37. Ms Masood submitted that it should be borne in mind that the  A2  could
    have applied for family reunion after 2007 when the  Immigration  Rules
    had changed and after A1 had been granted ILR in  2011.  All  that  had
    been done was an application on the wrong basis which was not appealed.





38. Further, it was submitted that little information had been provided  to
    the  Respondent  (but  see  for  example  the   schedules   to   Dublin
    Implementation as  a  comparator).  Ms  Masood  defended  the  decision
    letters asserting they were in some respects lacking  in  clarity,  but
    their essential meaning was clear.  It was to be  noted  also  that  in
    respect of the third decision this had not come about as a result of  a
    formal request by the Greek authorities but by what  was  expressly  an
    informal request.



39. It was also submitted that the psychiatric report had been submitted in
    support of an application for the matter to be expedited, indicative of
    the manner in which information had trickled towards the respondent.



40. The application has evolved, however, and there is some  merit  in  the
    respondent's submission that information has trickled to her; and, that
    it was brief. The initial application from  the  Greek  government  was
    succinct, stating



"This family is a single parent family with  one  minor  child  and  without
supportive environment in Greece That's why the alien is  totally  dependent
on her husband and needs his support so as to be in a safe  and  emotionally
supportive environment. For this reason the alien wishes to  be  transferred
to the United Kingdom with her child, and her application for asylum  to  be
examined by your authorities so that the family members be reunited"



41. While brief this contains a  significant  amount  of  information.  Its
    brevity is also to be considered in the context  of  what  is  required
    under the Implementation Regulations. It does, we  find,  set  out  the
    relevant information, and importantly  how  the  Greek  government  had
    assessed the family.




42. We were referred also to R (on the application of MK, IK  (a  child  by
    his litigation friend MK) and HK (a child by her litigation friend  MK)
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department (Calais; Dublin Regulation
    - investigative duty) IJR [2016] UKUT 231 (IAC)  at  [39]  to  [41]  in
    terms of the respondent's duties on receipt of a TCR.




(39) It follows that we reject  the  Secretary  of  State's  contention  (as
pleaded) that she had no duty of investigation upon  receipt  of  the  "take
charge" requests and the associated contention that the onus to provide  all
necessary evidence rested on the Applicants.  These contentions are, in  our
judgment, confounded by the provisions of  the  Dublin  Regulation  and  its
sister instrument considered as a whole. We further reject the Secretary  of
State's selective reliance on one of the various components of  Article  22,
namely Article 22(5), of the Dublin Regulation, for the same reason.

(40) We must now consider the Secretary  of  State's  modified  position  at
this stage of the hearing. This entailed an acknowledgement that  there  was
a duty of investigation under the Dublin Regulation when the  initial  "take
charge" request was received. What did this duty require  of  the  Secretary
of State? We consider that the investigative and evidence  gathering  duties
imposed on Member States by the Dublin Regulation are unavoidably  factually
and contextually sensitive. The content and scope of such duties  will  vary
from one context to another. While we did not receive detailed  argument  on
this discrete issue, we are inclined to the view that these duties  are  not
absolute, in the sense that they apply irrespective of  considerations  such
as excessive or disproportionate burden. It seems to  us  that  implicit  in
the Dublin Regulation is the principle that these duties require the  Member
State concerned to take reasonable steps. The court  or  tribunal  concerned
will, having regard to its duty under Article  6  TEU,  be  the  arbiter  of
whether this duty has been acquitted in any given case.

(41) We  find  nothing  in  either  the  Dublin  Regulation  or  its  sister
instrument  to  support  the  argument  that  the   Secretary   of   State's
acknowledged  duty  of  investigation  was  extinguished  once  the  initial
refusal decision had been made. There is nothing in this regime  to  suggest
that a decision on a "take  charge"  request  is  in  all  cases  final  and
conclusive, subject only to legal challenge under (inter alia)  Article  27.
Furthermore, this  would  be  entirely  inconsistent  with  the  concept  of
practical and effective protection and  the  broader  context  of  the  real
world of asylum claims. The phenomenon of  renewed  "take  charge"  requests
and successive "take charge" decisions by the requested  State  is,  in  our
view, implicitly recognised in the Dublin Regulation.  Furthermore,  it  was
not argued  that  the  Secretary  of  State's  reconsidered  decision,  made
pursuant to a renewed "take charge" request, was in  some  way  a  voluntary
act of grace, as opposed to the discharge of a  decision  making  duty.  Nor
was it argued that the Secretary of State's later  decisions,  made  in  the
course of these proceedings, were in  some  way  divorced  from  the  Dublin
Regulation context.

(42) The present cases are a paradigm illustration of the  truism  that,  in
certain contexts, there may be a series of formal  requests  by  one  Member
State and a series of formal decisions by the  requested  Member  State.  We
are in no doubt that all  such  decisions  and  associated  decision  making
processes are governed by the Dublin Regulation and its  sister  instrument,
the 2003 Regulation as amended.

43. This duty was, Ms Kilroy submitted, set out in the respondent's  policy
    entitled "Dublin III Regulation" of 2 November 2017  at  in  particular
    page 44 and that in  this  case  the  respondent  was  arguing  to  the
    contrary. We find that is so. The policy provides:




       Where an Article 17(2) request is received from another Dublin State,
       caseworkers  should  consider  whether  there  are  any   exceptional
       circumstances or compassionate  factors  which  may  justify  the  UK
       exercising discretion and accepting  responsibility  for  the  claim,
       notwithstanding that the UK is not bound to do so under  Dublin  III.
       There  may  be  exceptional  circumstances  raised  by  the  evidence
       submitted with the request from the other Dublin  State  which  would
       result in unjustifiably harsh consequences for the applicant or their
       family  relations.  It  is  for  the  requesting  Dublin   State   to
       demonstrate  what  the  exceptional  circumstances  or  compassionate
       factors are in their case: the evidence submitted with the request to
       exercise discretion must be coherent, verifiable and detailed in line
       with Dublin III's general provisions on evidence.
       ...


       You must, having considered the evidence submitted by the  requesting
       State  (proof  or  circumstantial  evidence,  as   above,   including
       information provided on standard forms which  aim  to  establish  the
       proven family link and the dependency link between the applicant  and
       his or her child, sibling or parent, as  well  as  to  establish  the
       capacity of the person  concerned  to  take  care  of  the  dependent
       person), information contained in Home Office  records  and  evidence
       submitted by the person in the UK, be satisfied that the parties  are
       related as claimed.(emphasis added)


44. Drawing these strands together, we find no merit in the submission that
    the  respondent  was  bound  only  to  take  into  account  information
    submitted by the Greek government.  While there is some  merit  in  the
    observation that the psychiatric report was submitted under cover of  a
    letter which did not emphasise its importance to the substance  of  the
    decision, we consider that the respondent should  have  taken  it  into
    account. The third decision was at that point in draft, but equally  as
    the CID notes show, legal advice was being taken, and  it  was  to  the
    legal advisers that the report was sent. This is not a requirement even
    to investigate, which might have been  expected  bearing  in  mind  the
    grant of humanitarian protection,  but  merely  to  take  into  account
    relevant factual information which had been forwarded to the respondent
    prior to the last decision.



45. There are in addition, a number of concerns about the decision  letters
    themselves.  They are barely coherent and in  the  first  two  make  no
    reference to humanitarian issues, or the best interests of  the  child.
    Viewed cumulatively  or  individually,  the  letters  lack  any  proper
    reasoning, and make several errors including the reference to paragraph
    281 of the Immigration Rules, and the factually incorrect assertion  in
    the third  letter  that  A2  and  A3  were  not  seeking  international
    protection because A1 is British.



46. Accordingly, for these reasons, we find that the respondent's  decision
    is flawed on standard public law grounds.



    Ground (iv)



47. We turn next to the more complex  issue  of  whether  the  decision  is
    incompatible with article 7 of the CFR and article 8 of the  ECHR.   It
    is not  suggested  to  us  that  the  effect  of  these  provisions  is
    different.  Given  article  52(3)  of  the  CFR,  and  the  established
    jurisprudence of the CJEU that they should be treated as equivalent, we
    accept that is so, and we remind ourselves of recital (39) in assessing
    this issue which we have cited at  paragraph  22  above.   Further,  in
    light of NS [2011] EUECJ C-411/10 at [116] - [122], it is not  arguable
    that protocol 30 of the CFR prevents us from  so  doing,  and  in  that
    respect we rely also on the observations of Mostyn J in R  (oao)  AB  v
    SSHD [2013] EWHC 3453.




48. We find that there is no effective difference  between  article  7  and
    article 8 but bearing in mind it was accepted that the CFR was  engaged
    we find little purpose in exploring  issues  under  article  8  because
    there is no rivalry between the schemes of Dublin III and  the  CFR  on
    the one hand and ECHR (article 8) on the other. The CFR, as accepted by
    Ms Masood, was engaged. We  have  cited  the  caselaw  in  relation  to
    Article 8 to underline, by  analogy,  that  we  as  the  Tribunal  must
    consider proportionality as a result of article 7.



49. We consider that  the  factual  matrix  in  this  application  is  very
    different from that in RSM or ZT (Syria) about  which  there  was  much
    argument.  In those cases, the Dublin III process had not been  engaged
    and  what  was  being  considered  were  the  respondent's  duties  and
    obligations under article 8. Here, the Dublin process has begun and the
    issue is how article 7 (or  article  8  ECHR)  duties  and  obligations
    affect the exercise of discretion exercised under Dublin  III.   It  is
    thus a situation different from that identified in ZT (Syria) at  [65].
    We accept also, bearing in mind that this is  a  case  involving  human
    rights, that article 27 (right to an effective remedy)  of  Dublin  III
    applies here. It was not properly argued  before  us  that  it  is  not
    applicable and we find that interpreting that article in the  light  of
    recital (19) that it is. It follows that, the intensity of review  must
    be commensurate with the issues involved.  The scope of the  review  is
    addressed by Beatson LJ at [76] - [77] and we apply that guidance.



50. Unlike in ZT (Syria) we are not being  asked  to  evaluate  the  asylum
    determination system of another member state.  We consider also that as
    was held in RSM at [121], Dublin III does not have  as  its  object  to
    give effect to additional rights of protection for rights guaranteed by
    the Convention - see also paragraph 122. In that case  a  TCR  had  not
    been initiated and so article 17.2 had no application [126].  There  is
    here no interference with the Greek authorities and the observations of
    Singh LJ in RSM at [174] are not applicable.  It is not the  case  that
    we are giving effect to 'additional rights' but only  respecting  those
    rights expressed in the Recital of Dublin III as being  applicable  and
    to which 'full observation is to be  given'  in  the  exercise  of  the
    incorporated rights.



51. Further, we note that at [83] of ZT (Syria)  Beatson  LJ  rejected  the
    respondent's argument that Dublin III strikes the proportionate balance
    for the purposes of article 8.



52. We were taken at some length to CK (Afghanistan) [2016]  EWCA  Civ  166
    which Ms Kilroy submitted was also to be distinguished as in that case,
    there had been no request from France to take charge,  and  as  it  had
    been decided under Dublin II which differs from Dublin III in that  the
    latter expressly introduces  remedies  for  those  affected.   In  this
    regard we note what Laws LJ at held [31] to [32],  and  we  agree  that
    that can, in the light of Article 27 of Dublin III and the observations
    of Beatson LJ in ZT(Syria) referred to above, be distinguished.



53. Ms Kilroy submitted that as the unlawfulness here was not just  in  the
    public law sense, but also in terms of section 6 of  the  Human  Rights
    Act 1998, following Begum v Denbigh High  School  [2006]  UKHL  15  and
    Belfast City Council v Miss Behavin [2007] UKHL 19, it is for the Upper
    Tribunal to make a finding on  whether  there  has  been  a  breach  of
    article 8 (or, for that matter, article 7 of the CFRR).    As  we  have
    identified above we consider that the  approach  courts  must  take  to
    address  proportionality  in  the  caselaw  cited  below   have   equal
    applicability to Article 7.



54. In Denbigh High School Lord Bingham held [30]:



    30.    Secondly, it is clear that the court's approach to an  issue  of
         proportionality  under  the  Convention   must   go   beyond   that
         traditionally adopted to judicial review in a domestic setting. The
         inadequacy of that approach was exposed in Smith and Grady v United
         Kingdom (1999) 29 EHRR 493, para 138, and the new approach required
         under the 1998 Act was described  by  Lord  Steyn  in  R  (Daly)  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2001] UKHL 26, [2001] 2
         AC 532, paras 25-28, in terms which have never to my knowledge been
         questioned. There is no shift to a merits review, but the intensity
         of review is greater than was previously appropriate,  and  greater
         even than the heightened scrutiny test  adopted  by  the  Court  of
         Appeal in R v Ministry of Defence, Ex p Smith [1996] QB  517,  554.
         The domestic court must now make a value judgment,  an  evaluation,
         by reference to the circumstances prevailing at the  relevant  time
         (Wilson v First County Trust Ltd (No 2) [2003] UKHL 40, [2004] 1 AC
         816, paras 62-67). Proportionality must be judged  objectively,  by
         the court (Williamson, above, para 51). As Davies observed  in  his
         article cited above, "The retreat to procedure is of course  a  way
         of avoiding difficult questions". But it is in my view  clear  that
         the court must confront these  questions,  however  difficult.  The
         school's action cannot properly be condemned  as  disproportionate,
         with an acknowledgement that on  reconsideration  the  same  action
         could very well be maintained and properly so.



55. Further, in Miss Behavin' at [26] - [27] Lord Rodger held:




    26.    Of course, where the public authority has carefully weighed  the
         various competing considerations and  concluded  that  interference
         with a Convention right is justified, a court  will  attribute  due
         weight to  that  conclusion  in  deciding  whether  the  action  in
         question was proportionate and lawful. As Lord Bingham  said  in  R
         (SB) v Governors of Denbigh High School [2007] 1 AC 100, 116G, para
         31:




           "If,  in  such  a  case,  it  appears  that  such  a  body   has
           conscientiously   paid   attention   to   all    human    rights
           considerations, no doubt a challenger's task will be the harder.
           But what matters in any case is the practical outcome,  not  the
           quality of the decision-making process that led to it."




         Similarly, having observed that head teachers and  governors  could
         not be expected to make decisions with textbooks on human rights at
         their elbows, Lord Hoffmann observed, at p 126C, para 68:

           "The most that can be said is that the way in which the school
           approached the problem may help to persuade a judge that its
           answer fell within the area of judgment accorded to it by the
           law."

      27.   In this case the  Council  did  not  weigh  the  competing human
         rights and other considerations in  that  way.  So,  when  deciding
         whether their refusal of a  licence  interfered  disproportionately
         with the applicant's right to freedom of expression, the court  had
         to go about its task without that particular  kind  of  assistance.
         Weatherup J concluded that, having regard to the  various  features
         of this particular locality which he mentioned, the  refusal  of  a
         licence to sell  pornography  in  the  applicant's  Gresham  Street
         premises did not interfere disproportionately  with  its  right  to
         freedom of expression. Neither the Court of Appeal  nor  indeed  Mr
         Larkin actually challenged that conclusion on its merits.  But,  if
         it is sound - as I believe it is - then the Council's decision  was
         lawful in terms of section 6(1) of  the  1998  Act  and  cannot  be
         quashed on the ground of incompatibility with article 10.




56. Accordingly, we have undertaken an analysis of the  proportionality  of
    the decision, bearing in mind also the respondent's policy.




57. Ms Kilroy submitted that this case fell squarely within Dublin III. She
    submitted further that the sole  basis  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision appeared to be that A2 and A3 can apply for  entry  clearance.
    She submitted that there is simply no evidence that the best  interests
    of the child had been taken into account nor had the Secretary of State
    properly considered the circumstances of the  applicants  in  terms  of
    their mental health.




58. Ms Kilroy advanced further that it was worrying that the  Secretary  of
    State had, despite the terms of the  grant  of  permission,  still  not
    provided any evidence or a witness statement explaining  the  reasoning
    behind the decisions. That was despite having asked for time so to do.



59. Ms Kilroy submitted that if the respondent's argument were correct, the
    A2 and A3 would be the subject of two parallel processes: an assessment
    of their asylum claims and  applications  for  entry  clearance,  which
    would be inefficient. There was no rationale for the need  to  make  an
    entry clearance application; and, the insistence on such procedures was
    contrary to the procedural duties which flowed from  properly  applying
    the best interests of the child as set out in article 24 of the CFR.



60. With respect to the best interests of a child  and  in  particular  the
    position of a British Citizen child, Ms Kilroy relied on ZH (Tanzania)v
    SSHD [2011] UKSC 4 at [32] and [33]:

    32. Nor should the intrinsic importance of citizenship be played  down.
    As citizens these children have rights which they will not be  able  to
    exercise if they move to another country. They will lose the advantages
    of growing up and being  educated  in  their  own  country,  their  own
    culture and their own language. They will have lost all this when  they
    come back as adults. As Jacqueline Bhaba (in  'The  "Mere  Fortuity  of
    Birth"? Children, Mothers, Borders and the Meaning of Citizenship',  in
    Migrations and Mobilities:  Citizenship,  Borders  and  Gender  (2009),
    edited by Seyla Benhabib and Judith Resnik, at p 193) has put it:
      'In short, the fact of belonging to a  country  fundamentally  affects
      the manner of exercise of a child's family and  private  life,  during
      childhood and well beyond. Yet children, particularly young  children,
      are often considered parcels that are easily  movable  across  borders
      with their parents and without particular cost to the children.'
    33. We now have a much greater understanding of the importance of these
    issues in assessing the overall well-being of the child. In making  the
    proportionality assessment under article 8, the best interests  of  the
    child must be a primary consideration. This means  that  they  must  be
    considered first. They can, of course, be outweighed by the  cumulative
    effect of  other  considerations.  In  this  case,  the  countervailing
    considerations were the need to  maintain  firm  and  fair  immigration
    control, coupled with the mother's appalling  immigration  history  and
    the precariousness of her position when family life was  created.  But,
    as the Tribunal rightly pointed out, the children were not to be blamed
    for that. And the inevitable result of  removing  their  primary  carer
    would be that they had to leave with her. On the facts, it is as  least
    as strong a case as Edore v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    [2003] 1 WLR 2979, where Simon Brown LJ held that "there really is only
    room for one view" (para 26). In those circumstances, the Secretary  of
    State was clearly right to concede that there could be only one answer.


61. Ms Kilroy submitted further that on the principles set out in Chikwamba
    [2008] UKHL 40, the observation by the respondent in the third decision
    that the applications had "every chance of success" was  not  a  reason
    why A2 and A3 should not  be  admitted  to  the  United  Kingdom  under
    Article 17.2 on merely procedural grounds,  this  serving  no  purpose;
    and, by analogy with the appellant SS in MM  (Lebanon)  v  SSHD  [2017]
    UKSC 10 at [102] and [104], A2 and A3 have strong cases. Here, as A2 is
    illiterate and dependant on A1, as well as having  a  child  and  being
    pregnant, the case is even stronger. It was submitted also  that  there
    was no real prospect of A1 being able  to  exercise  EU  Free  Movement
    rights as he does not speak Greek and is unlikely to  be  able  to  get
    employment.




62. Ms Kilroy submitted that A1 is, in effect, in an impossible  situation:
    either give up the home and job he has here and be with  his  wife  and
    child where his position would also be precarious; or, remain here  and
    be separated from his family who both suffer from serious  mental  ill-
    health including PTSD. The respondent's exercise of her discretion was,
    it was submitted, flagrantly unlawful.



63. In addition, Ms Kilroy submitted  that  article  9  of  Dublin  III  is
    relevant in this case as, because although it had not  formed  part  of
    the request made by Greece (who could not have known on the information
    given  to  them  that  A1  had  previously  been  granted  Humanitarian
    Protection),   its   applicability   was    relevant    in    assessing
    proportionality as there was no sensible or rational basis for treating
    the applicants differently based on A1's  nationality.  The  Respondent
    had full knowledge that he had  previously  been  granted  humanitarian
    protection and the dates thereto.



64. Ms Masood submitted that, as was submitted in RSM at  [85],  article  8
    was not engaged. We do not accept that. The  difference  here  is  that
    article 17.2 is engaged as a result of the TCR made by Greece but there
    is nowhere a detailed analysis of the  article  8  ECHR  case  made  by
    Greece. In particular, Ms Masood accepted that CFR was engaged and thus
    article 7 the equivalent to article 8 was in play.




65. Ms Masood submitted that, even if the decisions were incompatible  with
    article 8, other routes are available. It should be noted that  A1  had
    spent significant periods of time in Greece. The date  of  decision  is
    also, given that this is a judicial review case, relevant.  The purpose
    of Dublin III  is  we  accept  to  maintain  family  unity  during  the
    determination process and while that has occurred  here  to  a  limited
    extent, that is, however, not the only purpose of Dublin III.



66. Ms Masood submitted in respect of article 9 of  Dublin  III  that  that
    there was no case law on its meaning, and the  specific  point  of  its
    applicability had not been pleaded. She  submitted  that  article  17.2
    gave  the  requested  state  an  extensive   discretion,   albeit   not
    untrammelled, and the process was clearly optional.



67. In response, Ms Kilroy submitted that  it  is  wrong  in  principle  to
    expect the applicants to have understood the law and its intricacies in
    making their applications, but not to expect the same high standards of
    the respondent's caseworkers in their analysis which gave no indication
    of any of the correct standards being applied  or  the  proper  factors
    taken into account.



68. The starting point for analysing the potential breach must be the  best
    interests of the child. Given her age, and that she  has  already  been
    diagnosed as suffering from PTSD, as has her mother, we find  that  the
    general rule that it is in her interest to be with both parents is  all
    the stronger as the family unit relies to a great extent on A1 as carer
    and  provider  as  detailed  in  the  witness  statements  and  in  the
    psychiatric report which was  not  properly  taken  into  account.  The
    witness statements and  psychiatric  report  are  consistent  with  the
    limited references made in the TCR by the Greek authorities.   Further,
    as A2 is pregnant, her ability to care for  A3  is  limited,  and  that
    ability is limited also by her own mental ill-health.



69. We do not consider that it is  necessary  for  us  to  decide  on  A3's
    nationality and as an application for a British passport is pending, it
    would not be right for us to do so. We do, however, accept that if  she
    is a British Citizen as appears to be the case, given that she was born
    within marriage after her father was naturalised, that she  would  fall
    outside the scope of Dublin III Regulation which applies only  to  non-
    EEA nationals.



70. We accept also that, for the reasons set out above, A1 cannot reside in
    Greece; he has no right to reside there, nor  is  there  any  realistic
    prospect of him being able so to do. We accept he can and  does  visit,
    but that is a precarious basis of stay, and there is no  indication  of
    when A2 and A3's situation will be resolved. Further, in this case,  as
    A2 is assessed as stateless, and A3 is  a  minor,  there  is  no  third
    country in which they could be together as a family.



71. We also note that given A1's very low income, that there is  simply  no
    basis on which the requirements of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules
    could be met; paragraph EX.1 of that Appendix does not apply  in  Entry
    Clearance Cases).  There is, thus, a significant interference with  the
    right to family life during the Dublin III process.  The  obstacles  to
    family life continuing in anything other than  a  very  precarious  and
    unstable environment are, we consider,  given  the  poor  accommodation
    available, the effect on A2 and A3, and  their  mental  ill-health  are
    such that they do amount to compelling and compassionate circumstances.





72. A further factor in the applicants' favour arises in respect of Article
    9 of Dublin III, set out above.  As  we  have  already  identified  and
    confirmed in the CID  notes  disclosed,  A1  was  granted  humanitarian
    protection until 2011.  His change of status  subsequently  to  British
    citizen does not alter the fact that he was in receipt of international
    protection.

73. In ZN(Afghanistan) [2010] UKSC 21 the Supreme Court held:



    35. As to policy, it may well be that it would be possible to produce  a
        coherent policy argument for the view that applications for leave to
        enter or remain in the United Kingdom made by the spouse or children
        of those granted asylum should be dealt with under  paras  352A  and
        352D until the other spouse or parent became a British  citizen  but
        that thereafter such applications should be dealt with  under  paras
        281 and 297. It can be said with force that all  applications  by  a
        spouse or child to join or remain with a British citizen  should  be
        subject to the same rules. On the  other  hand  there  are  coherent
        policy reasons for applying the same principles to  applications  to
        join or remain with a spouse or parent who has been  granted  asylum
        both before and after such a sponsor has become a  British  citizen.
        An important factor in this regard is that referred to  in  para  25
        above, namely that one of the purposes of the Refugee Convention  is
        to protect and preserve the family unit of a refugee. The  need  for
        protection for a member of such a family unit is likely  to  be  the
        same  whether  the  sponsor  obtains  British  citizenship  or  not.
        Moreover, the risk of persecution may be  such  that  the  need  for
        protection for family members is particularly stark.


    36. The question is what policy is encapsulated in the rules,  which  is
        essentially a matter of construction of the language of  the  rules.
        For the reasons given  above  the  Court  has  reached  a  different
        conclusion from the Court of Appeal. It agrees that the sponsor must
        have been granted asylum in order to be (1) a "refugee"  within  the
        meaning of the opening words of para 352A and of para  352E;  (2)  a
        "person granted asylum" within sub-paras (i) and (ii) of  para  352A
        and sub-para (iv) of para 352D; and  (3)  a  "person  who  has  been
        granted asylum" within the opening words of para 352D.


    37. However it does not agree that there is an  additional  requirement,
        namely that the "person granted asylum" or the "person who has  been
        granted asylum" must not have become a British  citizen  before  the
        application for entry clearance  is  made,  or  perhaps  determined.
        There is no express language to that effect and it is  not,  in  the
        judgment of the Court, implicit in the language used. The fact  that
        British citizenship has been granted to the spouse  or  parent  does
        not change the fact that the spouse or parent is  a  person  granted
        asylum or a person who has been granted asylum.


74. We note  that  the  phrase  "who  has  been  allowed  to  reside  as  a
    beneficiary of international protection" is in effect the same  as  the
    phrase formerly used in paragraph 352D of the Immigration Rules.  While
    we accept that the rules of construction applicable in EU law  are  not
    necessarily the same  as  the  canons  of  construction  applicable  in
    domestic law, we do not accept that there would be  any  difference  in
    this case. Indeed, the same policy factors identified by Lord Clarke at
    [35]  would  be  applicable  here,  and  the  interpretation  would  be
    consistent with the purposes of Dublin III which include that principle
    that claims of families should be determined in the  same  country  for
    reasons of amongst other things consistency - see recital (15).




75. Whether the Greek government should have sought to invoke article 9  is
    not a matter for us, but it appears that it, unlike the UK  government,
    it was unaware of the previous grant of leave to A1 or  its  basis.  In
    these circumstances it is in fact likely that the 'responsible'  member
    state is the UK.



76. The fact that A1 has acquired British citizenship is, we consider,  not
    a rational or sensible basis for rejecting the  request.  As  explained
    above, it is not logically related to  the  availability  of  an  entry
    clearance route which is available to the pre-flight families of  those
    granted international protection. A further mismatch occurs as  article
    9 of Dublin III includes families which came into being after the grant
    of protection.



77. We bear in mind that the bringing together of the family would only  be
    for the purposes of assessing a protection claim,  and  that  thus  the
    interference must be all the greater to result in a breach of article 8
    ECHR/article 7 CFR. We are, however,  satisfied  that  the  refusal  to
    accede to the TCR is a breach of the applicants' article 8 or 7 rights.
    We reach that conclusion as, given the severity of the effect on  them,
    it would in the light of their  particular  circumstances,  ill-health,
    nationalities (or lack thereof), and article 9 of Dublin III,  that  it
    is disproportionate and not properly justified by the  respondent.   We
    therefore  find  that  on  the  material  before  the  respondent,  the
    decisions were not compatible  with  article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
    Convention and were thus unlawful under section  6  (1)  of  the  Human
    Rights Act 1988.



78. We therefore turn to the issue of remedy.

Remedy

79. Ms Kilroy submitted that the only remedy that  would  be  effective  in
    this case would be a mandatory order requiring the respondent to accede
    to the TCR. While the use of mandatory orders was to be approached with
    caution, as was noted in R (ota RSM) v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 18  and  in
    ZT (Syria), those cases fell to be  distinguished  on  the  basis  that
    those  cases  concerned  article  17.1,  and  more  importantly,   were
    concerned with scenarios where the Dublin III process had not commenced
    and the Secretary of State's article 8 obligations were being  used  to
    bypass the proper procedures whereas here, it was an alleged breach  of
    those obligations in the operation of Dublin III which was in issue. It
    was also submitted that quashing the  decision  would  be  inconsistent
    with the approach taken to human rights issues set out in  Denbigh  and
    Miss Behavin.




80. Ms Masood submitted that it was not appropriate  to  make  a  mandatory
    order in the circumstances where what was primarily  in  issue  was  an
    inter-state process.  She  relied  on  the  protracted  nature  of  the
    process, submitting that although there was no time limit  relevant  to
    Article 17.2, it was nonetheless a relevant factor.



81. Ms Masood submitted also that if, as  the  applicants  aver,  A3  is  a
    British Citizen, then it would not be correct to order  the  respondent
    to accept a TCR relevant to her.



82. It was submitted that while the issues of remedy is one for the court's
    discretion, and that should, even though RSM is not directly on  point,
    be exercised with extreme caution. While comity did not arise as it had
    in RSM at [176] as the Greek Courts were not involved, the Greek  state
    is seized of the issue.



83. Ms Kilroy re-iterated that the appropriate remedy here is  a  mandatory
    order, and that comity of approach did not arise here.  She  submitted,
    that delay did not, in this context militate against a mandatory order,
    relying on Ghezelbash at [56] - [58]:

      56.  Furthermore, with regard to  the  objective  of  establishing  a
      method for the swift determination of  the  Member  State  responsible
      without compromising the objective of processing  asylum  applications
      rapidly, referred to in recital 5 of Regulation  No 604/2013,  it  is
      true that  the  bringing  of  an  action  may  possibly  postpone  the
      definitive conclusion of the process for determining the Member  State
      responsible.
      57.      However, the Court has previously held, in  the  context  of
      Regulation No 343/2003, that the EU legislature did not  intend  that
      the judicial protection enjoyed by asylum seekers should be sacrificed
      to the requirement of expedition  in  processing  asylum  applications
      (see, to that effect, judgment of 29 January 2009  in  Petrosian,  C-
      19/08, EU:C:2009:41, paragraph 48). That finding applies, a fortiori,
      with  regard  to  Regulation  No 604/2013,  as  the  EU  legislature
      significantly enhanced, by that regulation, the procedural  safeguards
      granted to asylum seekers under the Dublin system.
      58.      It should be observed in that regard that the risk that  the
      conclusion of the procedure for the determination of the Member  State
      responsible may be excessively delayed as a result of the scrutiny  of
      the correct application of the criteria for determining responsibility
      is limited by the fact that such scrutiny must be carried  out  within
      the framework established by Regulation  No 604/2013,  in  particular
      Article 22(4) and (5), which provides (i)  that  the  requirement  of
      proof should not exceed what is necessary for the  proper  application
      of the regulation and (ii) that if  there  is  no  formal  proof,  the
      responsibility of the requested Member State should be acknowledged if
      the circumstantial evidence is coherent, verifiable  and  sufficiently
      detailed to establish its responsibility.
84. We remind ourselves that the decision impugned in  this  case  was  one
    arising from the exercise of a discretion conferred on the  respondent.
    On that basis,  and  following  Padfield  v  Ministry  of  Agriculture,
    Fisheries and Food [1968]  AC  997,  a  court  should  not  compel  any
    authority to do more than consider the exercise of  a  power  which  is
    merely permissive and does not impose an obligation to act.




85. There  are,  we  consider,  other  factors  which  militate  against  a
    mandatory order in this case. Owing to the lengthy process, we  do  not
    know the current position of the Greek authorities or whether they have
    decided to consider the substantive protection claims. We were given no
    information in this regard.  Further, the position of  A3  is  unclear,
    and if (as appears to be the case) she is  a  British  Citizen,  a  TCR
    simply could not apply to her.  It also appears to us that there is the
    alternative remedy of a TCR under article 9.



86. As against that, we appreciate the urgency of the situation,  and  that
    there is the prospect of a child being born to  A2  in  the  very  near
    future. Also, there is significant merit in  the  submission  that  the
    respondent has made three successive unlawful decisions.



87. Nonetheless, although we accept that there has been no material  change
    in circumstances, other  than  that  A2  and  A3's  situation  is  more
    precarious and A2 is, owing to pregnancy and her continuing mental ill-
    health less able to care for A3, we are not persuaded  that  we  should
    take the highly unusual step of making a mandatory order in respect  of
    A2, let alone A3 who appears to be a British citizen.



88. We do, however, consider it appropriate to make a declaration that  the
    decision was unlawful as it breached the applicants' article 7 CFR  and
    article 8 ECHR rights, and to quash  it.   We  also  consider  that  it
    would, after seeking the parties'  views,  be  appropriate  to  draw  a
    timetable  for  the  decision  to  be  remade,  in  the  light  of  the
    declaration, and in light of our decision on article  9,  and  to  make
    orders to that effect.





ENDNOTE

89. There is an issue identified during the hearing which, although it does
    not form part of our reasoning, merits further  comment.   We  consider
    that the  omission  of  spouses  from  article  16  of  Dublin  III  is
    problematic. It is odd that the relationship between spouses should  be
    omitted from the  list  of  family  relationships,  yet  those  between
    siblings  and  between  adult  children  and  a  parent  are  included,
    resulting in a definition of a "family" which is somewhat at odds  with
    how it is  usually  understood.  Arguably,  that  could  give  rise  to
    arguments of inequality of treatment within the meaning of  article  20
    of the CFR, there being no apparent justification given for distinction
    of treatment. While we are aware of academic arguments that article  16
    should be interpreted as applying to spouses[1], such  arguments  would
    almost inevitably require a preliminary reference to the European Court
    of Justice.







-----------------------
[1] See "EU Immigration and Asylum Law", Hailbronner & Thym (Second Edition
2016) at pp. 1530 to 1532


