
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


Sivapatham (Appearance of Bias) [2017] UKUT 00293 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London           |Decision given orally on 28 June    |
|On 28 June 2017                        |2017 and promulgated on 7 July 2017 |
|                                       |                                    |
|                                       |....................................|
|                                       |...                                 |


                                   Before

                  THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY, PRESIDENT

                                   Between

                             mr anton sivapatham
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:          Mr C Mannan, of counsel, instructed by Linga &
Co
For the Respondent:         Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

 i) Indications of a closed judicial mind, a pre-determined outcome, engage
    the appearance of bias principle and are likely  to  render  a  hearing
    unfair.


ii) Provisional or preliminary judicial  views  are  permissible,  provided
    that an open mind is maintained.


iii) An appellant does not require the permission of the  tribunal  to  give
    evidence. This does not prevent the application of  fair  and  sensible
    case management and, further, is subject to the doctrine of  misuse  of
    the tribunal's process.


                                  DECISION

Permission to Appeal

 1. The principal ground upon which permission to appeal to  this  Tribunal
    was granted was that of the conduct of the hearing at  first  instance.
    The permission judge refers to the witness statement of Mr  Lingajothy,
    counsel who represented the Appellant at first instance and states "...
    in light of its contents it is arguable that the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal (The "FtT") was vitiated by procedural unfairness through
    apparent bias."

 2. While, as the grant of permission makes clear, apparent  bias  lies  at
    the heart of this appeal, permission was granted in respect of  several
    wide ranging grounds and there is at least one further  discrete  issue
    of substance to be considered.



Framework of this Appeal

 3. The Appellant is the father figure in a family unit  completed  by  his
    spouse, and two children who were aged 18 and 12 years respectively  at
    the time of the first  instance  hearing.   Notably,  all  four  family
    members were Appellants before the FtT.  The appeal  to  this  Tribunal
    has been brought by the father only.  All are citizens  of  Sri  Lanka.
    The decision of the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  (the
    "Secretary of State") underlying this  appeal  was  a  refusal  of  the
    Appellant's claim for  asylum,  advanced  in  circumstances  where  his
    initial presence in the United Kingdom pursuant to a student  visa  was
    lawful for a period of approximately one year and  was  followed  by  a
    period of overstaying of comparable dimensions.

 4. The essence of  the  Appellant's  asylum  claim  was  as  follows.   He
    asserted that the cousin of his spouse was a senior member of the  LTTE
    (denoting the violent rebel force  which  was  ultimately  overcome  by
    government forces in Sri Lanka).  Upon visits  to  Colombo  the  cousin
    stayed at the Appellant's house, to the knowledge of  the  authorities.
    The cousin went missing and, in the  aftermath,  the  authorities  were
    "pursuing" the Appellant and continue to do  so.  When  interviewed  he
    described episodes  of  arbitrary  arrests,  protracted  detention  and
    beatings perpetrated by State agents.  Eventually he  was  prompted  to
    leave lucrative employment in Sri Lanka and, in July 2010, entered  the
    United Kingdom lawfully, in accordance with his student visa,  followed
    by his wife and two children some months later.

 5. The Secretary of State's refusal of the Appellant's  asylum  claim  was
    based largely on a negative assessment of the Appellant's  credibility.



 6. The ensuing appeal to the FtT was based on asylum and  Article  8  ECHR
    grounds. In dismissing the appeal  the  FtT  essentially  endorsed  the
    reasoning of and grounds invoked in the Secretary  of  State's  refusal
    decision.



The Apparent Bias Ground

 7. I turn to address the evidence of apparent bias.  As noted in [1] above
    it is contained in, inter alia, a  witness  statement  of  counsel  who
    represented all four Appellants before  the  FtT.   In  passing  it  is
    heartening to note that the guidance contained in the decision of  this
    Tribunal in BW (Witness statements by advocates) [2014] UKUT 568  (IAC)
    has been heeded, with the result that Mr Lingajothy has  undergone  the
    requisite conversion from advocate to witness and has been  substituted
    by replacement counsel.

 8. Former counsel's witness statement includes the following passages:

         "3.  ... at the beginning of the Appeal, ... the Judge spoke to  me
             in  the  following  tone.   He  informed   me   firstly   that
             Appellant's history clearly shows that he is  not  a  credible
             witness.  When I interjected and told him that  the  Appellant
             may be able to explain the adverse points in  his  immigration
             history, to the satisfaction of  the  Court,  the  Judge  then
             quite  assertively  repeated   the   alleged   inconsistencies
             referred  in  the  Respondents'  refusal  letter,  to  further
             justify his argument, and I use  the  word  argument,  as  the
             Judge appeared to be in no mood to listen to me but seemed  to
             have firmly made up his  mind;  that  this  case  was  a  non-
             starter.  He was also at the time, joined in by the  HOPO  and
             they both appeared to be singing from  the  same  hymn  sheet,
             metaphorically speaking.

         4.   When I clearly felt that the Judges' hostile attitude to  even
             hear the case, compromised the principles of natural  justice,
             namely audi ulteram partrem, I decided  to  inform  the  Judge
             that his attitude to not even hear the case and to persuade me
             that there was no case for the Appellant to answer, that  this
             would tantamount to a compromise of the above legal principle.

         5.   I also informed the Judge  of  the  Appellant's  right  to  be
             heard, although it  is  not  mentioned  in  the  body  of  the
             determination, [the Judge] then retorted the following: "Don't
             lecture to me the principles of natural justice."

         6.   I then informed him that it is he who started to pre-empt  the
             Appellant's credibility issue, without even hearing a sentence
             from the Appellant or even considering what was  said  in  the
             Appellant's Witness statement.  [The judge]  then  decided  to
             hear the appeal."

 9. Next there is a witness statement of the Appellant, which contains  the
    following:

         "1.  ... As far as I recall the immigration judge was hostile  from
             the outset.  The hearing commenced with sullen  comments  from
             the judge.  He mentioned, 'It is pointless  having  a  hearing
             and not to take much time'.

         2.   Sadly, even my children were at  the  Tribunal  attending  the
             hearing with me.   Even  they  were  dreaded  at  the  judge's
             attitude towards the hearing even before it could begin.   The
             judge kept emphasising that it's pointless having a hearing as
             my immigration history  is  very  bad.   He  also  advised  my
             representative not to dwell on to all facts of  the  case  but
             simply to make representations on the material facts.

         ...

         5.   Simply saying, the Judge did not keep an open mind as a  Judge
             should have.  The judge had a pre-conceived  mentality  to  my
             case.  After acting as the Judge, Jury and the executor on the
             hearing, a negative credibility was found.

         6.   Even before I had given evidence, the  judge  allowed  the  HO
             presenting officer to attack the medical report  as  though  I
             was not a credible witness.  As such the report was not  given
             any weight."

10. At this juncture I turn to the written response of the FtT Judge to  an
    invitation by the Principal Resident Judge of  the  Upper  Tribunal  to
    comment on the grounds. I preface my consideration  of  this  with  the
    observation that, once again, good practice  has  been  observed.   The
    materials criticising the judge's conduct of the appeal were  forwarded
    to him and he responded in writing.  This Tribunal, in  turn,  provided
    the judge's response to the  parties'  representatives.   These  simple
    measures served to ensure transparency and fairness to both parties and
    reflects the decision of the Court of Appeal in  Singh  v  SSHD  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 492

11. I paraphrase the FtT judge's response in the following way:

      a) There was nothing inappropriate about identifying the issues at the
         outset of the hearing.

      b) Counsel's invocation of the audi alteram partem principle "...  was
         not relevant....  I was  not  preventing  the  representative  from
         calling his evidence at all.  Nor was I questioning his running  of
         this appeal."

      c) The judge, at the outset of the hearing, was asking the Appellant's
         representative to "take on board and address"  the  issues  of  the
         Appellant's immigration history and the timing  of  his  claim  for
         asylum.

    The judge then comments that he made detailed notes of the hearing and,
    in defence of his  impartiality  and  objectivity,  refers  to  certain
    passages in his decision.

12. In [14] of his decision the judge records that at  the  outset  of  the
    hearing he identified the main issues as  the  Appellant's  immigration
    history; his asylum claim  and  the  inconsistencies  asserted  in  the
    refusal  decision;  the  expert  evidence;  and  the  country  guidance
    decision of GJ [2013] UKUT 00319.

    Continuing, the decision states at [15]:

         "15. Mr Lingajothy made an application to adduce  the  evidence  of
             the third and fourth Appellants, namely, the son and  daughter
             of  the  principal  Appellant.   Ms  Knight   objected.    She
             indicated that this was not in compliance with directions  and
             no application had been made prior to today.  I enquired of Mr
             Lingajothy what the purpose of calling the children  would  be
             today.  He indicated that it was to talk about the  Article  8
             rights.  I ruled that I would reject the application  for  two
             reasons.  First, no application was made until today  and  the
             Home Office had not  been  put  on  notice.   Second,  if  the
             purpose of calling the  two  children  was  to  shore  up  the
             Article 8  account,  this  is  something  that  the  principal
             Appellant himself could do."

13.  In  any  appeal  involving  issues  of  apparent  bias  or  procedural
    unfairness it is incumbent upon the  appellate  court  or  tribunal  to
    identify the material factual  matrix.   Concessions  and  inter-partes
    agreement will frequently facilitate this exercise.  However  these  do
    not form part of the present appeal matrix.  Thus it  is  necessary  to
    identify all relevant evidence as a whole and form a view  accordingly,
    keeping in mind that  the  central  question  is  the  quintessentially
    factual one: what actually happened at the first instance hearing?

14.  In this context I refer to the decision of  this  Tribunal  in  Wagner
    (advocate's conduct - fair hearing) [2015] UKUT 655  (IAC)  at  [12]  -
    [13]:


         "[12] One particular reflection is apposite.  Adjudication  by  the
    Upper Tribunal in
             respect of complaints relating  to  the  conduct  of  a  first
             instance hearing can be a difficult exercise.  Since  the  FtT
             is not a court of record  no  transcript  of  the  hearing  is
             available.   Furthermore,  disagreement  between  the  parties
             about the issues under scrutiny can occur.  In some cases,  as
             in  Alubankudi,  a  party's  representative  makes  a  witness
             statement which may  be  of  considerable  assistance  to  the
             appellate tribunal.  The contemporaneous notes of the parties'
             representatives may also be provided  in  certain  cases.   In
             addition, the record of proceedings, compiled by the Judge and
             maintained on the Tribunal's file,  may  provide  insight  and
             assistance.  Sometimes, as in the present case,  the  response
             of the Presiding Judge is also available. Even where  some  or
             all of these aids are available, it is impossible to  recreate
             matters such as  atmosphere,  intonation,  facial  expression,
             speed of response  et  al;  and,  fundamentally,  the  elusive
             quality of demeanour cannot  be  reproduced  on  appeal.   The
             basic handicap is that there is no audio or written record  of
             the words used by representatives, parties, witnesses and  the
             presiding Judge.

         [13] I highlight also that in cases of this  genre  first  instance
             advocates have the potential to become witnesses, normally via
             the provision  of  a  witness  statement.   As  this  Tribunal
             emphasised in BW (Witness Statements by Advocates) Afghanistan
             [2014] UKUT 00568 (IAC) the roles of advocate and witness  are
             distinct and, thus, in cases where a first  instance  advocate
             becomes  a  witness  a  different   representative   must   be
             instructed."

         Having established the material facts, the reviewing  or  appellate
         court or tribunal must not overlook that there is an onus of  proof
         in play: the onus rests on the appellant to prove, on  the  balance
         of probabilities, that the  first  instance  judicial  decision  is
         infected by apparent bias.

15. In Alubankudi (appearance of bias) [2015] UKUT 542 (IAC) this  Tribunal
    dilated on the governing legal principles in the following terms:

         "[6] Every litigant enjoys a common law right to  a  fair  hearing.
             This  entails  fairness  of  the   procedural,   rather   than
             substantive,  variety.  Where  a  breach  of  this  right   is
             demonstrated, this will  normally  be  considered  a  material
             error of law warranting the setting aside of the  decision  of
             the FtT: see AAN (Veil) Afghanistan [2014] UKUT 102 (IAC)  and
             MM (Unfairness; E&R) Sudan [2014] UKUT  105  (IAC).  The  fair
             hearing principle may be viewed as the unification of the  two
             common law maxims audi alteram partem and nemo judex in  causa
             sua, which combine to form the doctrine of natural justice, as
             it  was  formerly  known.  These  two  maxims  are,  nowadays,
             frequently  expressed  in  the  terms  of  a   right   and   a
             prohibition, namely the litigant's right to a fair hearing and
             the prohibition which precludes a Judge from adjudicating in a
             case in which he has an interest.



          [7] Further  refinements  of  the  fair  hearing  principle  have
    resulted in the
              development of the concepts of apparent bias and actual  bias.
             The latter equates with the prohibition identified immediately
             above.  In contrast, apparent bias, where invoked, gives  rise
             to a somewhat more sophisticated  and  subtle  challenge.   It
             entails the application of the following test:

                  "The question is whether the fair minded observer,  having
                  considered the facts, would conclude that there was a real
                  possibility that the tribunal was bias."

     See Porter v Magill [2001] UKHL 67, at [103].

             In Re Medicaments  [2001]  1  WLR  700,  the  Court  of  Appeal
             provided the following exposition of the task of the appellate,
             or review, court or tribunal:


                  "The Court must  first  ascertain  all  the  circumstances
                  which have a bearing on the suggestion that the Judge  was
                  bias.  It must then ask whether those circumstances  would
                  lead a fair minded and informed observer to conclude  that
                  there was a real possibility ...  that  the  Tribunal  was
                  bias.   The  material  circumstances  will   include   any
                  explanation given by the Judge  under  review  as  to  his
                  knowledge or appreciation of those circumstances."

             In Lawal v Northern Spirit [2003] UKHL 35, the House  of  Lords
             reiterated   the   importance   of   first   identifying    the
             circumstances which are said to give rise to apparent bias."

    In [8], this Tribunal emphasised that one of the  important  attributes
    of the hypothetical reasonable observer is that he  is  duly  informed.
    What this means is that the reasonable observer is aware of  everything
    bearing on the question of the  judge's  impartiality.   In  short  the
    hypothetical reasonable observer is endowed  with  greater  and  fuller
    attributes  than  his   jurisprudential   predecessor,   the   innocent
    bystander.




  16. I turn to consider another dimension of  this  appeal.   The  judicial
      duty of impartiality, one aspect whereof is the maintenance of an open
      mind, does not preclude the formation of tentative, provisional  views
      in advance of adjudication.  In AM (Fair Hearing)  Sudan  [2015]  UKUT
      656 (IAC), this Tribunal stated, at [7](iii):




         "The assiduous judge who has invested time and  effort  in  reading
         all of the documentary materials  in  advance  of  the  hearing  is
         entitled to form provisional views.  Provided that such  views  are
         provisional only and the judge conscientiously  maintains  an  open
         mind, no unfairness arises."

    In Arab Monetary Fund v Hashim  [1993]  6  Admin  LR  348,  Sir  Thomas
    Bingham MR stated at page 356:

         "But  on  the  whole  the  English  tradition  sanctions  and  even
         encourages a measure of disclosure by  the  Judge  of  his  current
         thinking ....  A judge does not act amiss if, in relation  to  some
         feature  of  a  party's  case  which  strikes  him  as   inherently
         improbable, he indicates the need for unusually compelling evidence
         to persuade him of the fact."

     On the other hand, the English tradition -

         "...   certainly does not  sanction  the  premature  expression  of
         factual conclusions or anything which may  prematurely  indicate  a
         closed mind ....

         An expression of scepticism is not suggestive of  bias  unless  the
         judge conveys  an  unwillingness  to  be  persuaded  of  a  factual
         proposition whatever the evidence may be."

    More recently, in Singh (supra) the Court of Appeal added, at [35]:

         "Indeed,  such  statements  sometimes  can  positively  assist  the
         advocate or litigant in knowing where particular efforts  may  need
         to be pointed ....

         In fact, sometimes robust expression may be positively necessary in
         order to displace a presumption or misapprehension, whether  wilful
         or otherwise, on the part of an advocate or  litigant  on  a  point
         which has the potential to be highly material to the case."

    The decision in  Singh  also  draws  attention  to  the  importance  of
    considering the proceedings as a  whole  in  conducting  the  objective
    assessment of whether there was a real possibility  that  the  Tribunal
    was biased: see [36].



My Conclusions

17. In my judgement the hypothetical reasonable observer  would,  balancing
    the key elements of the evidence outlined above, take  particular  note
    of any challenge to, or disagreement with,  sustainable  or  otherwise,
    the evidence pertaining to the conduct of the hearing at first instance
    via the judge's decision and his later response  to  the  appeal.  From
    this point of departure the observer would  scrutinise  with  care  the
    evidence said to demonstrate apparent bias on the  part  of  the  judge
    concerned.  This exercise would include taking note of  the  words  and
    descriptions  employed  by  all  concerned  -  in  this  instance   the
    Appellant, his first instance advocate and the judge  -  and  would  be
    alert to the use of  reported  speech  and  verbatim  quotations.   The
    observer, in forming his overall view, would also be conscious  of  the
    absence of a recording or transcript of the proceedings under scrutiny.
      Thus  the  tools  available  would  not  include  evidence  of  voice
    inflection or intonation.  In such  circumstances  any  ex  post  facto
    attempts to recreate the atmosphere in which a first  instance  hearing
    was transacted will invariably be difficult.

18. At the next stage the hypothetical observer  would  inform  himself  of
    what "bias" means in this context.  In short it denotes an  absence  of
    judicial impartiality, an ingrained inclination in favour of one  party
    to the detriment of the other.

19. Finally, the hypothetical observer would ask himself  not  whether  the
    FtT judge was biased  in  this  sense  but  whether  this  was  a  real
    possibility.  In performing this  exercise  the  observer  would  stand
    back, surveying the relevant landscape in the round and in its totality
    and would be cognisant that the burden of proof rests on the appellant,
    to the standard of the balance of probabilities.

20. The task of - and challenge for - this appellate tribunal is to don the
    clothing and wear the shoes of the  hypothetical  reasonable  observer.
    This duty must be undertaken in every  case  of  this  genre.   I  have
    undertaken  this  exercise,  juxtaposing  in  particular  the  evidence
    compiled on behalf of the Appellant with the FtT judge's  decision  and
    his later response.  As  I  have  noted  above,  there  is  no,  or  no
    sustainable, controversy about certain key  averments  in  the  witness
    statements in question, particularly that of former instructed counsel.
     This per se, I acknowledge, is not determinative since it is incumbent
    upon this Tribunal to nonetheless evaluate this evidence.

21. However, I cannot overlook that the FtT Judge, when presented with  the
    opportunity of responding to the two witness  statements  in  question,
    did not challenge some of the key averments.  While I acknowledge  that
    the witness statement of the Appellant is couched in  somewhat  general
    terms - see [9] above - I would have expected the judge to  respond  in
    particular to the quoted speech contained in [1] and [2].  However  the
    judge's response is silent on these matters.  I  would  also  have  the
    same expectation in relation to the main averment in counsel's  witness
    statement - see [8] above - in particular  the  quoted  speech  in  [5]
    thereof and the suggestion that, in exchanges, counsel  submitted  that
    the judge appeared  to  have  decided  the  facts  before  hearing  any
    evidence.  It is also significant that counsel was driven to invoke the
    audi alteram partem principle  at  this  stage  of  the  hearing.   The
    Judge's response to this is set forth in [11](b) above.   It  makes  no
    reply to the suggestion clearly implicit in counsel's witness statement
    that the judge was proposing to decide the  appeal  summarily,  without
    receiving any evidence (the  judge  "...   then  decided  to  hear  the
    appeal.")  Finally, I take into account  that  while  the  two  witness
    statements were not made in  the  immediate  aftermath  of  the  appeal
    hearing, their contents convey to me  that  the  authors  had  a  clear
    recollection of events and the statements do  not  suffer  from  either
    unparticularised assertions or bland generalities.

22. Giving effect to the analysis above, I conclude that the Appellant  has
    established, on the balance of probabilities, the real  possibility  of
    bias on the part of the FtT Judge.

23. My second conclusion is that the conduct of the appeal was vitiated  by
    unfairness having regard to [15] of the decision of the FtT Judge:  see
    [12] supra.  In my judgement the FtT judge could not properly or fairly
    have formed the view that the evidence  of  the  two  children  of  the
    family could not conceivably inform the inter-related  judicial  duties
    of determining the Article 8 ECHR and section 55 issues.  As no crystal
    ball was available this  "ruling",  whereby  evidence  from  these  two
    parties  was  prohibited,   is   manifestly   unsustainable   in   law.
    Furthermore, in thus ruling the judge did something which he  expressly
    disavowed in his  post-hearing  response  to  the  witness  statements:
    contrary to his claim in [11](b) above, the judge was  "preventing  the
    representative from calling his  evidence"  and  was  challenging  "his
    running of the appeal".  A twofold consequence  follows.   First,  this
    fortifies the appearance of bias conclusion above.  Second,  since  the
    evidence which the Judge excluded could have influenced the outcome - a
    possibility being sufficient  in  this  context,  by  well  established
    principle - the hearing was rendered unfair.

24. The further, related error of law into which the judge lapsed  in  this
    respect was to adopt the stance that parties to an appeal  require  the
    permission of the tribunal to give evidence in support of  their  case.
    I think it best to describe this approach as prima facie  unlawful.   I
    do not exclude the possibility that in certain circumstances it may  be
    appropriate for a judge  to  refuse  evidence  to  be  adduced  from  a
    particular person.  The ethos of tribunal litigation clearly recognises
    the validity of transparent and productive  communication  between  the
    presiding judge and  a  party  or  his  representative  concerning  the
    presentation of  any  given  appeal,  the  calling  of  witnesses,  the
    relevance and/or  likely  potency  of  certain  proposed  evidence  and
    kindred issues.  Furthermore,  the  presiding  judge  is  the  guardian
    against misuse of the tribunal's process. None of  this  is  unfair  or
    improper.  All of it forms part of the legitimate judicial function and
    is harmonious with the overriding objective.

25. However in the circumstances of this appeal the persons concerned  were
    parties, they were the third and fourth Appellants.  It was proposed to
    adduce evidence from them bearing on the issues concerning Article 8 of
    the Human Rights Convention and those issues in turn feed into  section
    55 of the Borders, Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009.   On  this
    freestanding separate basis I conclude that the refusal to  permit  the
    adoption of evidence from these  two  Appellants  fully  documented  in
    paragraph 15 of the Tribunal's decision  denied  the  Appellants  their
    right to a fair hearing.

26. In conclusion it seems timely to remind both judges  and  practitioners
    of what this Tribunal stated in [14] of Alubankudi:

         "The interface between the judiciary  and  society  is  of  greater
         importance   nowadays than it has ever been.  In both  the  conduct
         of hearings and the compilation  of  judgments,  Judges  must  have
         their antennae tuned to the immediate and wider audiences.  As  the
         decision  in  AAN  demonstrates,  Judges  must  be  alert  to   the
         sensitivities and perceptions of others, particularly in  a  multi-
         cultural society."

    In the real world of the United Kingdom in the year 2017 acute judicial
    alertness to what  is  stated  above  will  enhance  fairness,  promote
    justice and, ultimately, further and fortify the rule of law.

    Decision and Order

27. For these reasons the appeal succeeds to the following extent.   I  set
    aside the decision of the FtT and given the grounds upon which  I  have
    determined to do so I remit the case to the FtT for the  purpose  of  a
    further hearing to be conducted by a different judge.






                                                                       [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                                                          Date: 28 June 2017
