
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Arranz (EEA Regulations - deportation - test) [2017] UKUT 00294 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

                                   PART 1

|Heard at Field House, London           |                                    |
|On 16 and 30 January and 02 February   |Date of promulgation: 22 February   |
|2017                                   |2017                                |
|                                       |                                    |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                  The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey, President
  The Hon. Mr Justice Supperstone, sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                   PART 2

Heard at Field House, London
On 09 May 2017     Date of promulgation: 22 August 2017


                                   Before

                  The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey, President
                          Upper Tribunal Judge Blum

                                   Between

                           Antonio Troitino Arranz
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary Of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:     Ms L Dubinsky, of  counsel,  instructed  by  Birnberg
             Pierce Solicitors
For the  Respondent:     Ms  J  Anderson,  of  counsel,  instructed  by  the
             Government Legal
                                      Department
   i) The burden of proving that a person represents a genuine, present  and
      sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental interests
      of society under Regulation 21(5)(c) of the EEA Regulations  rests  on
      the Secretary of State.


  ii) The standard of proof is the balance of probabilities.


 iii) Membership of an organisation proscribed under the laws of  a  foreign
      country does not without more satisfy the aforementioned test.


  iv) The "Bouchereau"  exception  is  no  longer  good  law:  CS  (Morocco)
      applied.

Preface

This, the composite judgment of the Upper Tribunal, is in two  parts.   Part
1 contains the error of law decision promulgated on 22 February 2017.   Part
2 is the remade determination of this appeal.


                                  DECISION

                                   PART 1

Introduction

 1. This  is  the  judgment  of  the  panel  to  which  both  members  have
    contributed.  At this stage  of  these  appeal  proceedings,  the  sole
    question for the Upper Tribunal is whether the First-tier Tribunal (the
    "FtT") committed a material error of law  within  the  compass  of  the
    permitted grounds of appeal.


 2. The Appellant, Antonio Troitino Arranz, is a Spanish national, aged  59
    years.  The Respondent, the Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    (the "Secretary of State") is the author  of  the  decision  underlying
    this appeal.  The impugned decision, which is  dated  18  August  2015,
    notified the Appellant that  he  would  be  deported  from  the  United
    Kingdom under regulation 19(3)(b) of the Immigration (European Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006 (the "EEA Regulations") on the ground of  public
    policy.  The reason proffered was that the Appellant was considered  to
    represent "a genuine, present and sufficiently serious  threat  to  the
    public ....".


The Statutory Framework

 3. The underlying legislative instrument is a measure of  EU  law,  namely
    Directive 2004/38/EC (the "Citizen's Directive").  This,  as  its  long
    title states, regulates "the right of citizens of the Union  and  their
    family members to move and reside freely within the  territory  of  the
    Member States".   The  topic  of  expulsion  from  a  Member  State  is
    addressed in Article 27, which provides:


         "1.  Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, Member  States  may
             restrict the  freedom  of  movement  and  residence  of  Union
             citizens   and   their   family   members,   irrespective   of
             nationality, on grounds of public policy, public  security  or
             public health.  These grounds shall not be  invoked  to  serve
             economic ends.


         2.   Measures taken on grounds of public policy or public  security
             shall comply with the principle of proportionality  and  shall
             be based exclusively on the personal conduct of the individual
             concerned.  Previous  criminal  convictions   shall   not   in
             themselves constitute grounds for taking such measures.


         The personal conduct of the individual concerned must  represent  a
         genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting  one  of
         the fundamental  interests  of  society.  Justifications  that  are
         isolated  from  the  particulars  of  the  case  or  that  rely  on
         considerations of general prevention shall not be accepted.


         3    In order to ascertain whether the person concerned  represents
             a danger for public policy or public  security,  when  issuing
             the  registration  certificate  or,  in  the  absence   of   a
             registration system, not later than three months from the date
             of arrival of the person concerned on its  territory  or  from
             the date of reporting his/her presence within  the  territory,
             as provided for in Article 5(5), or when issuing the residence
             card, the host Member  State  may,  should  it  consider  this
             essential, request the Member State of origin and, if need be,
             other Member States  to  provide  information  concerning  any
             previous police record the person  concerned  may  have.  Such
             enquiries shall not be made  as  a  matter  of  routine.   The
             Member State consulted shall give its reply within two months.


         4    The Member State which issued the passport  or  identity  card
             shall allow the holder of the document who has  been  expelled
             on grounds of public policy, public security, or public health
             from another Member State to re-enter  its  territory  without
             any formality even if the document is no longer valid  or  the
             nationality of the holder is in dispute."



 4. The United Kingdom transposing instrument is the EEA Regulations  2006.
    Regulation 19 is the sister provision of Article 27 of  the  Directive.
    It provides, under the rubric of "Exclusion and Removal from the United
    Kingdom", in material part:


         "(3) Subject to paragraphs (4) and (5), an  EEA  National  who  has
             entered the United Kingdom or the  family  member  of  such  a
             National who has entered the United Kingdom may be removed  if
             -


             ...


             (b)  The Secretary of State  has  decided  that  the  person's
                  removal is justified on grounds of public  policy,  public
                  security or public health in accordance with regulation 21
                  ...."


         [Paragraphs  (4)  and  (5)  have  no  application  in  the  present
         context.]


    Regulation 21 is concerned  with  decisions  taken  on  public  policy,
    public security and public health grounds.  It provides:


         "(1) In this regulation a "relevant decision" means an EEA decision
             taken on the grounds of  public  policy,  public  security  or
             public health.


         (2)  A relevant decision may not be taken to serve economic ends.


         (3)  A relevant decision may not be taken in respect  of  a  person
             with a permanent right of residence under regulation 15 except
             on serious grounds of public policy or public security.


         (4)  A relevant decision may not  be  taken  except  on  imperative
             grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who-


             (a)  has resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous period
                  of at least ten years prior to the relevant decision; or


             (b)  is under the age of 18, unless the relevant  decision  is
                  necessary in his best interests, as provided  for  in  the
                  Convention on the Rights  of  the  Child  adopted  by  the
                  General Assembly of the United Nations  on  20th  November
                  1989.


         (5)  Where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of public policy
             or public security it shall, in addition to complying with the
             preceding  paragraphs  of  this  regulation,   be   taken   in
             accordance with the following principles-


             (a)   the  decision  must  comply  with   the   principle   of
                  proportionality;


             (b)  the decision must be based exclusively  on  the  personal
                  conduct of the person concerned;


             (c)   the  personal  conduct  of  the  person  concerned  must
                  represent a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
                  threat affecting  one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of
                  society;


             (d)  matters isolated from the  particulars  of  the  case  or
                  which relate to considerations of  general  prevention  do
                  not justify the decision;


             (e)  a  person's  previous  criminal  convictions  do  not  in
                  themselves justify the decision.


         (6)  Before taking a relevant decision on  the  grounds  of  public
             policy or public security in  relation  to  a  person  who  is
             resident in the United Kingdom the decision  maker  must  take
             account of considerations such as the age,  state  of  health,
             family and economic situation  of  the  person,  the  person's
             length of residence in the United Kingdom, the person's social
             and cultural integration  into  the  United  Kingdom  and  the
             extent of the person's links with his country of origin."


 5. In the context of this appeal, the key provision of  Regulation  21  is
    paragraph (5)(c).  The mirror provision in the Directive is Article  27
    (2).


The Secretary of State's Decision

 6. It is necessary to analyse the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  in  a
    little detail.  The decision refers to the Order  of  a  Spanish  Court
    dated 07 November 1989 whereby  the  Appellant  was  convicted  of  the
    murder of 12 civil  guards  and  injury  to  43  civil  guards  and  17
    civilians, all perpetrated  on  14  July  1986.   These  offences  were
    committed in the name of the terrorist organisation ETA.  The  decision
    letter states:


         "In appraising the interests of public policy and security,  it  is
         determined that your involvement  in  these  serious  offences,  as
         evidenced by the imposition of a custodial sentence of 30 years  in
         Spain, are evidence of your personal conduct constituting a present
         threat to the requirement of  that  policy.   Therefore  your  past
         terrorist conduct itself justifies your deportation."




 7. The second reason given for the deportation decision  is  expressed  in
    the following passage:


         "Furthermore, there is no evidence that you have severed your links
         to Basque terrorists ....


         The Metropolitan Police have provided  copies  of  forged  identity
         cards (which contained your photograph) found  at  [address]  where
         you were living with a man named .... [who] was wanted in Spain for
         his involvement in ETA Basque separatist related offences.  He  was
         accused of being a member of  an  armed  group  and  possession  of
         explosives .... [and] on 16 August 2013 [he]  was  extradited  from
         the United Kingdom to Spain in order to be tried for this matter."


    The decision continues:


         "Falsified documents can be used to  enable  identity,  theft,  age
         deception, illegal  immigration,  terrorism  and  organised  crime.
         There can be no legitimate reason to hold such documents.   Bearing
         in  mind  your  previous  conviction,  your  possession  of   these
         documents and  your  association  with  a  man  implicated  in  ETA
         terrorist offences strongly suggests that you present a significant
         risk of harm to the public."


    Thus the deportation decision was, in substance, based on two grounds.


 8. The decision maker then purported to give effect to regulation 21(5)(a)
    of the EEA Regulations, which stipulates that any deportation  decision
    must comply with  the  principle  of  proportionality  and  details  an
    inexhaustive list of factors to be taken into account:  age,  state  of
    health, family and economic  situation,  length  of  residence  in  the
    United Kingdom, social and cultural integration and links with  country
    or origin.  This discrete assessment yielded the following conclusion:


         "...  Given the threat of serious harm you pose to the  public,  it
         is considered that your personal circumstances do not preclude your
         deportation being pursued.  It is considered that the  decision  to
         deport you is proportionate ...."


    It was further noted that there was no evidence that the Appellant  was
    engaged in any form of rehabilitation in the United Kingdom.




 9. Next, the Secretary of State's  decision  maker  considered  Article  8
    ECHR, in the following terms:


         "You have not provided  any  evidence  of  Article  8  family  life
         existing in the United Kingdom ...


         It is accepted that you may have developed a degree of private life
         ....


         Your deportation is conducive to the public good and in the  public
         interest because you have been convicted of an  offence  for  which
         you have been sentenced to a period of  imprisonment  of  at  least
         four years."




    The decision  maker  noted  that  the  deportation  provisions  of  the
    Immigration Rules - paragraphs A362 and A398 - 399D - and  Part  5A  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 did not apply  to  the
    Appellant's case.  However,  these  had  been  "used  as  a  guide  for
    considering your Article 8 claim".  This exercise entailed  posing  the
    question of whether there were very compelling circumstances sufficient
    to  outweigh  the  public   interest   underpinning   the   Appellant's
    deportation.   The  conclusion  made  was  that  there  were  no   such
    circumstances.


The European Arrest Warrant

10. By reason of certain aspects of the permitted grounds of appeal, it  is
    necessary to outline some features of the evidential framework.  Two of
    the key components of this framework are the  European  Arrest  Warrant
    (the "EAW") and the Appellant's two witness statements.  The background
    to this evidence is that on 13 April  2011,  having  served  24  years'
    imprisonment  with  six  years'  remission  for  good  behaviour,   the
    Appellant was released from prison.  The only evidence of what occurred
    during the immediately ensuing  phase  is  what  is  contained  in  the
    Appellant's witness statements.


11. There is no dispute that the  Appellant  travelled  through  Spain  and
    entered France.  There he  remained  for  an  unspecified  period.   He
    admits to having procured  false  identity  documents  at  this  stage.
    Next,  equipped  with  these  documents,  he  travelled   to   England.
    Following arrival he resided in London, sharing  accommodation  with  a
    fellow countryman, whom we shall describe as "LS", until his arrest  on
    29 June 2012.


12. The ensuing extradition proceedings in this  jurisdiction  have  become
    complex and protracted,  involving  the  transmission  by  the  Spanish
    authorities  of  a  series  of  EAWs,  each  replacing  its   immediate
    predecessor and three decisions of the  Divisional  Court:  see  [2016]
    EWHC 3029 (Admin) at [3] - [7].  We shall refer  only  to  the  current
    EAW.


13.  Sandwiched between the first two  Divisional  Court  decisions  was  a
    significant decision of the Grand Chamber of  the  ECtHR,  in  Del  Rio
    Prada v Spain [2014] 58 EHRR 37.  This was  followed  by  a  successful
    appeal  against  the  second  EAW,  the  issue  of  a  third  EAW,   an
    unsuccessful first instance appeal  and  a  successful  appeal  to  the
    Divisional Court: see Spanish Judicial Authority v Arranz (No 3) [2015]
    EWHC 2305.  This was the impetus for the issue of the fourth -  current
    - EAW by the Spanish Judicial authority


14. The most recent judicial decision is that of the Divisional Court noted
    in [12] above which  upheld  the  decision  of  Senior  District  Judge
    Riddle, dated 14 June 2016, ordering  the  Appellant's  extradition  to
    Spain.  We were informed that  there  is  at  present  an  undetermined
    application for permission to appeal to the Supreme Court.


15. The current, operative EAW, is dated  23  October  2015.   It  contains
    several  references   to   "ETA",   a   proscribed   Basque   terrorist
    organisation.  It  identifies,  in  section  2,  the  offences  of  (a)
    actively participating in a terrorist organisation or  group  or  being
    part thereof and  (b)  falsifying  a  public,  official  or  commercial
    document, contrary to specified provisions of the Spanish Codigo Penal.
     Both offences are punishable by imprisonment.  In a later  section  of
    the EAW one finds the following detail:


         "[The Appellant] was set free in accordance with a ruling issued on
         April 2011 ....


         Subsequently, the same Division upheld  an  appeal  lodged  by  the
         State  Prosecutor  and  ordered  the  search  and  arrest  of  [the
         Appellant]  who  went  underground  and  hid,  initially,   in   an
         unidentified place in Spain. From there, he contacted the terrorist
         organisation ETA again so they would help him flee from Spain, thus
         making the search and arrest warrant against him  ineffective.   By
         doing so he accepted submission  to  the  terrorist  organisation's
         instructions regarding what is known as the Group of  Refugees  [El
         Colectivo de  Refugiados],  a  branch  that  groups  ETA  militants
         together in countries other than Spain and France, placing  himself
         at the disposal of ETA ...


         Thus, around 19 April 2011, to  evade  the  search  warrant  issued
         against him [the Appellant] sent a photograph  of  himself  to  the
         terrorist organisation ETA's branch  for  forging  documents  [FAL]
         which belongs to ETA's logistics department  ....   [which]  forged
         six Spanish identification documents with his  photograph  and  the
         following identities ....  [names] ....


         Said documents, analysed by the Forensic Services, were of the same
         origin as other  documents  seized  from  several  members  of  the
         terrorist organisation ...


         The same documents were found on 29 June 2012 in the possession  of
         [the Appellant] in the house he occupied with another member of the
         organisation [LS] at [London address] where they were  arrested  by
         the British police."




    The text continues:


         "In addition, two forged driving permits in the  names  of  [names]
         both of which had a photograph of [the Appellant] where seized from
         the latter.  Moreover, two European health cards  in  the  name  of
         [names] were also found in his possession."




    Referring to the person with whom the Appellant was living  in  London,
    the EAW continues:


         "Previously, [LS] had lodged [the Appellant].   Both  men  followed
         the guidelines received beforehand from the terrorist  organisation
         ETA, in accordance with the groups internal  rules  and  [its]  so-
         called Protocol for Refugees".


         ["Lodged" in this context denotes providing accommodation.]




16. The EAW then addresses the issue of alleged membership of ETA:


         "The  presence  of  [the  Appellant]  in  said   place   with   the
         aforementioned individual is not a casual circumstance. Rather,  it
         shows that [the Appellant] belongs to the  terrorist  organisation.
         The entire process by which an ETA militant goes underground is not
         due  to  an  independent,  individual  decision.   It   obeys   the
         organisation's  internal  rules  and  the  so-called  Protocol  for
         Refugees ....


         In the case of [the Appellant], it meant a reintegration  into  the
         terrorist organisation when he was released from prison".




    The EAW then  provides  an  outline  of  the  evidence  supporting  the
    allegation that the Appellant is a member of ETA: police  reports,  the
    entry and search at the London address,  items  and  documents  seized,
    experts' reports and police analyses and  certain  documents  recovered
    from LS when searched in France following his arrest in 2008.




17. The identity of the requesting Spanish judicial authority  is  of  some
    significance.  It is the Juzgado Central de  Instruccion  (the  Central
    Examining Magistrates' Court).  This indicates that the proceedings  in
    Spain relating to the two offences of which the Appellant is  suspected
    have not proceeded beyond the investigative phase and,  in  particular,
    have not reached the stage of indictment or prosecution, for the reason
    that the Appellant's presence in the Court is a necessary prerequisite.







The Appellant's Witness Statements

18. In juxtaposing the EAW with the  Appellant's  two  witness  statements,
    which are dated 01 May 2014 and 12  July  2016  respectively,  each  of
    which formed part of the evidence before the FtT, we are conscious that
    the Appellant did not give  evidence  at  first  instance  and,  hence,
    neither of these statements has been tested.  On the  other  hand,  the
    FtT stated, in substance, that its determination of the appeal did  not
    turn on these statements: see [5] of its decision.


19. In his first statement the Appellant asserts that upon his release from
    prison on 13 April 2011 he travelled directly to his daughter's home in
    Hendaye, South Western France.  He did so in order to avoid the  effect
    of the so-called "Parot" doctrine, which exposed him  to  the  risk  of
    reimprisonment for a considerable period.  His flight through Spain  to
    France appears to have been accomplished within a  period  of  some  24
    hours.  He claims that he entered France without having to display  any
    identification document.  His Spanish national  identity  card,  though
    returned to him by the prison authorities, was out of date.  He asserts
    that he obtained multiple false identity documents from an unidentified
    person in France at a cost of E600, claiming that he is unaware of  any
    ETA involvement in this exercise.  He felt unsafe in France on  account
    of the  French/Spanish  Governments'  collaboration  and,  following  a
    clandestine existence there,  he  entered  the  United  Kingdom  on  an
    unspecified date.  He was able to make contact with  LS  in  London  by
    virtue of information given to him by a  fellow  prisoner.   He  claims
    that LS was previously unknown to him.


20. In his statements the Appellant asserts that he is no longer  a  member
    of ETA.  He claims to support the permanent ETA ceasefire and expresses
    regret for his terrorist activities.


The Operative Extradition Decision

21. The second intervention by the Divisional Court  noted  above  was  the
    impetus for the issue  of  the  fourth  EAW  by  the  Spanish  Judicial
    Authority, on  23  October  2015.   The  Appellant  appealed.   By  his
    decision dated 14 June 2016 the Senior District Judge found that  there
    was no bar to extradition and made the Order culminating in  the  third
    of the Divisional Court's decisions, which is dated 25  November  2016.
    It is pertinent to note that by this stage the  extradition  order  was
    confined to the first of the two offences specified in the  fourth  EAW
    namely membership of a proscribed  terrorist  organisation  (ETA),  the
    Senior District Judge having discharged the Appellant in respect of the
    document falsification offence.  It is also appropriate to note that in
    the extradition proceedings, the Appellant's case relied heavily on the
    evidence of two experts, Mr Woodworth and Mr  Casanova.   All  of  this
    evidence, with the exception of some modest updating, was  laid  before
    the FtT.


First Instance Decision

22. The Secretary of State's decision to  deport  the  Appellant  from  the
    United Kingdom was challenged by  appeal  to  the  FtT  which,  in  its
    decision, made three principal conclusions.  First, the Appellant  will
    not be  "at  risk  for  a  Convention  reason"  in  the  event  of  his
    deportation to Spain (the "Convention" being the  Refugee  Convention).
    Second, the Appellant's deportation will  not  involve  any  breach  of
    Articles 5 or 6 ECHR (contrary to section 6 of  the  Human  Rights  Act
    1998).  Third, the Appellant's deportation "...  is  justified  and  in
    accordance with Regulation 19(3)(b)  and  Regulation  21  of  the  2006
    Regulations".  Giving effect to these conclusions,  the  FtT  dismissed
    the appeal on asylum grounds, under Articles 5 and 6 ECHR and under the
    EEA Regulations.


23. It is appropriate to highlight certain aspects of the  FtT's  decision.
    This can be conveniently undertaken in list form. The FtT:


      a) noted that  the  Appellant  was  entitled  to  the  first  tier  of
         protection from deportation only, in light of his status under  the
         EEA Regulations;


      b) accepted that the Appellant's witness, Mr Woodworth, is  an  expert
         in the realm of Basque and Spanish affairs;


      c) stated that the burden of proof rested on the Appellant in  certain
         specified respects and that the standard of proof was  the  balance
         of probabilities;


      d) acknowledged that the Secretary of State's decision maker erred  in
         stating that the Appellant's personal conduct itself warranted  his
         deportation, but considered this immaterial having  regard  to  the
         decision as a whole;


      e) accepted Mr Woodworth's evidence that ETA is a defunct organisation
         whose members have engaged  in  no  acts  of  terrorism  since  the
         declaration of its permanent ceasefire in 2011  and  that  ETA  has
         never posed any threat to the security of the United Kingdom;


      f) found that when the Appellant was encountered  in  London,  certain
         "false identity documents" were discovered;  that  he  admitted  to
         using forged documents to evade the UK and Spanish authorities; and
         that he was living with "a terrorist who was subsequently convicted
         of terrorism related offences";


      g) found that the Appellant  had  not  "addressed"  or  regretted  his
         offending and, linked to this, found that ETA continues to function
         "insofar as it provides logistical support and a welfare  role"  of
         which the Appellant had been  the  beneficiary  in  his  successful
         transition from Spain to the United Kingdom;


      h) further found, on this basis, that  the  Appellant  has  continuing
         links to ETA "in its non-violent supportive role"; and


      i) made no finding of whether the Appellant is still a member of ETA.




24. The main conclusion of the FtT entailed a finding that the  Appellant's
    "personal conduct" represented  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
    serious threat affecting one of the  fundamental  interests  of  United
    Kingdom society under regulation 21(5)(c) of the EEA Regulations.   The
    dismissal of the appeal entailed a rejection of all of the  Appellant's
    grounds which were, in brief compass, that  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision was unlawfully based on the Appellant's  previous  convictions
    alone; amounted to "disguised extradition"; was contrary to the Refugee
    Convention; infringed the Appellant's rights under  Articles  5  and  6
    ECHR; and infringed his rights under Article 47 of the EU Charter.


25. Permission to appeal  was  sought,  and  granted,  on  several  grounds
    (Grounds 1, 2 (in the alternative to 1), and 4-8).  These, in  essence,
    resolve to arguable errors of law  consisting  of  a  failure  to  make
    necessary findings, misdirection in law, failing to apply  the  correct
    legal test and inadequate reasoning.  We shall  concentrate  mainly  on
    what we consider to be the two principal grounds of appeal.


The Principal Grounds of Appeal

  26. In this section of our judgment we consider the following  grounds  of
      appeal: no  finding  of  identification  of  genuine,  present  threat
      (Ground 1), together with misdirection as to the  evidence  and  facts
      (Ground 4).  In addition we shall consider the burden of  proof  issue
      forming part of Ground 1.

  27. The main ground of appeal is that the FtT made no sustainable  finding
      that, in the language of regulation 21(5) of the EEA Regulations,  the
      Secretary of State's decision was -


         "... based exclusively on the personal conduct of  the  [Appellant]
         ....

         [representing] .... a genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
         threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of society."

    This omnibus formulation (ours) encompasses the  several  inter-related
    strands and alternatives of which this ground consists, both as pleaded
    and as developed in argument.



  28. The evidence of one of the two Appellant's experts, Mr  Woodworth,  is
      of particular relevance to this ground.  Mr Woodworth's report  formed
      part of the documentary evidence assembled and was supplemented by his
      oral testimony.  Mr Woodworth's evidence on  what  we  term  the  "ETA
      issue" is ascertainable from the following passages in his most recent
      report:


         "I am as certain as it is possible to be about such things that
         ETA's terrorism has now ended permanently ....


         There is no active ETA left to join .... "


     At [17] of its decision the FtT comments:

         "It was the evidence of Mr Woodworth,  in  particular  at  [114]  -
         [115], [177] and [184]  of  his  report,  that  ETA  is  a  defunct
         terrorist organisation.  None of the  high  profile  ETA  prisoners
         have [sic] returned to violence.  Further,  there  is  no  evidence
         that any ETA terrorist has returned to violence since ETA  declared
         its  permanent  ceasefire,  nor  is  there   any   active   violent
         organisation for them to join if they wished to do so.  No  serious
         observer of the Spanish security scene believes that ETA will  ever
         launch a new campaign of terrorism.  Mr Woodworth is as certain  as
         it is possible to be about such things  that  ETA's  terrorism  has
         ended permanently ....


         ETA has never operated in the United Kingdom or Northern Ireland in
         any way that involves risk to UK citizens or our  security  forces.
         Mr Woodworth is of the opinion that ETA activity here is limited to
         some of its members taking refuge  in  or  moving  through  the  UK
         utilising false documents possibly provided  by  ETA  in  order  to
         avoid detection and extradition to Spain."




  29. Following  this  passage  the FtT reminded itself that the deportation
      of the Appellant "... must be justified on grounds of  public  policy,
      public security or public health in accordance with Regulation 21(5)".
       In the next five paragraphs the judge rehearses some of the arguments
      developed by the parties' respective counsel.  This is followed by the
      key paragraph in his decision, [24]:


         "I  accept  that  there   is   no   presumption   of   reoffending.
         Nevertheless,  there  was  no  evidence  that  the  Appellant   has
         addressed the  issues  which  caused  him  to  engage  in  acts  of
         terrorism.  The Appellant did not adopt his statement, nor  did  he
         give oral evidence, for example,  to  acknowledge  regret  for  his
         terrorist activities.  The only  evidence  to  suggest  a  lack  of
         potential to further offend is not by  way  of  rehabilitation  ...
         but the view of Mr Woodworth that ETA is a defunct organisation and
         its terrorism has come to an end on a permanent basis.   While  ETA
         might be defunct in terms of carrying out  acts  of  terrorism,  it
         appears  to  be  functioning  at  least  insofar  as  it   provides
         logistical support and a welfare role.   There  was  no  suggestion
         that the Appellant was assisted  in  leaving  Spain  with  multiple
         false identities and directed to a house in  London  where  an  ETA
         terrorist was residing by any organisation other than  ETA,  albeit
         in a welfare role; there was no other credible explanation. In that
         sense, then, I find the Appellant at least has links to ETA in  its
         non-violent supportive role (albeit still proscribed), even  if  he
         cannot be said to be still a member of the organisation, although I
         make  no  finding  in  that  regard.   Whatever  justification  the
         Appellant might have considered  entitled  him  to  flee  Spain  in
         possession of  forged  false  identities  to  reside  with  an  ETA
         terrorist wanted by the Spanish authorities in  London,  I  do  not
         accept that either Article 31 of the Refugee Convention or  section
         31 of  the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  1999  are  authority  to
         legitimise the Appellant's continued association with ETA  and  the
         means by which he facilitated his exit from  Spain,  entry  to  the
         United Kingdom and residence here with an ETA terrorist."


30.  In the next comparable passage of substance, at  [27],  the  judge,  in
    giving consideration to the argument  that  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision was flawed as it was  based  exclusively  on  the  Appellant's
    previous convictions, states:


         "... but she went on to comment as part of her  overall  assessment
         that there was no evidence the Appellant had severed his  links  to
         ETA  (a  proscribed  organisation  in   Spain   and   in   the   UK
         notwithstanding the ceasefire), that the  Metropolitan  Police  had
         provided copies of the forged identity  cards  found  here  in  the
         possession of the Appellant and that he was living in  London  with
         an ETA member wanted for terrorist  offences  in  Spain.   In  such
         circumstances, I find that leaving aside  the  Appellant's  claimed
         motives ....  the fact that in all likelihood he  left  Spain  with
         ETA's facilitation and supply of numerous false identities and  was
         directed to an address in London where he might live with  [LS]  is
         sufficient evidence to satisfy Regulation 21(5)(c)."


    The judge then summarises his conclusions on  this  ground  of  appeal.
    These include this omnibus conclusion:


         "I find that the Appellant's  personal  conduct  does  represent  a
         genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting  one  of
         the  fundamental  interests  of  society  in  terms  of  regulation
         21(5)(c)."




31.  There are certain objectively demonstrable errors in  the  two  lengthy
    passages reproduced above.  First, the comment that the  Appellant  did
    not  give  oral  evidence  to  acknowledge  regret  for  his  terrorist
    activities is strictly correct.  However, there is  no  recognition  of
    the  expressions  of  regret  contained  in  the  Appellant's   witness
    statements.  Second, there was  no  evidence  that  the  Appellant  had
    departed Spain and entered France  "with  multiple  false  identities".
    This error was  repeated.   Once  again,  the  judge  gave  no  express
    consideration to the Appellant's witness statements.  Third, the  judge
    thrice describes LS as an "ETA terrorist" and once as a  "ETA  member".
    This too is erroneous, as the evidence establishes only that  LS  is  a
    suspect with alleged ETA links in  whom  the  Spanish  authorities  are
    interested.  Furthermore,  the  judge  erroneously  states   that   the
    Appellant's extradition to Spain relates to the two offences  specified
    in the fourth EAW, overlooking that the Appellant had  been  judicially
    discharged in respect of one of these.  Finally,  no  consideration  is
    given  to  the  evidence  relating  to  the  Colectivo  de   Refugiados
    organisation.

  32. Properly analysed and considered in their full context these  are  not
      egregious errors.  However, they provide some illumination in our task
      of determining the first ground of appeal.  In the course of  argument
       we suggested to counsel that in determining an issue of this kind viz
      whether the requirements of regulation 21(5)(c) are  satisfied  it  is
      incumbent on every first instance court or tribunal to  discharge  the
      three  inter-related  duties  of  engaging  with  the  most  important
      evidence bearing on the issue, making clear  findings  and  expressing
      sufficient and intelligible reasons for the findings made.  As regards
      both the "ETA issue" and the Appellant's possession of false  identity
      documents when arrested, we consider that the first  of  these  duties
      was acquitted.  However, for  the  reasons  we  shall  give,  we  find
      ourselves unable to make the same conclusion regarding the second  and
      third, having regard to the key passages in [24], [27] and [28] of the
      FtT's decision.

  33. The absence  of  clearly  expressed  findings  coupled  with  adequate
      supporting reasons is not fatal per se.  That is so  because  we  must
      nevertheless ask ourselves whether adequate  findings  and  sufficient
      supporting reasons can be deduced from what the FtT has written.  This
      exercise places the spotlight firmly on  the  three  paragraphs  noted
      immediately above.  In the first of these paragraphs there  are  eight
      references to ETA.  In the second, there are three.  Read as  a  whole
      and considered in their full  context  these  passages  impel  to  the
      inescapable conclusion that the judge's  finding  that  the  Appellant
      poses a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one
      of the fundamental interests of United Kingdom society  was  based  on
      two aspects  of  his  personal  conduct,  namely  (a)  his  continuing
      association  with  ETA  and  (b)  his  possession  of  false  identity
      documents when arrested.  Significantly, the  judge  did  not  make  a
      finding that the  Appellant's  past  offending  posed  a  sufficiently
      serious threat to one of the fundamental interests of society; rather,
      he focussed upon the "potential to further offend"  (para  24).   That
      being so it  is  not  necessary  for  us  to  consider  the  competing
      submissions  we  heard  as  to  whether  the  decision  in  Marchon  v
      Immigration Appeal Tribunal [1993] IMAR 384 remains good law.


  34. The factual dimension of (a) cannot be criticised, given the  evidence
      of the Appellant's conduct since his release from prison.   There  was
      undoubtedly sufficient evidence to underpin it.  However, the  overall
      assessment is unsustainable as it is  confounded  by  expert  evidence
      which the judge clearly accepted: see [23]  (e)  and  [27]  above.  It
      follows that this discrete conclusion was irrational.  It suffers from
      the further flaw of being unreasoned.

  35. Similarly there is no factual  flaw  in  the  second  of  the  judge's
      discrete conclusions: leaving aside technical  questions  relating  to
      the offence of "possession" of  something,  the  evidence  that  false
      identity documents were recovered  from  the  property  in  which  the
      Appellant was residing - or from the Appellant's person,  this  detail
      being unclear - at the time of his arrest was not disputed.   However,
      this represents the beginning  and  end  of  the  judge's  assessment.
      There  is  no  examination  of  any  possible  risks  or  consequences
      associable with this fact, with particular reference to the regulation
      21(5) (c) test.  Furthermore,  the  discrete  conclusion  is  entirely
      unreasoned. It is unsustainable in law in consequence.

  36. For the reasons given, the first ground of appeal succeeds.


The Burden of Proof Issue

 37. Though embedded in Ground 1, this emerged in  argument  as  a  discrete
     ground of appeal.  The gist of this ground is that the FtT erred in law
     by imposing a burden on the Appellant to demonstrate that his  personal
     conduct does not pose  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
     threat affecting one of the fundamental interests  of  society.   While
     this was formulated as one of the strands, or alternatives, of the main
     ground of appeal, we consider that it has a free standing status.

 38. In the introductory paragraphs of its  decision,  the  FtT,  under  the
     rubric "Burden and Standard of Proof" states, at [8]:


         "The Appellant claims he is at risk of  persecution  on  return  to
         Spain.  Alternatively or in addition, that there will be  a  breach
         of Articles 5 and 6.  The burden is on the Appellant to show as  of
         today's date that there are substantial grounds for believing  that
         he  meets  the  requirements  of  the  Qualification   Regulations.
         Insofar as the appeal relies upon the 2006 Regulations, the  burden
         is also on  the  Appellant,  the  standard  being  the  balance  of
         probabilities."


         [Emphasis added.]




    At the beginning of [24] the judge states:


         "I accept that there is no presumption of reoffending."




    This is followed by the passage which we have  reproduced  in  full  in
    [28] above.  Next, at [27],  the  judge  makes  reference  to  how  the
    Secretary  of  State  has  "attempted  to   justify   the   Appellant's
    deportation ...".  This is  followed  by  the  passage  which  we  have
    reproduced at [29] above.




  39. The last passage of significance in the context of this ground  is  at
      [28] (a):


         "Considering the provisions of Regulation 21(5),  I  find  for  the
         reasons I have set out at [21] - [24] above, the Secretary of State
         has not justified her  decision  to  deport  based  only  upon  the
         Appellant's previous criminal convictions."


     Followed by [28] (d):

         "I find that the Appellant's  personal  conduct  does  represent  a
         genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting  one  of
         the  fundamental  interests  of  society  in  terms  of  regulation
         21(5)(c)."


    In a later passage in this paragraph, the  FtT  adverts  to  "...   the
    Appellant's continued association with ETA and the means  by  which  he
    facilitated his exit from  Spain,  entry  to  the  United  Kingdom  and
    residence here with an ETA terrorist".




  40. We link the above passages to [27], where  the  FtT  refers  to  those
      parts of the Secretary of  State's  decision  which  highlighted  that
      there was no evidence of severance by the Appellant of  his  links  to
      ETA, together with  the  forged  identity  cards  discovered  "in  the
      possession of the Appellant" and his residing in London "with  an  ETA
      member wanted for terrorist offences in Spain".


    This is followed by the conclusion:


         "...  the fact that in all likelihood  he  left  Spain  with  ETA's
         facilitation and  supply  of  numerous  false  identities  and  was
         directed to an address in London where he might live with [name] is
         evidence sufficient to satisfy Regulation 21(5)(c)."




 41. The argument of Ms Dubinsky on behalf  of  the  Appellant  invoked  the
     decision of the Court of Appeal in Rosa v Secretary of  State  for  the
     Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 14, [2016] 1 WLR 1206 which held, in an
     EEA Regulations context, that the legal burden of proof rested  on  the
     Secretary of State to prove that a marriage was one of convenience,  to
     the standard of the balance of probabilities.  Richards LJ,  delivering
     the unanimous judgment of the Court, expressed this conclusion in  [24]
     and elaborated in [25] as follows:


         "I do not accept Mr Kellar's submission that the burden of proof is
         a matter for national law alone.  The EEA Regulations  have  to  be
         interpreted and applied in  line  with  the  Directive  which  they
         implement. Although the Directive is silent as to burden of  proof,
         the Commission's guidance (paragraph 20 above) provides the key  to
         the correct  approach  under  it.   Article  35  of  the  Directive
         provides that the rights otherwise conferred by the  Directive  may
         be refused, terminated or withdrawn in the case of abuse of  rights
         or fraud, such as marriages of convenience.  As a matter of general
         principle, one would expect that the  burden  of  proving  that  an
         exception applies should lie on the authorities of the Member State
         seeking to restrict rights conferred by the  Directive  -  in  this
         case, that it should lie on the Secretary of State when seeking  to
         rely on the existence of a marriage of convenience as a reason  for
         refusing a residence card  to  which  the  applicant  is  otherwise
         entitled.  That is the approach set out clearly in the Commission's
         guidance, and there is no reason to doubt the  correctness  of  the
         guidance on the point."




    He said further regarding the Commission's guidance, at [26]:


         "The  guidance  also  shows  the  subsidiary  role  that   national
         procedural rules have in this context.  As a matter of EU law,  the
         burden of proof lies on the authorities of the Member State seeking
         to restrict rights under the Directive, but it is for the  national
         court to verify the existence of the abuse relied on,  evidence  of
         which must be adduced in accordance  with  the  rules  of  national
         law."




    The judgment quotes from the Commission's guidance, at [20] and we were
    shown a copy of the entire instrument.  It is not confined to marriages
    of convenience.  Rather, it extends to several of the discrete  subject
    areas covered by the Citizen's Directive.




 42. Ms Anderson accepted that the legal  burden  of  proof  rested  on  the
     Secretary of State.  She suggested, faintly, that  [24]  of  the  FtT's
     decision is to be rationalised on the basis that the judge, in  effect,
     was stating that an evidential burden had transferred to the Appellant.
      She further submitted that in substance and read as a whole, there had
     been no misdirection by the FtT on this issue.

 43. We consider that, logically, the reasoning of the Court  of  Appeal  in
     Rosa, which was concerned with  a  decision  which  would  require  the
     removal of the Appellant from the United Kingdom, extends to  exclusion
     and removal decisions  made  under  Regulation  19.   We  can  identify
     nothing in the Directive, the Regulations or in principle impelling  to
     a different assessment.  It follows that the legal burden rested on the
     Secretary of State of establishing, on the  balance  of  probabilities,
     that the removal of the Appellant from the United Kingdom was justified
     on public policy grounds.


 44. Two inter-related questions arise.  Did the FtT  appreciate  where  the
     legal burden of proof lay and  did  it  give  effect  to  same  in  its
     decision?  We have reproduced in [37] - [39] above, the passages in the
     FtT's decision bearing most prominently on this issue.  The  thrust  of
     Ms Dubinsky's argument is that the  error  is  patent  in  [8],  quoted
     above, and we should deduce it from the other passages.

 45. It is indisputable that the FtT's first reference to burden of proof  -
     in [8] of its decision - in relation to regulation 21(5) is  incorrect.
     The misstatement here that the Appellant bore the burden of proof,  the
     standard  being  the  balance  of  probabilities  is  unambiguous   and
     unqualified.  It is not remedied in any other part of the decision.  We
     acknowledge that in [28] (a) the FtT uses language of the Secretary  of
     State not justifying something.   The  difficulty  with  this  discrete
     sentence is that, considered in its full context, it is far from  clear
     that this can properly be construed as a recognition of  the  Secretary
     of State's burden of proof sufficient to correct the stark misstatement
     of the burden of proof in [8] of the decision (see [37] supra).

 46. We elaborate thus.  The judge had just devoted a lengthy  paragraph  to
     considering Ms Dubinsky's submission that the Secretary of  State  "...
     has attempted to justify the Appellant's deportation in reliance on  ex
     post facto arguments ...".  We consider that there is some confusion in
     what follows.  It seems  to  us  that  this  submission  was  based  on
     arguments advanced by Ms Anderson at the hearing: we refer particularly
     to [15] - [17] of the FtT's decision in this context.  It might be said
     that quite substantial swathes of the submissions therein  recorded  do
     not readily bear comparison with the text of the Secretary  of  State's
     decision.   Be  that  as  it  may,  the  judge,  having  rehearsed  the
     Appellant's "ex post  facto"  argument,  turned  to  the  Secretary  of
     State's decision letter and embarked upon an assessment  of  this.   He
     rejected the submission that the Secretary of State had, impermissibly,
     based her decision on the Appellant's  previous  convictions.   Rather,
     the judge  found,  there  were  clear  references  to  the  Appellant's
     continuing links with  ETA  and  the  recovery  of  falsified  identity
     documents from his place of residence in London.  This was the stimulus
     for the judge's conclusion that these two factors were  "sufficient  to
     satisfy regulation 21(5)(c)".

 47. One of the consequences of this is that the Appellant's "ex post  facto
     justification" challenge was neither considered nor  resolved.   As  we
     have observed above, the extensive arguments addressed to  the  FtT  by
     counsel for the Secretary of State, summarised in [15] -  [17]  of  the
     decision, did indeed purport to add - significantly  and  substantially
     so - to the text of the Secretary of State's decision.  It seems to  us
     that the FtT  failed  to  grasp  the  thrust  of  the  "ex  post  facto
     justification" argument.  In our judgment, it would not have been  open
     to the FtT to allow many of the arguments outlined in [15]  -  [17]  of
     the decision to influence the conclusion that the  regulation  21(5)(c)
     test was satisfied.  However, reading  the  decision  as  a  whole,  it
     appears to us that this is what occurred.

 48. It is also necessary to  reflect  on  the  underpinning  of  the  FtT's
     conclusion at [28] (a) of its decision.   It  is  underpinned  by  "the
     reasons I have set out  at  [21]  -  [24]  above".   This  invites  the
     following analysis:


    (i)  Paragraph [21] of the decision is a  mixture  of  a  rehearsal  of
         certain submissions advanced in the Secretary of  State's  Skeleton
         Argument, some commentary by the judge on the Secretary of  State's
         decision  letter  and,  finally,  the  Appellant's  "response"   in
         argument.  This paragraph is essentially discursive in nature.   It
         contains no findings or conclusions.


    (ii) Paragraph [22] consists exclusively of a reference to the decision
         of the Court of Appeal in R v Benabbas [2005] EWCA Crim 2113 and  a
         lengthy quotation from the report.


    (iii)    Paragraph [23] continues the exercise begun  in  [22]  without
         making any clear conclusion regarding the  governing  principle  or
         principles to be applied.


    (iv) Paragraph [24] has been extensively analysed by us above.




 49. We continue our analysis as follows.  In  the  key  passages,  the  FtT
     began by stating that there was no  evidence  that  the  Appellant  had
     addressed the issues which caused him to engage in acts  of  terrorism.
     In context and in reality, only  the  Appellant  could  have  been  the
     source of evidence of this kind.  Next, the judge highlighted that  the
     Appellant had not given any oral evidence:  in particular, he had  not,
     by oral testimony,  acknowledged  regret  for  his  crimes.   The  only
     evidence suggestive of a lack of potential to reoffend was,  the  judge
     said, that of the Appellant's expert,  Mr  Woodworth.   He  highlighted
     that, furthermore, the Appellant had not testified ETA had not assisted
     him in leaving Spain and  entering  the  United  Kingdom  and  securing
     accommodation there.

 50. We have acknowledged that it is necessary to consider the  decision  of
     the FtT as a  whole,  rather  than  in  isolated  fragments.   The  key
     passages in its decision bearing on this ground of appeal are assembled
     in [24] - [27].  That these passages must be considered  in  unison  is
     confirmed by the conclusion expressed at the  end  of  [27].   The  FtT
     nowhere refers to the Secretary of State bearing  a  burden  of  proof.
     Reading the decision as a whole, we are satisfied  that  the  essential
     thrust of the critical passages is that the Appellant had not persuaded
     the Tribunal that his removal was not satisfied on  grounds  of  public
     policy.

 51. This analysis, in our judgment, follows from the series of failures  on
     the part of the Appellant identified by the FtT:  the Appellant  failed
     to formally adopt his witness statements, failed to give oral evidence,
     failed to testify that he  regretted  his  heinous  crimes,  failed  to
     testify that he was not assisted by ETA in his  flight  to  the  United
     Kingdom and in securing accommodation there and failed to  explain  the
     documents recovered by the police upon his arrest.   In  our  judgment,
     the FtT applied the wrong legal prism  to  all  of  these  issues  and,
     ultimately, to the  overarching  statutory  precondition  enshrined  in
     regulation  19(3)(b).   This  constitutes  an  error   of   law.    The
     materiality  of  this  error  is  clear  beyond  peradventure,  as  the
     conclusion expressed at the end  of  [27]  demonstrates.   Finally,  Ms
     Anderson's somewhat tepid submission about a shifting burden  of  proof
     was made without reference to supporting authority and we consider that
     [24] of the FtT's decision does not bear this analysis in any event.


 52. We return to the use of the verb 'justify 'in two  places,  in  [27]  -
     [28].  This might, in theory, lend some force  to  the  view  that  the
     manifest misdirection in [8] was on the road to  redemption.   However,
     we decline to adopt this assessment in light of our concerns about [28]
     (a), elaborated  above,  which  cannot,  in  our  judgment,  provide  a
     reliable basis for correcting the clear error of law  in  [8],  coupled
     with the other aspects of our analysis and construction  of  the  FtT's
     decision above.



Other Grounds of Appeal

  53. We have addressed above what we consider to be the  principal  grounds
      of appeal.  While remaining grounds  appear  to  us  supplementary  in
      nature we shall  consider  them  in  the  interests  of  finality  and
      certainty.

  54. Grounds 5, 6 and 7 of the grounds  of  appeal  challenge  the  judge's
      findings in relation to the issue of "judicial  engineering"  and  the
      risk of the Appellant not receiving a fair trial in Spain.   We  shall
      consider the points that arise under these grounds under the four sub-
      headings set out below.




(i)  Misunderstanding The Evidence


 55.  This  element  of  the  challenge  to  the  decision  of  the  FtT  is
     encapsulated in the grounds of appeal in these terms:


         "The Designated Immigration judge materially misdirected himself as
         to the evidence and facts.  He held that the Appellant is currently
         sought by the Spanish authorities in relation  to  the  forgery  of
         official  documents.    He   clearly   considered   that   it   was
         uncontroversial that the Appellant had obtained false documents  in
         Spain.  He also held that there was 'no suggestion' that any  group
         other than ETA had furnished the Appellant with the forged identity
         documents with which  the  Appellant  was  arrested  in  London  or
         directed him to another former ETA militant on the run  in  London.
         All this was either incorrect or in dispute."




    In argument emphasis  was  placed  on  the  evidence  relating  to  the
    Colectivo de Refugiados organisation, its undisputed peaceful aims  and
    methods, its non-proscribed status in France and what is said about  it
    in the EAW.




 56. The riposte of Ms Anderson on behalf of the Secretary of State  is,  in
     summary, that the decision in E v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
     Department; R v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004]  EWCA
     Civ 49; [2004] QB 1044 is not satisfied; there is a distinction  to  be
     made between the evidence of Mr Woodworth recited in [42] of the  FtT's
     decision and the content of the  EAW;  the  FtT's  findings  about  the
     Appellant's flight from Spain through France to the United Kingdom  and
     his  subsequent  settlement  in  this  jurisdiction  accord  with   the
     Appellant's own statements; and that no material error  of  fact  which
     could constitute a material error of law is demonstrated.  The  E  &  R
     test is formulated at [63] of the report in these terms:

         "In our view, the CICB case points the way to a separate ground  of
         review, based on the principle of fairness.  It is true  that  Lord
         Slynn distinguished between "ignorance of fact" and "unfairness" as
         grounds  of  review.  However,  we  doubt  if  there  is   a   real
         distinction.  The decision turned, not on issues of fault  or  lack
         of fault on either side; it was sufficient that "objectively" there
         was unfairness.  On  analysis,  the  "unfairness"  arose  from  the
         combination of five factors:


               i) An erroneous impression created by a  mistake  as  to,  or
                  ignorance  of,  a  relevant  fact  (the  availability   of
                  reliable evidence to support her case);


              ii)  The  fact  was  "established",  in  the  sense  that,  if
                  attention  had  been  drawn  to  the  point,  the  correct
                  position  could  have  been   shown   by   objective   and
                  uncontentious evidence;


             iii) The claimant could not fairly be held responsible for  the
                  error;


             iv)  Although there was no duty on the Board  itself,  or  the
                  police, to do the claimant's work of proving her case, all
                  the participants had a shared interest in co-operating  to
                  achieve the correct result;


             v)   The mistaken impression played a  material  part  in  the
                  reasoning."


      And at [66]:


             "Without seeking to lay  down  a  precise  code,  the  ordinary
             requirements for a finding of unfairness are apparent from  the
             above analysis of CICB.  First, there must have been a  mistake
             as  to  an  existing  fact,  including  a  mistake  as  to  the
             availability of evidence on a particular matter.  Secondly, the
             fact or evidence must have been  "established",  in  the  sense
             that it was uncontentious and objectively verifiable.  Thirdly,
             the appellant  (or  his  advisers)  must  not  been  have  been
             responsible for the mistake.  Fourthly, the mistake  must  have
             played a  material  (not  necessarily  decisive)  part  in  the
             Tribunal's reasoning."




 57. The overlapping nature  of  this  ground  of  appeal  is  confirmed  by
     reference to [31] above.  This does not, however, deprive  this  ground
     of its free standing character. The evidence bearing  thereon  includes
     the Appellant's two statements (outlined in [10] -  [15]  above).   The
     FtT highlighted, twice, that the Appellant had not  given  evidence  in
     that forum.  First, at [5]:


         "The Appellant declined to give oral evidence, nor did he adopt his
         statements, which inevitably affects the weight I  can  place  upon
         that evidence, although for reasons I will  explain,  in  my  view,
         nothing material turns upon it.  See [24] below."


    Next, at [24]:

         "...  There was no evidence that the Appellant  has  addressed  the
         issues which caused him  to  engage  in  acts  of  terrorism.   The
         Appellant did not  adopt  his  statement,  nor  did  he  give  oral
         evidence, for example, to  acknowledge  regret  for  his  terrorist
         activities."


    The description of the Appellant's written evidence in the singular
    ("statement") is, of course, erroneous.




 58. We consider that there was a  duty  on  the  FtT  to  engage  with  the
     Appellant's two written  statements.   In  [5]  the  judge,  correctly,
     recognised the existence of this duty and the related  duty  to  assess
     the weight to be attributed to this evidence.  However, this represents
     the beginning and end of this discrete exercise.  In  what  follows  in
     the decision, there is no engagement with the statements, no assessment
     of their weight and no associated  findings  with  supporting  reasons.
     Our assessment is that this failure is to be evaluated  in  conjunction
     with the factual errors identified above.   Individually,  the  factual
     errors are not egregious in nature.  However, collectively they  assume
     a more substantial hue.  We add to this the further failure on the part
     of the FtT which we have just identified. This assessment impels to the
     conclusion that this ground of appeal is also established.


(ii)  Misunderstanding the Second Divisional Court's Decision

 59. This ground of appeal  draws  attention  to  certain  passages  in  the
     decision of the Divisional Court in Spanish Judicial Authority v Arranz
     (No 3) [2015] EWHC 2305 (Admin).  The  context  is  ascertainable  from
     [20] - [26] of the judgment of the Court, delivered by the  Lord  Chief
     Justice.  In these passages, consideration is given to  the  ground  of
     appeal which is termed,  in  shorthand,  "judicial  engineering".   The
     substance of this ground, in very  brief  compass,  was  that  the  EAW
     should be  set  aside  on  the  ground  that  it  was  the  product  of
     submission, or surrender, by the Spanish Judicial Authority to pressure
     from and the expectations of the Spanish public and State.   In  common
     law terms, the asserted vitiating factor was improper motive.  In human
     rights terms, the vitiating factor advanced was an  apprehended  breach
     of Articles 5 and 6 ECHR, in contravention of section 6  of  the  Human
     Rights Act 1998.   The  Lord  Chief  Justice  outlined  the  supporting
     evidence, the sources whereof were Mr Woodworth and the Spanish lawyer,
     Mr Casanova.

 60. Having set the context, we now identify those passages upon which  this
     ground of appeal is promoted:


    Paragraph 27


        "We ourselves have very carefully considered the evidence that  was
        before the Senior District Judge.  In addition we have  also  taken
        into account the failure  of  the  Spanish  Judicial  Authority  to
        terminate the underlying Spanish proceedings relating to  EAW1,  in
        breach of their express undertaking to this court.  However, as  we
        explain at paragraph 39 below, the Spanish Judicial  Authority  has
        remedied that matter.  As is  apparent  from  the  Senior  District
        Judge's careful and considered judgment, he was also very concerned
        at the evidence put before him and the weight it carried."


    Paragraph 28


        "Nonetheless, despite the careful and  meticulous  argument  of  Mr
        Summers QC, we cannot conclude that the Senior District  Judge  was
        wrong in the conclusion he reached on the  evidence.   He  had  the
        benefit of hearing the witnesses and  of  carefully  weighing  that
        testimony.   We  cannot  in  those  circumstances  see,   on   well
        established principles, that he came to a  decision  that  was  not
        open to him on the evidence.  It would not therefore be the  proper
        function of an appellate court to set his findings aside.   In  the
        result therefore this particular submission fails ...".


     We interpose here paragraph 39 of the judgment:

         "Our view was communicated to the Spanish  Judicial  Authority  who
         immediately took action  to  bring  the  proceedings  in  Spain  in
         respect of the original sentence to an end. The  documentation  has
         been provided to the court and to the appellant.   It  is  accepted
         that the proceedings in respect of the conviction are  at  an  end.
         The  issue  on  specialty  therefore  no  longer  forms  a  bar  to
         extradition."



 61. The final passage invoked by the Appellant in support  of  this  ground
     relates to the issue of whether there was a bar  to  extradition  under
     section 12A of the 2003 Act on the basis that a decision  to  prosecute
     the Appellant had  not  been  made  in  Spain.   The  Spanish  Judicial
     Authority had formally certified that no prosecution decision had  been
     possible on the ground that by reason of the Appellant's  absence  from
     Spain, the preliminary investigation ("Instruccion") phase could not be
     concluded.  The Divisional Court stated, at [56]:


        "It is clear in our view that,  where  evidence  is  adduced  which
        shows that a means of examination of a defendant is possible either
        through the use  of  the  Mutual  Legal  Assistance  Convention  or
        otherwise before the decision to prosecute is made, then it is  for
        the requesting European judicial authority  to  prove  by  adducing
        evidence to the requisite  standard  of  proof  that  the  test  in
        s.12A(1)(b)(ii) has been met.  In  the  present  case  the  Spanish
        Judicial Authority has given no reasons.  On the face of it, on the
        evidence before the court, it therefore has not shown that the sole
        reason for the decision to prosecute not having been  made  is  the
        appellant's absence from Spain."

    This was a prelude to the particular passage  on  which  the  Appellant
    places much reliance.




    Paragraph 60


        "It seems to us, following the decision in Kandola, that the Senior
        District Judge was wrong on the facts of this case to  act  on  the
        unreasoned statement of the Spanish judge.
         (1)  Proper evidence had been adduced before the court  that  there
             was a means of examining the appellant in the United  Kingdom;
             therefore the sole reason for the decision  to  prosecute  not
             having been made was not his absence from Spain.
         (2)  There are real concerns about the delay  in  this  case.   The
             matter with which the appellant is charged relates  to  events
             in April 2011 and further delay would not be acceptable.
         (3)  It would not have been  difficult  for  the  Spanish  Judicial
             Authority to have responded on this point. It could easily set
             out its reasons, taking into account that the purpose of s.12A
             was to ensure that there would be no delays.
         (4)  It is inexplicable in  these  circumstances  why  the  Spanish
             Judicial Authority did not  seek  to  take  advantage  of  the
             invitation which we extended to put  in  evidence  during  the
             course  of  the  appeal.   We  are  very  concerned  that  our
             invitation was expressly declined on the instructions  of  the
             CPS,  in  contradistinction  to  acceptance  by  the   Spanish
             Judicial Authority of the need to  terminate  the  proceedings
             underlying EAW1.
         (5)  In the light of these matters and of evidence  which  we  have
             considered under the first issue, "judicial engineering",  and
             the concerns we have expressed,  the  failure  to  answer  the
             simple points raised by Mr Casanova cannot be accepted in this
             particular case.
         (6)  Even if Kandola was wrongly decided (which  we  think  it  was
             not) and the usual position  is  that  it  is  permissible  to
             accept the unreasoned statement of a  judicial  authority,  it
             would not in the circumstances of this case be appropriate  to
             accept  the  unreasoned  statement  of  the  Spanish  Judicial
             Authority."



Followed by, at [61]:

         "It follows that we consider the judge was wrong. We must therefore
         allow the appeal and discharge the Appellant."



 62. The Appellant's argument also invokes the decision  of  the  Divisional
     Court in Puceviciene v Lithuanian Judicial Authority [2016]  EWHC  1862
     (Admin) and, in particular, [72]:

         "There may be, in what we  would  anticipate  would  be  very  rare
         cases, circumstances in  which  mutual  trust  and  confidence  has
         broken down, or where there is cogent evidence of bad faith  or  of
         abuse.  In those circumstances, it may well be  appropriate  to  go
         behind the answers and seek  more  information.   Spanish  Judicial
         Authority v Arranz [2015] EWHC 2305 (Admin) provides a rare example
         of the problems, there described as "judicial  engineering",  which
         justify that different approach, and what it says should be read in
         the context of the  very  special  circumstances  of  that  unusual
         case."


    [Per Thomas LCJ]


    The correctness of this principle was not  disputed  in  the  arguments
    advanced to us.




 63. In evaluating this ground of appeal,  we  consider  it  appropriate  to
     identify the duty resting on the FtT.  In our  judgment,  the  FtT  was
     under a duty to, firstly, consider and, secondly, understand  correctly
     the judgment of the Divisional Court considered extensively in  [60]  -
     [61] above.  Was this twofold duty discharged?  The answer turns mainly
     on what the FtT stated in [35] of its  decision.   Having  acknowledged
     the discrete argument of Ms Dubinsky on this issue, the FtT stated:

         "I do not accept ...  nor was it demonstrated to me that  the  Lord
         Chief Justice expressed such concern  in  the  manner  Ms  Dubinski
         claims.  See [72] of Vanda Puceviciene."


    The FtT is to be commended  for  its  alertness  to  the  necessity  of
    confronting this submission and resolving  it.   However,  we  consider
    that its conclusion suffers from three material flaws.   The  first  is
    that it is expressed in bald and unreasoned terms.  The second is  that
    it fails to engage with the passages in the Divisional  Court  Judgment
    highlighted above.  The third is that it is irreconcilable with [72] of
    Vanda Puceviciene, to which the FtT made express reference.



 64. The materiality of these flaws cannot be gainsaid having regard to  the
     formulation of the Appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  FtT.   We
     conclude that this ground is also made out.








(iii)  The FtT's Treatment of the "Judicial Engineering" Evidence

 65. While this discrete  ground  of  appeal  overlaps  somewhat  with  that
     addressed in [59]-[64] above, we consider that its contours and content
     suffice to endow it with a free standing existence.

 66. Evidentially, the colourful and evocative term  "judicial  engineering"
     can be traced to Jacobo  Tteijelo  Casanova,  a  Spanish  lawyer  whose
     evidence to the Senior District Judge in  the  extradition  proceedings
     was both written and oral and whose written statement  formed  part  of
     the evidence considered by the FtT.  In his  written  statement,  Senor
     Casanovo  gave  consideration  to,  inter  alia,  the   phenomenon   of
     "ingeneria judicial".  As his evidence makes  clear,  this  phrase  was
     first coined, in public, by the Spanish Home Secretary  (El  Ministerio
     del Interior).  This issue was also addressed in the written  and  oral
     evidence of the Appellant's expert, Mr Woodworth.   The  gist  of  this
     ground of appeal is that the FtT failed to engage adequately with  this
     evidence and failed to give adequate reasons for rejecting it.

 67. We have, in [63] - [64] above, diagnosed a material error of law in the
     FtT's treatment of this discrete issue.  The thrust of this  ground  of
     appeal  may  properly  be  viewed  through  the  prism  which  we  have
     formulated in [32] above.  In short, it is based upon the inter-related
     first instance Tribunal's duties of engagement with material  evidence,
     making appropriate findings and providing sufficient  and  intelligible
     reasons.

 68. The key passages in the decision of the FtT bearing on this  ground  of
     appeal are found at [38] - [46].  It is  not  insignificant  that  this
     section of the judgment has  the  title  "Articles  5,  6  and  Refugee
     Convention".  It begins at [30].  We have considered  this  section  in
     its entirety and in conjunction with all that precedes it.

 69. In [38] of its decision, upon which much of the  spotlight  is  thrust,
     the FtT records:

          "The Appellant has made  grave  allegations  against  the  Spanish
          judiciary and authorities supported by the expert evidence  of  Mr
          Woodworth who gives specific examples of 'judicial engineering' or
          bad faith with regard to ETA cases: ..."

    This is followed by ten subparagraphs, each containing instances of the
    phenomenon espoused in the evidence of the experts.  This  is  followed
    by, in [39] - [41], a further recitation of  parts  of  Mr  Woodworth's
    evidence.  In [43] the FtT repeats its earlier  acknowledgement  of  Mr
    Woodworth's expertise,  while  observing  that  he  is  not  a  lawyer.
    Considered in its full context, the significance of this observation is
    at best opaque.  In [44] the FtT focuses exclusively on  the  topic  of
    persecution.  In [44] and [47] the FtT articulates the conclusion  that
    the deportation of the Appellant will not give rise to  any  breach  of
    his rights under Articles 5 and 6 ECHR.


 70. The FtT purported to base its decision on this  discrete  challenge  on
     "the reasons ...  set out ...".  There is no identifiable reasoning  in
     [43] - [45] of its decision.  In  [46],  the  FtT  refers  to  "complex
     historic, cultural and political issues which require  equally  complex
     academic study inappropriate to my  analysis  on  the  discrete  issues
     before me".   This is followed  by  a  reiteration  of  the  Tribunal's
     recognition of Mr Woodworth's expertise and some undeveloped references
     to the scope for discussion relating  to  the  IRA  and  the  interface
     between academic historians and Tribunals.  In  our  judgment  none  of
     this amounts to a proper engagement  with  the  "judicial  engineering"
     evidence.  Nor are there any identifiable findings.  Absent the latter,
     the lack of supporting reasons follows virtually as a matter of course.
      In the passages in question, one finds  nothing  more  than  bare  and
     unreasoned conclusions.


(iv) The Article 6 ECHR Issue

 71. The essence of this ground of appeal is that the FtT failed to consider
     the question of whether  the  Appellant  would  be  tried  by  (in  the
     language of Article 6 ECHR)  an  "independent  and  impartial  tribunal
     established by law" in both the subjective and objective senses of this
     criterion.

 72. We are of the opinion that, properly analysed, this ground is  subsumed
     within the ground which we  have  considered  in  [65]  -  [71]  above.
     Accordingly, it adds nothing of substance to the Appellant's appeal.


 73. Ground 8 of the Grounds  of  Appeal  concerns  the  "systemic  failure"
     issue.  It is based on what the FtT stated in [45] of its decision:


         "In summary, the evidence I have been asked to  consider  does  not
         disclose a systematic failure on the part of the Spanish  judiciary
         to discharge their duties in a fair and impartial manner."


    This statement formed part of the FtT's rejection  of  the  Appellant's
    contention that his removal to Spain would give rise to a breach of his
    fair trial rights under Article 6 ECHR.




 74. Insofar as the FtT was purporting to formulate the test to  be  applied
     to this aspect of the Appellant's challenge, we consider that it was in
     error.  "Systematic failure" was not the test to be applied (see R  (EM
     Eritrea) v SSHD [2014] AC 1321 per Lord Kerr at [68]).  Elaboration  is
     unnecessary.  To the extent that this ground adds anything of substance
     to that considered in [65] - [70] above, we conclude that it succeeds.

 75. We would add that we accept  Ms  Dubinsky's  submission  that  flagrant
     breach is not the touchstone to be applied in cases  where  apprehended
     breaches of Articles 5 and 6 ECHR are raised in resistance to expulsion
     decisions involving transfer between the High Contracting  Parties  who
     have subscribed to the ECHR.  We contrast the test applicable in  cases
     involving expulsion to third country  states:  see  R  (Ullah)  v  SSHD
     [2004] 2 AC 329 at [24], [29]  and  [69].   Furthermore,  no  flagrancy
     threshold  is  specified  in  Article  47  of  the  EU  Charter.    The
     uncluttered and straightforward question for the FtT in this appeal was
     whether there were substantial grounds for believing that there  was  a
     real risk of a breach of the Appellant's rights under Articles 5 and  6
     ECHR, Article 47 of the EU Charter and the Refugee  Convention  in  the
     event of expulsion to Spain. The FtT failed to formulate and apply this
     test.



Conclusion

 76. Based on the foregoing, we conclude that the decision  of  the  FtT  is
     vitiated by the material errors of law identified above.


Decision and Directions

 77. We decide as follows:


      a) The decision of the FtT is set aside.


      b) Taking into account the nature of the errors of law  diagnosed  and
         having regard to the Practice Statements of the Upper Tribunal, the
         remaking of said decision will be undertaken in this forum.


      c) The remaking will be carried out by any judge or panel of judges of
         the Upper Tribunal, with the President presiding if available.


      d) The Appellant's solicitors  will  review,  revise  and  update  the
         appeal and authorities bundles as appropriate.


      e) The relisting of this  appeal  for  the  purpose  of  remaking  the
         decision will be not later than the week commencing 10 April  2017.





                                   PART 2


 78. This, the second part of our  decision,  follows  the  further  hearing
     conducted  on  09  May  2017  in  the  wake  of  which   the   parties'
     representatives have provided further written submissions as  directed.
     We preface what follows with  the  detail  that  the  Appellant's  long
     battle against extradition has ultimately failed.  He was extradited to
     Spain on 05 May 2017.

 79. The underlying decision of the Secretary of State  was  to  deport  the
     Appellant from the United Kingdom  under  Regulation  19(3)(b)  of  the
     Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  (the   "EEA
     Regulations") on the ground of public policy  based  on  an  assessment
     that the Appellant represented "a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
     serious threat to the public".  The  Appellant  will  potentially  gain
     both practical and reputational  benefit  if  his  appeal  against  the
     Secretary of State's decision is successful.  Accordingly this  is  not
     an academic appeal and the contrary was not argued.

 80. The legal criteria to be applied are enshrined in Regulation 21 of  the
     EEA Regulations, the domestic law counterpart  of  Article  27  of  the
     Citizens Directive.  Regulation 21 provides in material part:

         "(1) In this Regulation a "relevant decision" means an EEA decision
             taken on the grounds of  public  policy,  public  security  or
             public health.

         (2)  A relevant decision may not be taken to serve economic ends.

         (3)  A relevant decision may not be taken in respect  of  a  person
             with a permanent right of residence under regulation 15 except
             on serious grounds of public policy or public security.

         (5)  Where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of public policy
             or public security it shall, in addition to complying with the
             preceding  paragraphs  of  this  regulation,   be   taken   in
             accordance with the following principles -

             (a)   the  decision  must  comply  with   the   principle   of
                 proportionality;
             (b)  the decision must be based exclusively  on  the  personal
                 conduct of the person concerned;
             (c)   the  personal  conduct  of  the  person  concerned  must
                 represent  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
                 threat  affecting  one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of
                 society;
             (d)  matters isolated from the  particulars  of  the  case  or
                 which relate to considerations of general prevention do not
                 justify the decision;
             (e)  a  person's  previous  criminal  convictions  do  not  in
                 themselves justify the decision.
         (6)  Before taking a relevant decision on  the  grounds  of  public
             policy or public security in  relation  to  a  person  who  is
             resident in the United Kingdom the decision  maker  must  take
             account of considerations such as the age,  state  of  health,
             family and economic situation  of  the  person,  the  person's
             length of residence in the United Kingdom, the person's social
             and cultural integration  into  the  United  Kingdom  and  the
             extent of the person's links with his country of origin."

 81.      We remind ourselves that Secretary of  State  bears  the  onus  of
     proof and the standard of proof is the balance  of  probabilities:  see
     [43] above.  Furthermore, it is not in  dispute  that  the  country  in
     which the requisite genuine present and sufficiently serious threat  of
     offending  must  arise  is  the  United  Kingdom.   We  further  remind
     ourselves that the sole basis of the Appellant's extradition  to  Spain
     has been his alleged continuing association with ETA. We also take into
     account that the extradition proceedings against  the  Appellant  were,
     ultimately successful.  See, generally, [10] - [17] above.





The Evidence of Professor Silke

 82. Professor Silke spoke to his central thesis  in  both  examination  in-
     chief and cross-examination.  An exhaustive rehearsal of his  testimony
     is not necessary.  Professor Silke elaborated  on  the  empirical  data
     touched on in  his  report  and  also  highlighted  the  low  rates  of
     psychiatric illness among politically motivated offenders.  He  further
     developed the discrete thesis of  subjective  altruism  which  features
     commonly in the psyche of such offenders.  In addition,  he  elaborated
     on the distinction between "core" and  "fringe"  former  members  of  a
     terrorist cell and the factor of an offender's age  -  which,  in  this
     Appellant's case - would fortify the low risk of reoffending thesis.

 83. In cross-examination Professor Silke contended that his thesis is in no
     way undermined by either the standard "OASYS" model or  the  "Extremism
     Risk Guidance" ("ERG") model.  He testified that, in  real  terms,  the
     reoffending rate for most convicted  terrorists  is  in  single  figure
     percentages.  He illustrated this by reference to  empirical studies in
     different areas of the globe, in particular Northern  Ireland  and  Sri
     Lanka.  He further opined that, in an evolving national context, access
     to political power for former terrorists is not a key factor.  Finally,
     he acknowledged that "one size does not fit all".

 84. The key elements of Professor Silke's thesis  were  not  challenged  or
     contradicted by  any  competing  expert  evidence.   They  were  probed
     appropriately in both cross-examination and questions from  the  bench.
     Professor Silke emerged as an impressive  witness.   His  evidence  was
     demonstrably balanced and well researched.  Furthermore, his contention
     that he was advancing an orthodox thesis  was  not  controversial.   He
     engaged well with questions and there was no element  of  impermissible
     advocacy in his evidence. Overall, we accept the  main  tenets  of  his
     evidence.

The Battle Lines Drawn

 85. The submissions of Ms Anderson on behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State
     placed considerable emphasis on the Appellant's  protracted  membership
     of the proscribed terrorist organisation ETA and the atrocious loss  of
     life perpetrated by him: see [6] supra.  We recall that the murders and
     other terrorist offences perpetuated by the Appellant or  in  which  he
     participated spanned  the  period  1983  -  1987,  culminating  in  his
     conviction of multiple offences on 07 November 1989.  Ms Anderson  also
     drew attention to the various strands of evidence underpinning the  EAW
     giving rise to the Appellant's extradition.   She  further  highlighted
     the Appellant's use of forged identity documents in order to enter  the
     United Kingdom and his continued possession of such materials,  exposed
     at the time of his  arrest,  together  with  the  allegation  that  the
     Appellant was harbouring a fugitive from justice, LS - (supra).

 86. At the core of Ms Andersons' submissions lay the  contention  that  the
     Appellant has demonstrated by his personal conduct that he  is  willing
     and able to breach United Kingdom laws by his  possession  and  use  of
     forged documents with the intention of deceiving  the  authorities  and
     aiding an ETA fugitive to evade justice.  Building on this  foundation,
     Ms Anderson submitted that there are reasonable grounds to expect  that
     if the Appellant considered  it  in  his  interests  to  breach  United
     Kingdom laws again, he would do so.  The Appellant is, she submitted, a
     person who considers himself not bound by the rule of law.  Ms Anderson
     contrasted the Appellant with other  ETA  prisoners  who,  rather  than
     fleeing, remained in  Spain  and  attempted  to  resolve  their  "Parot
     doctrine" issues there.  The gravamen of Ms Andersons' argument appears
     in the following extract from her helpful written submissions:

         "There is a clear risk of further resort to false documents if  the
         Appellant wished to evade the UK authorities on any return  in  the
         future and the harm from possession  and  use  of  forged  identity
         documents is unarguably significant  and  sufficient  to  meet  the
         limited requirement in the EEA context where only the basic  rights
         apply."



    In this context Ms Anderson also canvasses  the  possibility  that  the
    Appellant would continue to provide  assistance  to  ETA  fugitives  to
    evade the United Kingdom authorities.




 87. Ms  Anderson  further  submitted  that  belonging  to  or  assisting  a
     proscribed organisation in itself poses a  threat  to  the  fundamental
     interests of society.  There is a risk that the Appellant could use his
     "knowledge and potential access  to  weapons"  in  furtherance  of  his
     personal  interests  or  those  of  ETA.   Ms  Anderson  condemned   as
     misconceived any suggestion that the only threat that can be  posed  by
     the Appellant is engaging in a terrorist campaign in or  affecting  the
     United Kingdom on behalf of ETA.  She  emphasised  that  the  Appellant
     qualifies for the minimum level of protection available under  the  EEA
     Regulations.  Highlighting the Appellant's failure to give evidence  to
     the  Tribunal,  Ms  Anderson  invoked  section  8  of  the  Asylum  and
     Immigration (Treatment of Claimants etc) Act 2004,  submitting  that  a
     refusal to be interviewed and/or  to  give  evidence  belonged  to  the
     "highest possible end" of conduct warranting  the  drawing  of  adverse
     inferences.  Finally, Ms Anderson submitted that the lawfulness of  the
     Secretary of State's deportation decision is  not  dependent  upon  the
     "Marchon/Bouchereau" principle.

 88. On behalf of the Appellant Ms Dubinsky advanced four main  submissions.
     First, there is no evidence that ETA  or  Basque  militants  have  ever
     posed a threat to the community of  the  United  Kingdom  or  have  any
     motive for doing so in the future.  Second, there is no  evidence  that
     ETA or Basque militants pose  any  risk  of  resuming  armed  conflict.
     Third, there is no evidence that former ETA prisoners pose any risk  of
     reoffending in  any  form.   Fourth,  the  Appellant's  past  offending
     cannot, without more, as a matter of law be indicative of a  propensity
     to reoffend, per Regulation 21(5)(e).

 89. Ms Dubinsky further submitted that  there  is  no  adequate  evidential
     basis for the threat attributed to the Appellant in the context of  the
     Regulation  21(5)(c)  test.   She  developed  this  submission  in  the
     following way:

     (i)  In a context where the Appellant has  been  extradited  to  Spain,
         there is no logical basis for believing that he will have resort to
         the use of false documents in the future.

     (ii) The Appellant's past use and possession of  forged  documents  are
         insufficient to satisfy the statutory test.

     (iii)    The burden of proof is important because the key  question  of
         whether the Appellant will  re-offend  in  the  United  Kingdom  is
         disputed.

     Conclusions

     General

 90. The critical provision of the EEA Regulations is  Regulation  21(5)(c).
     The impugned decision of the Secretary of State is sustainable  in  law
     only if the personal conduct of the Appellant  constitutes  a  genuine,
     present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting   one   of   the
     fundamental interests of the United Kingdom.  Neither the  prism  of  a
     public inquiry nor that of supervisory judicial review applies to  this
     Tribunal's determination of this central  issue.   Rather,  this  issue
     falls to be decided by reference to the burden and  standard  of  proof
     noted in [81] above.  We note Ms  Andersons'  submission  based  on  JS
     (Sudan) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1378 that the burden  of  proof  is  not
     important in our resolution of this appeal.  We do not agree,  for  the
     basic reason that the primary facts are very much in issue. The central
     factual issue is that of the Appellant's threatened  reoffending  at  a
     prescribed level in the United Kingdom.  This is keenly contested.

 91. On the other hand, we derive some assistance from  JS  (Sudan)  on  the
     issue of evaluative judgment.  By virtue of  the  terms  of  regulation
     21(5)(c) of the EEA Regulations, the task of the Tribunal is to make  a
     predictive evaluative assessment of future events based on the relevant
     factual matrix.  This matrix must be  constituted  by  the  Appellant's
     personal conduct. Drawing the strands together,  the  elements  of  the
     Appellant's personal conduct under scrutiny are his previous activities
     as an active ETA  member;  his  convictions  in  Spain  in  respect  of
     appalling terrorist offences; his  post-release  interaction  with  the
     Colectivo; his use of forged identity documents to facilitate his entry
     into the United Kingdom; his  occupation  of  a  Colectivo  house  with
     another ETA member in this jurisdiction; and his continuing  possession
     of forged identity  documents  at  the  time  of  his  arrest.   These,
     properly analysed, are the building blocks of the Secretary of  State's
     case against the Appellant. It is trite that they must be considered in
     unison.

 92. Next, we pose the question of whether the Regulation 21 (5) (c) test is
     satisfied by any of the other elements identified in [90] above, singly
     or in combination. While we  shall  consider  each,  by  virtue  of  Ms
     Anderson's submissions the main focus is  on  the  Appellant's  use  of
     forged identity documents for the purpose of travelling to and entering
     the United Kingdom and his continuing possession of documents  of  this
     nature when apprehended by the police some considerable time later.  In
     agreement with Ms Andersons' submission, we take as our starting  point
     the truism that immigration  document  fraud  is  an  offence  of  some
     gravity, being in conflict with the  maintenance  of  firm  immigration
     control and the economic interests of society and, in  some  instances,
     having the potential to threaten public order  and  national  security.
     The question is whether  the  Appellant's  demonstrated  past  use  and
     continuing possession  of  forged  identity  documents,  considered  in
     isolation or in tandem with the  other  ingredients  identified  above,
     satisfies the statutory test.

 93. We shall now address seriatim  what  we  consider  to  be  the  central
     issues.

     The 'Colectivo' Issue

 94. Having considered the evidence in its totality, we highlight certain of
     its features only.  We draw  attention  particularly  to  the  evidence
     pertaining to the "Colectivo de Refugiados" (the  "Colectivo").   There
     is clear evidence that the Appellant interacted with this  organisation
     following his release from prison and,  in  this  way,  secured  forged
     travel documents to facilitate his entry  to  the  United  Kingdom  and
     benefited from accommodation here, shared with another ETA  beneficiary
     of the Colectivo's services, LS: see  [10]  -  [19]  supra.   There  is
     expert evidence that the Colectivo is  a  peaceful  organisation  which
     operates openly in France where it is not  proscribed.   It  exists  to
     provide solidarity and support to released ETA prisoners.

 95. In this  context,  it  is  convenient  to  address  the  topic  of  the
     Appellant's association with LS  and  the  London  accommodation.   The
     evidence indicates that LS was already  accommodated  in  the  relevant
     premises upon the Appellant's arrival.  It cannot be gainsaid that  the
     two men associated with each other thereafter,  until  the  Appellant's
     arrest.  However, there is no primary evidence that the  Appellant  was
     harbouring LS or obstructed justice on this front.   Nor  can  this  be
     properly  inferred  from  any  primary  evidence.   This  analysis   is
     fortified by the contents of the EAW: see [15]  -  [16]  above.   While
     there is mention of LS in the text, there is  no  allegation  that  the
     Appellant was instrumental in harbouring him.  Indeed, au contraire, it
     is asserted that LS "lodged" the Appellant in London.

     Risk of Reoffending

 96. The battleground upon which  the  hearing  of  this  appeal  ultimately
     unfolded was shaped mainly by the evidence of  Professor  Andrew  Silke
     (supra).  The expert credentials of this witness were not  in  dispute.
     In his evidence, both written and oral, he developed an abstract theory
     in circumstances in which he had neither interviewed nor  attempted  to
     assess the Appellant.  The central pillar of this theory, insofar as it
     can be reduced to  a  single  sentence,  is  that  in  a  post-conflict
     situation a politically motivated offender who has previously committed
     heinous crimes is unlikely to reoffend in a comparable way or  at  all.
     Professor Silke's opinion is encapsulated  in  the  following  extracts
     from his report:

         "Overall, the available elements suggests strongly that reoffending
         rates for released terrorist prisoners is [sic] low.  The terrorist
         reoffending  rates  are  certainly  much  lower  than  the   levels
         typically seen with ordinary, non-terrorist prisoners.  This  trend
         applies both in the context of releases where a related conflict is
         still ongoing and  where  the  conflict  has  ended  or  entered  a
         significant  peace  process.   It  is  important  to   acknowledge,
         however, that some reoffending does occur, although  the  level  of
         reoffending is typically much lower than we would  normally  expect
         with most released prisoners."

 97. Based on the above analysis we accept Professor Silke's  evidence.   We
     juxtapose it with the expert evidence of Mr  Woodworth  which,  in  the
     history  of  the  extradition  and  immigration  appeals  forming   the
     backgrounds to this hearing, has previously been rehearsed in  extenso.
     We consider it  unnecessary  to  repeat  any  part  of  these  previous
     exercises.   Rather  it  suffices  to  highlight  that  Mr  Woodworth's
     evidence, all of it in written form and none of it  challenged  by  any
     competing expert evidence, provides significant  complementary  ballast
     to the thesis of Professor Silke, which we have accepted.

     The Appellant's Terrorist Criminality and ETA

 98. In our judgment, the exercise of considering the evidence  as  a  whole
     impels to the following conclusions.  First,  ETA  does  not  pose  any
     present threat, serious or otherwise, current or predictive, to any  of
     the fundamental interests of the  United  Kingdom.  Nor  is  there  any
     realistic prospect of any such threat materialising  in  the  future  -
     short term, medium term or longer term.  These conclusions apply  fully
     to the Appellant qua former ETA terrorist. Thus, from this perspective,
     the past personal conduct of the Appellant in terrorist activities  and
     active membership of  a  proscribed  organisation  in  Spain  does  not
     constitute a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting
     one of the fundamental interests of the United Kingdom.

 99. We consider that the correct answer to this question is provided  by  a
     combination of the context to which the Appellant's  previous  conduct,
     in  all  of  its  guises,  belonged,  present  realities   and   future
     probabilities.  All  of  the  elements  of  the   Appellant's   conduct
     underpinning the impugned deportation  decision  of  the  Secretary  of
     State belonged to a context which no longer  obtains.   The  proscribed
     terrorist organisation  ETA  featured  in  all  aspects  of  this  past
     context.  This organisation, its aims and its ruthless  armed  struggle
     all lay at the heart of the Appellant's past conduct.   They  were  its
     raison d'etre.

100. It is, as a minimum, improbable  that  ETA  continues  to  exist.   The
     evidence establishes that it has not been involved in active  terrorism
     for several years. It has renounced its struggle and has been  involved
     in  the  decommissioning  of  weapons.   The  Appellant's  last  active
     terrorist involvement in ETA terrorism occurred some 30 years ago.  The
     circumstances and context in which  all  elements  of  the  Appellant's
     relevant past  conduct  occurred  have  been  extinct  for  some  time.
     Furthermore, there is no  realistic  prospect  of  their  resurrection.
     Thus there is no ascertainable reason why,  or  expectation  that,  the
     Appellant would conduct  himself  in  a  similar  fashion  ever  again.
     Furthermore, there is no evidence that a resuscitated ETA would conduct
     terrorist operations in, or affecting, the United Kingdom.

     The Forged Travel Documents

101. Next, we turn to the subject of forged documents.   Based  on  all  the
     evidence before the Tribunal, we accept Ms Dubinsky's  submission  that
     the Appellant's initial use of forged identity documents was  motivated
     by his flight from the real threat  of  further  incarceration  by  the
     Spanish authorities which, in light of the ECtHR decision  in  Del  Rio
     Prada, would  have  been  unlawful.  There  was  no  other  conceivable
     purpose, taking into account the Appellant's history as a whole.

102. We next focus on  the  evidence  bearing  on  the  Appellant's  alleged
     possession  of  similar  documents  at  the  time  of  his  arrest.  Ms
     Anderson's submission was that the Appellant possessed  such  documents
     for the purpose of deceiving the United  Kingdom  authorities.  We  can
     identify no evidential foundation for  this  submission.  There  is  no
     primary evidence of such (or any) purpose and none from which this  can
     reliably be inferred.  Furthermore, and notably, it does not feature in
     the impugned decision of the Secretary of State: see [6] -  [9]  above.
     We accept in  principle  that  immigration  document  fraud  could,  in
     certain circumstances, satisfy, or contribute to satisfying,  the  test
     enshrined in Regulation 21(5)(c).  Everything would depend upon  scale,
     impact, motive, context and the relevant prevailing  public  interests,
     bearing in mind that these are not immutable.

103.  We  make  two  conclusions  in  this  respect.   First,  there  is  no
     evidential foundation warranting the assessment that by reason  of  the
     Appellant's past conduct involving the use  and  possession  of  forged
     identity documents he poses a genuine, present and sufficiently serious
     threat affecting  one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of  the  United
     Kingdom.  Based on all the evidence, the most likely future scenario is
     that the Appellant will have no presence in, interest in or  connection
     of any kind with the United Kingdom which is not innocuous. If he  were
     to attempt to enter the United Kingdom or to resume  his  residence  in
     this jurisdiction, the evidential foundation for  concluding  that  the
     statutory test is satisfied is, in our view, clearly lacking.

104. The evidence on this issue, neither directly nor  inferentially,  fails
     to pass muster and the Secretary of State's case,  in  certain  of  its
     aspects, resorts to  bare  assertion  and  mere  speculation.  This  is
     exemplified by the suggestion that the Appellant might in  the  future,
     in the language of counsel's skeleton argument, engage in  "...   using
     his knowledge and potential  access  to  weapons  to  commit  crime  to
     finance  further  'legitimate'  or  illegitimate  activities  by   this
     proscribed  organisation  or  activities  pursuing  his  own   personal
     interests".  A further illustration of this is the assertion  that  the
     Appellant  engaged  in  "...    aiding  a  fugitive  to  evade  the  UK
     authorities".   A third example is provided by the suggestion that  the
     Appellant predictably would breach  United  Kingdom  laws  if  he  "...
     considered it  was  in  his  interests  to  [do  so]".   All  of  these
     suggestions, in addition to constituting bare  assertion,  suffer  from
     the  further  infirmities  of  neglecting  the  context  in  which  the
     Appellant's past conduct occurred, the markedly changed  circumstances,
     the absence of any discernible motive to re-engage in  similar  conduct
     and the current realities generally.

     The Reluctant Witness

105. The various assessments  and  conclusions  set  forth  above  are  made
     without reference to the Appellant's  written  evidence.   Ms  Anderson
     properly highlighted that this has not been tested by cross examination
     at any stage.  We further take into account that it is more  likely  to
     be  self-serving  than  not.   The  two  particular  features  of   the
     Appellant's conduct, in this discrete context, are his failure to  give
     evidence at any stage of these proceedings and his earlier  refusal  to
     engage with the Home Office proposal that he be  interviewed.  We  have
     considered all of the evidence bearing on these two issues. Having done
     so, we do not consider that any inference adverse to the  Appellant  is
     appropriate. In particular, in the language of section 8(3)(e)  of  the
     2004 Act, we are not persuaded that this behaviour  falls  within  "...
     designed or likely to conceal  information  or  to  mislead".   In  our
     judgment, this exacting test is  not  satisfied.   This  assessment  is
     based on our evaluation of the evidence as  a  whole.   It  is  further
     informed by the factors of strategy (generally), litigation tactics and
     legal advice.  The evidence, expressly  or  by  inference,  establishes
     that all of these factors formed part of this discrete equation.

106. We also take into account Ms Andersons' submission relating to what  is
     not contained in the Appellant's witness statement: no acceptance  that
     he was  a  terrorist  who  perpetrated  horrendous  offences  that  are
     inherently unjustifiable; no acceptance of culpability;  no  expression
     of apology or genuine remorse;  and  no  acknowledgement  of  breaching
     United Kingdom laws in the matter of  the  forged  identity  documents.
     This submission is well made. However, it does not deflect us from  our
     evaluative   assessments   and    conclusions    above.    Furthermore,
     protestations of this kind would have been scrupulously analysed by the
     Tribunal through the "possible self-serving" lens and would  have  been
     unlikely to attract any significant weight.

    The "Bouchereau" Exception

107. At the error of law stage  the  Appellant  argued  that  the  exception
     established by the Court of Justice in Case 30/77 Bouchereau [1978]  QB
     732 at 29, which was applied by the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Marchon  v
     Immigration Appeal Tribunal [1993] Imm AR 384, does not  represent  the
     current state of EU law having been displaced by  Case  C-340/97  Nazli
     and the Citizens Directive.  The Appellant further argued that if  this
     were not considered acte clair, a reference should be made to the Court
     of Justice.  The Respondent disputed that Bouchereau was a  live  issue
     or that any reference was necessary and submitted that  the  Bouchereau
     exception and Ex parte Marchon remained good law. The Tribunal received
     detailed submissions on these issues.

108.   At the second stage hearing,the parties' submissions  on  this  issue
     were not repeated in any detail and the  Appellant  invited  the  Upper
     Tribunal  to  follow  its   intervening   decision   in   SSHD   v   CS
     (DA/00146/2013,  currently  unreported)  at  [89]  -  [108]).We   refer
     particularly to [108] of CS:

         "Drawing together the various strands we summarise  our  evaluation
         of the Bouchereau decision in these terms.  First,  the  conclusion
         expressed in [29] is prima  facie  irreconcilable  with  the  clear
         language of Article  3(2)  of  the  1964  Directive.   Second,  the
         reasoning underpinning the conclusion is sparse and opaque.  Third,
         the conclusion cannot be readily linked to either the  argument  of
         the United Kingdom Government  or  the  opinion  of  the  Advocate-
         General. Fourth, neither the legal regime to which  the  Bouchereau
         decision belongs nor its modern incarnation has any application  to
         the expulsion of third country nationals such  as  the  Respondent.
         Finally, in our judgment, the Bouchereau principle has not survived
         the advent of Article 20 TFEU and the Citizens'  Directive,  either
         singly or in combination."



     We can identify no good reason not to follow CS. Accordingly we resolve
     this issue in the Appellant's favour.

    Omnibus Conclusion

109. On the grounds and for the reasons elaborated above  the  Secretary  of
     State has failed to discharge the burden of establishing on the balance
     of probabilities that the Appellant, by reason of the various  elements
     of his past conduct identified in [94] above,  considered  individually
     or as a whole, represents a genuine, present and  sufficiently  serious
     threat affecting one of the fundamental  interests  of  United  Kingdom
     society. We consider  that  the  evidence  falls  measurably  short  of
     satisfying this  exacting  test.  It  follows  that  this  appeal  must
     succeed.

110. The decision of the FtT has been set aside previously.  We remake  such
     decision allowing the appeal.

















                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

          PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                                                          Date:  30 May 2017
