
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

TPN (FtT appeals - withdrawal) Vietnam [2017] UKUT 00295 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision Promulgated          |
|On 14 March 2017                             |On 21 July 2017               |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                THE PRESIDENT, THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

                                   Between

                                     TPN
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr J Packer, Advocate, of Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr J Jollife, of counsel, instructed by Government
Legal Department

 i) The public law character of appeals to the  FtT  is  reflected  in  the
    regulatory requirement governing the withdrawal  of  appeals  that  any
    proposed withdrawal of an appeal  must  contain  the  reasons  for  the
    course mooted and must be judicially scrutinised, per rule  17  of  the
    FtT Rules and rule 17 of the Upper Tribunal Rules.


ii) Judicial evaluation of both the withdrawal of an appellant's appeal and
    the withdrawal of the Secretary of State's case or appeal is required.


iii) Every judicial determination of an appellant's proposal to withdraw  an
    appeal or the Secretary of State's  proposal  to  withdraw  requires  a
    brief outline of the reasons for the decision.    The  purpose  of  the
    judicial scrutiny is to ensure that the appeal is  being  properly  and
    correctly withdrawn.

iv) Judicial scrutiny will normally result in the mooted withdrawal of  the
    appeal being perfected by transmission of the  notice  to  the  parties
    required by Rule 17(iii).  However, this will not occur  automatically:
    for example where the proposed withdrawal lacks coherence or  is  based
    on a clear material misunderstanding or misconception.


 v) The outcome of the judicial scrutiny should be briefly reasoned.

vi) Rule 29 of the FtT Rules is confined to the  substantive  determination
    of appeals.

vii) The power of the  FtT  to  set  aside  a  decision  under  Rule  32  is
    exercisable only by the FtT President and the Resident Judges.

viii) In cases where an unsuccessful appellant has a choice,  best  practice
    dictates that an application to set aside the impugned decision of  the
    FtT under Rule 32 be first exhausted in advance of the lodgement of  an
    application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  Where both
    species of challenge are lodged simultaneously, it will be sensible  to
    assign them to the same Judge where feasible.


                                  DECISION

Introduction

 1. This appeal raises certain questions of some importance relating to the
    withdrawal of appeals  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  ("FtT")  and,  in
    particular, the judicial role and responsibility in this process.


The FtT Hearing


 2. Before the FtT, counsel representing the Appellant sought  to  withdraw
    his client's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent,  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department (the "Secretary of  State"),
    whereby the application for asylum of  the  Appellant,  a  national  of
    Vietnam now aged 13 years, was  refused.   The  assembled  evidence  is
    sufficiently satisfactory and in its  key  aspects  uncontroversial  to
    enable the following outline of events in the FtT to be formulated:


      a) As indicated, the Appellant,  a  minor  then  aged  13  years,  was
         represented by counsel instructed by  the  Appellant's  solicitors.
         There was also a representative of the  instructing  solicitors  in
         attendance.  Counsel was centrally involved  in  the  events  which
         unfolded.


      b)  The  actions  of  counsel  were  evidently  precipitated   by   an
         intervention on the part of the FtT Judge unfavourable in terms  to
         the merits of the appeal.  What counsel did was  clearly  motivated
         by this.


      c) Counsel then applied to have the appeal withdrawn. No reasons  were
         provided. The FtT Judge sanctioned this course.


      d) Counsel did not have the authority of either the Appellant  or  any
         duly authorised agent of the Appellant for this course.


 3. The salient aspects of the FtT Judge's conduct of the hearing at  first
    instance are outlined above.  To this summary it is  necessary  to  add
    one further feature of some significance.  The outcome of  the  hearing
    was not recorded in any order, decision or other document  bearing  the
    Judge's name or signed by the Judge.  It was,  rather,  recorded  in  a
    HMCTS pro-forma (Form IA55), dated 24 November  2016  (six  days  post-
    hearing) and addressed to the Appellant's  solicitors.   This  document
    contains all the basic, formal details pertaining to  the  appeal  and,
    under the rubric "Notice", states:


         "The appellant was represented at the hearing, his Counsel took the
         view to withdraw perfectly and legitimately, in these circumstances
         there is nothing for the tribunal to do.  Solicitors should take it
         up with Counsel."


    This form makes provision for signature by the "Clerk to the First-tier
    Tribunal".  However, it  bears  no  person's  signature.  As  the  text
    reproduced above indicates, the document was completed  reactively  and
    retrospectively.


 4. The context in which the aforementioned Form IA55 was completed becomes
    clear when one identifies what preceded and precipitated it,  namely  a
    letter dated 18 November from the Appellant's  solicitors  to  the  FtT
    "for the attention of" the Judge concerned.  This  states,  so  far  as
    material:


         "We write further to the above matter and the full  hearing  listed
         today that was withdrawn by Counsel ....


         We hereby confirm that we were not consulted about  this.   Counsel
         withdrew the appeal without our authorisation ......


         The Appellant had his foster carer, his social worker,  the  foster
         carer's senior social worker and another witness all in attendance.
         .......


         We submit that for something as important as an  asylum  and  human
         right's appeal for an unaccompanied minor, aged 13  years  old,  we
         would not have withdrawn his appeal in those circumstances."


    The letter then raises the issue of the decision being set aside  under
    Rule 32 (infra) on the basis that this would be  in  the  interests  of
    justice or on the ground  of  procedural  irregularity.   The  response
    which this stimulated, in Form IA55, does  not  address  this  discrete
    application and does not purport to determine it.  This is unfortunate,
    not least because of  the  clear  indications  that  the  response  was
    prepared either by or under the direction of the Judge concerned.


 5. I interpose the  following  at  this  juncture.   Initially  Instructed
    counsel has not had instructions to represent the Appellant  since  the
    FtT hearing.  Counsel has, however, clearly been most cooperative  and,
    so far  as  I  can  determine,  candid  in  his  interaction  with  the
    Appellant's solicitors. This is deserving of some credit, in a  context
    of professional embarrassment and possible disciplinary action. If  and
    insofar as there is any enquiry into the events summarised in [2] above
    in another forum, I emphasise two things.  First, this summary is based
    on the evidence available  to  this  tribunal.   Second,  it  does  not
    purport to bind any other court or tribunal and, as a  matter  of  law,
    does not have this effect in any event.


Appeal to this Tribunal


 6. Permission to appeal to this Tribunal was,  properly,  granted  in  the
    following terms:


         "The grounds requesting permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal
         argue that the Judge erred in allowing the withdrawal ...


         It is arguable that the Judge committed or permitted  a  procedural
         or other irregularity".


    As a result of the case management  steps  taken  in  this  forum,  the
    issues have crystallised and, ultimately, clear and focussed arguments,
    both written and oral, by Mr Packer (on behalf of the Appellant) and Mr
    Jolliffe (on behalf of the Secretary of State) have been presented.   I
    commend both representatives for the quality of their written and  oral
    advocacy.


The FtT Procedural Rules


 7. The following are the salient  provisions  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014  (the
    "FtT Procedural Rules").  I begin with the overriding objective  which,
    by no coincidence, sits proudly at the apex of this  regulatory  regime
    and requires neither introduction nor reproduction for the purposes  of
    this decision: see Rule 2.  Next, I highlight the  broad  and  flexible
    case management powers enshrined in Rule 4 and the equally wide ranging
    directions provisions of Rule 5.  It is also appropriate to  take  into
    account Rule 6(1), which provides:

         "An irregularity resulting from a failure to comply with any
         requirement in these Rules, a practice direction or a direction
         does not of itself render void the proceedings or any step taken in
         the proceedings."

 8. The withdrawal of appeals to the FtT is regulated by certain  specially
    tailored provisions.  Rule 17 is the main vehicle:

      "(i) A party may give notice of the withdrawal of their appeal-


             (a) by providing to the Tribunal a written notice of
          withdrawal of the appeal; or
             (b) orally at a hearing, and in either case must specify the
             reasons for that withdrawal.

         (ii) The Tribunal must (save for good reason) treat an appeal as
         withdrawn if the respondent notifies the Tribunal and each other
         party that the decision (or, where the appeal relates to more than
         one decision, all of the decisions) to which the appeal relates has
         been withdrawn and specifies the reasons for the withdrawal of the
         decision.

         (iii) The Tribunal must notify each party in writing that a
         withdrawal has taken effect under this rule and that the
         proceedings are no longer regarded by the Tribunal as pending."

    Rule 29 provides:

         "(i) The Tribunal may give a decision orally at a hearing.

          (ii)     Subject to rule 13(2) (withholding information likely to
             cause serious harm), the     Tribunal must provide to each
             party as soon as reasonably practicable after making a
             decision (other than a decision under Part 4) which disposes
             of the proceedings-


                  (a) a notice of decision stating the Tribunal's decision;
             and
                  (b) notification of any right of appeal against the
                  decision and the time within which, and the manner in
                  which, such right of appeal may be exercised.

          (iii)    Where the decision of the Tribunal relates to-


                  (a) an asylum claim or a humanitarian protection claim,
                  the Tribunal must provide, with the notice of decision in
                  paragraph (2)(a), written reasons for its decision;
                  (b) any other matter, the Tribunal may provide written
                  reasons for its decision but, if it does not do so, must
                  notify the parties of the right to apply for a written
                  statement of reasons.


         (iv)     Unless the Tribunal has already provided a written
             statement of reasons, a party may make a written application
             to the Tribunal for such statement following a decision which
             disposes of the proceedings.


         (v)   An application under paragraph (4) must be received within 28
             days of the date on which the Tribunal sent or otherwise
             provided to the party a notice of decision relating to the
             decision which disposes of the proceedings."

    Finally, it is necessary to  consider  the  provisions  concerning  the
    setting aside of a decision which disposes of proceedings.   These  are
    contained in Rule 32, which provides:

         (i)  The Tribunal may set aside a decision which disposes of
             proceedings, or part of such a decision, and re-make the
             decision, or the relevant part of it, if-

                  (a) the Tribunal considers that it is in the interests of
             justice to do so; and
                  (b) one or more of the conditions in paragraph (2) are
             satisfied.

         (ii)     The conditions are-

                  (a) a document relating to the proceedings was not
                  provided to, or was not received at an appropriate time
                  by, a party or a party's representative;
                  (b) a document relating to the proceedings was not
                  provided to the Tribunal at an appropriate time;
                  (c) a party, or a party's representative, was not present
                  at a hearing related to the proceedings; or
                  (d) there has been some other procedural irregularity in
             the proceedings.

         (iii)    An application for a decision or part of a decision, to be
             set aside under paragraph (1) must be made-

                  (a) if the appellant is outside the United Kingdom, within
             28 days; or
                  (b) in any other case, within 14 days,
                  of the date on which the party was sent the notice of
             decision."

 9. While the FtT Procedural Rules contain nothing further of significance,
    I would mention also in this context  paragraph  [15]  of  Presidential
    Guidance Note No. 1 of 2014 which, under the rubric of  "Withdrawal  by
    the Appellant", states:

          "Where an appellant seeks to withdraw an appeal in terms  of  rule
         17, provided the Tribunal is satisfied that the appellant is  doing
         so freely and understands the consequences of the  withdrawal,  the
         Tribunal will be satisfied that the appeal is withdrawn.  Where  an
         appellant is legally represented and the  request  to  withdraw  is
         made by the representative,  the  Tribunal  will  assume  that  the
         representative has explained the consequences of the action to  the
         appellant and that this is the intention of the appellant."

    As I shall explain infra,  I  consider  this  statement  to  faithfully
    reflect the  correct  construction  of  Rule  17  and  its  discernible
    underlying intention.

10. At this juncture I draw attention to certain provisions of Presidential
    Guidance Note No1 of 2014, an instrument of the President of  the  FtT.
    This  coincided  with  the  new  FtT  procedural  rules,  which  became
    operative on 20 October  2014.   Under  the  rubric  of  "Withdrawals",
    paragraph 15 states:


         "Where an appellant seeks to withdraw an appeal in  terms  of  rule
         17, provided the Tribunal is satisfied that the appellant is  doing
         so freely and understands the consequences of the  withdrawal,  the
         Tribunal will be satisfied that the appeal is withdrawn.  Where  an
         appellant is legally represented and the  request  to  withdraw  is
         made by the representative,  the  Tribunal  will  assume  that  the
         representative has explained the consequences of the action to  the
         appellant and that this is the intention of the appellant."


     This passage is directed exclusively to withdrawals by the appellant.


11. Paragraphs 16 - 20 of the Presidential Guidance Note are concerned with
    the separate, though related, topic of withdrawal by the respondent  of
    the decision challenged by the extant appeal. Notably,  and  correctly,
    the procedural rights of the appellant  are  explicitly  recognised  by
    paragraph 17:


         "Where the respondent withdraws the decision no later than 21  days
         prior to the hearing (28 days for out of country appeals), a notice
         will be sent to the appellant asking if there is  good  reason  why
         the appeal should not be treated as withdrawn.  If  a  response  is
         received, or the time for replying expires without a response, then
         a Judge will be asked to decide if the appeal should be treated  as
         withdrawn.  If there is insufficient time to consult the  appellant
         prior to the hearing, then the question of whether the appeal  will
         be treated as withdrawn will be considered at the hearing."


    Paragraphs 16 and 18 - 20  summarise  carefully  and  accurately,  with
    little  elaboration,  the  explicit  requirements  of  the  constituent
    elements of Rule 17.


12. The framework of this appeal is completed by certain provisions of  the
    Bar  Standards  Board  ("BSB")  Code  of  Conduct  and  its  Solicitors
    Regulatory Authority ("SRA") cousin. I consider it appropriate to  draw
    attention to these since their form part  of  the  broader  context  in
    which the FtT Procedural Rules  were  devised.   They  may,  therefore,
    provide some guidance  in  the  exercise  of  construing  the  material
    provisions of the Rules which, in turn, will involve  ascertaining  the
    intention underlying some of their provisions. Thus  some  illumination
    may be obtainable from this source.


13. The attributes  of  integrity,  competence,  honesty  and  independence
    coarse through the veins of both  the  BSB  Code  and  its  solicitor's
    counterpart (infra). From the perspective of this appeal the  BSB  Code
    contains the following material provisions:


         The Core Duties


         "You must observe your duty to the Court in the  administration  of
         justice .................


         You must act in the best interests of each client.


         You must act with honesty and integrity ...


         You must provide a competent standard of work and service  to  each
         client. "


     These are four of the ten core duties.


14. Part C of the BSB Code comprises "The Conduct  Rules".   The  first  of
    these rules is:


         "The Court is able to rely on information provided to it  by  those
         conducting litigation and by advocates who appear before it."


     The 2nd and 3rd rules are, respectively:


         "The proper administration of justice is served ....


         The interests of clients are protected  to  the  extent  compatible
         with outcomes C1 and C2 and the Core duties."


     The 7th rule is framed thus:


         "The proper administration of justice, access to  justice  and  the
         best interests of clients are served."


  15. There is a discrete section prescribing specific duties  owed  to  the
      client.  These include the following:


         "Clients receive a competent standard of work and service .....


         Client's bests interests  are  protected  and  promoted  by  those
    acting for them ....


              Care is taken to  ensure  that  the  interests  of  vulnerable
         clients are taken into account and their needs are met."


     [Client duties numbers 10, 11 and 14.]


    Conduct rule 15 provides:


         "Your duty to act in the best interests of each client, to  provide
         a competent standard of work and service to each client and to keep
         the affairs of each  client  confidential  includes  the  following
         obligations:


         (1)  You must promote fearlessly and by all proper and lawful means
             the client's best interests.


         (2)  You must do so without regard to your own interests or to  any
             consequences to you ..."


    Conduct rule 17 prescribes "a duty to  consider  whether  the  client's
    best interests are served by different legal representation and, if so,
    to advise the client to that effect".


16. As regards solicitors, there are certain  material  provisions  in  the
    Solicitors Regulation Authority  "Mandatory Principles", namely:

    (i)  To uphold the rule of law and the proper administration of justice
    (ii)     To act with integrity
    (iii)    To not allow your independence to be compromised
    (iv) To act in the best interests of each client
    (v)  To provide a proper standard of service to your clients.

    The two professional codes of conduct and  ethics  are  not  framed  in
    identical terms.  However,  I  consider  their  substance,  thrust  and
    overarching aims to be materially indistinguishable.


Consideration and Conclusions


17. In order determine the issues raised in this appeal it is necessary  to
    construe certain provisions of the FtT procedural  rules.   No  special
    principles fall to be applied  in  this  exercise.   Three  overarching
    principles, each of them orthodox,  are,  in  my  estimation,  engaged.
    First, it is necessary to ascertain  the intention of the agency  which
    made the Rules, namely the Tribunal  Procedure   Committee  ("TPC"),  a
    specialist body which draws on the expertise of,  inter  alios,  judges
    hailing from various corners of the world  of  tribunals.   Second,  it
    will normally be appropriate to ascribe to the words of any rule  their
    ordinary and natural meaning.  Third, regard should be had to the  full
    context, as I have highlighted in [10] above.


18. Rule 17 of the FtT Procedural Rules  establishes  two   mechanisms  for
    withdrawing an appeal, namely the provision  of  a  written  notice  of
    withdrawal or oral withdrawal at a hearing. I consider  that  the  rule
    makers clearly had two  distinct  scenarios  in  contemplation,  namely
    withdrawal in advance of a hearing, in writing and  withdrawal  on  the
    day of hearing.  In both instances, the central stipulation in rule  17
    is uncompromising.  The reasons for the withdrawal "must" be specified.
      This  is  expressed  as  a  mandatory  requirement,  subject  to   no
    exceptions.


19. This mandatory requirement points up and reflects some of the hallmarks
    of  tribunal  litigation.   Proceedings  in   tribunals   involve   the
    determination of the respective legal rights  and  obligations  of  the
    citizen and the State.  The administration of justice in tribunals has,
    by long established tradition and culture,  been  designed  to  provide
    swift, uncomplicated and inexpensive adjudication.  Litigants sometimes
    have  no  legal  advice  or  representation  and,  on  occasion,   have
    representatives who may not necessarily  be  appropriately  skilled  or
    experienced  in  the  relevant  field  of  law.  Furthermore,  tribunal
    litigation, particularly in  the  discrete  field  of  immigration  and
    asylum, does not lend itself to the consensual resolution mechanisms of
    mediation or other forms of conciliation. Finally, at  the  first  tier
    level, the appellant is always the citizen.


20. I consider that the TPC would have been alert to the  various  features
    of Tribunal proceedings highlighted above in  devising  Rule  17.   The
    Committee was, presumptively, operating in the real world  of  tribunal
    proceedings. In my judgement many of the  factors  highlighted  explain
    why the TPC considered  judicial oversight and  decision  necessary  in
    the matter of withdrawing appeals. Furthermore the  TPC,  in  my  view,
    clearly had in contemplation the need for judicial  evaluation  of  the
    question  of  whether  the  Secretary  of  State's  withdrawal  of  the
    underlying  decision  should   not   operate   to   preclude   judicial
    adjudication of for example an  important  issue  of  legal  principle,
    statutory construction or practice  and  procedure.   Fundamentally,  I
    consider that rule  17  envisages  and  requires  active  and  properly
    informed judicial involvement and decision making.


21. I develop this analysis as  follows.   The  phrase  "the  Tribunal"  is
    employed several times in the Rule 17 regime.  Indeed -  unsurprisingly
    - it appears repeatedly throughout the  FtT  Procedural  Rules.  It  is
    undefined. In some contexts, "the Tribunal" denotes the  administrative
    organisation of  this  judicialised  entity.   In  others,  it  plainly
    denotes a judge  of  the  Tribunal.   Rule  17  provides  a  convenient
    illustration of this important distinction.  The requirement to provide
    to the Tribunal a written notice - enshrined in Rule 17(1)(a) - clearly
    entails the provision  of  the  document  required  to  the  Tribunal's
    administration in the ordinary case.  Similarly, the  duty  imposed  on
    "the Tribunal" to provide  the  notification  required  by  Rule  17(3)
    clearly envisages an act on the part of the Tribunal's  administration.
    However, I consider that in all other material respects the words  "the
    Tribunal" in Rule 17, denote a judge of the FtT.


22. I elaborate on the above analysis in my outline of what Rule  17  means
    and requires, most conveniently formulated in tabular form:


      i) An appeal can only be withdrawn by, or on behalf of, the appellant.






     ii) The requirement to provide the tribunal with the reasons in support
         of a proposed withdrawal  clearly  envisages  that  there  will  be
         judicial consideration.




    iii) If reasons are not  provided,  proper  judicial  consideration  and
         oversight are not possible.




     iv) The combined effect of the notice provisions  in  Rule  17(i),  the
         requirement of judicial oversight in Rule 17(ii) and the notice  to
         be given in accordance with Rule 17(iii) is that the  notice  given
         by the appellant is the  first  step  in  the  Rule  17  withdrawal
         process.




      v) The best guidance available to the FtT  judge  in  performing  this
         function is what is contained in  the  Presidential  Guidance  Note
         (supra):  the  judge  must  be  satisfied  that  the  appellant  is
         withdrawing the appeal freely and understands the  consequences  of
         withdrawal.  This  will  not  be  so  if,  for  example,  it  lacks
         coherence  or  is  based  on   a   material   misunderstanding   or
         misconception.




     vi) In practice, enhanced judicial vigilance is likely to  be  required
         in cases where the appellant is unrepresented.




    vii) The reasons must be such as to persuade  the  FtT  Judge  that  the
         course proposed is appropriate.




   viii) In determining whether withdrawal is appropriate,  the  Judge  will
         take into account (inexhaustively) that Tribunal proceedings do not
         partake of the essential  characteristics  of  private  law  inter-
         partes litigation, with the result  that  withdrawal  requires,  in
         effect, judicial adjudication.




     ix) Fundamentally, the FtT Judge must be satisfied that there  is  good
         reason for the withdrawal.




      x) There is no obligation on the FtT Judge  to  approve  the  proposed
         withdrawal. Quite the reverse: Rule 17 plainly contemplates that  a
         proposal to withdraw may be refused.




     xi) Fundamentally, where the withdrawal of an appeal is proposed,  this
         takes the form of  an  application  to  the  tribunal  requiring  a
         judicial decision.




23. The exercise of juxtaposing Rule 17(i) and (ii) is instructive.   Their
    phraseology is not identical.  However, I consider that, in  substance,
    they are indistinguishable.  In both cases notice must  be  given,  the
    notice must incorporate reasons, judicial scrutiny is then applied  and
    the appropriate outcome follows. Withdrawal of the  appeal  is  neither
    automatic nor preordained. I consider  that  in  both  cases  the  main
    purpose of judicial scrutiny is to protect the appellant.  It  has  the
    further purpose of enabling detection of any misuse of the  process  of
    the Tribunal. Each of these purposes furthers the public interest.


24. The above analysis is fortified by the free standing provision in  Rule
    17(2) which is directed to the scenario where the  Secretary  of  State
    decides to withdraw the decision under appeal.  A decision of this kind
    is not binding on the FtT.  Rather, it too requires judicial  oversight
    and decision. This will entail scrutinising the reasons given  for  the
    withdrawal of the underlying decision and  the  evaluation  of  whether
    there is "good reason" not to permit the withdrawal of the appeal.


25. Thus every withdrawal of an appeal under Rule 17  requires  a  judicial
    decision. I can finding nothing in either the language of the  Rule  or
    the ascertainable underlying intention pointing to any other persuasive
    analysis or construction.  The next question which I address is whether
    Rule 29 of the FtT Procedural Rules  applies  to  a  judicial  decision
    under Rule 17.  Rule 29 requires that a formal notice of decision  must
    be provided.  Where (as  in  the  present  case)  an  asylum  claim  or
    humanitarian protection claim is involved, this notice must incorporate
    or annex "written reasons for its decision" - per  Rule  29(3)(a).   In
    all other cases, the FtT must either provide written reasons or  notify
    the parties of their right to apply for same - per Rule 29(3)(b).


26. Notably, Rule 17 contains no  reference  to  Rule  29,  while  Rule  29
    contains no reference to  Rule  17.   The  analysis  that  Rule  29  is
    directed to the substantive determination of appeals is  readily  made.
    In my judgment, the contemplation of the TPC was  that  Rule  17  would
    operate  as  a  discrete,  free  standing  regime.   This  analysis  is
    fortified by the significant contrast between Rule 17(3) and Rule 29(3)
    and (6).  Thus the question ultimately becomes: what  does  Rule  17(3)
    require?  Given my conclusion that the "notification" mandated by  Rule
    17(3) must be the product of judicial consideration and decision, it is
    impossible to escape the further conclusion that the notice to be given
    under Rule 17(3) must be  composed,  signed  and  dated  by  the  Judge
    concerned.   Second,  having  regard  to  the  common  law   principles
    rehearsed in extenso in MK (Duty to Give Reasons) Pakistan [2013]  UKUT
    641 (IAC) I consider that the judicially composed  notice  of  decision
    under Rule 17(3) must contain an outline of why the decision  has  been
    made. The TPC, in my  estimation,  cannot  have  contemplated  a  bare,
    perfunctory, conclusionary pro-forma.


27. What, in principle, will this require  of  the  Judge?   Context  being
    everything, one immediately contrasts a decision of this genre with the
    substantive determination of an  appeal.  The  key  to  answering  this
    rhetorical question lies mainly, in the requirement enshrined  in  Rule
    17(1)(b) that the "reasons" for the proposed withdrawal be provided  by
    the moving party.  I consider that, in all cases, the  notice  required
    by Rule 17(3) should explain why the FtT has decided that  the  reasons
    put forward are sufficient and satisfactory - or, as the case  may  be,
    are not.  In the typical case nothing elaborate  or  unduly  burdensome
    will be required of the Judge. Precisely the same analysis applies to a
    Notice of Decision  under  Rule  17(3)  belonging  to  the  Rule  17(2)
    scenario viz withdrawal by the Secretary of  State  of  the  underlying
    decision.


28. I apply my construction of Rule 17 to the factual matrix of this appeal
    in the following way.  I do not accept that bare  pro-forma  notice  to
    the Appellant and his legal representatives in the form which was  sent
    in this case was compliant with either the letter or the spirit of  the
    FtT Procedural Rules.  The reason for that is  that  neither  discloses
    any proper  judicial  consideration  or  any  proper  judicial  act  or
    judicial decision. Added  to  this  the  elementary  requirement  of  a
    judicial signature has not been observed.  The decision of the  FtT  is
    unsustainable in law  on  this  ground  alone.   It  suffers  from  the
    further, free standing infirmity that, in contravention of Rule 17,  no
    reasons for the proposed withdrawal of the appeal  were  provided.   It
    must be set aside in consequence.


29. The broader point of practice raised  by  this  appeal  is  whether  an
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal in this kind of context is appropriate.  I
    am satisfied that it is. What occurred at first instance was in  breach
    of the express and implied requirements of the Rules to the extent that
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is unsustainable in law.   That
    per se renders it vulnerable  to  challenge  on  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  The related point of practice raised is whether  one  has  a
    choice between appealing to the Upper  Tribunal  and  applying  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for an order setting aside the decision under  Rule
    32.  My decision on that issue is as follows.


30. In this context it is necessary to be alert to the  Practice  Statement
    of the Senior President of Tribunals dated 13 November 2014.  This,  in
    recognition of the important consequences  flowing  from  a  set  aside
    decision under Rule 32, confines this power to the  FtT  President  and
    the various Resident Judges.  From  this  it  follows  that  individual
    Judges throughout the regions must be  alert  to  refer  cases  to  the
    Resident Judge where appropriate.  It is worth emphasising  that  Rules
    32 - 36 must be considered in unison.  Rule 36, a paradigm illustration
    of a sensible procedural provision in the world of Tribunal litigation,
    is of particular importance.  It is also appropriate to  highlight  the
    distinction between the setting aside discretionary power contained  in
    Rule 32 and the separate,  self-contained  discretionary  review  power
    contained in Rules 34  and  35.   It  is  probably  uncontroversial  to
    suggest that a heightened alertness to the  setting  aside  and  review
    powers of the FtT will reduce the number of  grants  of  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal.


31. Rule 32, which is rooted in section 9  of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007, provides an alternative to an appeal  in  certain
    prescribed circumstances.  That option is available if and only if  the
    conditions enshrined in Rule 32 [2] are  satisfied.   These  conditions
    are rehearsed in disjunctive terms.  In the case of the present kind  I
    accept Mr Jollife's submission that Rule 32(2)(d)  namely  "some  other
    procedural irregularity in the proceedings" is  engaged.  However,  the
    breadth and elasticity of Rule 32(1)(a) ("the Tribunal  considers  that
    it is in the interests of justice to do so") must be acknowledged.   It
    seems to me that this provision is also engaged in the context of  this
    appeal.

32. A right of appeal to the Upper Tribunal is conferred by statute. It  is
    correctly characterised as a right to apply for permission to appeal to
    the  second  instance  level:  see  VOM  [2016]  UKUT  410  (IAC).  Any
    curtailment or limitation on the exercise of that right must be evident
    in the statutory language  provided.   There  is   no   curtailment  or
    limitation, express or to be  implied,  in  section  11  of  the   2007
    statute (supra) to the effect that an appellant must exhaust  the  Rule
    32 option before pursuing an appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

33.  It follows that in a context such as the present an  appellant  has  a
    choice.  Best practice dictates that  the  Rule  32  avenue  should  be
    pursued first, principally it  is  a  quicker  and  cheaper  mechanism.
    However, a failure to  observe  best  practice  does  not  deprive  the
    Appellant of their statutory right of seeking to pursue  an  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal asserting an arguable error of law in  the  decision
    in question.  That threshold will be judicially determined, as in every
    case, by an application for permission to appeal.  In  cases  of  doubt
    representatives may wish to adopt the cautious course of making an  in-
    time application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  whilst
    simultaneously applying to the FtT to set aside its decision under Rule
    32 within the time limit specified.  The former application should make
    clear that adjudication thereon will not  be  required  if  the  latter
    application is determined in a manner suitable to the  Appellant.   The
    appropriate choreography will be for the FtT to determine the  Rule  32
    application first.  At  a  practical  level,  the  assignment  of  both
    applications to the same Judge would make much sense.



DECISION

34. I conclude that the breaches of the express and implied requirements of
    Rule 17  identified  above  constitute  material  errors  of  law.  The
    decision of the FtT is set aside in consequence.  I remit the appeal to
    a different constitution of the FtT for rehearing.




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal)  Rules 2008

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






                                                                       [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                                                      Date:     05 June 2017
