
IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

R (on the application of RA) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
IJR [2015] UKUT 00292 (IAC)


                                                                 Field House
                                                                      London


                                                               13 April 2015

                                   Before

                     THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE CRANSTON
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

                       The QUEEN ON The application OF
                                     R A

                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
                               - - - - - - - -

Ms Harrison and Ms Cronin, instructed by Bhatt  Murphy  Solicitors  appeared
on behalf of the Applicant.

Ms Rhee and Ms  McArdle,  instructed  by  the  Government  Legal  Department
appeared on behalf of the Respondent.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                                  JUDGMENT

                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    MR JUSTICE CRANSTON: This is an application for the return of  a  child
    and her mother to this country following our judgment in Queen  on  the
    application of R A, a child, by his litigation friend, v the  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2015]  UKUT  00242  (IAC).   In  that
    judgment we held that the Secretary of State in making  a  decision  on
    representations that there was no fresh claim was in breach of her duty
    under Section 55 of the UK Borders Act  in  not  considering  the  best
    interests of the child R A.  On behalf of R A Ms Harrison has submitted
    that R A and her mother should be returned to the United Kingdom  since
    in the light of our decision he was removed to Nigeria unlawfully.  She
    advanced a number of points derived from the  authorities  and  against
    the background of the facts of this case  which  she  submitted  should
    lead to an order in favour of return.

 2. First of all there was the issue of legality of removal, then there was
    the issue of vindicating the rights which R A has or had, in particular
    under the Human  Rights  Act  of  1998,  and  thirdly  there  were  the
    practical issues of any out of  country  appeal.   A  large  number  of
    authorities were cited to us but in our view there is  no  need  to  go
    beyond the Court of Appeal authority of Queen on the application of  YZ
    (China) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2012]  EWCA  Civ
    1022 [2013] INLR 60.  In that decision,  giving  the  judgment  of  the
    court, Lord Justice Richards, in particular at paragraph 49, identified
    the key considerations which bear on the exercise of  discretion  in  a
    case such as this.

 3. Firstly, at paragraph 49 Lord Justice Richards said that  the  starting
    point for consideration in this type of case should be the unlawfulness
    of the decision to remove.  Ms Harrison underlined this  point  in  the
    light of our decision.  There had been a clear breach by the  Secretary
    of State in relation to R A's rights under Section 55 of the UK Borders
    Act.  That was a powerful factor in favour of his return and  an  order
    in favour of return would put him in the position that  he  would  have
    been had he not been removed.  While that is certainly a factor  we  do
    take into account the submissions by Ms Rhee on behalf of the Secretary
    of State.  As we identified in the judgment, these representations came
    at the very last moment on the eve of the removal and this was not  the
    type of flagrant breach which arose in a number  of  the  single  judge
    decisions which were put  before  us.   Indeed,  as  we  noted  in  the
    judgment, perhaps not as expressly as we could  have,  if  R  A's  then
    solicitors had applied for judicial  review  with  an  application  for
    immediate consideration it may well have been that  the  removal  would
    have been prevented by the grant of interim relief.

 4. The second point which Ms Harrison made  was  the  vindication  of  the
    rights which R A had, in particular his rights under Section 55 of  the
    Borders Act.  Had our decision been available  at  the  time  then  the
    Secretary of State would not have made a decision on  the  fresh  claim
    and under the  Immigration  Rules  his  removal  would  not  have  been
    possible.  We  acknowledge  this  point  although,  as  we  would  have
    preferred to put it, more  in  terms  of  the  way  that  Lord  Justice
    Richards expressed it in the YZ (China) decision that a  point  telling
    strongly in favour of avoiding a person's return is to restore  him  to
    the position he should have been in under  the  legislation  and  would
    have been in if the Secretary of State had acted lawfully.

 5.  The  third  bracket  of  her  submissions  concerned   the   practical
    implications of R A's out of country appeal.  Again, we would  discount
    some of the submissions which Ms  Harrison  made.   The  key  point  of
    course is that at this point the Secretary of  State  had  not  made  a
    decision on the representations taking  into  account  her  duty  under
    Section 55 of the UK Borders Act, so there is at present  no  right  of
    appeal.  In terms of the practicalities of the out of country appeal we
    certainly see force in Ms Rhee's submissions that this is a case  which
    is not going to turn heavily on any oral evidence which either R  A  or
    the mother could give.  There may be difficulties with  video  evidence
    from Nigeria but to our mind that does not  necessarily  have  a  heavy
    bearing on the practicalities of an out of country appeal.

 6. However, there are three factors which tip the balance in favour of our
    exercising a discretion to order return.  First of all, this is a  case
    involving a child.  In saying that we acknowledge that the Secretary of
    State over a substantial period of time running up to the  removal  did
    obtain information from both the local authority and R A's school about
    the position of R A.  Moreover, the Secretary  of  State  involved  the
    office of the Children's Champion within the Home Office and  the  work
    of the independent panel as we have described in the  judgment,  albeit
    that was focused on the mechanics of return, was thorough.  However, at
    the end of the day the decision on the eve of removal, as we have  held
    in the judgment, did not properly accord with the legislation  and  the
    Secretary of State did not fulfil her duty under Section 55 of the Act.
     In saying this we are not seeking in any way to prejudge any  decision
    which will subsequently be made.  We note in passing as well  that  the
    authorities which were canvassed before us did not involve children.

 7. The second point is that we cannot turn a blind  eye  to  the  evidence
    which  the  current  solicitors  of  R  A  and  her  mother  have   now
    accumulated.  Again, we do not prejudge the extent to which  this  will
    have a bearing on the Secretary of State's decision.  It  is  a  matter
    for the Secretary of State to take into account  relevant  factors  but
    that evidence post-removal does raise concerns about the position of  R
    A, turning as it does primarily on the position of the mental health of
    the mother.

 8. Thirdly there are practical factors which bear  on  our  decision.   Ms
    Rhee on behalf of the Secretary of State informed us that the  decision
    on the  representations  could  be  effective  by  24  April,  possibly
    earlier, but we cannot ignore the realities  of  delay  because  it  is
    clear to us that should the decision be unfavourable there would  be  a
    further challenge.  The possibility of delay  does,  however,  have  an
    important bearing on the position of R A in Nigeria.

 9. We can well understand the submission which Ms Rhee made that should  R
    A be returned to this country there might well be a  second  relocation
    if he is ordered to be removed again and that could well  have  a  very
    detrimental effect on his wellbeing.  We have taken  that  factor  into
    account but we do not find it determinative.

10. Finally, in terms of the practicalities, the changes in the  legal  aid
    regime under LASPO, we were not taken to these in detail but in as much
    as they may have implications for the way any out of country appeal  is
    conducted, again, that is something to go in the balance.

11. As we have said, the exercise of our discretion is finely balanced  but
    in the round we have decided that the  Secretary  of  State  should  be
    ordered to take all reasonable steps to ensure the removal of R  A  and
    her mother to this country.

12. In terms of costs we are going to take an issue-based approach.  We can
    understand when the Secretary of State says that the claim was based on
    two or three issues but it does seem to us that much  of  the  material
    would have had to be adduced in any event.  Trying  to  do  justice  in
    this sort of case is always difficult in terms of costs  but  we  think
    the appropriate rule would be to give a claimant 70% of their costs.

13. In terms  of  permission  to  appeal  we  refuse  permission  for  both
    sides.~~~0~~~~

