
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

ZEI and others (Decision withdrawn - FtT Rule 17 - considerations)
Palestine [2017] UKUT 00292 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |
|On 25 October 2016 and 16 December 2016       |
|                                              |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

                              z e i and Others
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr R Drabble QC and Mr T Royston, solicitors
instructed by
     Wilson Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Senior Presenting Officer

Rule 17 clearly envisages that in general the appeal is  to  be  treated  as
withdrawn.  It will continue  only  if  a  good  reason  is  identified  for
allowing it to proceed despite being an appeal against a decision that  will
not have effect in  any  event.  The  appellant  needs  the  opportunity  to
advance a case  why  he  considers  an  appeal  should  not  be  treated  as
withdrawn, and the SSHD needs the opportunity to respond. The  Tribunal  has
no power to require the Secretary of State to give (or even to have) a  good
reason for her decision.
The list below cannot and should not be regarded as a comprehensive  account
of all reasons that might be urged on judges, but we trust that as  well  as
giving guidance on the arguments discussed the reasoning may be  adapted  to
other cases.

(i)  The following are not likely to be considered good reasons:
    - The parties wish the appeal to proceed.
    - The applicant is legally aided and if he has to appeal against  a  new
      decision, he will not (or will probably not) be legally aided  because
      the legal aid regime has changed.
    - The withdrawal is for reasons the  judge  considers  inappropriate  is
      very unlikely to be a good reason to proceed. An example is that of  a
      Presenting Officer who seeks adjournment of a hearing and when that is
      refused, withdraws the decision.
    - The witnesses are ready to be heard and can only  with  difficulty  or
      expense be gathered again.

(ii) The following are likely to be capable of being a good reason.
    - The appeal regime has changed since the first decision, so that  if  a
      new decision is made in the same sense, the rights of appeal  will  be
      reduced.
    - Undue delay by the respondent.
    - The appeal turns on a pure point of law that  the  judge  thinks  that
      even after argument is certainly or almost certainly to be decided  in
      the appellant's favour.
    - If there has already been a  considerable  delay  in  a  decision  the
      appellant is entitled to expect, the fact that children are affected.



                            DECISION AND REASONS

INTRODUCTION

 1. Rule 17 of the Tribunal Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration
    and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014 provides:

         "17.-(1)  party may give notice of the withdrawal of their appeal-


                  (a)  by providing to the Tribunal a written notice of
                      withdrawal of the appeal; or

                  (b)  orally at a hearing,

             and  in  either  case  must  specify  the  reasons   for   that
               withdrawal.

             (2)  The Tribunal must (save for good reason) treat an  appeal
                  as withdrawn if the respondent notifies the  Tribunal  and
                  each other party that the decision (or, where  the  appeal
                  relates to more than one decision, all of  the  decisions)
                  to  which  the  appeal  relates  has  been  withdrawn  and
                  specifies the reasons for the withdrawal of the decision.

             (3)  The Tribunal must notify each party  in  writing  that  a
                  withdrawal has taken effect under this rule and  that  the
                  proceedings are no longer  regarded  by  the  Tribunal  as
                  pending."

 2. On 11 December 2014, the Secretary of State decided to remove the first
    appellant having refused his claim for asylum for reasons given in  her
    decision dated 18  November  2014.  The  Appellant  is  a  national  of
    Palestine and was last resident in Lebanon. In summary, she  considered
    that was no reasonable degree of likelihood that he would be at risk of
    serious harm on return to Lebanon.  Contemporaneous  decisions  by  the
    Secretary of State addressed to the first appellant's  wife  and  child
    indicated that they did not have an in-country right of appeal  (unlike
    the first appellant).

 3. In a letter dated 22 December 2014 the appellants' solicitors  notified
    the First-tier Tribunal that  when  the  first  appellant  had  claimed
    asylum, he had asked that his  wife  and  son  should  be  included  as
    dependants on his application.   That  application  also  raised  human
    rights grounds on behalf  of  not  only  the  appellant  but  also  his
    dependants individually.  That being  so  it  was  contended  that  all
    parties had an appealable decision which could be considered in country
    in accordance with s.92(4)(a) Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
    2002.  Appeals were issued for all three.

 4. On 2 March 2015, the appellants came before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Simpson sitting in  Manchester.   The  judge's  Record  of  Proceedings
    indicates that Miss  E  Homer,  the  Presenting  Officer  withdrew  the
    decisions under appeal owing to a "technical problem" with the  removal
    directions which had been to 'Palestinian Territories' ".   It  appears
    the judge gave her decision orally and thereafter notice  was  sent  to
    the parties in the following terms:

         "1.  Under R24 a decision may be given orally.

         2.   The reasons for the decision  were  also  given  orally,  they
             were:

         (a)  there was a technical problem in that the  removal  directions
             were set for "Palestinian  Territories"  but  this  is  not  a
             lawful destination.

         (b)  while removal directions are likely to be amended  to  Lebanon
             there has to be consideration of his partner's nationality  ie
             Tunisian given their child.

         3.   Any fresh appeal is reserved to Mrs A.K. Simpson

         4.   This was ALL [emphasis retained] announced orally.

         5.   This was not a decision it was a withdrawal under R17(b)

         6.   Given that the respondent's reasons were valid  there  was  no
             ground to object the withdrawal."

 5. We note that the judge did not address the point whether the second and
    third appellants has valid appeals but instead treated them as  matters
    before her.  The  appellants  applied  for  permission  to  appeal  her
    decision to the Upper Tribunal on 30 March 2015.  On 8  May  2015,  the
    First-tier Tribunal issued a notice in the following terms:

         "The application for Permission to Appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
         received on 31st March 2015 is not valid."

 6. Undaunted, the appellants renewed the application to the Upper Tribunal
    relying on grounds that there was a right of appeal against  the  FtT's
    decision of 18 March.  The First-tier Tribunal had misdirected  itself;
    the proper test was not whether the Secretary of State had demonstrated
    a single 'valid' reason for withdrawal.  Instead it was  whether  there
    is  "good  reason"  to  allow  the  appeal  to  continue  in  all   the
    circumstances.  The second limb to the grounds asserted that inadequate
    reasons had been given for the decision.  Finally, it was  argued  that
    it was irrational for the First-tier  Tribunal  to  accept  the  reason
    given by the Secretary of State as it was not a matter relied on by her
    in correspondence with the First-tier Tribunal and the appellants.

 7. Whilst consideration of that  application  was  pending  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal, the appellants applied for permission to proceed with a claim
    for judicial review of the decisions of the First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    Upper Tribunal and the Secretary of State were included  as  interested
    parties.  By order dated 19 May 2016, the claim against the  First-tier
    Tribunal was stayed pending determination of  the  pending  proceedings
    before the Upper Tribunal  of  whether  a  statutory  right  of  appeal
    existed against the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   On  that
    basis, the matter came before the Vice-President, who for reasons given
    in his decision dated  27  January  2016,  granted  permission  in  the
    following terms:

         "1.  This case has a contorted history.  The present applicant  was
             refused asylum and appealed  on  asylum  grounds  against  the
             decision  to  remove  him,  the  specified  destination  being
             'Palestinian  Territories'.   (Two  family   members   brought
             appeals were recognised  in  limine  as  invalid:  no  further
             question arises in respect of them.)  At or shortly before the
             hearing of  the  appellant's  appeal  the  HOPO  decided,  for
             reasons unknown to me and not obviously supported by paragraph
             8 of Schedule 2 to  the  Immigration  Act  1971  ('country  or
             territory'), that the proposed destination was  unlawful;  she
             withdrew the decision against which the appeal was brought.

         2.   In those circumstances  under  the  FtT's  current  rules  (as
             distinct from the rules they replaced) the Tribunal had, under
             r 17(2) a discretion or partial discretion  whether  to  treat
             the appeal as withdrawn.  The rule is rather  loosely  drafted
             and  its  wording  raises  the  issue  whether  withdrawal  is
             automatic if the Tribunal does not  exercise  its  discretion.
             The Tribunal issued two different notices, one saying that  as
             the original decision had been withdrawn it was satisfied that
             the appeal had been withdrawn (this was the standard form  and
             does not appear to have been changed in 2014  to  reflect  the
             change in the Rules) and one signed by  the  judge  indicating
             the reasons for the withdrawal of the decision,  but  not  for
             any consequent decision by the Tribunal.  This notice  asserts
             that 'this [is] not a decision it is a  withdrawal'  and  that
             'given that the respondent's reasons were valid  that  was  no
             ground to object to the withdrawal'.

         3.   Pausing there, I  note  that  that  first  assertion  is  very
             dubious if the Notice records activity by the Tribunal under r
             17(2); it is arguable that the respondent's  reasons  were  in
             part not valid (see above); and that in any  event  the  judge
             was concerned  not  with  whether  the  decision  was  validly
             withdrawn but with whether the appeal against the decision was
             to be treated as withdrawn.

         4.   The  appellant  thought  and  thinks  that  this  was  not  an
             appropriate case for the  Tribunal  to  treat  the  appeal  as
             withdrawn and that in any event the  Tribunal  ought  to  have
             made a decision on his representative's submissions that  this
             was a case in which there was good reason to allow the  appeal
             to proceed, preferably giving reasons for such decision as  it
             might  make  on  that  point.   He  applied  to  the  FtT  for
             permission to appeal.   The  clerk  that  received  it  sought
             advice from a judge and apparently in response to that  advice
             wrote saying that the application was 'not valid' and that the
             Tribunal would take no further action.   It  is  not  easy  to
             classify that letter but given that it had judicial  authority
             (as I deduce from the papers on file) and given the  terms  of
             FtT rule 34, I think  it  is  properly  treated  as  either  a
             refusal of permission or a refusal to admit  the  application.
             The latter is no longer covered specifically by the FtT rules,
             but is envisaged by r 21(2) of the Upper Tribunal  Rules.   If
             it was not a refusal to admit it must  I  think  have  been  a
             refusal of permission and in either case (subject only to  the
             decision of the FtT being amenable to  appeal)  the  appellant
             was now entitled to apply to the UT for permission to appeal.

         5.   It is said that an application was made in time.  It  has  not
             been traced, but I suspect that it may have been treated as  a
             nullity given the previous history.   A  new  application  was
             made on 9 July 2015.  On 16 July 2015 a clerk to the UT  wrote
             saying that the application could not be  entertained  because
             the  'decisions  about  which  you   complain   are   excluded
             decisions'.  I have examined the file and others have examined
             the UT's database: there is no evidence that that  letter  had
             any judicial authority, and no clerk is entitled  to  exercise
             the judicial powers of the Tribunal in  deciding  applications
             for permission, although it does not seem to me that there  is
             any reason why a clerk should not convey the information  that
             there is no valid application, provided that that is correct.

         6.   The appellant then commenced judicial  review  proceedings  in
             relation to the UT's refusal to entertain the application  for
             permission to  appeal.   I  have  not  heard  of  any  further
             progress with the appellant's actual appeal  against  any  new
             immigration decision.

         7.   (i) Essentially  for  the  reasons  given  in  the  grounds  I
             consider that it is more than arguable that  the  FtT  made  a
             decision, which under s 11 of the 2007 Act carries a right  of
             appeal unless it is an excluded decision; (ii) it is also more
             than arguable that the decision of the FtT, such  as  it  was,
             reached  after  hearing  submissions  from  the  parties  (the
             judge's notes occupy one and a half well-filled pages) was not
             procedural, ancillary or preliminary within the meaning of art
             3(m) of SI 2009/275: see JH (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2009] EWCA  Civ
             78 and Abiyat v SSHD [2011] UKUT 314 (IAC).

         8.   There is, therefore, as it seems to me, an appealable decision
             with arguable grounds.  Given the history, I would not take  a
             time point in relation to the  application  to  the  UT.   The
             question is whether I  have  jurisdiction  to  determine  that
             application.  I think I have, for the following reasons.   (i)
             If the position is that the  letter  from  the  UT  clerk  was
             ineffective to determine the application, then the application
             to the UT is pending and awaiting a decision which I can make.
              (ii) If it be said that the letter from the clerk brought  or
             may have brought the application, and  hence  the  proceedings
             before the UT, to an end, that was a  procedural  irregularity
             within the meaning of r 43(2)(d) and it is in the interests of
             justice to set his decision aside and re-make  it:  there  has
             been no application for that relief but the Tribunal  can  act
             on its own motion under r 43.  (iii) Finally, if  it  be  said
             that the FtT's response to the application for permission made
             to it was not either a refusal of  permission  or  refusal  to
             admit,  the  UT  has  no  jurisdiction,  but  in   that   case
             necessarily the application to the FtT has  not  been  decided
             and as a judge of the FtT I can decide it.

         9.   For the foregoing reasons as a judge of the Upper  Tribunal  I
             (if necessary) set aside the decision conveyed by the clerk of
             the Upper Tribunal and remake the  decision  conveyed  by  his
             letter; alternatively, I sit as  a  Judge  of  the  First-tier
             Tribunal and consider the application made to it.

         10   Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal is granted."

 8. On 27 April 2016, the  Secretary  of  State  made  a  further  decision
    refusing the appellants' protection claims.   They  appealed  and  were
    allocated case number AA/006432/2016 by the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The
    hearing has been adjourned by the First-tier Tribunal after  a  refusal
    of such an application in August 2016.

 9. On 25 October 2016, we gave our decision that the  First-tier  Tribunal
    had materially erred in treating Appeal AA/11525/2014 as withdrawn  and
    set aside the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  with  a  view  to
    remitting the case to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh  decision  on
    whether to treat the appeal as withdrawn as the result of the Secretary
    of State's notice of decision to withdraw the  decision  under  appeal.
    We now give our reasons  for  doing  so.   On  16  December,  we  heard
    submissions from the parties on the correct approach to be taken by the
    First-tier Tribunal when considering a decision  by  the  Secretary  of
    State to withdraw a decision. We now give guidance on the approach  the
    First-tier Tribunal should take when  considering  notices  under  Rule
    17(2).  We also sat as judges of the First-tier Tribunal in respect  of
    AA/11525/2014 (and the accompanying appeals).  Mr Deller on  behalf  of
    the Secretary of State conceded that there was good  reason  for  those
    appeals continuing in the light of the submissions that had  been  made
    by Mr Drabble as to the impact on the availability of funding  for  the
    appellants in any new appeal and  furthermore,  in  the  light  of  the
    impact of the amendments to s82 under the Immigration  Act  2014  which
    apply to Appeal No. AA/00643/2016.  Accordingly, both appeals  continue
    in the First-tier Tribunal and will require being determined.

DISCUSSION

10. When the First-tier Tribunal  is  presented  with  a  decision  by  the
    Secretary of State to withdraw a  decision,  in  many  cases  this  may
    result  in  a  grant  of  leave  and  it  is  unlikely  this  will   be
    controversial. But in other cases, as was the position in  the  appeals
    before us, this would be a precursor to another decision in respect  of
    the outstanding application. The effect of amendments to s 82 is that a
    right of appeal against a decision made on or after 20 October 2014  is
    dependent on whether a  protection  or  human  rights  claim  has  been
    refused or there has been a refusal to revoke a protection status. Rule
    17  was  amended  by  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier   Tribunal)
    (Immigration & Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014 introducing  the  requirement
    which is at the heart of this appeal ("save for good reason").  In  its
    previous guise under  the  Asylum  &  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure
    Rules) 2005 Rule 17 provided, inter alia,

             "(2) An appeal shall be treated as withdrawn if the  Respondent
             notifies the tribunal that the decision (or, where  the  appeal
             relates to more than one decision, all  of  the  decisions)  to
             which the appeal relates has been withdrawn."

11. In many cases, we understand that the SSHD may  want  to  consider  new
    evidence or a change in circumstances by the appellant which warrants a
    further consideration of the claim or application before her. It is  to
    an extent speculative but there is also the possibility that  the  SSHD
    may consider that the decision under challenge is in  some  way  flawed
    and requires remaking.

12. The Secretary of State operates a  policy,  Withdrawing  decisions  and
    conceding appeals (Home Office, 04 June 2015).  We are grateful  to  Mr
    Drabble for the helpful summary  of  the  policy  in  his  skeleton  as
    follows:

                 "

            a) rule 17(2) of the 2014 Rules 'brings the First-tier Tribunal
               procedure rules in line with Upper Tribunal Rules;
            b) SM (withdrawal of  appealed  decision  -  effect  (Pakistan)
               [2014] UKUT 64 (IAC) (11  February  2014)  is  the  relevant
               authority on the factors to be taken into account;
            c) Where an appeal is not treated as withdrawn, a  HOPO  should
               participate in the appeal as normal;
            d) A subsequent decision 'will have full regard to any findings
               made by the Tribunal unless the appeal is challenged'.

13. We note that the sentiment summarised in paragraph (a) is simply wrong;
    the Upper Tribunal Rules are silent on the matter. Reference is made in
    the above policy guidance to SM, a decision of the Upper Tribunal which
    was concerned with withdrawal of what were then  immigration  decisions
    in appeals in the Upper Tribunal.  That case involved consideration  of
    Rule 17 of the Upper Tribunal Procedure Rules and so  not  directly  on
    the point of concern in the appeals before us.  The following  guidance
    was given.

               1) Rule 17 (withdrawal)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
                  Tribunal) Rules 2008 does not enable the Upper Tribunal to
                  withhold consent to the withdrawal  by  the  Secretary  of
                  State of the decision against which a person  appealed  to
                  the First-tier Tribunal.
               2)  Where  such  a  decision  is   withdrawn   in   appellate
                  proceedings before the Immigration and Asylum  Chamber  of
                  the  Upper  Tribunal  that  Tribunal  continues  to   have
                  jurisdiction under the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement
                  Act 2007 to decide whether the determination of the First-
                  tier Tribunal should be set aside for error of law and, if
                  so, to re-make the decision in the appeal, notwithstanding
                  the  withdrawal  of  the  appealed   decision.    Such   a
                  withdrawal is not, without more, one of the ways in  which
                  an appeal under section 82 of the Nationality, Immigration
                  and Asylum Act 2002 ceases to be pending.
               3) When re-remaking a decision in a 2002 Act appeal where the
                  decision  against  which  a  person  appealed   has   been
                  withdrawn by the Secretary of State,  the  Upper  Tribunal
                  will need to decide whether:-
                        (i)     to  proceed  formally  to  dismiss  (or,  in
                            certain circumstances, allow) the appeal; or
                        (ii)     to  determine  the  appeal   substantively,
                            including   (where   appropriate)   making    a
                            direction under section 87 of the 2002 Act.
               4) In deciding between (i) and (ii) above, the Upper Tribunal
                  will apply the overriding objective in rule 2 of the  2008
                  Rules, having regard to all relevant matters, including:
                        (a)     the principle that the  Secretary  of  State
                            should, ordinarily, be  the  primary  decision-
                            maker in the immigration field;
                        (b)     whether the matters potentially in issue are
                            such as to require the Tribunal to give general
                            legal or procedural guidance, including country
                            guidance;
                        (c)     the  reasons  underlying  the  Secretary  of
                            State's withdrawal of the appealed decision;
                        (d)     the appeal history, including the timing  of
                            the withdrawal; and
                        (e)     the views of the parties.

    We agree with Mr Drabble's submission that the above factors are likely
    to be applicable in the context of Rule 17(2).

14. We begin our conclusions by setting out what  we  see  as  the  general
    principle in context.  First, Rule 17 clearly envisages that in general
    the appeal is to be treated as withdrawn.  It will continue only  if  a
    good reason is identified for allowing it to proceed despite  being  an
    appeal against a decision that will not have effect in any event.  What
    is more, the reason (or combination of reasons) must be regarded by the
    judge as sufficiently good to justify a decision that the appeal should
    proceed.  That is the effect of the causative 'for' in the rule: it  is
    not enough merely that some good reason exists.  This is not  an  issue
    of  a  'burden  of  proof'  exactly;  but  has   some   of   the   same
    characteristics. If no good reason is identified, the appeal  will  not
    proceed; and there must be room for discussion about whether  a  reason
    that is identified  is  good  enough,  although  the  time  and  energy
    occupied in such a dispute must  be  kept  to  a  proportionate  level,
    bearing again in mind that if the appeal proceeds the outcome  may  not
    affect either party directly.  On the  other  hand,  there  can  be  no
    suggestion of rareness, or 'exceptionality'.  If a  reason  is  a  good
    one, it may apply to a considerable proportion of  the  relatively  few
    cases in which a decision is withdrawn.

15. Secondly, even though the  rule  requires  that  the  reasons  for  the
    withdrawal are specified, the appeal  process  does  not,  and  cannot,
    include a determination of whether the  decision  ought  to  have  been
    withdrawn.  The First-Tier Tribunal has  no  jurisdiction  in  Judicial
    Review: its statutory powers are limited  to  hearing  appeals  against
    those decisions set out in  the  statute,  which  do  not  include  the
    decision to withdraw an appealable decision. The enquiry as to  whether
    there is a good reason not to treat  the  appeal  itself  as  withdrawn
    therefore is to take place in the context that the  decision  has  been
    withdrawn, and, whatever else may happen, the former  decision  is  not
    and  cannot  be  operative  against  the  individual  to  whom  it  was
    addressed.  Further, although r  17(1)  requires  the  reason  for  the
    withdrawal to be given, the  Tribunal  has  no  power  to  require  the
    Secretary of State to give (or even to have)  a  good  reason  for  her
    decision.  In the present case, as it happens, the reason given appears
    to be one that wholly depends on a mistake of  law  by  the  Presenting
    Officer.  It seems to us that the judge probably ought to have drawn to
    the officer's attention that the reason did not seem to be  correct  in
    law, but although the judge might thereby have  persuaded  the  officer
    not to withdraw the decision, she had no power to prevent it.  And,  it
    may be appropriate to add, once a decision is formally withdrawn,  that
    is the end of it.  A new decision requires  a  new  notice  and  a  new
    appeal.  So any influence on the  officer's  thought  process  must  be
    before the withdrawal, or it is too late.

16. Thirdly, it is appropriate to consider the nature and  purpose  of  the
    appeal process.   It is asymmetrical: only the individual affected  can
    appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal;  all  appeals  at  that  level  are
    against the government.  In an appeal, the government hopes to have its
    decision endorsed, whilst the appellant hopes to have it set aside.  By
    withdrawing the decision, the government signals the discontinuance  of
    its wish to have the decision endorsed in an appeal.  The  respondent's
    side cannot  subsequently  be  heard  to  assert  the  desirability  of
    proceeding with the appeal.  If that was what they thought, they should
    not have withdrawn the decision.  The question of  whether  to  proceed
    can therefore be raised only by the appellant.

17. Thus, task before the FtT is not to consider whether there is a  "valid
    reason" for withdrawal but instead, whether is a "good reason" why  the
    mandatory effect of Rule 17(2) should not apply  when  application  has
    been made by the  appellant  for  the  appeal  not  to  be  treated  as
    withdrawn.  If the issue is not raised by the  appellant  there  is  no
    need to decide it and in that case the default position of r 17(2)  can
    be allowed to take effect, and a notice that the appeal is  treated  as
    withdrawn will be sent out.

18.  Consideration  of  an  application  by  the  appellant  will   include
    examination  of  the  reason  behind  the  SSHD's  decision   but   not
    exclusively; the tribunal is also required to look at the impact on the
    appellant. Accordingly, the appellant needs the opportunity to  advance
    a case why he considers an appeal should not be treated  as  withdrawn,
    and the SSHD needs the opportunity to respond. This is ideally done  at
    the hearing if the appeal has been  listed  or  by  of  directions  for
    submissions if not. In general, it  seems  to  us  that  the  appellant
    should be given fourteen days to submit  any  argument  why  an  appeal
    should nevertheless proceed and the SSHD, a like period to respond.

19. We turn now to consider the considerations that were raised  before  us
    and others that may be argued, to assess the degree  to  which  any  of
    them could be good reasons.  Of  course,  the  list  below  cannot  and
    should not be regarded as a comprehensive account of all  reasons  that
    might be urged on judges, but we trust that as well as giving  guidance
    on the arguments discussed the reasoning may be adapted to other cases.


          a. The parties wish the appeal to proceed.  This  is  not  a  good
             reason.  First, the appellant's wish to proceed is the  process
             of raising the question, not part of its answer.  Secondly, the
             respondent cannot be heard  to  seek  the  continuation  of  an
             appeal in these circumstances.  Finally the joint wish of  both
             parties cannot be a good reason when the wish of  one  of  them
             cannot be.




          b. The applicant is legally aided and if he has to appeal  against
             a new decision, he will not (or will probably not)  be  legally
             aided because the legal aid regime has changed.  This is not  a
             good reason.  It is superficially attractive as a good  reason,
             and was pressed by Mr Drabble and agreed by Mr Deller.   But  a
             moment's reflection casts severe doubt upon it.   If  it  is  a
             good reason, that would be because if  an  otherwise  identical
             case was raised by a person who had had to pay  his  own  legal
             costs it would have a lesser chance of being successful.  It is
             impossible to see why the  person  who  is  not  legally  aided
             should suffer in this way.




          c. The appeal regime has changed since the first decision, so that
             if a new decision is made in the  same  sense,  the  rights  of
             appeal will be reduced.   This  is  capable  of  being  a  good
             reason.  In these circumstances the withdrawal of the  decision
             and its replacement by a decision  made  at  a  later  date  is
             likely to be wholly prejudicial to the appellant.




          d. There has already been undue delay by the respondent.  This may
             be a good reason or it may not.  It is capable of being a  good
             reason in cases where the appellant  has,  by  proper  process,
             sought a decision on an application.  The most obvious  example
             is a paid-for application duly made.  If there has been a  long
             delay, which will be  lengthened  further  by  awaiting  a  new
             decision, that may be a good reason to proceed with  an  appeal
             against the withdrawn decision.  But this argument cannot be  a
             good reason if the decision is  one  the  timing  of  which  is
             wholly for the respondent.   The  most  obvious  example  is  a
             removal or deportation decision, whether or not combined (as it
             would now have to be in order to carry a right of appeal)  with
             a human rights or protection decision.



          e. The appellant may succeed.  This is  perhaps  the  reason  most
             likely to be asserted, and it is not  at  all  easy  to  assess
             before  the  hearing  takes  place.   The  appellant's  aim  in
             bringing the appeal is essentially fulfilled by the withdrawal.
              In all ordinary cases, it cannot matter very much whether  the
             decision is withdrawn before an appeal is launched, or while an
             appeal is pending or because it falls because of the Tribunal's
             decision.  We note that the Secretary of State will, as she  is
             bound  to  do,  take   account   of   any   relevant   judicial
             determination in making a new decision, but she is in any event
             bound to apply the law;  and  the  general  duty  to  follow  a
             determination cannot be said in general to justify the  holding
             of hearings to determine issues except based on a need  to  set
             aside a disputed decision.  It might be said that if an  appeal
             continues and  is  concluded  in  an  appellant's  favour,  the
             appellant will benefit by that in a way in which he  would  not
             benefit  by  the  withdrawal,  because  of  the  force  of  the
             determination.  But that is only a benefit if  he  does  indeed
             win the appeal, a matter which  cannot  normally  be  discerned
             before the appeal is heard, and which, in the  Immigration  and
             Asylum Chamber of the First-tier Tribunal may well depend on  a
             judicial assessment of the credibility of  witnesses.   If  the
             appeal proceeds and the decision is against the appellant,  the
             new decision is almost bound to be adverse to him (but  may  be
             appealable again): in that case, time and resources  will  have
             been wasted because it turns out that the reason was not  good.
             Further, there is the difficulty that if the appellant sees the
             case going against him, he can at any stage  under  rule  17(1)
             withdraw his appeal against the withdrawn  decision,  following
             which the judge could not issue the decision  anticipated.   It
             seems to us that the appellant's expectation of success may  be
             a good reason if, but only if, the appeal turns on a pure point
             of law that the  judge  thinks  that  even  after  argument  is
             certainly or almost certainly to be decided in the  appellant's
             favour.




          f.  The  withdrawal   is   for   reasons   the   judge   considers
             inappropriate.  We think this is very unlikely  to  be  a  good
             reason to proceed, for the reasons given above (the  second  of
             the general principles).  An example discussed  is  that  of  a
             Presenting Officer who seeks adjournment of a hearing and  when
             that is refused, withdraws the decision.  Again,  superficially
             that may appear to be a strong case for proceeding,  but  given
             that in these circumstances the officer is unlikely to  take  a
             meaningful part in  the  proceedings,  the  result  is  equally
             unlikely to be the  careful  judicial  assessment  of  opposing
             positions leading to a decision upon which the respondent would
             have to base any new decision.



          g. The  witnesses  are  ready  to  be  heard  and  can  only  with
             difficulty or expense be gathered again.  This is very unlikely
             to be a good reason.  It is in many ways  little  more  than  a
             special case of (e) above; and looks too far forward in  trying
             to make provision for a further  adverse  decision,  a  further
             appeal, and the need to have the same witnesses at that stage.



          h.  Children  are  affected  by  the  decision,  the  appeal,  the
             withdrawal, and the wait for a new decision.  This is a special
             case of (d) above.  If there has already  been  a  considerable
             delay in a decision the appellant is entitled  to  expect,  the
             fact that children are affected may make a good reason  better.
             But if the decision is one that the appellant has no  right  to
             timetable, particularly if the appellant is already  in  breach
             if immigration law, the effect on children is unlikely to  make
             very much difference, it being remembered that the  context  is
             still that the withdrawn decision  will  not  itself  have  any
             effect at all.


20. In the present case, as we have recorded above, Mr Deller was evidently
    persuaded by reasons (b) and (c).  Reason (b) is not a  good  one,  but
    there is no doubt that reason (c) applies.  A  new  decision  has  been
    made but because of the date of the new decision, the appeal rights are
    substantially  less.   The  appellant  is  thus   prejudiced   by   the
    withdrawal.  The fact that the withdrawal was  for  a  reason  that  is
    extremely difficult to justify cannot, for  the  reasons  given  above,
    itself be a good reason, but it helps to show that the  effect  of  the
    withdrawal is indeed prejudicial rather than  merely  unfortunate.   We
    identify the fact that the  new  decision  carries  reduced  rights  of
    appeal as a good  reason  for  allowing  the  appeal  against  the  old
    decision (and thus governed by the old appeals provisions) to proceed.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  treating  the  appeal  (numbered
AA/11525/2014) as withdrawn is set aside. We remit the case  to  the  First-
tier Tribunal for a fresh  decision  on  whether  to  treat  the  appeal  as
withdrawn as a result of the notice by the Secretary of  State  to  withdraw
the decision under appeal. It is conceded by the  Secretary  of  State  that
AA/11525/2014 should continue in the First-tier Tribunal.  Accordingly,  our
decision sitting as  judges  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  that  appeal
numbered AA/11525/2014 is not to be treated as  withdrawn  and  this  appeal
(and the related appeals) together with AA/00643/2016 remain pending  before
the First-tier Tribunal for determination.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies to the appellant and to the respondent  and  to  all  other  persons
save as may be required by other proceedings before any Court  or  Tribunal.
Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.




Signed                                  Date:  5 May 2017


[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson

