
[pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

R (on the application of P) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
IJR [2014] UKUT 00294 (IAC)
|                                     |                                     |
|                                                                            |
|Heard at:|Field House               |                   |                  |
|On       |20 May 2014               |                   |                   |
|                                                                            |
|                                                                            |
|IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW                         |
|                                                                            |
|                                                                            |
|Before                                                                      |
|The Honourable Mr. Justice Green, sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal  |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Gill                                                   |
|Between                                                                     |
|           |THE QUEEN ON THE APPLICATION OF                   |             |
|           |P                                                 |             |
|           |                                                  |Applicant    |
|           |(ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)                            |             |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|           |THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT    |Respondent   |


Appearances:

For the Applicant:     Mr. C. Buttler,  of  Counsel,  instructed  by  Duncan
                       Lewis Solicitors.
For the Respondent:       Ms.  C.  Patry,  of  Counsel,  instructed  by  the
                 Treasury Solicitor.




Anonymity Order under rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008 (Upper Tribunal Rules)

      We make an  order  under  rule  14(1)  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Rules
      prohibiting the disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead
      members of the public to identify the Applicant. No  report  of  these
      proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify the Applicant.  This
      direction applies to both the Applicant and to the Respondent. Failure
      to comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
      proceedings.


                                  JUDGMENT


1.    The Applicant is a national of Sri Lanka  who  first  arrived  in  the
      United Kingdom in April 2010 and claimed asylum in June 2010.   It  is
      unnecessary for us to detail the immigration  history  in  this  case,
      except to say as follows. In  April  2012,  the  Applicant  brought  a
      challenge to a decision of the Respondent of 15 April 2012. Permission
      was granted at a renewed oral application. The claim was settled by  a
      consent order signed by the parties on 26 November 2012 and sealed  by
      the Administrative Court on 11 December 2012  (hereafter  the  Consent
      Order). The terms upon which the parties agreed to settle that  claim,
      as set out in the Consent Order, are said to have been breached by the
      Respondent. That is the nub of the instant claim for judicial  review,
      permission having been granted by the  Upper  Tribunal  at  a  renewed
      application on 7 April 2014.

2.    Under the terms  of  the  Consent  Order,  the  Respondent  agreed  to
      withdraw her decision of 15 April  2012  and  reconsider  the  medical
      evidence that was before her together with any further representations
      made by the Applicant within two months  of  the  date  on  which  any
      further submissions were received by  the  Respondent.  The  Applicant
      agreed to withdraw her claim for judicial review  and  make  any  such
      further submissions within two weeks of the date on which the  Consent
      Order was signed. There were other ancillary matters provided  for  in
      the Consent Order.

3.    The  Applicant  made  further  representations  in  writing  dated  12
      December 2012. These were  posted  to  Lunar  House  in  Croydon.  The
      Respondent did  not  consider  that  these  representations  had  been
      validly made. She took the view that they should  have  been  made  in
      person, as her policy published  on  her  website  makes  clear.   The
      Applicant contended that the Consent Order did not make any  provision
      for the manner in which the further representations were to have  been
      made. Secondly, and in any event,  it  was  contended  that  the  said
      policy was unlawful.

4.    As we have said, permission was granted on 7 April 2014. The  Tribunal
      considered the issue of jurisdiction and concluded that  it  did  have
      jurisdiction because the claim essentially concerned a challenge to  a
      failure to make a decision arising under the  Immigration  Acts.   The
      Tribunal granted permission stating: "We are satisfied that there is a
      properly arguable issue".  The Tribunal went on to say: "Though we see
      the force of Ms. Patry's submissions, and find  the  arguments  finely
      balanced, we agree with Mr. Buttler that the  matters  raised  in  the
      application are arguable and  identify  issues  of  potentially  wider
      importance."

5.    Events have moved on since the grant of permission.  On  6  May  2014,
      the Respondent made a decision. She decided  to  grant  the  Applicant
      refugee status. Accordingly, to the extent that the claim  sought  the
      Tribunal to order the Respondent to make a decision in her case within
      a specified period, the claim has become academic.

6.    We were told at the hearing that the Tribunal granted  permission  not
      only on the ground that it was arguable that the Respondent's delay in
      reaching a decision in this particular case was unlawful but also that
      it was arguable that the Respondent's  policy  that  requires  certain
      applications to be made in person was unlawful. It is said  that  this
      was the issue of wider importance mentioned by  the  Tribunal  in  its
      judgment. However, we could see  nothing  in  the  transcript  of  the
      Tribunal's judgment or the written submissions  of  the  parties  that
      were before the Tribunal at the permission hearing that indicates that
      the issue of wider importance was  the  lawfulness  of  the  published
      policy of the Respondent requiring asylum claims lodged on or after  5
      March 2007 to be made in person. Indeed, paragraph 3 of the Claimant's
      skeleton argument for the hearing on 20 May 2014  described  the  "two
      issues of general importance" as follows:

      (1)   The routine flouting of consent orders by the Respondent.

      (2)   Whether there is an implicit obligation on a claimant to  submit
           representations in person where a consent  order  provides  that
           the Respondent will reconsider the claim for leave to remain and
           for the claimant to lodge further representations in advance  of
           the reconsideration.

7.    Whilst (2) may entail consideration of the Respondent's policy, it  is
      essentially an argument about the terms, express and implied,  of  the
      agreement reached between the parties  as  evidenced  by  the  Consent
      Order, as opposed to the lawfulness of the Respondent's policy per se.



8.    Since parties are free to enter into agreements on such terms as  they
      see fit, we could see little purpose in the  Tribunal  permitting  the
      claim to proceed to a substantive hearing,  save  in  order  to  raise
      awareness amongst applicants and their representatives in  general  to
      exercise care in ensuring that the terms of any  consent  orders  that
      provide for the  applicants  to  make  further  representations  state
      specifically whether such representations are to be made in writing or
      in person, a purpose that is just as effectively achieved through  the
      medium of this judgment.

9.    Furthermore, Ms. Patry informed us that the Respondent was willing  to
      publish  further  clarification  of  her  policy,  which  Mr.  Buttler
      accepted addressed the issue of wider importance. We can see the force
      in Ms. Patry's submission that, at the time the Respondent  agrees  to
      enter into a consent order that provides for  further  representations
      to  be  made,  she  is  unlikely  to   know   whether   such   further
      representations  will  include  representations  that   fall   to   be
      considered as an asylum claim and thus fall subject to the policy that
      the representations be made in person.

10.   The Respondent's willingness to clarify her policy and  Mr.  Buttler's
      acceptance  that  this  adequately  addressed  the  issue   of   wider
      importance  mean  that  the  issue  whether  the  Respondent's  policy
      requiring asylum and Article 3 protection claims to be made in  person
      is lawful has also become academic.

11.   For the above reasons, we dismiss this claim to judicial  review.  The
      issues raised in this claim for judicial review have  become  entirely
      academic.

12.   However, in the hope of  avoiding  public  funds  being  unnecessarily
      wasted in the future by similar claims, we have decided  to  make  the
      following observations:

      (i)   Although entirely a matter for  the  Respondent,  she  may  well
           wish to clarify whether her policy requiring asylum and  Article
           3 protection claims that fall within her  policy  (i.e.  initial
           applications made on or after 5 March 2007) to be made in person
           includes claims for humanitarian protection.

      (ii)  We take the view that the Respondent's policy of requiring  such
           claims to be made in person is a matter of  procedure  which  is
           not inherently unlawful or unfair and  which  is  essentially  a
           matter for her.  It is difficult to see the basis in public  law
           upon which this Tribunal can make a general declaration  that  a
           process  for  handling  claims  is  not  one  well  within   the
           executive's power.  Absent  any  specific  and  very  compelling
           reasons in an individual claim that makes the application of the
           Respondent's procedure for handling such  claims  so  unfair  or
           unreasonable as to be unlawful in the case in question, it would
           seem to us likely that a general challenge to the lawfulness  of
           the policy will be unsuccessful.

      (iii) Indeed, it is very  difficult  to  see  why  an  individual  who
           claims international protection would wish to resist  a  request
           to make an application for protection in person. There may  well
           be good reasons, such as, for example,  an  inability  for  some
           very compelling reasons and that cannot be  suitably  addressed,
           to travel  the  distance  to  make  an  application  in  person.
           However,  whilst  we  have  regularly  seen  challenges  to  the
           Respondent's policy of requiring  such  claims  to  be  made  in
           person, we have yet to see a single case in which an explanation
           was offered  for  the  failure  to  follow  what  we  see  as  a
           reasonable process for handling such claims, one aim of which is
           to be ensure  that  the  identity  of  the  individual  claiming
           protecting is checked.

      (iv)  The Respondent's policy makes provision  for  the  general  rule
           that such applications be made in person to be disapplied  in  a
           particular case upon application. The policy gives  examples  of
           the circumstances in which the general policy may be disapplied.
            Nothing we say in this judgment is intended to make it more  or
           less onerous to secure an exception to the general rule.  As  we
           say, the policy and its operation is essentially  a  matter  for
           the Respondent. The Tribunal  will  expect  any  individual  who
           claims that  it  is  unlawful  to  expect  him/her  to  make  an
           application in  person  to  have  made  an  application  to  the
           Respondent to be exempted from the general rule.

      (v)   Pending the Respondent's clarification of her policy  (which  we
           were told may take some time),  this  judgment  should  make  it
           clear to applicants and their  representatives  that  they  must
           ensure that any consent order they agree  that  makes  provision
           for the claimant to make further representations clearly  states
           whether the further representations may be made  in  writing  or
           whether they should be made in person.

      (vi)  A failure to observe what we have said in (i) to (v)  above  may
           sound in costs in a judicial review  claim.  In  particular,  in
           relation to (ii), we add that it may sound in costs if:

            (a)  there is a  failure  to  provide  such  specific  and  very
                 compelling reasons in any challenge to  the  lawfulness  of
                 the policy; and

            (b)  the same  is  true  if  reasons  offered  for  a  professed
                 inability to make such claims in person are not specific or
                 compelling on any reasonable view.

      Conclusion


      The application for judicial review is dismissed.







Upper Tribunal Judge Gill         Date: 4 June 2014
