

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                VN (Chicago Convention - s 86(4)) Iran [2010] UKUT 303 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |                             |
|On 29 June 2010                               |                             |
|                                              |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      Mr C M G Ockelton, Vice President
                      Senior Immigration Judge Roberts

                                   Between

                                     vn

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss G Brown, instructed by IAS (London)
For the Respondent:    Mr Nate, Home Office Presenting Officer

Removal stated in a reasons for refusal letter as under  the  provisions  of
the Chicago Convention but  which  would  be  lawful  under  paras  8-10  of
Schedule 2 to the 1971 Act cannot  be  regarded  as  unlawful  by  reference
either to that Convention or the relevant IDIs,  because  of  the  mandatory
provisions of s.86(4) of the 2002 Act.
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The Appellant is a national of Iran. He arrived in the United  Kingdom
      in February 2007. He was carried by an  aircraft  from  New  Delhi  in
      India. On arrival he presented  a  counterfeit  Cypriot  passport.  It
      appears that the deception was detected. The Appellant claimed  asylum
      by reference to his country of nationality,  Iran.  The  Secretary  of
      State refused his claim. The Appellant appealed, but  the  appeal  was
      dismissed. The Secretary of State says, and the Appellant appears  not
      to dispute this, that so far as that issue was concerned,  his  appeal
      rights were exhausted on 6 June 2007.

   2. There was then a period during  which  the  Secretary  of  State  lost
      contact with the Appellant, and two incidents as a result of which the
      Secretary of State had contact with the Appellant again,  but  in  the
      end, on 22 December 2009, the Secretary of State made  a  decision  to
      give directions for removal of the Appellant to India, having  refused
      him leave to enter as a result of the asylum decisions made some years
      previously. The Appellant appealed, as he was entitled to do,  against
      the decision to give directions for his removal. The appeal was  heard
      by Immigration Judge Devittie, who dismissed it.  The  Appellant  then
      obtained permission to appeal to this Tribunal.

   3. It is necessary to look at three documents in  a  little  detail.  The
      first is the letter of reasons accompanying the  Notice  of  Decision,
      the latter being in standard form. The  reasons  for  refusal  of  the
      Appellant's claim to remain in the United Kingdom is dated 15 December
      2009. It specifically indicates that the Appellant's removal to  India
      will take place under the provisions of the Chicago Convention,  which
      is the main instrument governing  international  civil  aviation,  and
      founding the International Civil Aviation Authority. The  letter  goes
      on to deal in substance with the Appellant's claim under Article 8  of
      the European Convention on Human Rights, but there is  no  doubt  that
      that letter, as distinct  from  the  Notice  of  Decision,  bases  the
      decision to remove to India firmly on the provisions  of  the  Chicago
      Convention, and indeed refers specifically to an indication  given  by
      India that  the  Appellant  would  be  received  by  India  under  the
      provisions of that Convention.

   4. The second document is the grounds of appeal to the Immigration Judge.
      There are five bullet points in the grounds, but it  is  fair  to  say
      that only two substantive issues are raised. One is that the  decision
      to remove from the United Kingdom would breach the Appellant's  rights
      under the European Convention on Human Rights. The second is that  the
      decision to remove is "not in accordance  with  Immigration  Rules  or
      otherwise in accordance with the law".

   5. The Immigration Judge's determination results from submissions made to
      him on the issues in the grounds. So far as the Chicago Convention  is
      concerned, the Immigration Judge said this at paragraphs 11 and 12  of
      his determination:

         "11. As I understand the submissions by  appellant's  counsel  they
         amount to the contention that the Appellant's removal to  India  in
         accordance with the Chicago Convention  is  a  dereliction  of  the
         United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention  and  the
         Convention of Human Rights. In developing this argument  she  began
         by pointing out that there were apparent procedural  irregularities
         in the proceedings to invoke the Chicago Convention.  She  did  not
         draw attention to the  provisions  of  the  Chicago  Convention  in
         support of this submission. I have reviewed the provisions  of  the
         Chicago Convention. It is a convention  whose  contracting  parties
         aim to provide a framework  for  the  regulation  of  international
         civil aviation. It does not  concern  itself  directly  with  human
         rights issues. In the case of persons such  as  the  appellant  the
         section in the Convention that provides for his return would appear
         to be annex 9 paragraph 6.3. It obliges the contracting States  "to
         accept for examination any person found inadmissible at  the  point
         of destination if that person previously stayed in their  territory
         before embarkation other than in direct transit"

         12. In considering the argument that the respondent's  decision  to
         invoke the Convention is fraught  with  procedural  irregularities,
         one must  look  at  the  Convention  itself.  It  is  contended  on
         appellant's behalf  that  respondent  cannot  properly  invoke  the
         Convention because it has not sought the assurance  of  the  Indian
         authorities that he would be received; it has  not  confirmed  that
         the appellant would be provided with an emergency travel  document;
         it has  not  indicated  whether  the  Indian  authorities  will  be
         apprised fully of the  appellant's  circumstances  and  immigration
         history and whether they would still receive him if so informed. As
         appellant's counsel aptly put it "Chicago is  not  Dublin".  Indeed
         that is so.  The procedural matters she raises do not constitute an
         impediment to the respondent's decision to remove the appellant  to
         India in accordance with the Chicago  convention.  In  other  words
         from my reading of it the Chicago convention does not  require  the
         respondent to carry out the inquiries and seek the assurances  that
         that the appellant's counsel mentions."

   6. The Immigration Judge  dealt  with  the  substantive  claim  that  the
      Appellant's  removal  from  the  United  Kingdom,  and  to  India   in
      particular, would breach his human rights. The Immigration  Judge  was
      not impressed by the Appellant's evidence on those  issues,  and  took
      the view that the European Convention on Human  Rights  would  not  be
      breached by the Appellant's removal.

   7. The Immigration Judge did not have before him the determination of the
      Appellant's asylum appeal. He referred to the fact, as it  was  before
      him, that although the Appellant relied on medical evidence to support
      his human rights claim, he raised no  additional  issues  relating  to
      asylum, and did not assert that  circumstances  had  changed  in  that
      respect. At paragraph 16 of his determination, the  Immigration  Judge
      noted those facts. He said: "there is no  suggestion  at  all  by  the
      Appellant that he relies on any fresh evidence. To the extent that  he
      contends that there has been a worsening of conditions  in  Iran,  the
      onus lies on him to show that he would  be  at  risk  because  of  the
      changed circumstances. This he has not done."  The  Immigration  Judge
      then went on to deal with the possibility of the  Appellant's  removal
      to Iran, and concluded that it would not breach the  United  Kingdom's
      obligations under the Refugee Convention.

   8. His final paragraph is as follows:

         "DECISION

         I dismiss the asylum appeal

         I dismiss the claim for humanitarian protection

         I dismiss the article 3 claim

         I dismiss the article 8 claim"

   9. The grounds of appeal to this Tribunal persuasively and concisely  put
      by Miss Brown, who did not appear before the Immigration Judge, are on
      two discreet issues. We intend no disrespect to her if we take them in
      the reverse order to that in which they are put in the grounds.

  10. The point which we take first is the Immigration Judge's  approach  to
      asylum. As we have indicated, the grounds of appeal to the Immigration
      Judge were based on Article 8 and on an assertion that  the  Secretary
      of State's decision was not in accordance with the  Immigration  Rules
      or otherwise not in accordance with  the  law.  There  was  no  asylum
      appeal  before  the  Immigration  Judge.  It  is  not  clear  why  the
      Immigration Judge raised the asylum issue himself, and it is certainly
      not clear why he purported  to  dismiss  an  asylum  appeal.  To  that
      extent, it appears to us that that ground is clearly made out.  It  is
      fair to say that Miss Brown's ground is put on a more detailed  basis.
      The ground argues that in the circumstances where an Immigration Judge
      has not had sight of an earlier determination in an asylum appeal,  it
      would be wrong for the Immigration Judge even when it is accepted that
      there is no subsequent relevant  information  to  dismiss  any  asylum
      appeal that is newly before him. We are far from confident  that  that
      argument ought to be accepted, but certainly for the purposes of  this
      appeal, the position is that there was no  asylum  appeal  before  the
      Immigration Judge, and for that reason we find that he  was  wrong  to
      purport to dismiss it.

  11. The other ground of appeal to us relates to  the  application  of  the
      Chicago Convention.  Miss  Brown's  submission  is  that  the  Chicago
      Convention, taken  with  the  Respondent's  Immigration  Directorate's
      instructions on the  application  of  it,  prevented  the  Appellant's
      removal under that Convention. She submits that because the  Appellant
      had been admitted to the United Kingdom (in  the  sense  that  he  had
      physically passed through immigration for the purposes of  his  asylum
      claim), and had been, to the knowledge of the Respondent (if  that  is
      important), in the United Kingdom for a considerable  period  of  time
      following it, that the Chicago Convention no longer applied: and  that
      in any event if the Chicago Convention on its terms  applied,  removal
      under it, after that period of time, and after that process,  was  not
      what the IDIs provide.

  12. In the course of her submissions, we drew Miss  Brown's  attention  to
      section 86 s86(4) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002,
      which, following subsection (3) which indicates the grounds  on  which
      the Tribunal is required to allow an appeal, reads as follows:

         "4.      For the purposes of  subsection  (3)  a  decision  that  a
         person should be removed from the United Kingdom under a  provision
         shall not be regarded as unlawful if it could  have  been  lawfully
         made by reference to removal under another provision."

  13. As we have indicated, the Notice of Decision in the present case is in
      standard form. It itself makes no reference to the Chicago Convention.
      If it is to be read with the reasons for refusal letter which do  make
      such reference, then  it  is  arguable  that  the  decision  that  the
      Appellant should be removed is a decision under the provisions of that
      Convention. But even if that is right, it is necessary to bear in mind
      that paragraphs 8 and 10 of Schedule 2 to  the  Immigration  Act  1971
      would have themselves allowed, and do allow, the Secretary of State to
      remove the Appellant from the United Kingdom to India, because that is
      within the terms of paragraph 8(1)(c)(iii): "a country or territory in
      which he embarked for the United Kingdom". The provisions  of  s.86(4)
      are mandatory. They would have prevented the  Immigration  Judge  from
      regarding removal under the Chicago Convention  as  unlawful,  because
      the removal could have lawfully been made by reference to  Schedule  2
      to the 1971 Act.

  14. That resolves the Chicago Convention issue. It  is  not  necessary  to
      consider the provisions either of the Chicago  Convention  or  of  the
      IDIs, because the direction for removal could have been  made  in  the
      same terms under the 1971 Act, and it therefore follows that an appeal
      cannot be allowed on the basis  of  non-compliance  with  the  Chicago
      Convention or the IDIs in such a case.

  15. The Immigration Judge dismissed the appeal on all grounds.  He  should
      not have dismissed an asylum appeal that was not before  him.  He  was
      obliged to dismiss the appeal on the basis of the decision  not  being
      in accordance with the law. He did dismiss the Article 8 and Article 3
      and Qualification Directive appeals, and those aspects of his decision
      are not challenged before us.

  16. Our  conclusion  is  that  the  Immigration  Judge  erred  in  law  in
      dismissing an appeal that was not before him, and in failing  to  deal
      with s.86(4), but his errors were entirely immaterial. The appeal  was
      properly dismissed and for those reasons the appeal to  this  Tribunal
      is dismissed.



                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                       VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL,
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER



