
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                NB and ZD (para. 59 discretion) Guinea [2010] UKUT 302 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |                             |
|On 1 February 2010                            |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE GLEESON
                      SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE SOUTHERN


                                   Between

                                     NB
                                     ZD


                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the first Claimant:           Mr Abid Mahmood and Mr Rupert Beloff,
Counsel
            instructed by Blakemores Solicitors
For the second claimant:     Mr C Jacobs, Counsel instructed by Howe & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Mr A Payne, Counsel instructed by the Treasury
Solicitor
    1. The Court of Appeal decided in the present case that a failure by  a
       party to comply with the provisions of the  Procedure  Rules  is  an
       "error of procedure" within the meaning of rule 59,  and  that  rule
       therefore operates to preserve the validity of steps  taken  in  the
       proceedings thereafter, unless the Tribunal exercises the discretion
       therein to order to the contrary.
    2. The power may be exercised even when the point has not  been  raised
       by the appellant.
    3. In the exercise of its  discretion  in  relation  to  rule  23,  the
       Tribunal must consider the nature and extent of the breach and  this
       will entail a consideration  of  all  material  factors.  These  are
       likely to include:
        a. The length of the delay in the context of the strict time-limits
           under the Rules for filing and serving grounds  of  appeal,  (19
           days in a case when the time for appealing was 5 days).
        b. The Secretary  of  State's  action  in  misinforming  the  Upper
           Tribunal that she had complied with  the  requirements  of  rule
           22(5)(a) as to the date when service had been effected.
        c. The Secretary of State's failure to draw to the attention of the
           Tribunal her failure to have complied with rule 23(5)(b).
        d. Prejudice suffered by the applicant such as the effect of  being
           notified  by  the  Tribunal  that  the  respondent  is   seeking
           permission to appeal when the appellant has not yet received the
           determination, the loss of the opportunity to protest  that  the
           Secretary of State's application is out of time and  the  effect
           of the passage of time.
        e. Repugnance arising from the Secretary of  State's  pursuing  for
           any prolonged period  her  challenge  to  the  decision  of  the
           Tribunal without  the  successful  party  being  aware  of  that
           decision.
        f. The merits of the substantive application.
        g. The fact that the failure does not prevent a fair hearing is not
           decisive.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. These appeals, which were not  linked  before  the  original  Immigration
   Judges or those who reconsidered the appeals, were listed together before
   the Court of Appeal and remitted together as both of them  concerned  the
   effect of paragraph 23(5)(i)(a) of the Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal
   (Procedure) Rules 2005, in cases where the respondent had failed to serve
   the  Tribunal's  determination  on  an  appellant   before   filing   her
   application for reconsideration.

2. The first claimant is a citizen of Guinea and the second  claimant  is  a
   citizen of Turkey. In each case, the claims succeeded  before  the  first
   Immigration  Judge,  at  least  in  part,  and  the   respondent   sought
   reconsideration.  The respondent failed to serve the Immigration  Judges'
   determinations on the appellant 'not later than the  date  on  which  the
   respondent  makes  [the  reconsideration]  application'.   That  is   not
   disputed.

3. The facts as to delayed service of the determinations were that  in  each
   case the respondent sent his application for reconsideration by facsimile
   to  the  AIT  within  the  time  limited,  but  delayed  in  serving  the
   determination on the claimant.  The respondent did not  serve  the  first
   claimant until 19 days after faxing his application for  reconsideration,
   but the claimant asked the AIT for a copy and received that after only  a
   four  day  delay.  The  second  claimant's   copy   of   the   favourable
   determination was posted on  the  day  after  the  respondent  faxed  his
   reconsideration application to the Tribunal and was thus one, or  perhaps
   two days late.

Paragraphs 23 and 59 of the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)
Rules 2005

4. The respondent's responsibility as to  service  is  set  out  at  out  in
   paragraph 23 of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
   2005:

    "23 Special procedures and time limits in asylum appeals

    ... (5) The respondent must-
         (a) serve the determination on the appellant-
             (i) if the respondent makes an application for  permission  to
             appeal  against  a  decision  of  the  Tribunal,  by  sending,
             delivering or personally serving the determination  not  later
             than the date on which the respondent makes that  application;
             and  ...
         (b) as soon as practicable after serving the determination,  notify
         the Tribunal on what date and by what means it was served.
    (6) If the respondent does not give  the  Tribunal  notification  under
    paragraph  (5)(b)  within  29  days  after  the  Tribunal  serves   the
    determination on it, the Tribunal must serve the determination  on  the
    appellant as soon as reasonably practicable thereafter."

5. That contrasts with  the  service  provisions  in  the  Immigration   and
   Asylum (Procedure) Rules 2003:

    "Service of determination

    3.5     (1)    Except  where  paragraph  (2)  applies,  the   appellate
    authority must send to every party written  notice  of  the  Tribunal's
    determination on an application for permission to appeal.
      (2)  Where an application for permission to appeal relates, in  whole
    or in part, to a claim for asylum and-
           (a)   the appellant-
                 (i)   is the person claiming asylum; and
                 (ii)  is in the United Kingdom; and
           (b)   the Tribunal has refused permission to appeal,
           the appellate authority  must  send  the  determination  to  the
    Secretary of State, who must serve it on every other party.
      (3)  Where paragraph (2) applies, the Secretary of State must  notify
    the  Tribunal  when  and  how  the  determination  was  served  on  the
    appellant."

6. The earlier rule restricts service  by  the  respondent  to  unsuccessful
   asylum claims, with the Tribunal being required to  serve  determinations
   on immigration claimants and successful  asylum  claimants.   That,  with
   respect, is a more sensible formulation.

7. The respondent agrees that, in both these appeals,  she  did  not  comply
   with the new paragraph  23(5)(a)(ii)  obligation,  but  argues  that  the
   subsequent proceedings were nevertheless valid by reason of the operation
   of paragraph 59, the  failure  to  serve  being,  in  her  contention,  a
   procedural error rather than one of substance:

    "59 Errors of procedure
    (1) Where, before the Tribunal has determined an appeal or application,
    there has been an error of procedure such as a failure to comply with a
    rule-
    (a) subject to these Rules, the error  does  not  invalidate  any  step
    taken in the proceedings, unless the Tribunal so orders; and
    (b) the Tribunal may make any order, or take any other  step,  that  it
    considers      appropriate      to       remedy       the       error."
                                  [Emphasis added]

8. There has been  no  suggestion  that  the  original  Immigration  Judge's
   determinations were invalid, so paragraph  59(2)  is  inapplicable.   The
   effect  of  paragraph  59(1)  is  to  keep  effective  any  step  in  the
   proceedings unless or until the Tribunal exercises a discretion to  treat
   that error a invalidating a step in the proceedings, or make an order, or
   take any other step it considers appropriate.

Second claimant's appeal: grant of leave to remain

9. In the case of  the  second  claimant,  the  original  Immigration  Judge
   allowed  the  appeal  on  human  rights  grounds  only  (suicide   risk),
   dismissing the asylum appeal.  On 19 March 2010,  after  the  hearing  of
   this appeal, but before this determination was finalised, the  respondent
   granted her leave to remain under a legacy exercise which is  dispositive
   of her human rights appeal.

10. The second claimant served a timely  notice  under  rule  17  indicating
   that she wished to  revive  and  pursue  the  Refugee  Convention  appeal
   dismissed by the original Immigration Judge in 2006.  Subsection 104 (4A)
   of the Nationality. Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  provides  that  an
   appeal under s 82(1) (against an immigration decision) shall  be  treated
   as abandoned where leave to enter or remain is granted, save as  set  out
   in subsection 104 (4B):

    "104(4B)     Subsection (4A) shall not apply to an appeal in so far  as
    it is  brought  on  the  ground  relating  to  the  Refugee  Convention
    specified in section 84(1)(g) where the appellant -
            a) is granted leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom for
               a period exceeding 12 months, and
            b) gives notice, in  accordance  with  any  relevant  procedural
               rules (which may include provision about timing  ),  that  he
               wishes to pursue the appeal so far as it is brought  on  that
               ground."

11. Section 84(1)(g) provides that it shall be  a  ground  of  appeal  under
   section 82(1):

    "84 (1)(g)   that removal of the appellant from the United  Kingdom  in
    consequence of  the  immigration   decision  would  breach  the  United
    Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention..."

12. The original Immigration Judge's  dismissal  of  the  asylum  appeal  in
   January 2006 has stood unchallenged until now and  it  is  not  therefore
   clear why the second claimant  considered  that  her  Refugee  Convention
   claim could be revived at this late stage.   That element of  her  appeal
   is not treated as abandoned because she has been granted  leave:  it  was
   dismissed in 2006 and she  has  never  challenged  that  dismissal.   The
   second claimant therefore has no Refugee  Convention  claim  before  this
   Tribunal.  If her circumstances have changed, she would need  to  make  a
   fresh claim to the Secretary of State.

13. As far as her human rights claim is concerned, the exception  in  s  104
   (4B) does not avail her.   The  second  claimant  has  been  offered  and
   accepted leave to remain in the United Kingdom and that is an end of  her
   human rights appeal, which is statutorily abandoned.

14. Accordingly, there is no element of the second claimant's  appeal  which
   is still before the Tribunal for determination.  We record below the very
   helpful evidence given by her  solicitor  Mr  Saldanha,  and  the  useful
   skeleton argument and submissions by Mr Jacobs.  We have given weight  to
   them in considering the appeal of the first claimant, and we also had the
   advantage of a skeleton argument and oral submissions by  Mr  Mahmood  on
   behalf of the first claimant.

Transitional provisions

15. This determination was not completed before the AIT ceased to  exist  on
   15 February 2010;  the  AIT  was  replaced  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) and the Upper Tribunal (Immigration  and
   Asylum Chamber).   Pursuant to Schedule 4 to the Transfer of Functions of
   the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal Order 2010 (S.1.2010/21):

    "4.   Where  the  reconsideration  of  an  appeal  by  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration Tribunal under section 103A of the 2002 Act  has  commenced
    before  15  February  2010   but   has   not   been   determined,   the
    reconsideration shall continue as an appeal to the Upper Tribunal under
    section 12 of the 2007 Act and section 13 of the 2007 Act shall apply."

16. This remitted  reconsideration  therefore  falls  to  be  determined  as
   though it were an appeal before the Upper Tribunal.

The history of the first claimant's appeal

17. We are concerned in this determination only with  the  first  claimant's
   appeal (hereafter 'the claimant').  The  claimant  succeeded  before  the
   first Immigration Judge on  both  human  rights  and  Refugee  Convention
   grounds; the reconsideration  (now  overturned)  substituted  a  decision
   dismissing both elements of her appeal on the same grounds.

18. The claimant did not raise  the  question  of  delayed  service  of  the
   determination until the Court of  Appeal  grounds.  SIJ  Freeman  granted
   leave, querying nevertheless whether the claimant should be permitted  to
   pursue such a fundamental new issue so late  in  the  day.   However,  it
   appears that in the Court of Appeal there was no difficulty perceived  in
   allowing the claimant to do so.

19. Both appeals were considered together by  the  Court  of  Appeal  on  17
   November 2008, and the reconsideration determinations set aside.  In each
   case, the respondent was ordered to pay 75% of the claimant's  agreed  or
   assessed costs.  The Court of Appeal judgment herein is  reported  as  NB
   (Guinea), ZD (Turkey) v The Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
   [2008] EWCA Civ 1229.   The judgment of Jackson LJ clarifies the task set
   for the AIT, and now the UT (IAC) to perform.

    "19.    I have set out the provisions of  paragraph  59(1)  in  part  1
    above. There can be no doubt that the Secretary of State's  failure  to
    comply with paragraph 23(5)(a)(i) constitutes an 'error  of  procedure'
    within the meaning of paragraph 59(1). Paragraph  59(1)  (a)  expressly
    provides that such an error does not invalidate any step taken  in  the
    proceedings unless the tribunal so orders. The  inexorable  consequence
    of paragraph 59(1) is that the Secretary of State's  failure  to  serve
    the immigration judge's decision  on  the  date  when  he  applied  for
    reconsideration does not automatically invalidate  the  reconsideration
    proceedings. In my view the correct analysis of paragraph 59(1) is that
    in the case of procedural error, save where the rules expressly provide
    otherwise (e.g. rule 35), the AIT has a discretion as to whether or not
    subsequent steps in the proceedings are  invalidated.  Some  procedural
    errors plainly will not have that  Draconian  consequence.  However,  a
    breach  of  paragraph  23(5)(a)(i)  (the  rule  in   issue   in   these
    proceedings) may well attract such a consequence. In each case the  AIT
    must carefully consider the nature  and  extent  of  the  Secretary  of
    State's breach of paragraph 23(5)(a)(i) and the effect of  that  breach
    upon the claimant. It will undoubtedly be relevant if the claimant  has
    suffered prejudice as a result of late receipt of the appeal  decision.
    For example, he may lose the opportunity to protest that the  Secretary
    of State's application for reconsideration is out of time (even  though
    the rules do not confer upon him  the  right  to  make  submissions  in
    respect of the Secretary of State's application  for  reconsideration).
    However, mere absence of prejudice  does  not  automatically  give  the
    Secretary of State a licence to delay serving the appeal decision.  The
    proposition that the Secretary of State can pursue  for  any  prolonged
    period his challenge to an AIT decision without  the  victorious  party
    being aware of that decision is repugnant. The  AIT  should  take  that
    repugnance  into  account   when   deciding   whether   a)   to   allow
    reconsideration  proceedings  to  go  ahead  or  b)  to  declare  those
    proceedings invalid.

    20 Let me now consider how those principles should be  applied  to  the
    two cases before this court. In NB's case there was a delay of 20  days
    between the Secretary of State  applying  for  reconsideration  and  NB
    receiving a copy of the appeal decision  from  the  Home  Office.  That
    probably means that the Home Office posted the appeal decision 19  days
    too late. That period of delay on the part of the  Home  Office  cannot
    simply be brushed aside as immaterial. First of all  the  Secretary  of
    State's  application  for  reconsideration   included   the   following
    statement:

         "The determination of the AIT was served on the appellant by  first
         class post on 23 November 2006"

    That statement was incorrect on the evidence available to us. Secondly,
    during the course of the 20 day period NB received a  letter  from  the
    AIT  informing  her  that  the  Secretary  of  State  had  applied  for
    reconsideration. She had no copy of the determination, and did not  yet
    know what the  Immigration  Judge  had  decided.  On  27  November  her
    solicitors wrote to the AIT in the following terms:

         "Our client has received a letter confirming the acknowledgement of
         an application  for  a  review  of  the  tribunal's  determination.
         Nevertheless neither ourselves nor our client has received  a  copy
         of the tribunal's determination."

    It is, in my view, unfortunate that those  solicitors  needed  to  send
    this letter on a date four days after the Secretary of State had lodged
    his application for reconsideration. On  29  November  NB's  solicitors
    sent an email to the Home Office expressing similar concerns  to  those
    previously expressed in their letter to the AIT dated 27  November.  It
    is clear from this correspondence that the Home Office and the AIT were
    well aware that the requirements of paragraph 23(5)(a)(i) had not  been
    complied with. It therefore behoved the Secretary of State to draw this
    breach of paragraph 23 and the  misstatement  in  his  application  for
    reconsideration to the attention of the AIT in the  course  of  his  ex
    parte application for reconsideration. In this regard see the  decision
    of Mr Justice Maurice  Kay  in  R  (Cindo)  v  The  Immigration  Appeal
    Tribunal [2002] EWHC 246 (Admin) at paragraph 11. Even if the Secretary
    of State did not do so, it behoved the AIT  as  a  specialist  tribunal
    alerted to the relevant facts, to consider the matter. See  rule  4  of
    the Procedure Rules. The AIT should have considered how to exercise its
    discretion under paragraph 59(1). The AIT did not order so.  It  simply
    proceeded to make an order for reconsideration.

    21.     Mr Payne for the Secretary of State submits that neither  party
    raised the breach of paragraph 23(5)(i)(a) [sic] at the reconsideration
    hearing and it is now too late to take the point. He  submits  that  in
    the absence of any order by  the  AIT  under  paragraph  59(1)  of  the
    Procedural Rules the error had automatically been cured. In support  of
    this submission Mr Payne relies upon  the  decision  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal in R v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  ex  parte
    Jeyenthan [2000] 1 WLR 354 , in particular at page 366. I do not accept
    this argument. The original order for reconsideration was made  on  the
    basis  of  an  erroneous  statement  in  the   Secretary   of   State's
    application. The AIT must now  consider  this  matter  on  the  correct
    factual basis. In my view this case should now be remitted to  the  AIT
    so that the tribunal can consider how to  exercise  its  discretion  in
    relation to the breach of paragraph 23(5)(a)(i) which has occurred.  "

20. The meaning of the judgment is plain:  the Tribunal is to consider,  and
   exercise, its paragraph 59 discretion on the facts.  To the  extent  that
   the line of  guidance  determinations  by  the  Tribunal  indicated  that
   paragraph 23(5)(a)(i) could be considered without reference to  paragraph
   59, they were no longer good law.



The hearing

21. The Tribunal directed the filing  of  evidence  and  skeleton  arguments
   before the hearing.  We had the benefit in addition of oral evidence  for
   the second claimant, supported by a  witness  statement,  from  Mr  David
   Saldanha, a solicitor with Howe  &  Co.   We  have  given  Mr  Saldanha's
   statement and oral evidence weight, although his client's appeal  is  not
   before us now due to  the  statutory  abandonment  of  the  human  rights
   appeal.

22. Mr Saldanha has made a very detailed study of the Secretary  of  State's
   practice over time in relation  to  paragraph  23  which  has  been  very
   helpful to the Tribunal in this and other appeals.

23. Evidence from Mr Saldanha was considered and approved in Semere,  R  (on
   the application of) v Asylum and Immigration  Tribunal  [2009]  EWHC  335
   before Blake J at paragraphs 32-35 thereof:

    "32.   Mr. Saldanha is a solicitor in the firm of Howe and Co  who  had
         previously been appearing as an advocate before  the  AIT  and  its
         predecessors for some twenty years. He has made a witness statement
         in which he points to  evidence  of  the  practice  of  the  former
         Immigration Appellate Authority to allow two  working  or  business
         days for receipt of its determinations  when  calculating  time  to
         appeal to the former second tier authority.  This  was  at  a  time
         before 2005 when the IAA had the responsibility for service of  its
         own decisions. He indicates that there was  no  notification  of  a
         change in practice in 2005. He points out that  in  2006  when  the
         Home Office adopted the practice of postmarking envelopes with  the
         date of posting it became apparent that the actual date of  posting
         of determinations was one business day after the date that had been
         stamped by the Home Office on the AIT's determination as  the  date
         of promulgation, and this latter date could not be  considered  the
         date of posting.

    33.    This account is supported by the pertinent observations of Mr.
         Justice Hodge OBE when sitting as the President of AIT in the case
         of EY (Democratic Republic of Congo) [2006] UKAIT 00032. He
         observed:

         "[11] It is of the first importance, given the time limits in  this
         jurisdiction, that the date of service by the Secretary of State is
         clear. Where asylum decisions are served by post by  the  Secretary
         of State it is consistently the case that the date of posting  such
         determinations is unclear.

         [16]...It is within the knowledge  of  the  Tribunal  that  in  the
         majority of asylum cases the respondent does not give the  Tribunal
         notification on what date and by  what  means  determinations  have
         been  served.  This  is  breaching   Paragraph   23(5)(b).   Senior
         immigration judges considering time limits are not assisted by this
         failure....

         [19] The word "promulgation" has been used for  many  years  within
         this  jurisdiction.  It  appears  on  the  front   sheet   of   all
         determinations.   It   was   traditionally   completed    by    the
         administrative staff within the Tribunal with a  date  stamp.  That
         stamp was the same date as that  on  which  the  determination  was
         served by post on the parties. Where the determination is served by
         the Tribunal on the respondent alone the date  is  left  blank.  In
         asylum cases any date placed beside the word  promulgation  on  the
         determination of the Tribunal is unlikely to be of great assistance
         in deciding when the document was served. It is not  a  matter  for
         the respondent to add dates to determinations made by the Tribunal"

    1. The Treasury Solicitor's letter of the 29th January  2009  does  not
       dispute  the  evidence  of  Mr  Saldanha,  rather  it   gives   some
       independent support for it. It states:

         "ADMU have no paper records reaching back to 2005. The only  record
         of service is found on the UK Border Agency's computer system. This
         records the date that the determination would be sent to  the  post
         room to be sent out via royal mail, and  the  determination  itself
         would have been date stamped prior to being sent to the post  room.
         It is therefore possible that in cases where the determination  was
         sent late in the day (or after the last post collection)  the  date
         stamp of the determination may not have reflected the day on  which
         the determination was posted"

    1. The letter  continues  that  the  2005  franking  machine  has  been
       superseded and it is now impossible to be  sure  that  the  date  of
       sending was included in the franking machine  in  2005.  Since  15th
       October 2008 all AIT determinations are served by recorded  delivery
       which acts as confirmation of the date when it was sent by the  Home
       Office  and  when  it  was  received  by   an   appellant   or   his
       representatives."

24. At paragraph 39, Mr Justice Blake said this:

    "39.   ...The present application is concerned with events in July 2005
    three months after the new rules came into force. The date stamping  in
    the present case is precisely what the President of the  AIT  indicated
    should not occur. The  evidence  of  Mr  Saldanha  supports  the  AIT's
    observation that the date stamping of the decision is not the  same  as
    evidence of sending, as  does  the  response  to  it  by  the  Treasury
    Solicitor."

Mr Saldanha's evidence
Witness statement

25. Mr Saldanha relied on  his  witness  statement  of  August  2009,  which
   reflected his continuing analysis of  the  respondent's  compliance  with
   paragraph  23(5)(a)(ii)  in  Howe  &  Co  clients'  appeals,  where   the
   respondent had applied for reconsideration of  determinations  favourable
   to his firm's clients.   He  had  caused  envelopes  to  be  retained  to
   establish dates of posting and checked the dates asserted with the  AIT's
   records where necessary.  The following conclusions could be drawn:

    i) Over the period from April 2005, when  paragraph  23(5)(a)(ii)  came
       into effect with the formation of the AIT until August 2009 when  he
       prepared his witness statement, there were  700  appeals  where  the
       Secretary of State had failed to serve the determination as required
       in paragraph  23,  but  only  7  where  the  respondent  had  sought
       reconsideration.  (The other 693 breaches must  therefore  not  have
       concerned paragraph 23(5)(a)(ii)and do not concern the  Tribunal  in
       this appeal.)

   ii)  Of  the  7  appeals  where   the   respondent   had   applied   for
       reconsideration, the second claimant's case was the only  one  where
       the AIT had not held that that there was no valid appeal before  it.



   We  do  not  have  the  benefit  of  equivalent  statistics  retained  by
   solicitors representing the first claimant.

26. Mr Saldanha's records identified  several  phases  in  the  respondent's
   response to paragraph 23(5)(a)(ii):

      i)    Before the end of February 2006, determinations were  served  by
         being posted in an envelope bearing no postmark and the sequence of
         events was correspondingly hard  to  establish.   (see  EY  (asylum
         determinations - date of service) Democratic Republic of the  Congo
         [2006] UKAIT 00032);

     ii) From about 21 February 2006 to the  end  of  2007,  the  respondent
         served determinations in postmarked  envelopes,  typically  showing
         that the determination was date stamped one day  earlier  than  the
         envelope was actually posted.

         During this period, despite the recommendation by Hodge  P  in  EY,
         only a handful of letters were accompanied by a letter dealing with
         the posting date, and these letters were dated differently from the
         date when the determination was sent, again  not  as  Hodge  P  had
         suggested in EY;

    iii) In late 2007, the number of determinations where the  posting  date
         was a day later than the stamped date began to decline.

         On 11 October 2007, the AIT heard RN (paragraph 23(5): respondent's
         duty) Zimbabwe [2008] UKAIT 00001 which was promulgated in  January
         2008;

     iv) From January - October 2008,  the  determinations  as  served  bore
         neither date stamp nor method of service.

         The only way to establish the date of service was by examining  the
         envelope and/or telephoning the AIT to find out the  date  asserted
         by the respondent and entered onto the AIT computer system, ARIA;

      v)  From  October  2008,   determinations   were   almost   invariably
         accompanied by standard letters dealing with the date  of  service,
         but again these letters were frequently not dated on the  same  day
         as the posting of the determination; and

     vi) Mr  Saldanha  provided  examples  up  to  August  2009,  where  the
         respondent failed to serve the determination at all.   Service  had
         been by the AIT instead, under the provisions of  paragraph  23(5),
         after 29 days had elapsed.

         He had telephoned the respondent on each occasion to establish when
         the determination was served on the respondent.

27. Mr Saldanha was unable to identify any  prejudice  to  his  client,  the
   second claimant, but noted that in an appeal by a different client of his
   firm, NASS support was terminated, on the basis that  the  permission  to
   appeal application was out of  time,  based  on  an  erroneous  date  for
   service supplied to the AIT  by  the  respondent.   In  another  client's
   appeal, the respondent's failure to serve  the  successful  determination
   had resulted in a two year old child almost being removed from its parent
   and taken into care.

28. Mr Saldanha  observed  that  there  was  an  element  of  repugnance  in
   allowing one of the parties to control the service of  the  determination
   on the other; to permit such open breach  of  paragraph  23(5)(a)(ii)  by
   condoning the respondent's failure to serve the determination at the same
   time as  his  application  for  reconsideration,  or  sometimes  at  all,
   compounded  that  repugnance,  especially  as  the  respondent's  current
   practice was not to date-stamp the determination when served,  making  it
   difficult for the parties to check whether there had been compliance.  He
   characterised the respondent's  behaviour  as  'a  persistent  course  of
   conduct which has continued since the provision  for  the  respondent  to
   serve  determinations  was  reintroduced  on   4   April   2005'.     The
   respondent's  failure  to   observe   the   requirements   of   paragraph
   23(5)(a)(ii) continued, albeit not to the same extent as formerly,  right
   up to the date of his August 2009 witness statement.

Oral evidence

29. Mr Saldanha's evidence in  chief  followed  his  witness  statement  but
   added a clarification, that the position was now much improved,  although
   late service of determinations continued to some extent.

30.  In  cross-examination,  Mr  Saldanha  said  that  the  respondent   was
   considering an application by the second claimant  for  leave  to  remain
   under the legacy programme: he would not be pursuing any  ECHR  arguments
   before the present Tribunal.  There was no  factual  material  about  the
   second claimant's appeal in his statement.  Additional evidence about the
   claimant's health had been provided to the Secretary  of  State  and  was
   under consideration, together with further submissions from Howe & Co.

31. As already noted, that consideration had  a  positive  outcome  and  the
   second claimant now has leave to remain for a  period  in  excess  of  12
   months, apparently on human rights grounds, which  has  disposed  of  his
   appeal.  The Tribunal is very grateful to Mr Saldanha  for  the  detailed
   analysis of the varying practices of the Secretary of State since 2005 in
   relation to paragraph 23(5)(a)(ii).

Submissions for the claimants

32. We have taken into account the skeleton arguments  filed  on  behalf  of
   both claimants.  In oral submissions for the second claimant,  Mr  Jacobs
   relied on Mr Saldanha's evidence of the respondent's routine  failure  to
   comply with paragraph 23(5)(a)(i). Paragraph 23(5)(a)(ii)  was  expressed
   in mandatory terms and had an aspect of repugnance about  it,  as  giving
   overmuch control of the process of serving a determination to one of  the
   parties.   The   soundness   and/or   merits   of   the   reconsideration
   determination were of no relevance to the exercise which the AIT had been
   asked to carry out in these appeals.

33. For the first claimant, Mr Mahmood relied on his skeleton  argument.  He
   acknowledged the breadth of paragraph 59 but argued that, taking it  with
   paragraph 23(5)(a)(ii), the Secretary of  State  had  a  high  hurdle  to
   overcome.  Breach of paragraph 23(5)(a)(ii) might be  only  a  procedural
   error but it was a significant one.  As to the factors which the Tribunal
   might consider, Mr Mahmood set out a list of factors which  the  Tribunal
   might consider when exercising its discretion under paragraph 59:

      i) the reasons for non-compliance  with  paragraph  23(5)(a)(ii),  and
         whether there was any evidence to support the account now given;
     ii) whether that evidence was a good explanation by which the  Tribunal
         was persuaded;
    iii) the nature and extent of the breach (length of  delay,  element  of
         misstatement);
     iv) issues of repugnance, if relevant;
      v) the extent of the effect/prejudice on  the  claimant,  noting  that
         absence of prejudice is insufficient without more  to  require  the
         Tribunal to exercise its discretion in  favour  of  validating  the
         proceedings; and
     vi)  whether  or  not  the  reconsideration  proceedings  ought  to  be
         permitted to proceed, bearing in mind the overriding objective  set
         out at paragraph 4 of  the  2005  Rules  (that  appeals  should  be
         processed fairly, quickly and efficiently).

34. The stumbling block here was that despite having five years in which  to
   do so, the respondent  has  given  no  explanation  whatsoever  for  non-
   compliance.  Well over a year after the Court of Appeal decision in these
   appeals, the respondent had furnished neither a witness statement nor any
   other evidence for the Tribunal to consider by way of  explanation.   The
   best that the Tribunal had received was  an  apology  from  the  Treasury
   Solicitor, sent on Friday January 29 2010, some four years late, and from
   Counsel not the Secretary of State.  The Tribunal might have sympathy for
   the Secretary of State and even seek to decipher a possible  explanation,
   but there was just nothing to go on.

35. As regards the type and length of delay, the type of delay was  a  plain
   and until recently unapologetic breach of a mandatory  provision  of  the
   rules.   A period of 19-20 days was significantly more than the permitted
   time, particularly as a party wishing to submit grounds  for  review  had
   only five days in which to do so.  The system was  there  for  a  reason.
   Issues of repugnance were highly relevant here, Mr  Mahmood  argued.  The
   absence of any  direct  evidence  of  prejudice  was  not  sufficient  to
   validate the appeal.  At paragraph 20 of the Court  of  Appeal  judgment,
   the prejudice was set out; the 'hassle' and the passage of four years  of
   the claimant's life rendered the effect  of  the  proceedings  themselves
   prejudicial.

36. In relation to the overriding objective, contended Mr Mahmood, this  was
   not a deportation case.  There was no real need  for  the  provision  for
   service of determinations by the respondent on appellants such  as  these
   claimants; no successful claimant was likely to abscond.  When  paragraph
   23(5)(a)(ii) was introduced,  the  understanding  was  that  its  default
   operation would be by personal service but in the great majority of  such
   appeals, the respondent  had  in  practice  been  content  to  serve  the
   determinations by post.  The merits of the claim should not weigh in  the
   balance, although an appeal which might have been allowed would  arguably
   be a stronger case for a refusal to use the paragraph 59 discretion.

Respondent's case

37. In both her skeleton arguments, the respondent argued that the  question
   for the Tribunal was whether, in the exercise  of  its  discretion  under
   paragraph 59, it should hold that the  respondent  had  made  an  invalid
   application for reconsideration by virtue of its failure to  comply  with
   paragraph 23(5)(a)(i) of the AIT Procedure Rules 2005.

38. After setting out the history of  each  appeal  and  the  provisions  of
   rules 23 and 59, the respondent's argument focused on the decision of the
   Court of Appeal  in  Benkaddouri  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
   Department [2003] EWCA Civ 1250, a case decided  under  the  earlier  IAT
   Procedure Rules 2000.  The failure to comply in  Benkaddouri  related  to
   breach  of  directions,  described  by  Sedley  LJ  as  'verging  on  the
   contumacious' and not to the  provisions  of  paragraph  23(5)(a)(ii),  a
   procedure which came into being with the AIT in 2005.

39. The respondent's argument did not engage  at  all  with  the  series  of
   decisions by the AIT about the effect  of  paragraph  23(5)(a)(ii).    It
   recited (without the neutral or any citation) paragraph 19 of  the  Court
   of Appeal's judgment in these appeals, but out of context:  the  guidance
   at paragraphs 20-22 is omitted and instead, working from Benkaddouri, the
   respondent extracted four principles:

      a) the extent of the non-compliance (whether the  Secretary  of  State
         'pursued   for   a   prolonged   period'   his   application    for
         reconsideration without the claimants being aware of the outcome);
      b) the prejudice (if any) to the claimants;
      c) the impact on the respondent of not permitting the  application  to
         be made, thus 'denying it the opportunity to  challenge  a  legally
         flawed first instance determination'; and
      d) The substantive merits of the reconsideration  applications,  which
         both succeeded  at  the  reconsideration  hearings,  reversing  the
         outcome of the appeals.

40.   Where, notwithstanding  non-compliance,  a  fair  hearing  could  take
   place, the respondent contended that was 'ultimately decisive'.

41. The Benkaddouri-derived merits criterion was not among those  identified
   by Jackson LJ in the Court of Appeal judgment in these appeals and we  do
   not consider that it is relevant:  the applications  for  reconsideration
   either were or were not correctly served, and if incorrectly served,  the
   respondent should have notified the Tribunal as soon as she became  aware
   of the defect so that the operation of paragraph 59 could be considered.

42. In submissions for the Secretary of State, Mr Payne accepted that  there
   was less justification for the procedure  in  paragraph  23(5)(a)(ii)  in
   cases where, as here, the claimants had succeeded and there was  no  risk
   of absconding.  Where the  respondent  challenged  a  successful  outcome
   before the first Immigration Judge, the successful party had no right  of
   reply to the permission application. The mandatory  nature  of  paragraph
   23(5)(a)(ii)  should  properly  be  viewed  as  a  gateway  for   further
   consideration of the consequences of  non-compliance.   Failure  to  rely
   paragraph 59 did not invalidate the substantive assessment of the  merits
   of the appeal in the reconsideration determination.

43. Mr Payne relied on the consultation documents prepared on behalf of  the
   respondent before the present Rules were introduced:

    "In commenting on the time limit for service of asylum decisions by the
    respondent (Immigration  and Nationality Directorate of the Home Office
    (IND)), almost all responses expressed  a  preference  for  service  of
    decisions to remain the responsibility of the Tribunal.

    Specific concerns  raised  in  this  area  were  that  there  were  not
    safeguards to ensure that service takes place within the  28  day  time
    limit and no sanctions if it did not. The commonly held view  was  that
    this means that successful and unsuccessful claimants may have to  wait
    unlimited periods of time until they know the outcome of their  appeal.
    Responses also commented that service on the  respondent  only  by  the
    Tribunal means that IND will receive all asylum decisions up to 28 days
    before the claimant. This was seen as creating procedural unfairness as
    it meant that the IND could apply for review of an  AIT  decision,  and
    the Tribunal may order a review and set a date  for  a  reconsideration
    hearing before the asylum seeker knows the outcome of the next appeal.

    We have retained provisions for respondent service, as these provisions
    support the government's intention of improved  contact  management  in
    support of broader policy objectives. However, to address the  specific
    concerns, the rules have been amended to specify that ...in cases where
    IND are seeking to challenge a Tribunal determination they must send or
    personally serve the determination on the claimant at the same time, or
    before, they lodge their application."

44. In discussion of paragraph 59, the consultation process  described  that
   rule as mirroring the pre-2005 'slip  rule'  to  allow  the  Tribunal  to
   correct an administrative error and that:

    "Recognising the introduction of time limits at various points  in  the
    rules, it also sets out a provision  whereby  a  determination  is  not
    invalidated  if,  for  example,  hearings  do  not  take  place  within
    specified time periods.  Respondents generally welcomed steps  enabling
    the correction of administrative errors and agreed that a determination
    should be valid where time limits in the rules are not met."

45. The determination in the first claimant's appeal  was  received  by  her
   after four days (almost twice the intended time), but  only  because  the
   AIT had sent it to her, at her request.  Mr  Payne  argued  that  in  the
   Immigration Rules made it  improper  for  the  AIT  to  have  served  the
   determination directly and, at least in the absence of an application for
   reconsideration served by the respondent, the claimant had  no  right  of
   response and prejudice  to  her  was  difficult  to  discern.  The  first
   claimant had not relied on paragraph 23(5)(a)(ii) in  proceedings  before
   the AIT.  The AIT could not be  criticised  for  not  dealing  with  that
   point, given that the claimant had not raised it.

46. Mr Payne accepted that at paragraph 20 of the Court of Appeal  judgment,
   the court considered that the AIT as an expert tribunal should have dealt
   with the question of its own motion.  The Secretary of State had prepared
   thoroughly for that hearing and he had personally examined the file  but,
   two years after the event, there was simply no material on the  files  to
   enable the respondent to put forward any explanation for  the  oversight.
   Remittal by the Court of Appeal in both appeals  was  restricted  to  the
   paragraph  59   point.    Both   claimants   had   been   determined   on
   reconsideration to have no asylum or human rights  claim  but  sought  to
   retain  the  successful  outcome  of  their  initial  Immigration   Judge
   determinations, merely on the basis of  a  procedural  breach.   Had  the
   point been taken before the reconsidering Immigration  Judge  that  would
   have been different; the merits of the appeals were  highly  relevant  to
   the exercise of the Tribunal's paragraph 59 discretion.

47. On any view, argued Mr Payne, the claimant was  not  prejudiced  by  the
   respondent's delay.   She had never suggested that she needed  more  time
   to prepare or was disadvantaged or ambushed by the delay. She herself had
   successfully sought an extension of  time  to  appeal  to  the  Court  of
   Appeal. The procedural claim was the only  claim  the  claimant  now  had
   available to her.  Mr Payne accepted that there was a breach of paragraph
   23(5)(a)(ii)  but  invited  the  Tribunal  to  decline  to  exercise  its
   paragraph 59 jurisdiction to  void  the  reconsideration  determinations.
   The Secretary of State had admitted and apologised for errors  which,  at
   this distance in time, it was almost impossible for her to explain.

Claimant's reply

48. For the claimant, Mr Mahmood reminded the Tribunal that the  time  issue
   had been raised in the Court of Appeal application in September 2007. The
   respondent should not be permitted to rely on  the  intervention  of  the
   claimant's solicitors which resulted in her receiving  the  determination
   after four days instead of 19 or 20.  Delay and repugnance were  separate
   and not interdependent as the respondent alleged.

49. On behalf of the second claimant, Mr Jacobs reminded the  Tribunal  that
   the last day for service by the respondent of a  contested  determination
   was the date of her review application.  The 28-day  limit  in  paragraph
   23(5)(2) for service  of  unchallenged  determinations  where  claimants'
   appeals had been unsuccessful had no relevance  to  this  situation.   It
   would be Draconian for the Tribunal to  permit  the  respondent,  without
   explanation or apology, to abuse a repugnant provision for which  on  the
   facts there was no justification.  It was the  policy  itself  which  was
   repugnant, not the length of the delay.

50. The respondent's explanation for failure to explain the delay of  19  or
   20 days in service on the claimant was unacceptable:   file  records  and
   case workers would remain, even after a year or 18 months, from  whom  an
   explanation could have been sought.  The default was  compounded  by  the
   respondent's misleading statement that the determination had been  served
   by post at the same time as the application  for  permission  to  appeal,
   which was untrue.

51. The Tribunal could not and ought not to permit  a  defaulting  party  to
   default with impunity on this important obligation, either by interfering
   with the right of appeal or supplying erroneous dates when it  was  those
   dates which triggered the statutory right of appeal.  Only in exceptional
   circumstances should the paragraph 59 discretion be  exercised  to  allow
   the appeal to proceed.

52. It was also not right to say that either claimant had lost their  appeal
   on all grounds and now had to rely on a technicality in order to succeed.
    The reconsideration determinations had  been  struck  down,  the  effect
   being that the original Immigration Judge determinations in favour of the
   claimants still stood.   The  material  error  of  law  findings  in  the
   reconsideration determinations were an integral part thereof and were now
   of no effect.

53. The Court of Appeal had given clear guidance as to  the  application  of
   paragraph 59.  There was a persistent course  of  non-compliance  by  the
   respondent which was relevant under EY.  Late application to the Court of
   Appeal by  the  claimants  was  not  comparable,  being  something  which
   occurred in the ordinary course of events in individual  appeals,  rather
   than a course of conduct in many appeals  by  one  of  the  parties.  The
   judgment in Benkaddouri  was  irrelevant  since  it  dealt  with  a  non-
   mandatory provision contained in an earlier version  of  the  Asylum  and
   Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and was of  no  relevance  in
   considering the present, mandatory provision.

54. We reserved our determination which we now give.

Discussion

55.  The  AIT  has  had  occasion  to  consider  the  Secretary  of  State's
   obligations under paragraph 23(5)(a)(ii) on a number of occasions. Before
   the introduction of the AIT, a similar rule had existed, the operation of
   which was narrower, confined to circumstances  where  deportation  was  a
   possibility and the claimant had been unsuccessful.  We are not concerned
   with that narrower version of the rule.  Nor, with respect, are  we  much
   assisted by Benkaddouri, dealing as it does with a non-mandatory rule  in
   the pre-AIT rgime.

56. The first consideration of the present rule by the AIT  was  EY  (Asylum
   determinations - date of service) Democratic  Republic  of  Congo  [2006]
   UKAIT 00032, in which, at paragraphs 15-16, the AIT (Hodge P, SIJ Gleeson
   and SIJ King) said this:

    "15.   Because of the failure by the respondent to indicate the date on
    which the determination had been posted it was in fact not possible  to
    calculate the proper deemed date of receipt in accordance with Rule  55
    (5).

           16. These failures are  of  great  significance  where  the  time
               limits for challenging the decision of this Tribunal  are  as
               restricted as they are.  There are further  difficulties  for
               the Tribunal operating the review procedure.   It  is  within
               the knowledge of the Tribunal that in the majority of  asylum
               cases the respondent does not give the Tribunal  notification
               on what date and  by  what  means  determinations  have  been
               served.  This  is  breaching  Paragraph   23(5)(b).    Senior
               Immigration Judges considering  time  issue  limits  are  not
               assisted by this failure.  A standard letter to the appellant
               with copies to the appellant's representatives  and  the  AIT
               all dated and sent on the day of posting of the determination
               would     remove     most     of      the      difficulties."



                  [Emphasis added]

   As set out in Mr Saldanha's evidence,  that  guidance  was  not  properly
   implemented and the date of service problems continued.

57. The AIT considered paragraph 23(5)(a)(ii) again  in  HH  (Paragraph  23:
   meaning and extent) Iraq [2007] UKAIT 00036 (Mr C M  G  Ockelton,  Deputy
   President, SIJ Grubb).  That decision was specifically disapproved in the
   Court of Appeal consideration of these appeals, because it failed to deal
   with the effect of paragraph 59.

58. The next consideration by the AIT of paragraph 23(5)(a)(ii)  was  in  RN
   (paragraph 23(5): respondent's duty) Zimbabwe  [2008]  UKAIT  00001  (SIJ
   Moulden and SIJ P R Lane) which held that:

    "The respondent complies with paragraph 23(5)(a)(i) if, in cases  other
    than personal service, she sends  or  delivers  the  determination  not
    later than the date on which the section 103A application is  made.  It
    is not necessary for the determination  to  have  been  served  on  the
    appellant for the purposes of  rule  55(5)  by  that  date.  Where  the
    appellant  adduces  evidence  that  suggests  the  respondent  has  not
    complied with paragraph 23(5)(a)(i), it is for the respondent  to  show
    otherwise."

59. Again, the paragraph 59 argument was not run.  We reminded ourselves  of
   the provisions of paragraph 59.   Contrary  to  the  submissions  of  the
   claimants' Counsel, the primary effect of paragraph 59 is to ensure  that
   appeals are not invalidated by procedural flaws:

    "59 Errors of procedure

    (1) Where, before the Tribunal has determined an appeal or application,
    there has been an error of procedure such as a failure to comply with a
    rule-
         (a) Subject to these Rules, the error does not invalidate any  step
         taken in the proceedings, unless the Tribunal so orders; and
         (b) The Tribunal may make any order, or take any other  step,  that
         it considers appropriate to remedy the error.
    (2) In particular, any determination made in an appeal  or  application
    under these Rules shall be valid notwithstanding that-
         (a) A hearing did not take place; or
         (b) The determination was not made or served,
    within a time period specified in these Rules."

60.  In the present appeals, before  the  AIT  determined  the  application,
   there was a  plain  and  undisputed  failure  to  comply  with  paragraph
   23(5)(a)(i). We turn therefore to the guidance given by Jackson LJ in the
   Court of Appeal as to how the Tribunal should apply paragraph 59:

         "20. ...In my view the correct analysis of paragraph 59(1) is  that
         in the case of procedural error, save  where  the  rules  expressly
         provide otherwise (e.g. rule 35), the AIT has a  discretion  as  to
         whether or not subsequent steps in the proceedings are invalidated.
         Some  procedural  errors  plainly  will  not  have  that  Draconian
         consequence. However, a breach of paragraph 23(5)(a)(i)  (the  rule
         in  issue  in  these  proceedings)  may   well   attract   such   a
         consequence."

61. Pausing there, we see that the effect of paragraph 59  is  to  make  the
   proceedings valid unless the  AIT  (or  now,  UT  (IAC)),  exercises  its
   discretion to invalidate them.  Jackson LJ then  set  out  what  the  AIT
   needed to consider:

    a. The nature  and  extent  of  the  Secretary  of  State's  breach  of
       paragraph 23(5)(a)(i)  and  the  effect  of  that  breach  upon  the
       claimant.

    b. Whether the claimant has suffered prejudice  as  a  result  of  late
       receipt of the  appeal  decision.  For  example,  he  may  lose  the
       opportunity to protest that the Secretary of State's application for
       reconsideration is out of time (even though the rules do not  confer
       upon him the right to make submissions in respect of  the  Secretary
       of State's application for reconsideration).

    c. Mere absence of prejudice does not automatically give the  Secretary
       of State a  licence  to  delay  serving  the  appeal  decision.  The
       proposition that the Secretary of State can pursue for any prolonged
       period his challenge to an AIT decision without the victorious party
       being aware of that decision is repugnant.

    d. The AIT should take  that  repugnance  into  account  when  deciding
       whether a) to allow reconsideration proceedings to go ahead or b) to
       declare those proceedings invalid.

62. We prefer that analysis to  that  put  forward  by  Mr  Payne  based  on
   Benkaddouri; for the reasons already  given,  we  do  not  consider  that
   Benkaddouri is of much assistance because both the status of the rule and
   the failure of the Secretary of State are significantly different.

Nature and extent of the respondent's breach of paragraph 23(5)(a)(ii)

63. It is not disputed that since 2005 the respondent  has  been  unable  to
   provide either a satisfactory explanation or a system which  enables  her
   to comply with paragraph 23, which we note was inserted into the Rules at
   her request, in the teeth of objections from consultees  about  precisely
   the type of problems which subsequently occurred. We  consider  that  the
   repugnance factor of bringing within the paragraph  23(5)(a)(ii)  service
   procedure determinations relating to claimants with no reason to  abscond
   (because their First-tier Tribunal appeal was successful),  coupled  with
   the respondent's failure to notify  the  correct  dates  or  control  his
   internal postal system so as to comply, must be given significant weight.



64. We also note that the respondent did not apologise until the hearing  of
   this second reconsideration, three and a half years later,  and  then  by
   Counsel, and can provide no explanation of the error on  in  relation  to
   the claimant's appeal. The respondent's non-compliance was  systemic  and
   her attempts to deal with it were designed to obfuscate  rather  than  to
   solve the problem.    There is no obligation on the respondent  to  serve
   her notice of appeal on the very last day for service nor any  suggestion
   that it was not reasonably possible for her  to  have  done  so  one  day
   earlier, to enable proper compliance:  removing the date stamp to make it
   impossible to tell whether there had been compliance is  an  unattractive
   'solution' to this problem.

Prejudice

65. As set out in the judgment of Jackson LJ at paragraph 19,  prejudice  to
   the claimant is not determinative nor the lack of it  necessarily  fatal.
   Jackson LJ considered that prejudice might  take  many  forms,  over  and
   above the delay which the necessity to go to the Tribunal and  the  Court
   of Appeal could be said to have caused to the claimant:

    "19.   ...For example, he may lose the opportunity to protest that  the
    Secretary of State's application for reconsideration  is  out  of  time
    (even though the rules do  not  confer  upon  him  the  right  to  make
    submissions in respect of the  Secretary  of  State's  application  for
    reconsideration).  However,  mere  absence  of   prejudice   does   not
    automatically give the Secretary of State a licence  to  delay  serving
    the appeal decision. "

66. It is right that the claimant did  not  raise  the  delayed  service  at
   first instance or in her reconsideration application  and  hearing:   the
   first mention was in grounds of appeal to the Court of Appeal.   She  has
   not provided any evidence of prejudice to her.   She  wishes,  after  all
   this time, to have the certainty which the original  Immigration  Judge's
   favourable determination gave her.  The third, conflated head of analysis
   is that absence of prejudice is not determinative, and in this context we
   remember that the respondent served the determination almost three  weeks
   late and misled the Tribunal about that date of service.

Repugnance

67. We bear in mind that paragraph 3.5 of  the  2003  Rules,  the  last  IAT
   Procedure Rules, was sensibly restricted to service by the respondent  on
   the losing asylum claimant in the United Kingdom only, with the objective
   of preventing absconding.  That was changed in the AIT Rules at paragraph
   23(5)(a)(i) to allow service  by  the  respondent  on  successful  asylum
   claimants,  at  the  respondent's  request.   It  was  incumbent  on  the
   respondent to come up with a method of service  which  was  effective  to
   meet the requirement of paragraph 23 and she has had five years to do so.
     The original understanding was that such service would normally  be  in
   person, in which case it would have  been  straightforward  to  give  the
   determination and the grounds of appeal to the claimant at the same time.

68. However, the respondent has not found that  necessary.   The  reason  is
   clear:  there is no real risk of absconding until the claimant knows  the
   outcome of her appeal, and even less risk when a claimant knows that  her
   appeal has been successful:  the respondent has therefore not  needed  to
   devote resources to individual meetings and simply posts the  grounds  of
   appeal and determination to the  claimant's  address  for  service.   The
   respondent is in control of that process,  both  as  to  service  of  the
   determination and of her grounds of appeal.  It is not  good  enough  for
   her to say that business needs mean that she cannot get  her  grounds  of
   appeal ready in time for both to be served together  before  the  grounds
   reach the Tribunal.

69. The repugnance factor is a weighty one.  In this claimant's  appeal,  we
   remind ourselves that she received  the  respondent's  challenge  to  her
   appeal some three weeks before the respondent served the determination in
   her favour.  In the second claimant's appeal, of which  we  are  not  now
   seised, the delay was one or two days.

Should the Tribunal exercise its paragraph 59 discretion?

70. We now turn to the exercise of the paragraph 59 discretion.

    "59 Errors of procedure
    (1) Where, before the Tribunal has determined an appeal or application,
    there has been an error of procedure such as a failure to comply with a
    rule-
    (a) subject to these Rules, the error  does  not  invalidate  any  step
    taken in the proceedings, unless the Tribunal so orders; and
    (b) the Tribunal may make any order, or take any other  step,  that  it
    considers      appropriate      to       remedy       the       error."
                                  [Emphasis added]

71. The position in this appeal is that  the  reconsideration  determination
   having been struck down, the original Immigration  Judge's  determination
   in the claimant's favour stands.  The material  error  of  law  reasoning
   forms part of the determination which was set aside and is no  longer  in
   effect.

72. The respondent has served an application for reconsideration  which  now
   is treated as grounds of appeal to this Tribunal.  It was served  out  of
   time.   We  have  to  consider  whether  to  exercise  the  paragraph  59
   discretion or to allow that application to stand, and list the appeal for
   hearing before the Upper Tribunal.

73. The first question is whether the respondent's default is an  'error  of
   procedure such as a failure to comply with  a  rule'  thus  engaging  the
   paragraph 59 provisions.  We are  satisfied,  given  the  plain  language
   used, that this is a failure to comply with a rule and thus an  error  of
   procedure as paragraph 59 defines it.  We  are  also  satisfied  that  it
   occurred before the Tribunal reconsidered the appeal.

74. The default position under paragraph 59 is that subsequent steps in  the
   proceedings are not invalidated.  However, in the light of the  Court  of
   Appeal's judgment, there are no such steps.  The appeal remains frozen at
   the grounds of appeal stage,  the  reconsideration  determination  having
   been set aside.   Should  the  Tribunal  now  decline   to  exercise  its
   paragraph 59 discretion to invalidate the grounds of appeal  for  failure
   to comply with the provisions of paragraph 23(5)(a)(i), then the grant of
   reconsideration remains valid and the appeal would be heard again  before
   the Upper Tribunal.

75. If, on the other hand, the Tribunal considered that in the light of  the
   respondent's  long-standing  failure  to  meet  her   obligations   under
   paragraph 23(5)(a)(i)  or  to  explain  why  she  cannot  do  so,  either
   generally or in this appeal, it would be  appropriate  to  exercise  that
   discretion, the Tribunal "may make any order, or  take  any  other  step,
   that it considers appropriate to remedy the error".   There  is  a  clear
   indication in the judgment of Jackson LJ in the Court of Appeal  that  in
   relation to this claimant, the exercise of the  paragraph  59  discretion
   should be considered.  We are satisfied that it is right to  exercise  it
   against the respondent. We take into account the following factors:

    a) The long period (5 years) during  which  successive  Secretaries  of
       State failed to  make  any  headway  in  compliance  with  paragraph
       23(5)(a)(ii) or to keep records enabling the respondent  to  explain
       what went wrong. There was no apology by the respondent  until  very
       late in the day.

    b) The delay of 19  or  20  days,  four  times  the  time  for  seeking
       reconsideration,  before  the  Secretary   of   State   served   the
       determination of this claimant's successful appeal;

    c) The knowing misstatement by the respondent as to her compliance with
       the service requirements of rule 23(5)(a)(i);

    d) The 'hassle' and prejudice  caused  to  the  claimant  by  receiving
       grounds for review while she was  still  waiting  to  find  out  the
       result of her appeal, and the long delay thereafter in resolution of
       her international protection status.

76. This was a repugnant provision applied  to  a  claimant  who  was  never
   going to abscond because she had  a  determination  in  her  favour.  The
   respondent was fully aware of  the  structural  problems  in  her  postal
   system,  which  were  not  addressed,  save  for  various  date  stamping
   procedures which made it more  difficult  to  ascertain  exactly  when  a
   determination had been served.   The  EY  approach  was  not  adopted  as
   suggested by Hodge P.  The Secretary of  State  could  have  arranged  to
   complete grounds of appeal two days earlier and post them,  at  the  same
   time as posting the determination to the claimants:  that would have been
   in line with her paragraph 23(5)(a)(i) obligations.  It was her  practice
   of faxing them on the last day, then posting the  determination  out  the
   next day, which has caused the delays overall.  In the present claimant's
   case, there is a further delay which is both lengthy and unexplained.

77. We therefore exercise our paragraph 59 discretion against the  Secretary
   of State. We consider that the appropriate remedy  for  the  respondent's
   defective service of the determination is to  treat  the  reconsideration
   application as defective, leaving the  original  determination  standing.
   There is accordingly no  valid  reconsideration  application  before  the
   Tribunal.

Merits arguments

78. Both Counsel agreed that the reconsideration  before  the  Tribunal  now
   turned on the paragraph 59 point alone.  That is clearly right;  however,
   even had it turned on the merits, we consider  that  the  respondent  was
   wrong to argue that this claimant's appeal was bound to  have  failed  on
   reconsideration and that she had a hopeless claim which she  was  seeking
   to win on a technicality.

79. The respondent's  challenge  to  the  original  determination  concerned
   findings  of  fact  and  credibility  which  were  partially  upheld  and
   partially reversed in the overturned reconsideration determination.   Had
   the merits been relevant, weight would have been given to  the  following
   facts and matters:

    e)  The claimant produced a  medical  report  from  Dr  S  K  Gill  who
       reported  scarring  on  the  left  side  of  her  upper  chest  wall
       'consistent with' marks of a jaw or teeth, and with  the  claimant's
       account of being bitten.  The first Immigration Judge accepted  that
       as confirming the credibility of the core account.   The  overturned
       reconsideration determination did not engage with the bite  evidence
       or the Istanbul Protocol language used, although there was criticism
       of  the  Immigration  Judge's  knowledge  of  post-traumatic  stress
       disorder.

    f) The Secretary of State also challenged the first Immigration Judge's
       reasoning for finding that the claimant had been arrested during UFR
       strikes and riots which both Immigration Judges accepted took  place
       and were well documented.

    g) It was accepted by both Immigration Judges that the claimant  was  a
       teacher, as she claimed.

80. If those points are taken into account, we consider  that  it  was  much
   more likely than not that any reconsideration hearing would have  reached
   the same conclusions as the original Immigration  Judge,  albeit  perhaps
   for different reasons.  With or without an analysis of  the  merits,  the
   right thing to do is to treat the grounds of appeal as invalid for breach
   of rule 23(5)(a)(i).

DECISION


81. For the foregoing reasons, our decisions are as follows:


    1. There is no  valid  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  the  first
       claimant's appeal and the determination of the Immigration Judge  in
       the First-tier Tribunal stands.

    2. The second claimant's appeal has been abandoned.






Signed



Senior Immigration Judge Gleeson
Judge of the Upper Tribunal


