

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

       Akhtar (CEFR; UKBA Guidance and IELTS) [2013] UKUT 00306 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 28 September 2012                          |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                 HUMA AKHTAR

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ISLAMABAD

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms L Fenney of Duncan Moghal Solicitors and
Advocates
For the Respondent:    Ms L Goodfellow, Home Office Presenting Officer


1. Where, under Immigration Rules, it  was  required  that,  as  an  English
language  requirement,  an  individual  must  achieve  a  certain  level  by
reference to the Common European Framework Reference (CEFR)  (i.e.  A1,  B1,
B2 etc) and the individual relies on an International English Language  Test
System (IELTS) test result awarded by Cambridge ESOL, that  individual  must
necessarily rely on the relevant UKBA's  Guidance  to  succeed  because  the
Rules do not state an equivalence between the IELTS  test  results  and  the
levels of the CEFR.

2. The UKBA's Guidance does not attribute any mark less  than  level  B1  to
any IELTS score and so, in practical terms, equivalence to at least B1  must
be established even where the level to be achieved is A1.

3. In order to achieve a particular CEFR level, it is not enough  simply  to
look at the individual's overall score: the Guidance requires that at  least
each of the individual  modules  in  "speaking"  and  "listening"  has  been
assessed at the level required.[1]


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who was  born  on  6  September
      1986.  On 13 July 2011, the ECO  refused  her  application  for  entry
      clearance to come to the UK as the spouse  of  a  person  present  and
      settled in the UK, namely her husband, Mr Muhammad Daud  Akhtar  under
      para 281 of Statement of Changes  in  Immigration  Rules  HC  395  (as
      amended).  The ECO was  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  met  the
      English language requirement in para 281(ii) of the Rules.

   2. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  Judge E M  Simpson
      dismissed  her  appeal.   The  Judge  was  not  satisfied   that   the
      appellant's International English Language Test  System  (IELTS)  test
      result of an "overall band score" of 4.5 was  the  equivalent  of,  or
      exceeded, level A1 of the Common European Framework  Reference  (CEFR)
      as required by the Rules.  The Judge  went  on  also  to  dismiss  the
      appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR.

   3. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on the
      basis that the Judge had erred in law in finding that the  appellant's
      IELTS result did not meet the requirements of the Rules.  No challenge
      was made to the Judge's decision in relation to Article 8.  On 30  May
      2012, the Upper Tribunal granted the appellant permission  to  appeal.
      Thus the appeal came before us.

   4. The relevant provision of the Rules to this  appeal  is  para  281(ii)
      which provides as follows:

           "The requirements to be met by a person seeking leave  to  enter
           the  United  Kingdom  with  a  view   to   settlement   as   the
           spouse.....of  a  person  present  and  settled  in  the  United
           Kingdom... are that:

           ....(ii)    the applicant provides an original English  language
                 test certificate in speaking and listening from an  English
                 language test provider approved by the Secretary  of  State
                 for these purposes, which  clearly  shows  the  applicant's
                 name and the qualification obtained  (which  must  meet  or
                 exceed  level  A1  of  the  Common  European  Framework  of
                 Reference)..."

   5.  Although  para  281(ii)  creates  a  number  of  exceptions  to  this
      requirement, none of which are relevant to this appeal.   Further,  it
      is clear from the ECO's decision that  the  appellant  meets  all  the
      remaining requirements of para 281.  Thus,  the  only  requirement  in
      dispute is that in para 281(ii).

   6. In support of her application, the appellant relied upon a Test Report
      Form dated 16 April 2011 which gave her test results as follows:

           "Listening  5.5

             Reading   4.0

             Writing   5.0

             Speaking  3.5

             Overall Band Score   4.5"

   7. At paras 11-12, the Judge rejected the  appellant's  claim  that  this
      test result was equivalent to or exceeded level A1 of the  CEFR.   The
      Judge said this:

           "11.  The IELTS test certificate which is awarded  by  Cambridge
                 ESOL is one approved by the  Secretary  of  State  but  the
                 minimum level test  approved  is  at  B1  and  providing  a
                 minimum grade requirement  of  4.0  across  the  board  for
                 listening, speaking,  reading  and  writing.    (UKBA  IDIs
                 chapter 8  &  Annex  A3),  UKBA  entry  clearance  guidance
                 SET17).

           12.   If taking the IELTS test to attain level A1 of the CEFR in
                 listening and speaking the Appellant had to in effect  meet
                 the B1 level  and  a  minimum  grade  of  4.0  in  each  of
                 listening and speaking having  regard  to  this  being  the
                 minimum level approved by the Secretary of State  for  this
                 test and test provider.  The Appellant manifestly  met  the
                 requisite standard for listening 5.5, but failed to meet it
                 for speaking with the score of 3.5.   She  thus  failed  to
                 provide an English  language  test  certificate  showing  a
                 qualification obtained meeting or exceeding level A1 of the
                 CEFR."

   8. On behalf of the appellant, Ms Fenney submitted that the overall score
      of 4.5 equated to a result exceeding level A1 because it exceeded  the
      necessary score to reach level B1 which was set at 4.0.  In support of
      that submission she referred us to  the  relevant  UKBA  guidance,  in
      particular the list of approved  providers  which  included  Cambridge
      ESOL and the IELTS test.  There, Ms Fenney pointed  out  that  it  was
      stated that level "B1" had a "grade" required of "4.0".  She submitted
      that level B1 exceeded level A1 and therefore the Judge had been wrong
      to  find  that  the  appellant's  IELTS  score  did  not  satisfy  the
      requirement in the Rules.

   9.  With  respect,  we  do  not  accept  this  submission.   First,   the
      requirement in the Rules, namely para 281(ii) is plain.  The appellant
      must establish on a balance of probabilities by providing an  original
      test certificate that she has obtained  a  qualification  which  "must
      meet or exceed level A1" of the CEFR.  The English test taken  by  the
      appellant, namely the IELTS test at Cambridge ESOL does not provide  a
      result in terms of the CEFR grading.  As we understand it, some  tests
      would do this.  In order for the appellant  to  demonstrate  that  her
      test result is the equivalent of at least level A1 she must  therefore
      rely upon UKBA guidance reflecting the equivalence of  marks  obtained
      in the IELTS test to the levels of the CEFR.

  10. Looking at the UKBA schedule, the equivalences set out are as follows:

           "B1 = 4.0

             B2 = 5.5

             C1 = 6.5"

  11. As will be obvious, there is no  equivalence  for  level  A1.   As  we
      understand it, and this is what is said on behalf of the Secretary  of
      State, IELTS itself does not  provide  CEFR  equivalences  for  scores
      below 4.0 such that no score is equivalent to levels A1, or  A2.   The
      appellant must, therefore, in practical terms show a score of at least
      B1 in order to meet the requirement in para 281(ii).

  12. Ms Fenney submits that her overall score of 4.5 is, by virtue  of  the
      schedule, the equivalent of B1 because she has an overall score of  at
      least 4.0.

  13. Whilst that submission has a  superficial  attraction,  it  cannot  be
      sustained when the guidance is read as a whole.   The  appellant  must
      necessarily rely upon the guidance in order to show her IELTS has  any
      prospect of meeting the Rules.  Reading that  guidance,  it  is  clear
      that the overall score in itself is not sufficient to  show  that  the
      appellant has a score which is the equivalent of level B1.  Ms  Fenney
      took  us  to  the  UKBA  agency's  guidance  headed  "Information  for
      Applicants on the New  English  Language  Requirements  for  Partners"
      This guidance is, as we understand it, provided with  the  application
      form and so is something of  which  any  applicant  should  be  aware.
      Under the sub-heading of "Meeting the Requirement", the guidance -  in
      the form of question and answer - addresses the following question:

           "I have taken a test  at  Level  A1  which  tested  reading  and
           writing as well as speaking  and  listening  skills.   I  passed
           speaking and listening but failed to reach  A1  in  reading  and
           writing.  Can I still use this test?"

      The guidance provides the following answer:

           "Providing you can demonstrate you have passed in  speaking  and
           listening at Level A1 with one of the  approved  test  providers
           you can use this evidence.  We are only using  tests  which  can
           show separate scores for speaking and listening skills."

  14. Although this question and answer is directed to a test at  level  A1,
      reflecting the requirement in para 281(ii), it is  of  course  equally
      pertinent where, as in the case of this appellant, in practical  terms
      a score at level B1 has to be established because the test taken  does
      not recognise an equivalent directly at the A1  level.   The  guidance
      makes clear that the UKBA will take as the equivalent of a CEFR  level
      a test result that reaches the equivalent level in the two elements of
      "speaking" and "listening skills".  Here, the appellant has failed  to
      do that.  In the  "listening"  element  of  her  test,  the  appellant
      achieved a score of 5.5 which on the basis of  the  schedule,  is  the
      equivalent of the even higher level B2.  However, in relation  to  the
      element of "speaking" the appellant only achieved a score of 3.5.   On
      the basis of the schedule, that score has no equivalence to a level of
      the CEFR.  Only scores at 4.0 and above have equivalents.   Ms  Fenney
      initially relied upon a  document  (at  page  40  of  the  appellant's
      bundle) which purported to state that an IELTS score of  3.0  was  the
      equivalent of a CEFR level of A2.  The  provenance  of  this  document
      taken from the internet is not clear to us.  Although it has a  footer
      including the "British Council" and  "University  of  Cambridge,  ESOL
      examinations" and is headed "IELTS" this document does not  appear  to
      emanate from IELTS itself.   Indeed,  it  appears  to  contradict  the
      information received from IELTS by the UKBA set out  in  the  Rule  24
      response dated 11 July 2012 that:

           "IELTS has indicated to UKBA (and confirmed again recently) that
           they are not in a position to score tests below 4.0 for UKBA and
           although there is a wealth  of  information  on  the  web  which
           attempts to align IELTS scores below  4.0  to  a  score  on  the
           Common European Framework of Reference, a score below 4.0 is not
           equivalent to any scale on  the  Common  European  Framework  of
           Reference."

  15. We accept that to be the present position.  Consequently, in order  to
      establish  that  she  meets  the  requirements  of  para  281(ii)  the
      appellant must rely upon the UKBA's guidance to demonstrate  that  her
      IELTS test score is the equivalent  of  at  least  level  A1  and,  in
      practical terms given the nature of the IELTS test,  is  at  least  at
      level B1.  That guidance, when read as a whole  which  undoubtedly  it
      must be, makes clear that the UKBA will only treat IELTS  test  scores
      as equivalent to a particular CEFR level if the appellant can show the
      required scores in both the "speaking" and "listening" elements.   The
      appellant cannot do that because she only achieved a score of  3.5  in
      the "speaking" element.

  16. Our views may be summarised as follows.  The Rules require  level  A1.
      A person who takes a test marked on a different scale needs to rely on
      the guidance to show that the  mark  obtained  is  equivalent  to  (at
      least) level A1.  The guidance has to be read as  a  whole.   It  says
      that IELTS 4 is equivalent to level B1.  But, apparently deliberately,
      it does not attribute any mark less than level B1 to any IELTS  score;
      and it requires at least the  individual  modules  in  "speaking"  and
      "listening" to have been assessed at the level required.   The  former
      prevents  an  assertion  that  any  of  the  appellant's  marks   were
      equivalent to level A1; the latter prevents an assertion that  a  mark
      of 3.5 for speaking is sufficient, given that the guidance requires  4
      for the lowest point at which equivalence is attributed.

  17. The Judge was therefore correct to find that the  appellant's  English
      language  test  certificate  did  not  establish  that   she   had   a
      qualification which met the requirements of the Rules,  namely  at  or
      exceeding level A1 of the CEFR.  No error of law  is  established  and
      the Judge's decision to dismiss the appeal stands.

  18. This appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.










                               Signed






                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:




















                               -----------------------
[1] See now Appendix O to Immigration Rules HC 395.

