

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

         F (Para 320(18); type of leave) USA [2013] UKUT 00309 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Promulgated on               |
|30 April 2013                                 |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                      Mr C M G Ockelton, Vice President
                        Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


                                   Between

                    THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, NEW YORK

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                                      F

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs M O'Brien, Home Office Presenting Officer
For  the  Respondent:     Mr  Sharma,  instructed  by  Matthew   Cohen   and
Associates Limited


1. Paragraph  320(18)  requires  a  two-step  approach.   The  sub-paragraph
   itself  requires  an  assessment  of  whether  there   are   no   "strong
   compassionate reasons" before it applies at all; if it does apply  it  is
   discretionary because of the internal heading above para 320(18).

2. It may be necessary to ensure that,  if  an  appeal  is  allowed,  it  is
   allowed on the correct ground, because that may have  an  impact  on  the
   reasons for any grant of leave, which itself may  impact  on  any  future
   attempt at renewal.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The respondent, to whom we shall refer as "the claimant", is a national
    of the United States of America.  He is married to a  British  citizen.
    He has visited the United Kingdom on a number of occasions to  be  with
    her, and in November 2011 made an in-country application for settlement
    as a spouse.  That was  refused  solely  on  the  basis  that  such  an
    application has to be made from abroad.  The claimant accordingly  went
    back to the United States of America and made his application.  It  was
    refused because of a criminal conviction in April 1992.   The  date  of
    the Entry Clearance Officer's decision was 2 March 2012.

 2. The claimant appealed against that decision.  His appeal was  heard  in
    Glasgow on 14 June 2012.  The claimant was represented by Mr Sharma, as
    he was before us.  No Presenting Officer appeared to  argue  the  Entry
    Clearance  Officer's  case.   Judge  Clough  heard  evidence  from  the
    claimant's wife, and read his  statement,  with  supporting  documents.
    She noted that the claimant's conviction was for offences in 1989.   He
    had served a term of imprisonment, originally set  as  eight  -  twelve
    years.  He was in custody for five and a half years and on  parole  for
    six.  Part of the evidence was a letter dated  1  July  2003  from  the
    National  Forensic  Counsellor  to  the  Massachusetts   Parole   Board
    describing the claimant as an exceptionally responsible client "who has
    maintained high integrity, sobriety and a positive  relapse  prevention
    plan.  He does not seem  to  be  a  risk  to  society,  his  family  or
    himself".  The judge noted also  the  claimant's  immigration  history,
    including his previous visits to the United Kingdom, and was aware that
    in September 2008 he was visited by Immigration Officers who asked  him
    about his offence but did not raise any issues about his being  in  the
    country.   The  judge  looked  at  the  surrounding  circumstances  and
    concluded  that  they   were   not   "the   exceptional   compassionate
    circumstances envisaged in para 320(18) of the Immigration Rules".  Her
    final word on the claimant's ability to  comply  with  the  Immigration
    Rules is the following:-


        "The respondent failed, however to follow the UKBA  guidelines  and
        explain why the appellant would constitute a threat to the UK".

 3. We recall that the judge's final word on  the  matter  so  far  as  the
    Immigration Rules are concerned, because she then goes on to deal  with
    Article 8, and neither here nor at the  end  of  her  determination  is
    there any clear conclusion as to whether the  claimant's  appeal  under
    the Immigration Rules succeeded or failed.  But as she does pass on  to
    Article 8, and indeed allows the appeal under Article 8, we must assume
    that she thought that the appeal under the rules must fail.

 4. So far as Article  8  was  concerned,  the  judge  reviewed  again  the
    circumstances.  The appellant had family life with his  wife;  and  his
    mother-in-law now needed considerable help.  There had been no previous
    attempt to bar the claimant from the United Kingdom.  He had employment
    available to him in the United Kingdom,  and  a  family  network.   The
    judge concluded that it was disproportionate to refuse his application.
     As we have said, she allowed the appeal under Article 8.

 5. The Entry Clearance Officer's grounds of appeal, on the basis of  which
    permission to appeal to this Tribunal was granted, are that  the  judge
    failed to give adequate reasons for her conclusion allowing the appeal.
     The offence was a serious one, and  the  claimant  had  been  able  to
    conduct his family life at a distance for some years.  It was difficult
    to see the basis upon which the judge had decided that the decision was
    disproportionate.

 6. We heard submissions from Mrs O'Brien, who was able to assist us on the
    technicalities of para 320(18) and on the guidance to which  the  judge
    had referred.  She confirmed that there was no  Presenting  Officer  at
    the hearing, and indicated that that  appeared  to  be  the  result  of
    planned deployment of scarce resources, not a last-minute crisis.   She
    confirmed that there was no  doubt  that  at  all  relevant  times  the
    claimant met the substantive requirements of para 281.  We did not need
    to call upon Mr Sharma.

 7. Para 320(18) of the Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules,  HC  395
    (as amended) is complicated, or subtly drafted: perhaps it is both.  It
    is part of a list running from sub-paragraph (8) to (20)  following  an
    interior heading:

        "Grounds on which entry clearance or  leave  to  enter  the  United
        Kingdom should normally be refused".

    That part of para 320 is thus contrasted  with  sub-paragraphs  (1)  to
    (7C), which follow the sub-heading:

        "Grounds on which entry clearance to  leave  or  enter  the  United
        Kingdom is to be refused".


    Refusal is mandatory under sub-paragraphs  (1)  to  (7C):  there  is  a
    discretion to be exercised under  sub-paragraphs  (8)  to  (20).   Sub-
    paragraphs (18) itself is as follows:

        "18. Save where the Immigration Officer is satisfied that admission
        would be justified for strong compassionate reasons, conviction  in
        any country including the United Kingdom of an  offence  which,  if
        committed in the United Kingdom, is  punishable  with  imprisonment
        for a term of 12 months or any greater punishment or, if  committed
        outside the United Kingdom, would be so punishable if  the  conduct
        constituting the offence had occurred in the United Kingdom".

 8. Thus, the  sub-paragraph  requires  an  assessment  to  be  made  as  a
    precondition to its applicability.  If the individual in  question  has
    been convicted of a relevant offence, para 18 does  not  apply  if  the
    Immigration Officer  (here  including  Entry  Clearance  Officers)  "is
    satisfied that admission would be justified  for  strong  compassionate
    reasons".  If he is not so satisfied, sub-paragraph 18 applies, and sub-
    paragraph 18 imports, as we have said, a discretion.  To put the matter
    shortly, if there are strong compassionate reasons,  the  sub-paragraph
    has no application; if there are, exclusion is still not mandatory.

 9. This feature of para 320(18) is of some importance because of the terms
    of the notice of decision.  In it, the Entry Clearance  Officer  writes
    as follows:

        "Paragraph  320(18)  of  the   Immigration   Rules   requires   the
        satisfaction that there has not been a [relevant]  conviction  ....
        [The claimant's  history  is  then  set  out,  and  the  conviction
        identified].  Therefore, I have refused your application because  I
        am satisfied that para 320(18) applies".

10. The Entry Clearance Officer did not consider whether there were  strong
    compassionate reasons, nor did he show any signs of considering how the
    discretion should be exercised.

11. As we have said, the judge referred to "the  exceptional  compassionate
    circumstances envisaged in paragraph 320(18)".  But  that  is  not  the
    phrase in the rules, and it may well be thought that  circumstances  or
    reasons may be  "strong"  without  being  "exceptional".   The  judge's
    decision does, however, make it clear that she was aware of one of  the
    features of the sub-para  that  we  have  identified.   She  offers  no
    treatment of the consequences of the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  having
    failed to indicate the exercise  of  discretion.   She  does,  however,
    refer to guidance, which she correctly summarises.  She does not say in
    her determination that she regarded the guidance as  going  to  whether
    there were "exceptional compassionate circumstances"; nor does she work
    through the consequences of the decision having been made  contrary  to
    relevant guidance.  It is, we have to say, not easy to see why,  having
    reached the conclusion that it was, she did not allow the appeal on the
    basis that the Entry Clearance Officer had not applied the  Immigration
    Rules correctly.  That at least would have been a conclusion consistent
    with her reasoning.

12. It seems to us that the Immigration Judge erred in her  application  of
    the rules.  So did the Entry Clearance Officer, by  failing  either  to
    assess the circumstances or to apply the discretion.  We  now  need  to
    decide how to determine this appeal.

13. If the First-tier Tribunal had, recognising the defects  in  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer's decision, concluded that the decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the law and that the claimant's application  for  entry
    clearance therefore remained outstanding, awaiting a  lawful  decision,
    we do not think that it would have been possible to criticise it.   But
    the judge did not do that: she made no decision under  the  rules,  but
    allowed the appeal under Article 8.  Having detected an  error  in  her
    decision, we have a discretion whether to set the decision aside: see s
    12(2)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.   It  might
    be tempting to allow the judge's decision to stand, on the  basis  that
    it looks as though the claimant should  have  been  granted  his  entry
    clearance.  The problem with that is that the judge's decision  allowed
    the appeal only on Article 8  grounds.   The  consequence  is  that  in
    applying that  decision  the  Immigration  Officer  would  grant  leave
    outside the rules, and the claimant would have difficulty in  obtaining
    an extension of that leave in order to remain as a spouse,  because  of
    the nature of his leave.  (The current rules are in Appendix FM, para E
    - ILRP.1.2.).  On the other hand, if we substitute the decision that we
    think  the  First-tier  Tribunal  ought  probably  to  have  made,  the
    claimant's application remains outstanding after a considerable  delay;
    and clearly remittal for a new  decision  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    would do nothing other than extend that delay.

14. The claimant meets all  the  substantive  requirements  of  the  rules.
    Despite his conviction for a serious offence he is fully  rehabilitated
    and nobody thinks he is  a  danger  to  the  community  of  the  United
    Kingdom.  He has been in the United Kingdom on a  number  of  occasions
    without objection from the Secretary of State; it  is  clear  from  the
    fact that he was interviewed by Immigration Officers that the Secretary
    of State is aware of the history.  Even if the Entry Clearance  Officer
    took the view that there were no  "strong  compassionate  reasons"  for
    discounting his conviction, it seems to us that  the  question  whether
    the discretion under para 320(18) should be  exercised  in  his  favour
    admits of only one answer.  Indeed in the circumstances of this case we
    take the view that to exercise the  discretion  against  him  would  be
    irrational.

15. For the foregoing reasons we find an error in the First-tier Tribunal's
    decision and set it aside.  We substitute a determination allowing  the
    appeal, and again, for the reasons we have given, we direct that  entry
    clearance be issued to the claimant.










                                                              C M G OCKELTON

VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                           Date: 4 June 2013





Direction regarding anonymity - rule 45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration
Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or  any  member  of  their  family.  This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure to comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of Court proceedings.


