
                                                                      [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

R (on the application of RJ) v London Borough of Ealing (AAJR) [2012] UKUT
00305 (IAC)

             IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

|Heard at Field House                    |                        |
|on 13th, 14th ,15th June 2012           |                        |
|and 6th July 2012                       |                        |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern
                         Upper Tribunal Judge Coker

                         The Queen on the application of

                                     RJ

                        (by his litigation friend HJ)
                                                                    Claimant

                                    - v -


                        THE LONDON BOROUGH OF EALING
                                                                   Defendant

Representation:

For the Claimant:     Mr A. Gask, instructed by Harter and


                                    Loveless, Solicitors
For the Defendant:   Mr H. Harrop-Griffiths, instructed by London Borough
                  of Ealing






                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
Introduction

   1. In these proceedings the claimant (to whom we  shall  refer  as  "RJ")
      challenges an age assessment carried out on behalf  of  the  defendant
      and served upon him on 28th February 2011  whereby  it  was  concluded
      that RJ's date of birth was 30th May 1992.  RJ  contends  that  he  is
      younger than he has been assessed to be by  the  defendant,  insisting
      that his date of birth is 21st August 1995. The precise date and month
      adopted by the defendant is a result of RJ having said initially  that
      he was born on 30th May 1995, explaining subsequently that he had said
      that because of an error in converting his  date  of  birth  from  the
      Afghan calendar. He says that his position, all along, has  been  that
      his date of birth is 30 Asad 1374 which  is  21st  August  1995,  that
      being the date disclosed to  him  by  his  mother  shortly  before  he
      commenced his journey to the United Kingdom.


   2. Put another way, the difference between the  positions  taken  by  the
      parties is this: As at the date of the hearing before us the defendant
      asserts that RJ is an adult aged 20 years old with a date of birth  of
      30th May 1992 whereas RJ insists that he is 16 years old with  a  date
      of birth of 21st August 1995 and so still  a  minor  entitled  to  the
      level of services provided by the defendant that flows from him  being
      a minor.


   3. Thus, it is common ground and agreed between the parties that RJ was a
      child on arrival in the United Kingdom at the end  of  July  2009;  RJ
      saying that he was born on 30th  May  1995  and  thus  13   years  old
      (albeit subsequently changed by RJ to an assertion that he was born on
      21st August 1995 and thus aged 12 when he arrived) but  the  defendant
      asserting that he was then 17 years old with a date of birth  of  30th
      May 1992.

The claimant's account of his life in Afghanistan

   4. RJ is a citizen of Afghanistan. He was  born  and  lived  in  a  rural
      village in Nangarhar Province with his mother and siblings. His father
      died when he was three years old, and he has no memory of him.  He has
      three brothers. The eldest, JJ, had left home  some  time  before  the
      claimant travelled to the United Kingdom. RJ  says  that  it  was  the
      involvement of that brother with the activities of Hezb-i-Islami  that
      attracted to his family the adverse attention of the authorities  that
      led him to leave Afghanistan and seek asylum in the United Kingdom.


   5. Of the three siblings who remained living at home  with  their  mother
      the claimant was the middle brother. His elder brother  HJ  left  home
      and travelled to the United Kingdom in June 2007  in  order  to  claim
      asylum, his journey and unlawful entry being arranged by an agent. His
      asylum claim was  dismissed  but,  after  an  age  assessment  by  the
      defendant, he was accepted to be 16 years old, as he  claimed  to  be,
      and was granted discretionary leave to remain. As we shall see,  there
      was a subsequent reassessment of  HJ's  age.  HJ  has  now  married  a
      British citizen and they have  recently  had  a  child.  Although  his
      immigration status is presently unresolved, as he awaits an answer  to
      his application for further leave to remain,  he  is  now  effectively
      settled in the United Kingdom.

   6. RJ says he had no education in Afghanistan other than attending  at  a
      mosque in his village to pray and read the Koran under the supervision
      of the local Mullah and he had no plans for nor any prospect of  work.
      He passed his time "hanging out with friends" and rarely  strayed  far
      from his village.

   7. Despite being pressed at some length when giving oral evidence  before
      us, RJ has given scant information of his life in Afghanistan. He says
      he never went to school nor engaged in any other activity  that  might
      provide some form of reference point  for  seeking  to  ascertain  his
      likely age.


   8. RJ's account of the circumstances  that  led  to  his  departure  from
      Afghanistan is that the police came on several occasions to  his  home
      asking after his elder brother JJ because of his involvement with Hezb-
      i-Islami. In short, he says that the level of interest was  escalating
      and he was at risk of ill treatment at the hands of police because  he
      and his  mother  would  not  disclose  JJ's  whereabouts.  (This  was,
      incidentally, effectively the same account as was given by HJ when  he
      made his unsuccessful asylum claim  two  years  earlier.)  Because  of
      this, JJ arranged for an agent to facilitate RJ's journey  to  a  safe
      country so that he could claim asylum. No explanation is offered as to
      why, if JJ was the focus of adverse attention from the authorities  so
      that he would also be  at  risk,  he  did  not  arrange  for  his  own
      departure from Afghanistan as well. RJ says that at no time during the
      8 month long journey did he know that his destination was  the  United
      Kingdom, nor that his brother HJ would be there to meet him.

   9. RJ was reunited with HJ on the day of his arrival because, by a  happy
      coincidence, a relative of one of the other  boys  he  was  travelling
      with, who had met them after they left the lorry  in  which  they  had
      made their clandestine  entry  into  the  United  Kingdom  arrived  in
      London, happened to know HJ from playing football with him in  a  park
      in Southall. That person telephoned HJ  so  that  he  could  come  and
      collect the claimant and HJ assisted the  claimant  to  register  with
      Ealing Social Services as a child in need  of  support  and  to  claim
      asylum the following day.

  10. That claim was refused because UKBA did not believe any part  of  RJ's
      account of his difficulties  in  Afghanistan  to  be  true.  With  the
      assistance of experienced immigration lawyers, Howe & Co, he  appealed
      against that decision but he did not attend his appeal  hearing  after
      which the immigration judge promulgated a determination dismissing the
      appeal.

  11. RJ was granted discretionary leave to remain until a date  upon  which
      he would be 17 � years old, if his date of birth were in fact 30th May
      1992 as he had initially asserted.

   History of Proceedings

  12. There have, in fact, been three age assessments in respect of RJ.  The
      first and third were carried out  on  behalf  of  the  defendant,  the
      second being commissioned by the solicitors previously acting  for  RJ
      in his asylum appeal. Each is examined in detail below.


  13. It will be necessary also to examine an age assessment carried out  on
      behalf of the defendant in  respect  of  RJ's  brother,  HJ.  That  is
      because, although it had initially been accepted by the defendant  and
      by the UKBA following assessment by the  defendant,  that  HJ  was  16
      years old on arrival in June 2007,  about  a  year  later  the  social
      worker newly assigned to HJ was instructed to carry out a further  age
      assessment after which he concluded that HJ was three years older than
      hitherto he had been accepted to be. Plainly, that is significant.  It
      has always been asserted by RJ and by HJ that there is a four year age
      gap between them and so if the 2008 age assessment  of  HJ  is  sound,
      that is evidence that undermines RJ's case but if it is not  then  the
      evidence relating to HJ's age provides cogent support for  RJ's  case,
      especially as one social worker, Mr Dean, was involved  with  the  age
      assessment of both brothers.


  14. The first of RJ's age assessments was carried out on 13th August 2009,
      shortly after his arrival in the United Kingdom. That  assessment  was
      that the claimant's date of birth was 30th May 1992, adopting the  day
      and month first given by the claimant but disputing the year of  birth
      he claimed. Thus, RJs claimed age was rejected by  the  defendant  who
      concluded that he was then 17 years old.

  15. The second age  assessment,  commissioned  by  the  claimant's  former
      solicitors,  reached  the  same  conclusion.  The  defendant's   first
      assessment, that the claimant's date of birth was 30th May  1992,  was
      challenged by the claimant's present solicitors.  That  challenge  was
      supported, inter alia by a report  of  Dr  Diana  Birch,  although  no
      reliance is now placed upon that evidence and we have not  been  asked
      to consider it. In response to that challenge, the defendant agreed to
      withdraw the first age assessment and to  make  it  afresh.  That  was
      done, as we have mentioned above, in December 2010, although  the  two
      social  workers  carrying  out  that  assessment  reached   the   same
      conclusion, which was that the claimant's date of birth was  30th  May
      1992.

  16. Permission to seek a judicial review was  refused  on  the  papers  by
      Silber J but granted on oral renewal by Stephen Males QC, sitting as a
      deputy  judge  of  the  High  Court.  Subsequently,  the   claim   was
      transferred to the Upper Tribunal.

  17. And thus the matter now comes before us to carry out the fact  finding
      exercise that is required. We heard evidence over three days from 13th
      June and then, after a joint request to do so, we adjourned until  6th
      July so that final submissions could be advanced after the result of a
      DNA test were available. That  DNA  test  was  inconclusive  in  that,
      although it established that RJ and HJ were related, it could not with
      certainty be said what the nature of that relationship is. We  accept,
      however, that whatever the precise nature of their relationship,  they
      have been brought up as brothers and have always  believed  themselves
      to be so.

   The legal framework


  18. Given that it is agreed and common ground between the parties that the
      legal framework applicable to our assessment is clear and  settled,  a
      jointly adopted position with which we agree, it is not necessary  for
      us to carry out an extensive analysis of the authorities. In R (CJ)  v
      Cardiff City Council [2011] EWCA Civ 1590 Pitchford LJ observed that :


           1. In R (A and M) v Croydon and Lambert Borough Councils  [2009]
              UKSC 8, [2009] I WLR 2557,  the  Supreme  Court  settled  the
              question whether, in the event of a challenge to the decision
              of a local authority as to the claimant's age, the High Court
              was required either to reach  its  own  decision  as  to  the
              claimant's age or, alternatively, the challenge was by way of
              review of the  local  authority's  assessment  on  Wednesbury
              principles alone. Baroness Hale  gave  the  leading  judgment
              with which the other members of the Supreme Court agreed.  At
              paragraphs 26 and 27 Baroness Hale explained  the  difference
              in approach required for the evaluative  judgment  whether  a
              child was "in need" within the mean of section 20 of the 1989
              Act and the decision upon  the  precedent  question  of  fact
              whether the individual concerned was a child. She said this:
                 "26.  ...  the  1989  Act  draws  a  clear   and   sensible
                 distinction  between  different  kinds  of  question.   The
                 question whether a child is "in need" requires a number  of
                 different value judgments ... but where the  issue  is  not
                 what order the court should make but  what  service  should
                 the local authority provide it is  entirely  reasonable  to
                 assume that Parliament intended such  evaluative  questions
                 to be determined by the Public Authority,  subject  to  the
                 control  of  the  courts  on  the  ordinary  principles  of
                 judicial review. Within the  limits  of  fair  process  and
                 "Wednesbury reasonableness" there are no clear-cut right or
                 wrong answers.
                 27. But the question whether a person is  a  "child"  is  a
                 different kind of question. There is a  right  or  a  wrong
                 answer. It may be difficult to determine what  that  answer
                 is. The decision-makers may have to do their  best  on  the
                 basis of less than perfect or conclusive evidence but  that
                 is true of many questions  of  fact  which  regularly  come
                 before the courts. That does not prevent  them  from  being
                 questions for the courts rather than  for  other  kinds  of
                 decision-makers."
           Lord Hope, in his concurring judgment, said at paragraph 51:
                 "51. It seems to me that the  question  whether  or  not  a
                 person is a child for the purposes of  section  20  of  the
                 1989 Act is a question of fact  which  must  ultimately  be
                 decided by the court. There is no denying the  difficulties
                 that the social worker is likely to face in carrying out an
                 assessment of the question whether an unaccompanied  asylum
                 seeker  is  or  is  not  under  the  age  of  18.  Reliable
                 documentary evidence  is  almost  always  lacking  in  such
                 cases. So the process has to be  one  of  assessment.  This
                 involves the  application  of  judgment  on  a  variety  of
                 factors, as Stanley Burnton J recognised in R (B) v  Merton
                 London Borough Council [2003] 4 All ER 280,  para  37.  But
                 the question is not whether  the  person  can  properly  be
                 described as a child. Section 105 (1) of the Act  provides:
                 "in this Act ... 'child' means, subject to paragraph 16  of
                 Schedule 1, a person under the age of 18". The question  is
                 whether the person is, or is not,  under  the  age  of  18.
                 However difficult it may be to resolve the issue, it admits
                 of only one answer. As it is a question of fact, ultimately
                 this must be a matter for the court."
   The evidence


  19. There is a good deal of evidence before us. The claimant, as  well  as
      raising general criticisms of the age assessments carried out,  relies
      upon:


        a. His own evidence;
        b. The evidence of his elder brother, HJ;
        c. The evidence of a former tutor, Ms Therese Lorphevre who, as  an
           experienced teacher, offers her view upon the claimant's  likely
           age.


      The respondent, in support of its case that it has correctly  assessed
      the complainant's age, relies upon the three age assessments mentioned
      above and the evidence of the following witnesses:

        a.  Georgette  McKenzie  Parchment,  one  of  the   two   assessors
           responsible for the second age assessment;
        b. Dennis Dean, one of the two assessors responsible  for  the  age
           assessment under challenge in these proceedings;

  20. We propose to approach our assessment of the  evidence  in  the  order
      suggested by Mr Gask. We will consider first the weight to  be  placed
      upon RJ's own evidence and that of his brother and  the  tutor  before
      considering the weight to given to the professional  witnesses,  which
      requires a detailed analysis of the age assessments themselves.


   The evidence of the claimant


  21. RJ has set out his account of events and what he wishes to  say  about
      his likely age on a number of occasions:


        a. A witness statement dated 9th September 2009 prepared  with  the
           assistance of Duncan Lewis, the solicitors he  first  instructed
           to assist him with his asylum claim. ("Asylum  statement"  found
           at E41);
        b. The first of two witness statements prepared for judicial review
           proceedings, dated 21st  June 2011 ("first statement" at B1);
        c. The second statement prepared for these proceedings, dated  10th
           November 2011 ("second statement" at B12)
        d. In oral evidence before us, on 13th June 2012.


  22. RJ gave lengthy oral evidence before us but, as we  shall  see,  there
      are very considerable difficulties with that evidence  which  make  it
      hard to rely upon. In assessing that evidence we took full account  of
      the fact that although his age was  disputed  he  remains  young;  the
      giving of oral evidence  can  be  a  stressful  experience  which  may
      sometimes affect the quality of evidence given.  No  special  measures
      were adopted in response to this and none were requested by  Mr  Gask.
      RJ or HJ during the course of the hearing or at any  preparatory  case
      management hearing and because none appeared to us to be necessary,


  23. Although it may sometimes be helpful to assess the credibility of  the
      claimant in order to weigh the evidential value of what he has to  say
      about matters that illuminate the search for his age, here that is not
      so. The fact is that the claimant himself does not know  his  date  of
      birth and nor can he say how old he is.  In  evidence  he  was  asked,
      directly, whether he knew how old he was when he arrived in the United
      Kingdom and he answered, in our view truthfully, that he did not.


  24. And, as we have mentioned above, RJ has told  us  very  little  indeed
      about his life in Afghanistan so that there is very little by way of a
      chronological framework that might provide some reference  point  from
      which to begin a search for his true age.

  25. The village in which RJ lived was a small one. He has said that  there
      were something in the region of 40 houses  surrounded  by  fields.  He
      said that there were no shops or official buildings other than the one
      to which he referred as the mosque. RJ knew of no school in  the  area
      (although that is difficult to reconcile with the  evidence  we  heard
      from his brother which was  that  there  was  a  school  that  he  had
      attended for about a year before leaving to support  his  family)  and
      the nearest police station was an hour's walk away.

  26. It is not in dispute that neither RJ nor anyone in his family took any
      notice or had any regard to issues  of  age  or  birthdays.  That  was
      simply of no interest to anyone. It is also plain  that  the  claimant
      himself had no idea of his age or date of birth and that there  is  no
      documentary evidence of any kind whatsoever to establish it.

  27. The high point of RJ's own evidence offered in support of his  claimed
      age is that his mother told him his date of birth shortly  before  his
      departure from Afghanistan.

  28. RJ says that about two months before he left Afghanistan he  was  at
      home with his mother and younger  brother  when  the  latter,  for  no
      apparent reason, asked his mother how old he was. According to RJ, his
      mother told his younger brother that he was nine years old.  At  this,
      RJ says that he asked his mother how old he himself was, for no reason
      other than that, as his brother had asked,  he  thought  he  would  do
      also. RJ says that his mother told him not how many years old  he  was
      but that his birthday was on the 30th day of Asad in the year 1374.

  29. There are a number of difficulties with this  account  of  RJ.  First,
      despite having been asked  on  a  number  of  occasions  and,  indeed,
      pressed on the question at the hearing in his oral  evidence,  he  has
      been unable to offer any explanation at  all  as  to  why,  it  having
      previously being of no account whatsoever, either he  or  his  younger
      brother suddenly became interested to discover their age.  It  is  not
      claimed that this had anything  to  do  with  a  proposed  journey  to
      the United Kingdom because, on RJ's account, the events that generated
      a need for his journey were yet to occur.

  30. In oral evidence RJ confirmed that at the time his mother told him his
      date of birth he did not know what the then current year  was  in  the
      Afghan calendar. This meant that although he says he had been provided
      with a date of birth he was unable to work out from this  how  old  he
      was. He was asked why, if his purpose in  asking  his  mother  was  to
      discover his age, and if the information she provided was insufficient
      to enable him to calculate this, he did not simply ask his  mother  to
      provide him with the same information as  had  been  provided  to  his
      younger brother immediately before,  that  being  his  age  in  years.
      Despite being pressed upon this RJ was unable to offer any explanation
      at all.

  31. What he did say is that after this conversation he went out and  spoke
      to his friends to see if they could help him work out his age from the
      date of birth that he now had been provided with. However, none of his
      friends were able to do this and  so  when  he  left Afghanistan and
      arrived in London he still did not know how old he was.

  32. We do not accept that RJ has given a truthful account of any of  this.
      First, it is impossible to understand, if any  such  conversation  had
      taken place in Afghanistan between RJ, his younger brother  and  their
      mother, why she should have chosen to answer the question relating  to
      the age so far as the younger brother was concerned by expressing  the
      answer in years, telling him he was nine  years  old  while  answering
      RJ's question by telling him his date of birth which, of  course,  did
      not deliver an answer to the question asked: how old am  I?.  Even  if
      she had provided not his age in years but his date  of  birth  in  the
      Afghan calendar, it is impossible  to  understand  why,  if  that  had
      happened, RJ would not have asked the obvious question to enable  him,
      with his mother's assistance, to calculate  his  age.  Further  still,
      RJ's evidence indicates that he was intent  on  establishing  his  age
      from the date of birth given because he  says  he  asked  his  friends
      about it but they were unable to help. There is no reason at all  why,
      if that were the case, he would then not have returned to  his  mother
      to seek help in calculating his age.

  33.  Therefore, we are satisfied that RJ had no idea how old  he  was  nor
      what was his date of birth when he entered the United Kingdom. Nor  do
      we have any doubt that the date of birth he was  to  provide  was  one
      selected by HJ and provided to RJ for the purpose of establishing that
      he was a minor. HJ said in oral evidence that he told RJ what  to  say
      about his age, immediately before he took RJ to make his asylum claim.

  34. RJ's account is  that,  having  met  his  brother  and,  having  first
      registered with  Ealing  social  services  as  a  minor,  his  brother
      arranged with him to go to make an asylum claim the following day. His
      brother told him that he would need to supply  his  age  and  date  of
      birth. RJ says that he told his brother what his mother had  told  him
      and his brother calculated, wrongly as it turned out, that his date of
      birth should be expressed as 30th May 1995.  In  fact,  as  is  common
      ground and agreed between the parties, the correct  calculation  would
      have produced a birth date of 21st August 1995.

  35. In his oral evidence to us, the claimant's brother  HJ  said  that  he
      could not remember being told by RJ, after his arrival here, that  his
      mother had given him a date of birth that needed to be converted to  a
      date that those who  would  be  interviewing  him  would  be  able  to
      understand. Instead, HJ told us that he had told RJ that he should say
      that he was 12 or 13 years old.

  36. For these reasons we are entirely satisfied that  this  part  of  RJ's
      evidence is simply untrue. We find as a fact that neither he  nor  his
      mother knew his date of  birth,  that  the  conversation  referred  to
      between RJ, his mother and his younger brother never  took  place  and
      that the date of birth offered at the asylum  interview  of  30th  May
      1995 was one agreed between RJ and his brother after he arrived in the
      United Kingdom.

  37. It follows that nothing whatsoever turns upon the  asserted  error  by
      the brother in thinking that that the 30th day of Asad 1374  was  30th
      May 1995 when in fact it was 21st August 1995. Neither of those  dates
      is based upon anything other than an arbitrary  selection  of  a  date
      agreed upon between RJ and his older brother.

  38. We consider next  the  evidence  offered  by  RJ  about  his  life  in
      Afghanistan. Unfortunately, the evidence  of  RJ  has  disclosed  very
      little indeed about his life in Afghanistan. We have little doubt that
      RJ has been told to disclose as little information as possible and  to
      a very large extent his  response  to  questions  about  his  life  in
      Afghanistan has been that he cannot remember.

  39. Therefore, all we know from RJ about his life in Afghanistan  is  that
      he lived his whole life at the same family home, that his father  died
      when he was very young and he has no recollection of him, that he  had
      no formal education, and that he spent most of his time  playing  with
      friends with no expectation of  entering  into  employment  or  become
      involved in farming the family's land.

  40. We consider next the claimant's  account  of  his  journey  to United
      Kingdom.

  41. We are not satisfied that RJ has  given  a  truthful  account  of  his
      journey to United Kingdom. He said that  when  he  embarked  on  this
      journey, which was arranged with the assistance of an agent  paid  for
      by his eldest brother, he had no idea  of  his  ultimate  or  intended
      destination. That plainly is untrue because he  is  recorded  to  have
      said elsewhere, during the age assessment process, that he  knew  that
      he was coming to United Kingdom to join his brother and that  was  one
      reason why he did not seek to claim asylum in the countries  where  he
      was arrested and fingerprinted. Another reason for not  doing  so  was
      that no one asked him to.

  42. In any event, his account of how he came to be reacquainted  with  his
      brother in United Kingdom stretches the bounds of coincidence to its
      limits. RJ said that the lorry in which he and five  others  had  been
      concealed by the agents brought them to the United Kingdom and then to
      London where they all got out. The others phoned relatives who came to
      collect them. One of those relatives, who had previously been  unknown
      to the claimant, asked him whether  he  had  any  relative  in United
      Kingdom. RJ said that he did not although he did have an older brother
      who had left home two years earlier and had been "lost" and he did not
      know where he had gone. He was asked the brother's name and one of the
      strangers said that he knew someone of a similar (but  not  identical)
      name from playing football with him  in  Southall.  This  person  then
      phoned the claimant's brother who  spoke  to  him  on  the  phone  and
      established that the claimant was indeed his  brother.  The  strangers
      took RJ to Victoria Station where he waited until his brother came  to
      collect him.


  43. We have no doubt that the truth of the matter is  that  RJ  knew  very
      well that HJ was safely established in London and was  being  provided
      for by the local authority. It can be seen  that  the  social  workers
      responsible for HJ had established that he was  in  contact  with  his
      mother in Afghanistan, having spoken to her on the telephone, and they
      actively encouraged him to maintain that contact.  At  F128  a  social
      worker recorded:

           "(HJ) has phone contact with his mother and siblings"

      In his oral evidence HJ said that when he spoke to his mother  on  the
      telephone he told her that he was in this country. It is impossible to
      understand why the claimant's mother would have kept that  information
      from RJ as he set off to make the same journey, for the same  purpose,
      to the same destination.

  44. Further reason to conclude that RJ has not given a frank  or  truthful
      account of his journey is found in his evidence about the final  stage
      of that journey. RJ had spent some two months or  so  living  in  "the
      jungle" at Calais waiting for an opportunity for the agents to put him
      in a vehicle that would take him to the United Kingdom.  His  evidence
      was that despite this and despite having lived with many others  in  a
      similar situation in "the jungle" he did not know  what  his  ultimate
      destination was to be until he decamped from the lorry in  London  and
      someone told him where he had arrived.

  45. We have no doubt at all that RJ's evidence  about  this  part  of  his
      journey is untrue. We are satisfied that both he and his brother  knew
      that he was travelling to the United Kingdom and that his brother was
      expecting his arrival.

  46. It emerged from RJ's oral evidence  that  there  were  in  fact  three
      occasions  during  his  journey  from Afghanistan upon  which   he
      encountered the police who recorded his name, date of birth and, on at
      least one occasion, took his fingerprints. On each occasion RJ gave  a
      false name and a date of birth which would have made him over  18.  Mr
      Harrop-Griffiths submits that this evidence should be relied  upon  as
      indicating RJ's true age. We do not accept that argument. RJ explained
      that the  agent  had  instructed  him  and  those  with  whom  he  was
      travelling that they should give false details of identity which would
      be such as to indicate they were adults because otherwise they may  be
      detained as children. That seems to us to be an explanation  that  has
      the ring of truth about it and we accept it.

  47. Drawing together this part of the evidence, and taking full account of
      the fact that the claimant a young person, whether he is  a  minor  or
      not, we  reach  the  following  conclusions  and  make  the  following
      findings of fact. We are satisfied that HJ remained  in  contact  with
      his mother after  he  arrived  in  United  Kingdom  and  that  he  was
      expecting RJ to join him in this country. We  are  entirely  satisfied
      that neither RJ nor his elder brother knew the claimant's age or  date
      of birth and that the date advanced was one chosen by them arbitrarily
      in order to establish that RJ was a  minor.  Therefore,  as  there  is
      nothing to be drawn from the evidence RJ has chosen to make  available
      to us about his life in Afghanistan upon which to base a judgement  as
      to age there is nothing of assistance to be drawn from  RJ's  evidence
      other than what can properly be drawn from our assessment of him as he
      gave oral evidence for us over a number of hours on 13th June.


   The evidence of the claimant's brother, HJ

  48. HJ arrived in the United Kingdom on 6th June 2007 and  claimed  asylum
      the following day. The basis for his claim was similar to  that  which
      was to be put forward  subsequently  by  the  claimant,  involving  an
      account of adverse attention  from  the  authorities  because  of  the
      involvement of his elder brother, JJ, with Hezb-i-Islami.  That  claim
      was rejected by UKBA, who did not believe to be true the  account  put
      forward. There was no appeal against that decision, possibly  because,
      in view of his age, the period of discretionary leave granted was less
      than that required to generate a right of appeal under section  83  of
      the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. .


  49. When making his asylum claim HJ had said that he  was  16  years  old.
      This was not accepted initially  by  UKBA  who  referred  him  to  the
      defendant for an age assessment. The outcome of  that  assessment  was
      that HJ was the age he claimed and he was allocated a notional date of
      birth of 1st January 1991. This  was  accepted  by  UKBA  and  he  was
      granted a period of discretionary leave to remain.

  50. Having just set out an asylum claim to UKBA that he had  come  to  the
      United Kingdom to escape from persecution  at  home,  he  went  on  to
      explain to the social workers what, in the  light  of  the  subsequent
      rejection of his asylum  claim,  might  be  thought  to  be  his  real
      motivation, or that of his family, in him  travelling  to  the  United
      Kingdom. The initial report from Ealing dated 13th June  2007,  a  few
      days after HJ's arrival, says this, after having recorded that HJ  had
      managed only a year of schooling in Afghanistan, having had to end his
      education in order to support his family:

           "(HJ) is a very ambitious young man who has many  future  plans;
           he hopes to pursue a career as a Doctor, Engineer or teacher; he
           has requested assistance to enrol at a school in order to  learn
           English and develop his skills."

  51. He went on to say to the social  workers  carrying  out  that  initial
      assessment, and this is important evidence, that  the  family  he  had
      left behind in Afghanistan consisted of his  mother  and  two  younger
      brothers, one of whom he identified as "(RJ) (12)", Therefore, it  can
      be seen that he identified RJ by name and said he was  then  12  years
      old.


  52. This, in our view, is the high water mark of the claimant's case.  The
      fact is that the defendant and UKBA initially accepted from HJ that he
      was 16 years on arrival on June 2007 and allocated him a notional date
      of birth of 1st January 1991. He was granted discretionary leave until
      1st July 2008 when he would, by that reckoning, have been 17  �  years
      old. That assessment and that age was accepted by the  London  Borough
      of Ealing, the  fact  being  recorded  repeatedly  in  review  reports
      compiled by social workers with responsibility for HJ's care.  It  was
      not until May 2008 that any doubt was expressed about his age. An  age
      assessment was carried out by the social worker, Mr Dean, but for  the
      reasons we set out below we have found that assessment to be flawed.

  53. Therefore, the one piece of evidence before us that survives  analysis
      is the acceptance of HJ's age on his  arrival  in  2007.  As  we  have
      pointed out, he said when asked that RJ was then 12. The question that
      arises is whether reliance can be placed upon that assertion.

  54. That in turn raises the question of how HJ knew  how  old  he  was  on
      arrival in the United Kingdom and how he knew how old  RJ  was  or  on
      what basis he though RJ was four years younger than him.

  55. It transpires that the explanation put forward  by  HJ  is  remarkably
      similar to that advanced by RJ for knowing his age. In  oral  evidence
      HJ told us that he had asked his mother how old he was not long before
      the events that were  to  give  rise  to  a  need  for  him  to  leave
      Afghanistan had occurred. She had told him he was  then  15  so  that,
      given the length of the journey to the United  Kingdom,  he  estimated
      that he would be 16 on arrival.

  56. But, as was the case with his brother, he could not explain why, after
      having previously been entirely uninterested in knowing  his  age,  he
      should suddenly have felt driven to enquire. Nor can he  say  why  his
      mother should have any reason to be in  a  position  to  provide  this
      information. We find this evidence no more credible than  we  did  the
      evidence from the claimant.

  57. Therefore, we are satisfied that when HJ gave  his  age  as  being  16
      years old on arrival in June 2007 he did so on the basis of  his  best
      estimate. Similarly, when he said that RJ was 12 years old,  that  was
      because he estimated that RJ must be about four years younger than  he
      was and not because he knew that RJ was that age. That may or may  not
      have been a correct estimate his own age, but it was accepted as so by
      both UKBA and the professional staff of London Borough of  Ealing,  at
      least for nearly a year, until Mr Dean, became involved.

  58. We heard evidence from HJ also about the  circumstances  in  which  he
      revised his asserted date of birth from the notional, allocated,  date
      of 1st January to the claimed actual date of 6th  June.  He  described
      how he was with friends in a park when he met someone who had  been  a
      neighbour at home in Afghanistan. This  was  particularly  significant
      because it had been known by all that these two young men, living with
      their families in adjacent houses, had been born on the same  day.  HJ
      asked him how "his case was going" and told him that he,  HJ  "had  an
      issue with" his date of birth. HJ, knowing that they shared  the  same
      date of birth, asked this friend what date he had given and  this  was
      the date subsequently adopted by HJ of 6th June 1991.

  59. We do not accept that evidence. First, there was no  more  reason  for
      this friend to know his date of  birth  than  there  was  for  HJ.  No
      explanation is offered as to why that friend should know his true date
      of birth when HJ did not know his.  There  is  no  reason  at  all  to
      suppose that the date selected by this friend to offer to  those  with
      whom he was dealing in seeking to secure leave to remain was any  less
      arbitrarily selected than was the case with HJ or RJ. Further,  if  it
      were true that an immediate neighbour in the  village  in  Afghanistan
      had a known particular date of birth and it was, as claimed by  HJ,  a
      regular topic of observation that the two boys had been  born  on  the
      same day, it is hard to see why HJ's mother  should  not  have  shared
      that information with him before he left to travel here.  HJ  said  he
      did not know this date of birth in the Afghan calendar. It is also odd
      that HJ did not secure from him contact details with the  result  that
      he did not see him again after this chance meeting in the park.


   Evidence of Therese Lorphevre


  60. This witness teaches English as a second language and was  RJ's  tutor
      at Harrow College for the academic year commencing in September  2010.
      In our view Ms Lorphevre is well placed to express an informed opinion
      about RJ's likely age. She has a great deal of experience of  teaching
      adolescents of  RJ's  age  range.  Significantly,  many  are  not  age
      disputed and so their age is established. She has taught for the  last
      20 years and at Harrow College since 1996 where she has a tutor  group
      of 25 students aged between 15 and 18. In each  group  there  are  now
      usually between 8 and 12 students from Afghanistan. In this  capacity,
      between September 2010 and June 2011, she had up to 12  hours  contact
      per week with RJ, 11  hours  of  which  were  teaching  and  one  hour
      pastoral care looking after his academic progress,  welfare,  housing,
      social service problems and emotional issues.


  61. She adopted a witness statement she made in May 2011 in which she said
      of RJ:


           "In my opinion his behaviour in class is not that  of  an  adult
           learner (18 plus). He shows little maturity in  his  interaction
           with others in class. He tends to play games  and  he  laughs  a
           lot. In my experience this is usually an indication that someone
           is of a younger age.


           I understand that the London Borough of Ealing  Social  Services
           have assessed (RJ's) age to be 18 turning 19 years of age on May
           2011. I do not think it at all likely that he is this old.


           (RJ) says that he is turning 16 years of age on 30 May 2011.  In
           my opinion this is more likely than the view  that  he  will  be
           turning 19 years on that date."


  62. She said she had considerable contact with the person (whose name  she
      could not recall) who looked after him in his accommodation because he
      didn't do his homework and because of his lack of progress at college.



  63. When asked where she would place him in age during the time she taught
      him she replied 17. She did not agree with the suggestion that he  was
      20.

  64. In oral evidence she  said  that  RJ  showed  immature  behaviour  and
      approach to learning. She said that as a  person  becomes  older  they
      engage with learning more and explained that this was one  reason  why
      the age group is 15 to 18.

  65. She disputed the reference in the age assessment report by Ms McKenzie
      Parchment and Ms Hennig, which is considered below, that RJ  may  have
      learning difficulties. She said if there had  been  concerns  to  that
      effect he would have been sent for assessment and that was never done.



  66. Ms Lorphevre could  not  recall  having  a  conversation  with  social
      workers when she is recorded as saying that RJ is "...doing very well;
      is very good and supportive towards his classmates. [His]  English  is
      improving and he appears to be integrating into  the  wider  society."
      She said that if this conversation took place it would have  been  one
      week into teaching; he had just joined her tutor group  at  that  time
      and thereafter he went downhill. He had  not  passed  his  first  year
      exams  because  his  childish  behaviour  had  interfered   with   his
      performance, he would not do the mock exams; he failed to turn up  and
      he refused to engage. Although he started out well that has to be seen
      in the context of young learners in respect of whom managing  to  keep
      them in class and sitting down is an achievement in itself.

  67. When asked why, if 18 year olds misbehave she thought RJ was  17,  she
      replied that all she  could  say  was  that  his  behaviour  like  the
      behaviour of most of her students was immature. She said that  of  the
      25 students in her tutor group that year 23 out of the 25 had  passed.
      RJ was one who did not.

  68. We found Ms Lorphevre  to  be  an  impressive  witness  whose  opinion
      carries a good deal of weight.  Her assessment of RJ's age  was  based
      on contact with him for significant periods of time over  an  academic
      year in the context of 25 other students aged between 15  and  18,  an
      age group she has considerable experience of teaching over many  years
      including Afghan young people. Although  some  are  age  disputed  the
      majority of the tutor group  are  not,  including  many  other  Afghan
      adolescents.

  69. As Mr Gask has reminded us in his closing  submissions,  maturity  and
      demeanour  are  recognised  to  be  qualities  that  are   notoriously
      difficult to assess in the absence of certainty of the subject's  true
      age. In R (AM) v Solihull Metropolitan BC [2012] UKUT 00118  (IAC)  at
      para 20 the Vice President said this:

           "The  asserted  expertise  of  a  social  worker  conducting  an
           interview is not in our judgement sufficient to counteract those
           difficulties. A person such  as  a  teacher  or  even  a  family
           member, who can point to consistent attitudes, and a  number  of
           supporting instances over a  considerable  period  of  time,  is
           likely to carry weight that observations made in the  artificial
           surroundings of an interview cannot carry."

  70. In September 2010 RJ  asserted  he  was  aged  15  and  the  defendant
      asserted he was 18. By both accounts he  would  have  been  within  an
      appropriate age range  to  be  in  Ms  Lorphevre's  tutor  group.  She
      considered him, during the year that she taught him, to  be  aged  17,
      i.e. at the upper range of the group.


The Age Assessment reports

  71. As we have said, there are before us three age assessments in  respect
      of RJ. Two were carried out on behalf of the defendant but the  other,
      commissioned  by  RJ's  then  solicitors,   which   was   the   second
      chronologically, was carried out by a social worker who had previously
      been employed by the defendant and who had worked with  Mr  Dean,  the
      social worker who had carried out the first age assessment.


  72. The role played by Mr Dean takes on additional significance when it is
      recognised that it was he who had carried out an age  assessment  upon
      HJ, immediately he had taken responsibility for him  from  the  social
      worker previously allocated who had not, it seems expressed any doubts
      about the age previously asserted by HJ, assessed by the defendant and
      accepted by all concerned.

  73. Therefore, we will examine first the age assessment carried out by  Mr
      Dean, together with another social worker from whom we  did  not  hear
      evidence, in respect of HJ.

Age assessment report - HJ

  74.  Mr Dean is a qualified social worker with 10 years post qualification
      experience  and,  according  to  oral  evidence,  in  total  22  years
      experience. He is now referred to as a senior social worker. He states
      he has:


            "significant experience not only  in  assessing  the  needs  of
           unaccompanied minors but also in undertaking age  assessment  of
           which [he] would estimate he [has] conducted not  less  than  20
           including approximately 20 Afghan males".


      He has attended internal  training  courses  provided  by  the  London
      Borough of Ealing and others provided by  the  London  Asylum  Seekers
      Consortium.

  75. Mr Dean became HJ's social worker and had his first contact  with  him
      on 8th May 2008 when he commenced an age assessment. As we have  said,
      until then all concerned had accepted the age  asserted  and  assessed
      and that HJ was still  a  minor.  In  early  2008  Mr  Dean's  manager
      determined that HJ should be  re-assessed  because,  according  to  Mr
      Dean, HJ was:

           "confident, very independent and not easily intimidated by being
           in a new country where he had difficulties expressing himself in
           English. He was  adept  at  speaking  up  for  himself.  He  was
           physically big and had a mature bearing. He had got into a fight
           in college."


      The age assessment process was started on 8th May 2008  and  completed
      on 11th August 2008. HJ was also examined by  John  Graham  Ritchie  a
      registered dental surgeon. There were no  notes  kept  of  either  age
      assessment interview.

  76. Mr Dean, in an analysis summarising his findings in assessing the  age
      of HJ gave the following reasons for rejecting  his  claimed  age  and
      finding him to be over 18 and not 16 (nearly 17) as claimed:


        a. "His mannerisms,  body  language,  his  interaction  with  other
           adults, leads me to the conclusion that (HJ) is older  than  his
           stated age and is over 18";
        b. HJ's muscular physique "cannot be achieved  by  a  child,  whose
           physic (sic) is still developing";
        c. HJ had been observed spending time with people  older  than  his
           stated age group;
        d. HJ had to be spoken to  about  his  behaviour  and  having  been
           expelled from college because of fighting and such behaviour "is
           more  accustom  [sic]  in  males  in  their   late   teens/early
           twenties";
        e.  HJ  "is  very  adept  at  advocating  for  himself  on  matters
           concerning his wellbeing"


  77. The reasons given by Mr Dean for concluding that HJ was older than  he
      claimed to be, and had been until then treated as being do not, in our
      judgement, stand up to scrutiny.


  78. With regards to HJ's muscular physique, Mr Dean accepted that  he  was
      aware that HJ had been training with weights and was unable to say why
      that would not explain the physique noted. He was shown photographs of
      a 15 year old athlete which portrayed a younger  person  with  a  very
      well developed physique.

  79. Mr Dean accepted that getting into a fight, as referred to in the  age
      assessment, was not an indication of maturity. The  report  refers  to
      having been involved in several  confrontations  resulting  in  street
      fights/scuffles as being "more accustom (sic) in males in  their  late
      teens/early twenties"; when asked his evidence for that  assertion  Mr
      Dean said it was having worked with young people over the years.  When
      asked whether getting into fights at  school  was  equally  consistent
      with being 16/17 as being in late  teens/early  twenties  he  accepted
      this was a possibility.

  80. The report refers to HJ spending time  with  older  people  and  being
      adept at advocating for himself. Mr Dean accepted that this was not  a
      sufficient basis upon which to assess age but reiterated that this was
      one of many factors they had taken into account.

  81. Mr Dean had obtained a report from a dentist who  had  been  asked  to
      state an expert view of HJ's likely age based on dental  x-rays  taken
      by him. But that dentist concluded from the X -Rays that  the  absence
      of the lower left wisdom tooth rendered analysis of age  by  reference
      to the other wisdom teeth unreliable and therefore he  was  unable  to
      assess age from HJ's teeth. Despite that, he did feel able to go on to
      offer a view about HJ's likely age, that view not obviously based upon
      his expert opinion as a dentist but, upon the presence  of  sideboards
      and shaving habits which are not obviously matters for  a  dentist  to
      comment upon. He said that the three other people assessed by him that
      day were 90% likely to be older than 18 and that HJ:


           "...gave every appearance of being the oldest in the  group.  In
           addition HJ showed slight gum recession and bone loss  in  front
           of one lower front tooth, he had an  established  shaving  habit
           and his side  boards  were  of  trimmed  facial  hair  not  down
           combings of head hair. None of  these  latter  features  is  age
           specific but they do point to an  older  rather  a  younger  age
           (sic)".

  82.  HJ's  age  assessment  report  makes  no  reference  to  the   dental
      examination, although in oral evidence Mr Dean said  that  regard  had
      been had to the report in reaching that decision. In the letter to  HJ
      informing him that Ealing  considered  him  to  be  over  18  specific
      reference was made to the outcome of the dental  assessment.  In  oral
      evidence Mr Dean acknowledged that:


            "with hindsight he (the dentist) should not have concluded what
           he did. We made our decision not only on what he  (the  dentist)
           said but also on events."

  83. That Mr Dean did place undue reliance upon the dental report is  clear
      from a comment in the subsequent age assessment report he prepared  in
      respect of RJ in which he said:


           "We have taken into account the fact that (RJ))'s) brother  (HJ)
           had a dental age assessment in  2008...  the  outcome  of  which
           concluded that (HJ) was over 18....)"

  84. The age assessment disclosed in the papers before us gives  a  claimed
      date of birth of 06/06/91. We have described above how this date  came
      into play. There are no recorded questions or  explanation  given  why
      this differs from the date of birth initially allocated to HJ  or  why
      that date of birth is different to the date of birth  referred  to  in
      the subsequent records  of  meetings  with  HJ  -  which  remains  his
      initially allocated date of birth. Mr Dean stated that he  would  have
      asked about claimed date of birth as part of the interview  and  could
      give no explanation why no reasons for the  changed  claimed  date  of
      birth were recorded.

  85. Mr Dean was asked about the fact that, at some stage,  he  had  become
      aware that HJ was asserting that the notional date of birth  allocated
      as 1st January was wrong because he had  discovered  that  his  actual
      date of birth was 6th June. Having  said  in  evidence  that  in  such
      circumstances, while the year of birth established by the  process  of
      age assessment would be maintained, he would accept the particular day
      and date of birth asserted.  That  it  did  not  happen  here  was  an
      oversight.

  86. But that does disclose the readiness with which  Mr  Dean  would  have
      been happy to accept a 6 month change in the assessed date of birth.

  87. We later heard oral evidence from another social worker, Ms  McKenzie-
      Parchament, that the particular  day  and  month  of  birth  would  be
      accepted anywhere in the range from 1st January to 31st December. That
      admits a whole year of variance, once  the  year  of  birth  has  been
      accepted, dependant upon nothing more  than  the  birth  date  details
      asserted by the person whose claimed age is not accepted.  That  does,
      perhaps, illustrate how inexact is the process of assessing  age  that
      is adopted.

  88. Mr Dean  denied  that  the  second  age  assessment  of  HJ  had  been
      undertaken with a view to saving the defendant money. He said that  HJ
      had continued to receive financial and emotional support after his age
      had been re-assessed.

  89. Considering all this in the round we fail to see how the reasons given
      in the assessment report can possibly be sufficient  to  displace  the
      position previously accepted in respect of HJ's age.


   The first age assessment of RJ - by Mr Dean and Ms Aderinola

  90. The first age assessment of RJ was carried out by Mr Dean and  another
      social worker from whom we did not hear evidence.  This  commenced  on
      13th August 2009, shortly after  HJ  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom
      claiming to be 14 years old with a date of birth, as then asserted, of
      30th May 1995.

  91. It must be recognised that Mr Dean had previously declined  to  accept
      the age asserted by HJ, whom he knew to be HJ's brother, and  he  knew
      that there was a four year age gap claimed to exist between  them.  It
      is, in our view, unrealistic to accept, as Mr Dean says, that  he  was
      able to leave that  entirely  out  of  account  in  carrying  out  the
      assessment of RJ's age.

  92. In our view it is hard to identify any reliable line of  reasoning  in
      this report to support its conclusion. In the first section,  under  a
      heading "Physical Appearance and demeanour", the following points  are
      noted. There was evidence of  acne  and  spots  and  a  "lightly  thin
      moustache" but "this is not indication that of someone older than 18".
      RJ was said to be "a relaxed confident young person, mostly because of
      his brother's presence". He was said to maintain  little  eye  contact
      except when communicating.  Otherwise  "he  held  his  head  down  and
      interlocked his fingers".

  93. There is nothing there upon which to found doubt that this  was  a  14
      year old. Mr Dean accepted in evidence  that  the  description  of  RG
      sitting with his head down did not sit  easily  with  the  observation
      elsewhere in the assessment of his "open manner".

  94. Perhaps not sitting comfortably within a section dealing with physical
      appearance and demeanour, the report adds that RJ was vague about  his
      journey to the United Kingdom, describing having travelled by  lorries
      and a ship "but had no indication of time frames". Yet the  very  next
      sentence says:

           "He said that he travelled with other young people and the whole
           journey took 8/9 months."


      Finally, it is noted that RJ was unable to say which countries he  had
      travelled through and he confirmed he had been  fingerprinted  in  two
      separate countries but could not say which, and that his intention was
      to claim asylum here, having joined his brother in the United Kingdom,
      which is why he made no asylum claim elsewhere on the journey.

  95.  Although we have also noted in RJ's evidence a reluctance to  provide
      detail when asked to, given that Mr Dean was aware  that  the  journey
      had been organised by agents, it  is  not  immediately  apparent  what
      other information might reasonably have been expected to  be  offered.
      He also accepted, in his oral evidence, that it was  not  unreasonable
      to find that a young person undertaking such a journey was unaware  of
      the places he had travelled through.


  96. The second section of the assessment form is  headed  "Interaction  of
      person during assessment" and largely reiterates what was said in  the
      first. Although RJ answered most questions "quickly and efficiently in
      a calm, relaxed manner" and was "confident  and  clear  when  speaking
      about his journey" as the journey took 8 or 9 months it was considered
      that RJ was "very vague and reluctant to give any more details".

  97. The difficulty with that is that there is no indication of  what  more
      was expected of RJ and it is not suggested that he  failed  to  answer
      any question that was put to him.

  98. Finally, in this section, it is  said  that  RJ  appeared  comfortable
      with the process and:

           "It was as though he knew what to expect and the questions to be
           asked."

      But, as Mr Dean confirmed in oral evidence it was not put to  RJ  that
      he had been "coached" which is the clear implication in what is  said,
      and so RJ had no opportunity to  respond  to  that  suspicion,  as  he
      should have had. Nor is there any  indication  of  what  it  was  that
      generated a suspicion that RJ had been coached. All that  is  said  is
      that he answered the questions  he  was  asked  in  a  calm  efficient
      manner. Given that he was in the  reassuring  presence  of  his  elder
      brother and the absence of evidence of "coached answers" it is hard to
      see how that concern could be justified.


  99. The third, fourth and fifth sections of the assessment  form  disclose
      nothing of consequence other than providing confirmation that  RJ  was
      unaware of the age of family members; of his account,  which  we  have
      rejected, of having been provided with his date of birth by his mother
      before leaving Afghanistan and having been  vague  and  evasive  about
      questions concerning his life in Afghanistan, something we  also  have
      noted and commented on above.

 100. The sixth section of the form is of some significance. The point  made
      here, which is a point taken against RJ, is that he was able:

           "to be self sufficient in travelling  across  various  countries
           unaided and supported. This behaviour demonstrates that  Zenulah
           (sic) has the maturity older that someone older  then  (sic)  14
           years old,... His ability to engage in an activity of great risk
           and danger to travel to the UK leads me to belief that  (RJ)  is
           older than 14 years old."

      But of course it was never RJ's case that he  had  made  this  journey
      unaided and unsupported. In fact the contrary was the case. Money  had
      been paid to an agent to organise the journey to  the  United  Kingdom
      and RJ was never left to make any decision about the journey  himself,
      being under the supervision of  an  agent  throughout.  That  was  not
      unexpected.  Mr  Dean  told  us  that  in  his   experience   95%   of
      unaccompanied minors arriving in the United Kingdom have been assisted
      by agents. He said also that he had known claimants younger than  RJ's
      claimed age to have made such a journey.


 101. Nothing of consequence is added by the remaining sections of the  form
      which brings us to section 9, "Analysis of information  gained"  which
      Mr Dean told us was where he set out the factors that were material to
      his conclusion.

 102. Although those conclusions conclude the observation that  RJ  "has  an
      appearance of a young person" as he was noted to be "confident in  his
      body language and communication  skills"  and  "evasive  when  talking
      about his journey to the UK", given that he would have been just 13  �
      years of age, on his account that led Mr Deans and his colleague  with
      whom the assessment was carried out to conclude that RJ must be older.
      This was reinforced by the observation that "his mannerism,  level  of
      maturity, his interaction with adults, lead us to the conclusion  that
      (RJ) is older than 14 years old." The  conclusion  was  that  "On  the
      balance of probability we are of the opinion that  (RJ)  is  aged  17+
      years old".

 103. We find the  reasoning  and  the  analysis  wholly  unpersuasive.  Put
      another way, it is not easy to see why all of  the  issues  identified
      might not be reconciled equally with a young person of 14 years  as  a
      person three years older. When one adds to this the fact that  RJ  was
      given no opportunity to respond to some key issues  which  were  being
      held against him we are unable to accept this assessment report  as  a
      sound basis to establish the claimant's likely age. We find that  this
      report provides very little  assistance  to  the  task  before  us  of
      reaching a decision as to RJ's  age.  We  place  no  weight  upon  its
      conclusions but do have regard to the document as a record of what the
      two social workers saw and heard.

The 2nd age assessment of RJ - by Ms McKenzie Parchment and Ms Hennig

 104. This assessment was not carried out by the defendant but it is  relied
      upon because it reached a similar conclusion as did those carried  out
      by the defendant. This assessment was commissioned by  the  solicitors
      acting for RJ in his asylum appeal. We heard  oral  evidence  from  Ms
      McKenzie-Parchment who, we accept, was suitably qualified to carry out
      this task. Her conclusion was that RG's allocated  date  of  birth  of
      30th May 1992 was correct, rejecting  his  claim  to  be  three  years
      younger.

 105.  Ms  McKenzie-Parchment  acknowledged  that  there  was  probably   no
      responsible adult present during her interview with RJ. She said  that
      the position is now clear that there should be. I

 106. When this witness was questioned in detail about the reasons  set  out
      in  the  report  offered  to  support  its  conclusions  a  number  of
      difficulties emerged.

        a. There is reference to  RJ's  height  but  Ms  McKensie-Parchmant
           accepted this was not a relevant indicator  of  age  and  to  an
           absence of grey or white hair which simply meant  there  was  no
           reason to enquire further on that account;
        b. It was noted that RJ's face showed  signs  of  acne,  marks  and
           blemishes but it was accepted that  a  person  younger  than  15
           might exhibit such physical manifestations of acne;
        c. It  is  said  that  "the  facial  skin  appeared  to  be  shaved
           regularly" but in evidence it was accepted  that  it  could  not
           properly be deduced from a visual inspection on a  single  visit
           how frequently shaving occurred  and the witness thought she may
           have been told by RJ that he shaved once a week although that is
           not recorded in this report drawn up nearly two years ago;
        d. Ms McKenzie-Parchmant and her colleague noted in the report that
           "RJ's voice did sound as if it had broken a while  ago"  but  in
           evidence she accepted that it was not in fact possible to  gauge
           from the conversation that had taken place how long before  then
           the voice had broken;
        e. She wrote in the report that the clothes RJ had selected himself
           to wear were "more suited to someone in their  very  late  teens
           and older". Asked about this  she  explained  that  this  was  a
           reference to his choice of a short black  trench  coat  to  wear
           over jeans and a T shirt. It was her view that such a  coat  was
           not "popular attire for someone aged 15" but nothing further was
           offered in support of that. She acknowledged that,  in  view  of
           the first age assessment made by  the  defendant,  RJ  had  been
           treated as a 17 year old and that young people did tend, in  any
           event, to seek to dress in line with their peers;
        f.  Ms  McKenzie-Parchmant  said  that  when  conducting  the   age
           assessment account would "not necessarily" be taken of the  fact
           that RJ had been treated as a 17 year old in  terms  of  housing
           and schooling.
        g. The witness said that if he were the age he  claimed  to  be  RJ
           would not have maintained eye contact to the extent he did.  But
           no account appears to have been taken of the fact  that  in  the
           year or so RJ had  been  in  the  United  Kingdom  he  had  been
           required to undergo a  significant  number  of  interviews  with
           persons in authority;
        h. Similarly, the report noted that RJ was able to avoid  fidgeting
           throughout  a  2  hour  long  interview,   drawing   from   that
           reinforcement of the view that he was  older  than  claimed.  No
           account has been taken of the experience of the claimant  during
           a 8 month long journey during which he had to spend long periods
           of time concealed in lorries, on occasion without knowing if his
           presence was known to the driver;


 107. Looking at all the reasons given, not just the examples set out above,
      we can find nothing of cogency that supports the conclusion reached as
      to RJ's age that should be preferred to the age asserted by him. Thus,
      what is left is the unsubstantiated professional opinion of a  trained
      social worker as to RJ's age, based upon a two hour long interview. In
      our judgement this is not, considered alone, such as to prove much  in
      the way of assistance to the defendant's case.

The 3rd age assessment (the 2nd involving Mr Dean)

 108. This age assessment, the result of a process that  commenced  on  14th
      December 2010 and ended on 28th January 2011 when it was  served  upon
      the claimant, is the decision under  challenge  in  these  proceedings
      although, plainly, that which went  before  is  the  backdrop  against
      which the picture is painted. Mr Dean insisted that  this  was  a  re-
      assessment, rather than a review of his earlier decision. With respect
      to Mr Dean we have difficulty in accepting that assertion. The earlier
      assessment would have been in  his  mind  because  the  defendant  had
      agreed to set it aside and consider the matter afresh. As we know,  he
      had also been involved with the age assessment of  HJ  and  was  aware
      that the two brothers had always claimed  an  age  difference  between
      them of about four years. There is an unavoidable air of artificiality
      about any pretence that this was an assessment of RJ's age carried out
      afresh, uninformed by anything that had previously  happened.  Indeed,
      Mr Dean would, quite properly, draw upon  his  experience  of  dealing
      with both RJ and HJ in a professional capacity.

 109. Indeed, in the second age assessment are reproduced extracts from  the
      first. Mr Dean  confirmed  in  his  oral  evidence  that  reasons  for
      reaching the decision arrived at in this age assessment are those  set
      out in section 9 of the report.

 110. The first of those  reasons is that account had been taken of:

            "the fact that (HJ) had a dental age assessment in  2008  based
           on an x-ray examination, the outcome  of  which  concluded  that
           (HJ) was over 18 years of age at the date of the assessment."

      But, as we have seen, that was not a view expressed on  the  basis  of
      evidence provided by an x-ray examination because that  revealed  that
      nothing could be drawn from the x-ray. That means that the report from
      the dentist has not been assessed for what it  actually  was  and  was
      regarded to be authoritative for reasons that were incorrect.


 111. The second reason given is that RJ failed to disclose to  UKBA  or  to
      those conducting age assessments that he had been arrested  in  Calais
      and that his fingerprints were taken. That assertion is simply  wrong.
      RJ provided this information to UKBA when interviewed on 3rd  November
      2009 and to Mr Dean himself on 13th August 2009 at  the  time  of  the
      first age assessment. When asked about this Mr Dean confirmed that  it
      was inaccurate to say that RJ had failed to disclose this information.
      But he added that what RJ had failed to do was  to  say  that  he  had
      provided a different date of birth than that now claimed.  But  it  is
      not apparent that anyone asked him about that. And we  have  addressed
      above the reason offered by RJ for  having  given  the  authorities  a
      false date of birth and have accepted that he had good  reason  to  do
      so.

 112. There follows in this section of the age assessment report  a  section
      concerning the approach taken to the report prepared by Dr  Birch.  As
      we have not been asked to look at that report it is not  necessary  to
      engage with what is said other than to say that, even though that  was
      a key reason for the defendant agreeing to revisit the  issue  of  the
      assessment of RJ's age, nothing turns on that now  and  it  is  not  a
      factor that informed the age assessment reached by  Mr  Dean  and  his
      colleague because they rejected it.

 113. That leaves a simply articulated conclusion:

           "Having re-assessed the evidence and interviewed (RJ) we are  of
           the opinion that on the balance of probability that (RJ)  is  18
           years of age."

      After which is endorsed a comment from RJ:

                   "My age is not 18 as you state, but I am 15 years of
      age."

      and

           "The medical report [Dr Birch's]  accepted  me  as  15  years  6
           months, why are you (social care) not agreeing with that?"

 114. Drawing together this part of the evidence we conclude  that  the  age
      assessment report produced is flawed and  its  conclusions  are  based
      upon reasoning that is either simply wrong or insufficient to  support
      the outcome. In reality, in our judgement Mr Dean  and  his  colleague
      have done no more that look to see if there was any reason  to  depart
      from the conclusion of the first assessment and found none.

Closing submissions

 115. We do not need to set out, in detail, the helpful closing  submissions
      advanced by Mr Gask and Mr  Harrop-Griffiths  because  we  have  taken
      those into account as we have assessed the evidence and had regard  to
      all that has been said, both in the skeleton  arguments  and  in  oral
      submissions, whether we have specifically referred to the points  made
      or not.

 116. Mr Gask  did  stress,  however,  that  in  advancing  his  submissions
      reliance was placed upon two principles drawn from B v London  Borough
      of Merton [2003] EWHC 1689 (Admin). First, that where a decision maker
      has formed a provisional view that a claimant has lied as to his  age,
      the claimant must be given an opportunity to address the matters  that
      led to that view, so that he can explain himself, if he  can.  We  are
      not satisfied that has happened here. While the claimant  has  had  an
      opportunity to indicate his disagreement as to the outcome of each  of
      the three age assessments, we cannot see that there has been,  in  any
      of them, a moment where he has been provided with  an  opportunity  to
      respond while those concerns were provisional. Information as  to  the
      process of challenging the decision is a very different thing from  an
      opportunity to address concerns before a concluded view is reached.

 117. The second principle relied upon by Mr Gask is that the  fact  that  a
      claimant gives an untruthful account of matters, although relevant, is
      not necessarily indicative that he is being untruthful about his age.

Conclusions

 118. Drawing all this together and doing the best we can with the  evidence
      the parties have chosen to put  before  us,  we  reach  the  following
      conclusions. We are entirely satisfied that neither  HJ  nor  RJ,  nor
      their families had any idea at all as to the dates  of  birth  of  any
      family member. Nor do we accept that the position would have been  any
      different for the friend of HJ's with whom he said he shared the  same
      date of birth and who he says he met in the park in Shepherds Bush and
      provided him with the date he had put forward as his date of birth. It
      follows from this that we have rejected  both  of  their  accounts  of
      being provided with a date of birth or age by  their  mother  so  that
      when they were asked how old  they  were  on  arrival  in  the  United
      Kingdom the response was based upon an estimate of their own age, that
      estimate no doubt informed by a knowledge  of  the  advantages  to  be
      secured by asserting as young an age as possible.

 119. We have accepted that HJ and RJ were brought up as brothers and no one
      has challenged their claim of there being an age  gap  of  about  four
      years between them.

 120. The first considered assessment of the issue of age occurred  in  late
      June 2007 when HJ arrived and claimed to be 16  years  old.  That  was
      accepted by the defendant after assessment and by UKBA, who assigned a
      notional date of birth of 1st January 1991. HJ was  treated  as  a  16
      year old.

 121. There is documentary evidence before us in the form of regular  social
      work reviews of HJ, which demonstrate clearly that the  acceptance  of
      his age based on that date of birth was repeatedly reaffirmed by being
      reproduced in those reports by social workers and other  professionals
      tasked with meeting  the  responsibilities  due  to  a  child  in  his
      circumstances.

 122. For reasons that have not been  shown  to  be  sufficient,  doubt  was
      expressed as to HJ's age and Mr Dean carried out a re-assessment which
      concluded that HJ was three years older than  claimed.  But,  for  the
      reasons we have given, that assessment was  flawed  and  so  it  falls
      away. The consequence of that  is  that  the  previously  unchallenged
      acceptance of HJ's age prevails in our assessment of the facts,  there
      being no reason to set it aside.

 123. On that basis, HJ was correct to estimate RJ's age as being  12  years
      old when describing his family composition when interviewed by UKBA in
      June 2007, if he was correct also in  estimating  the  age  difference
      between them as being four years.

 124. When RJ arrived he sought to assert his age as being 14. He  did  this
      by offering a date of birth, and subsequently a corrected one, both of
      which we are satisfied were selected at random, connected only in that
      both sought to offer a date in the Western calendar equivalent  to  30
      Assad 1374. He was age assessed as being 16 years  old  but  that  was
      based upon an age assessment that was deeply flawed for the reasons we
      have set out above and, in any event,  was  informed  by  the  earlier
      flawed assessment carried out in respect of HJ. The second  and  third
      attempts  to  assess  RJ's  age  by  formal   process   were   equally
      unsatisfactory and unreliable.

 125. This means that we are left with just one reliable assessment  of  age
      that survives scrutiny, that being the initial acceptance of HJ's  age
      as asserted on arrival, and drawn from that, the fact  that  RJ  would
      have been 12 years old on 6th June 2007 when HJ said his  brother  was
      12 years old, assuming  that  HJ  was  correct  to  estimate  the  age
      difference as being one of four years. It  is  important  to  remember
      that he did not know how old RJ was.

 126. The next piece of evidence that we find of assistance is  provided  by
      Ms Terese Lorphevre, who was RJ's tutor for the academic  year  ending
      in June 2011. Her  evidence  might,  on  a  superficial  analysis,  be
      considered to be contradictory because she has given  differing  views
      about RJ's age, But, properly considered, there is no contradiction in
      her evidence. She was asked first to express a view as to which of two
      dates was most likely to be correct and she chose between  them.  This
      was her written  evidence.  She  was  then  asked  a  quite  different
      question in oral evidence which was what she thought was RJs  age  and
      she said that she thought he was 17 when she taught him. We take  that
      as his age at the end of the period of tuition, so that  she  regarded
      him as being 17 years old in June 2011.

 127. That raises a possible tension with the evidence previously considered
      which is that HJ had said that RJ  was  12  in  June  2007  which,  if
      correct, would mean that he would have been 16 years old in June  2007
      and not 17 as Ms Lorphevre thought.

 128. Given what we have said  above,  both  views  are  expressions  of  an
      estimate of age, based in HJ and RJ's case upon their idea of how many
      years separated them and their own assessment of their likely age  and
      in Ms Lorphevre's case upon two decades of experience of dealing  with
      young people, in respect of only some of whom age was disputed. Taking
      account the incentive for HJ to understate his age,  to  which  RJ  is
      locked in because of the  need  to  maintain  the  age  gap  asserted,
      balanced against the acceptance of HJ's asserted age  on  arrival,  we
      find this to be an assessment that is not altogether  straightforward.



 129. The probability is that either could be correct but we have to make  a
      judgement based upon our assessment of the evidence as whole. We  find
      that Ms Lorphevre is best placed to make this assessment of age, given
      her professional experience and the  length  of  time  she  had  close
      dealings with RJ. Therefore we find as a fact that in June 2011 RJ was
      17 years old.


 130. That of course does not provide a date of birth. There is no reason to
      think that any day or month of birth asserted by either HJ  or  RJ  is
      based upon the reality of their actual birthdates. Therefore, it seems
      to us that, once we have concluded that RJ was 17 years  old  when  he
      finished college in June 2011,  we should take 1st  February  2011  as
      RJ's 17th birthday, that  being  a  date  about  halfway  through  the
      academic year.

 131. To test that finding we can apply it to  other  "measures"  that  have
      arisen in this case. That does not in fact grate  with  what  we  have
      said above about the acceptance by UKBA and by the defendant  of  HJ's
      age on arrival in 2007. That is because the age difference between  HJ
      and RJ is based upon their estimate uninformed  by  any  knowledge  of
      their actual ages. Thus, dependant upon whether one were born  at  the
      beginning of the year and the other at the end of it, nothing of  real
      merit in terms of reasoning turns on the fact that RJ may have been 13
      years old in June 2007 when HJ thought he was 12.

 132. We have also, of course, had the opportunity of seeing  for  ourselves
      RJ and noting how he conducted himself throughout what was  a  lengthy
      hearing. He also spent most of a day giving oral evidence. We also had
      before us two photographs of RJ, one of which was taken  when  he  was
      first assessed and one more recently. We  approach  with  considerable
      caution  any  assessment  of  our  own  based  upon  the   appellant's
      appearance and demeanour. But we do observe that nothing we have  seen
      is difficult to reconcile with our conclusions as to his age, which we
      have reached upon the other evidence.

Decision

 133. We make a declaration, therefore, that the claimant's date of birth is
      1st February 1994. This means that he is  now  18  years  old  and  no
      longer a minor. The parties may make further  written  submissions  on
      the terms of any further orders sought and in particular on the  issue
      of costs.




                 Signed




                 Upper Tribunal Judge Southern

                 10th August 2012

