
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

   Abdin (domicile - actually polygamous marriages) [2012] UKUT 00309(IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 13 April 2012                              |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY



                                   Between

                                 Suzia Abdin

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, DHAKA

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Ahmed, Syed Shaheen Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms C Gough, Home Office Presenting Officer

Whilst the Private International Law  (Miscellaneous  Provisions)  Act  1995
amended section  11(d)  of  the  Matrimonial  Causes  Act  1973  so  that  a
potentially polygamous marriage would not be void if  either  party  was  at
the time of the marriage domiciled in England and Wales, it  did  not  alter
the position regarding actually polygamous marriages.  Under  section  11(d)
of the 1973 Act a polygamous  marriage  entered  into  outside  England  and
Wales shall still be void if either party at the time of  the  marriage  was
domiciled in England and Wales.
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The appellant is a citizen  of  Bangladesh.   On  19  April  2004  she
    married Syed Alal Abdin, a British  citizen,  in  Bangladesh.   He  had
    previously married a woman called Nasima Begum but they had decided  to
    separate in July 2003 when (the  sponsor  now  says)  he  gave  her  an
    Islamic divorce.  Their English divorce was finalised  on  16  November
    2009.  The present couple now have four children, although at the  date
    of the decision there were only three.

2.    In September 2010 the appellant applied for entry  clearance  for  her
    and three children.  On 20 December 2010 the  respondent  refused  this
    application.   Two  interrelated  reasons  were   given.    First   the
    respondent considered that the appellant's marriage to the sponsor  was
    not a valid marriage because his divorce from his previous  wife  post-
    dated his second marriage by over  four  years.   Second,  because  the
    sponsor was domiciled in the UK he  could  not  lawfully  contract  his
    second marriage to the appellant so as to satisfy paragraph  281(i)  of
    HC 395.

3.    The appellant appealed.  The grounds of appeal were that  the  sponsor
    had validly divorced his first wife  before  contracting  his  marriage
    with the appellant and so the appellant did meet  the  requirements  of
    the Immigration  Rules.   Further,  it  was  stated  that  the  refusal
    decision infringed the appellant's human rights.

4.    On 30 November 2011 First-tier Tribunal (FTT) Judge  Neyman  dismissed
    her appeal.  Prior to determining the appeal the judge  sent  direction
    to the parties so as to afford the appellant the opportunity to  submit
    DNA evidence and to  produce  an  original  of  the  sponsor's  tenancy
    agreement.  Having made adverse credibility findings on  the  sponsor's
    credibility, the judge concluded as follows:

         "44.     The sponsor is now 45 years old  and  he  left  Bangladesh
             when he was 20 i.e. he has lived here for the  last  25  years
             i.e. more than half of his life.  He is  a  national  of  this
             country.  When his last Bangladeshi passport  expired  in  May
             2004, he did not bother to renew it.  He works in  the  United
             Kingdom and has done so for many years.  In paragraph 1 of his
             statutory declaration the sponsor said that he is "permanently
             settled in the United Kingdom".  All these factors when  taken
             together indicate that the sponsor  has  made  a  decision  to
             abandon his domicile of origin and to acquire a  new  domicile
             of choice in the United Kingdom.  In addition, the sponsor  is
             not a credible witness, so  I  attach  little  weight  to  his
             claims that he  has  retained  his  domicile  of  origin  i.e.
             Bangladesh and that he has not acquired a domicile  of  choice
             i.e. the UK.

         45.      For  all  these  reasons,  I  find  that  the  sponsor  is
             domiciled in the United  Kingdom  and  that  he  has  been  so
             domiciled at all relevant times.  Given that the  sponsor  did
             not divorce his first wife until 2009 and that he married  the
             appellant in 2005, his marriage to the appellant is polygamous
             and so it is not a valid marriage at English law.

         46.      I now turn to the requirements of  paragraph  281  of  the
             Immigration  Rules  which  requires  (inter  alia)  that   the
             applicant be married to the sponsor.  Since the appellant  has
             failed to show that her marriage to the sponsor  is  valid  at
             English law, she  cannot  succeed  under  paragraph  281.   In
             addition, given that the sponsor is not a credible witness, he
             has failed to show that he intends to  live  permanently  with
             the appellant, so that again her appeal under paragraph 281 of
             the Immigration Rules  must  fail.   In  addition,  since  the
             sponsor has failed to  show  that  he  has  the  accommodation
             claimed, the appellant has failed to show that there would  be
             adequate accommodation for her here without recourse to public
             funds, so that, for this additional  and  independent  reason,
             her appeal must fail under the  Immigration  Rules.   For  all
             these reasons, I must dismiss the appellant's appeal under the
             Immigration Rules and I hereby do so."

5.    Although the judge here refers to the appellant marrying  the  sponsor
    in 2005, the actual documentation gives the date of the marriage as  19
    April 2004, although this was not registered until 19 April 2005.

6.    The judge further concluded that for Article 8 purposes the  appellant
    had failed to show she had a family life with the sponsor or  that  she
    or the sponsor were the parents of the three  children  claimed  to  be
    theirs.

Legal Framework

7.    It is as well to set out before proceeding further relevant  parts  of
    two sets of statutory provisions.  There is first of all s. 11  of  the
    Matrimonial Causes Act 1973 (as amended):

      "Nullity


         11 Grounds on which a marriage is void.


         A marriage celebrated after 31st July 1971 shall  be  void  on  the
         following grounds only, that is to say-


         (a) that it is not a valid marriage under  the  provisions  of  the
         Marriage Acts 1949 to 1986 that is to say where -


         (i)       the  parties  are  within  the  prohibited   degrees   of
         relationship;


         (ii)     either party is under the age of sixteen; or


         (iii)  the  parties  have  intermarried  in  disregard  to  certain
         requirements as to the formation of marriage;


         (b) that at the time of  the  marriage  either  party  was  already
         lawfully married or a civil partner;


         (c)  that the parties are not respectively male and female;


         (d) in the case of  a  polygamous  marriage  entered  into  outside
         England and Wales, that  either  party  was  at  the  time  of  the
         marriage domiciled in England and Wales.


         For the purposes of paragraph (d) of this subsection a marriage  is
         not polygamous if at its inception neither  party  has  any  spouse
         additional to the other."


8.    Then there is ss. 5-7 of paragraph 2 of the Schedule  to  the  Private
    International Law (Miscellaneous Provisions)  Act  1995  which  entered
    into force on 8 January 1996. Paragraph 2 of the Schedule amends s.  11
    of the Matrimonial Causes Act:
         "2(1)The Matrimonial Causes Act 1973 shall be amended as follows.
         (2)In section 11 (grounds on which a marriage  is  void),  for  the
         words "may be polygamous although" there shall be  substituted  the
         words  "is not polygamous if "."
9.    It can be seen that my citation of s. 11 incorporates this  amendment.
     So far as is relevant ss. 5 and 6 of the 1995 Act provide:-


         "PART II VALIDITY OF MARRIAGES UNDER A LAW WHICH PERMITS POLYGAMY


         5 Validity in English law of potentially polygamous marriages.


         (1) A marriage entered  into  outside  England  and  Wales  between
         parties neither of whom is already married is not  void  under  the
         law of England and Wales on the ground  that  it  is  entered  into
         under a law  which  permits  polygamy  and  that  either  party  is
         domiciled in England and Wales.


         (2) this section does not affect the determination of the  validity
         of a marriage by reference to the law of  another  country  to  the
         extent that it falls to be so determined  in  accordance  with  the
         rules of private international law.


         6 Application of section 5 to prior marriages.


         (1) Section 5 above shall be deemed to apply, and  always  to  have
         applied, to any marriage entered into before commencement which  is
         not excluded by subsection (2) or (3) below.


         (2) That section does not apply to a marriage a party to which  has
         (before commencement) entered into a later marriage which either  -




         (a) is valid apart from this section but would be void if section 5
         above applied to the earlier marriage; or


         (b) is valid by virtue of this section.


         (3)  That section does not apply  to  a  marriage  which  has  been
         annulled before  commencement,  whether  by  a  decree  granted  in
         England and  Wales  or  by  an  annulment  obtained  elsewhere  and
         recognised in England and Wales at commencement.


         (4)  An annulment of a marriage resulting  from  legal  proceedings
         begun before commencement shall be  treated  for  the  purposes  of
         subsection (3) above as having taken effect before that time.


         (5)  For the purposes of subsections (3) and (4) above  a  marriage
         which has been declared to be  invalid  by  a  court  of  competent
         jurisdiction in any proceedings  concerning either the validity  of
         the marriage or any  right  dependent  on  its  validity  shall  be
         treated as having been annulled.


         (6) ... "




Discussion

10.   The grounds of appeal contend first that the judge  erred  in  failing
    to recognise that the sponsor had divorced his first wife according  to
    the law of his domicile of origin.  I find this wholly devoid of merit.
     When making the application the appellant  and  her  sponsor  made  no
    mention of having divorced his first  wife  in  2003,  and  indeed,  to
    question 8.4.13 of the relevant form of application (asking whether her
    sponsor had ever been married before),  the  appellant  answered  "yes"
    and, underneath the name of the wife and the date  of  marriage,  wrote
    "date of dissolved 16.11.2009" (sic), a plain reference to the 2009  UK
    divorce.   Further,  although  the  grounds  of  appeal   against   the
    respondent's decision stated that "the divorce took place a  few  years
    ago", even if that were to be construed as a reference to pre-19  April
    2004 (the date of the appellant's marriage to the sponsor), no evidence
    was produced in support.  It was  not  indeed  until  the  day  of  the
    hearing that the appellant produced a  document purporting to verify  a
    divorce in 2003.  The judge addressed this evidence at paragraph 33 and
    noted  that  the  sponsor  had  been  unable  to  give  a  satisfactory
    explanation for why it had not been produced earlier.  The  grounds  of
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal wholly fail to address the judge's reasons
    for finding this divorce document unreliable and indeed for finding the
    whole claim to a pre-April 2004 divorce  mendacious.   The  appellant's
    and the sponsor's marriage was thus an actually polygamous marriage.

11.   The appellant's second ground  of  appeal  is  not  drafted  with  any
    finesse but can only be intended as an alternative ground to the effect
    that even if the judge was correct to find that the  spouse  was  still
    validly married to his first wife when  he  married  the  appellant  in
    2005, his second marriage was still  lawful  because  previous  UK  law
    (s.11(d) of the Matrimonial Causes Act 1973 only permitting  polygamous
    marriages contracted outside the UK except where one  or  both  of  the
    parties was domiciled in England and Wales at the time of the marriage)
    had  been  repealed  by  s.5   of   the   Private   International   Law
    (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1995 which does not require that  either
    party is domiciled in England and Wales.  The  author  of  the  grounds
    also prayed in aid CB (Validity of Marriage) Brazil [2008] UKAIT  00080
    where the Tribunal is said to have stated  that  for  the  purposes  of
    English law the validity of the marriage is now governed solely by  the
    lex loci celebrationis and not by the domicile of the parties.

12.   If the above contention is correct, then the appellant would  be  able
    to meet the requirement that her marriage to the sponsor was lawful.

13.   Before proceeding to decide whether it is correct, I should  state  my
    finding on the issue of the appellant's domicile.  If the test set  out
    in s. 11(d) of the Matrimonial Causes Act 1973  is  still  the  correct
    test, then the appellant could only succeed if able to  show  that  her
    husband had not lost his domicile of origin in Bangladesh and  acquired
    an English domicile of choice.  That is the test  that  the  FTT  Judge
    considered.

14.   I am satisfied that the FTT Judge was fully justified in finding  that
    the appellant's husband had not retained a Bangladesh domicile.   There
    were, it is true, some factors pointing to its retention: that  he  had
    retained his Bangladesh  citizenship  (being  a  dual  national);  that
    (contrary to what the FTT judge thought) he had renewed his  Bangladesh
    passport; that he had no property in the UK; that he had travelled back
    to Bangladesh on several occasions.  However, there were  also  a  very
    significant set of factors pointing to his having acquired  a  domicile
    of choice in the UK: that he  had  applied  for  and  obtained  British
    citizenship in 1997; that he  had  applied  for  and  obtained  British
    citizenship for his children; that he had been ordinarily  resident  in
    the UK for some 25 years (more than  half  his  life)  and  that  in  a
    statutory declaration he had described himself as "permanently  settled
    in the UK".

15.   Of course, under what  is  known  as  the  principle  of  tenacity  of
    domicile of origin, the burden of proving loss of such  domicile  rests
    on the respondent.  In addition,  I  accept  that  the  FTT  judge  was
    mistaken in finding that the sponsor had  not  renewed  his  Bangladesh
    passport; the file shows it was renewed on 31 May 2009.  However, I  do
    not consider that the sponsor continuing to hold a Bangladesh  passport
    detracts in any significant way from the very weighty factors otherwise
    indicating that he had acquired a domicile  of  choice  in  the  United
    Kingdom prior  to  November  2009.   I  am  quite  satisfied  that  the
    respondent had discharged that burden and that the judge was correct to
    find at paragraphs 44-45 that prior to the date of his marriage to  the
    appellant, the sponsor had acquired a domicile of choice in England and
    Wales.

16.   The question remains, however, whether the judge was right  to  regard
    the sponsor's change of domicile as invalidating his  marriage  to  the
    appellant.  In my view the attempt in the grounds of  appeal  to  argue
    that they did is misconceived.  Contrary  to  what  is  stated  in  the
    grounds, the Private International Law (Miscellaneous  Provisions)  Act
    1995 at s.5(1) did not repeal s.11(d) of  the  Matrimonial  Causes  Act
    1973, although it did amend it (as is reflected in the  text  cited  at
    para 7). However, the amendment was confined  to  the  validity  of  de
    facto monogamous or potentially polygamous marriages; it did not affect
    the application of s.11 to actually polygamous marriages. As  explained
    in Dicey, Morris and  Collins,  The  Conflict  of  Laws,  Vol  2,  14th
    Edition,  2006 at 17-173 to 17-186:

         "17-173 Section  11(d)  of  the  Matrimonial  Causes  Act  1973  as
                originally  enacted  provided  that  a  polygamous  marriage
                entered into outside England after July 31,  1971  would  be
                void if either  party  was  at  the  time  of  the  marriage
                domiciled in England. It further provided  that  a  marriage
                might be polygamous even though  at  its  inception  neither
                party had any spouse additional to the  other.   This  meant
                that  an  actually  or   potentially   polygamous   marriage
                celebrated after July 31, 1971 would be void if either party
                was domiciled in England at the time of the  marriage.   The
                statutory provision did not apply to marriages celebrated at
                an earlier date,  and  there  was  some  uncertainty  as  to
                whether the common-law position was the same.

         17-174  It was however held in Hussain v  Hussain  [1983]  Fam.  26
                (CA) that a marriage  celebrated  outside  England  under  a
                system of law permitting polygamy was not to be regarded  as
                polygamous for the purpose of  s.11(d)  (or  presumably  for
                other purposes) if neither spouse had capacity to enter into
                a second marriage, such capacity being determined by the law
                of the domicile of the spouse in question immediately before
                the first marriage.

         ...

         17-178  This anomaly was widely regarded as unfair and  reform  was
                proposed by the Law Commission in a report published in 1985
                (Law Commission No. 146).  Sections 5 to 8  of  the  Private
                International Law (Miscellaneous Provisions)  Act  1995  are
                based on the recommendations in that report.   Section  5(1)
                provides  that  a  marriage  entered  into  outside  England
                between persons neither of whom is already  married  is  not
                void under English law on the ground  that  it  was  entered
                into under a law which  permits  polygamy  and  that  either
                party  is  domiciled  in  England.   Section   11   of   the
                Matrimonial  Causes  Act  1973  is   amended   [by   Private
                International Law (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1995, Sch 2
                para 2] so that, instead of providing that, for the  purpose
                of s.11(d), a marriage may be  polygamous  even  if  at  its
                inception neither party has any  spouse  additional  to  the
                other it now provides that a marriage is not polygamous  if,
                at its inception neither party has any spouse additional  to
                the other.  As a result s.11(d) can  apply  only  to  actual
                polygamous marriages.

         17-179   Actually polygamous marriages.   A  marriage  is  actually
                polygamous in terms of Rule 72 if one of the parties  to  it
                is a party  to  a  prior,  subsisting  marriage.   The  Rule
                applies irrespective of whether or not  the  prior  marriage
                was celebrated under a system of law permitting polygamy, it
                also applies irrespective of whether or not the party who is
                already married is the one domiciled in England. Thus if  an
                unmarried woman domiciled in England goes through a ceremony
                of marriage in a foreign country with a  married  man,  that
                marriage will be void.

         17-180  Section 5(2) of the 1999 Act states that the  section  does
                not affect the determination of the validity of  a  marriage
                by reference to the law of another  country  to  the  extent
                that it falls to be so determined  in  accordance  with  the
                rules of  private international law.  Thus, for example,  if
                one of the parties is domiciled in a third country  (neither
                England nor the country of celebration),  the  law  of  that
                country will normally decide  whether  the  party  domiciled
                there has a capacity to enter  into  a  marriage  celebrated
                under a law permitting polygamy.  The  mere  fact  that  the
                internal law of the country  in  question  does  not  permit
                polygamy would not however, be sufficient: it must be  shown
                that its rules of private international law would regard the
                marriage as invalid. Thus, for example, the internal law  of
                England does not permit polygamy, but the English  rules  of
                private international law nevertheless  recognise  marriages
                celebrated in a  foreign  country  under  a  system  of  law
                permitting polygamy.

         17-181   Transitional provisions. Subject to  two  exceptions,  the
                new rule laid down in s.5 applies, and is deemed  always  to
                have applied, to marriage entered into before it  came  into
                force (on January 8, 1996). This means that  such  marriages
                are retrospectively validated to the extent that  they  were
                previously invalidated as polygamous. ..."

    To similar effect see Macdonald's Immigration Law and Practice, 8th Ed,
    para 11.33, (pp 17-405).

17.   Hence it is clear that the FTT judge was correct to consider that  the
    sponsor's acquisition of  a  UK  domicile  of  choice  meant  that  his
    marriage to the appellant, being actually polygamous, was void.

18.   As regards Mr Ahmed's attempt to rely on CB, in CB there was no  issue
    of polygamous marriages and the case was concerned not with a  question
    of capacity, but of form (proxy marriages).

19.   The FTT Judge also dismissed the appeal because he was  not  satisfied
    the appellant met the accommodation requirement.  The grounds of appeal
    complain that as this was not a point taken by the ECO,  it  was  wrong
    and unfair of the judge  to  have  raised  it.  I  cannot  agree.   The
    accommodation requirement is a mandatory requirement and  an  appellant
    is not entitled to succeed under the Immigration Rules unless  able  to
    meet all of the relevant requirements in full.  Furthermore, the  judge
    had ensured procedural fairness by notifying the appellant in  advance,
    by way of directions, that accommodation was considered by him to be  a
    live issue.  At the hearing the sponsor was afforded an opportunity  to
    address the accommodation issue, but, having heard his evidence on  the
    matter, the judge was not satisfied the proposed tenancy  was  a  valid
    one.  The grounds fail to  raise  any  substantive  challenge  to  this
    finding. I conclude that  the  appellant's  appeal  was  also  properly
    dismissed for failure to satisfy the accommodation requirement.

20.   The grounds also contend that the FTT Judge erred  in  his  assessment
    of the appellant's Article 8 claim.  Given that - as Mr Walker  accepts
    is the case - the UK passport  authorities  have  issued  passports  as
    British citizens to the three children, I consider the judge was  wrong
    to find  that  there  was  no  family  life  relationship  between  the
    appellant and the  sponsor.  The  ECO's  grounds  of  refusal  did  not
    challenge the appellant's claim that the sponsor was the father of  her
    three children. It was unjustified, therefore, for the  judge  to  have
    found they were not related  as  claimed  just  because  they  had  not
    availed themselves of the opportunity to conduct DNA tests.

21.   However, I do not consider that the error was a  material  one.   Even
    if related as claimed (and even if the appellant was  lawfully  married
    to the sponsor), the appellant could not succeed unless  able  to  show
    that  her  family  life  would  be   disproportionately   affected   or
    disrespected by the  refusal  decision.   Despite  his  children  being
    stated as born on 7 November 2005; 5 October 2006 and 11 November 2008,
    and despite going to the trouble to acquire British passports  for  the
    oldest two children in 2007, the sponsor made no effort  to  apply  for
    entry clearance for his wife until 2009, even though on his own account
    he had the legal capacity to marry her from 2003 onwards.  The  sponsor
    appears to have been content for some period of  time  to  conduct  his
    family life with his second wife and their children by way  of  visits.
    The evidence before the  judge  did  not  indicate  that  that  way  of
    conducting his family life was contrary to either his wishes or that of
    his wife.  Nor does it indicate  that  the  children's  best  interests
    necessitated that  they  uproot  from  the  ties  with  their  existing
    extended family in Bangladesh.  No evidence was  produced  to  indicate
    otherwise.

22.   For the above reasons I conclude that the  judge  did  not  materially
    err in law.  Accordingly his decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal
    is upheld.



Signed                                             Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Storey

