

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

          Ukus (discretion: when reviewable) [2012] UKUT 00307(IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 6 March 2012                               |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                     Mr C.M.G. Ockelton, Vice President
                         Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan

                                   Between

                     THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, LAGOS
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            IRIKWEFE CHAPSON UKUS
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C. Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms H. Short, instructed by D.J. Webb & Co.,
Solicitors


1.  If a decision maker in the purported exercise of a discretion vested  in
him noted his function and what was required to be done when  fulfilling  it
and then proceeded to reach a decision on that  basis,  the  decision  is  a
lawful one and the Tribunal cannot intervene in the absence of  a  statutory
power to decide that the discretion should have been  exercised  differently
(see s 86(3)(b) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002).

2.  Where the decision maker has failed to exercise a discretion  vested  in
him, the Tribunal's jurisdiction on appeal is limited  to  a  decision  that
the failure renders the  decision  'not  in  accordance  with  the  law'  (s
86(3)(a)).  Because  the  discretion  is  vested  in  the   Executive,   the
appropriate course will be for the Tribunal to require  the  decision  maker
to complete his task by  reaching  a  lawful  decision  on  the  outstanding
application, along the lines set out in SSHD v Abdi [1996] Imm  AR  148.  In
such a case, it makes no difference whether there is such a statutory  power
as is mentioned in paragraph 1 above.

3.  If the decision maker has lawfully  exercised  his  discretion  and  the
Tribunal has such a statutory power, the Tribunal  must  either  (i)  uphold
the decision maker's decision (if  the  Tribunal  is  unpersuaded  that  the
decision maker's discretion should  have  been  exercised  differently);  or
(ii) reach a different decision in the exercise of its own discretion.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Entry Clearance Officer in Lagos appeals against the  determination
    of Immigration Judge Nicholls promulgated on 18 May 2011  allowing  the
    appeal of the respondent, Mr Ukus, against the  decision  refusing  him
    entry clearance to the United Kingdom as a spouse. The application  was
    refused on 28 October 2010. For  the  sake  of  consistency,  we  shall
    revert to the original titles of the parties: Mr Ukus is therefore "the
    appellant".

 2. The principal point taken by the Entry Clearance Officer in the grounds
    of appeal is in relation to paragraph 320(18) of the Immigration Rules,
    which forms one of a number of sub-paragraphs between 320(8)  and  (20)
    being grounds on which entry clearance or leave  to  enter  the  United
    Kingdom should 'normally be refused':

         Save where the Immigration  Officer  is  satisfied  that  admission
         would be justified for strong compassionate reasons, conviction  in
         any country including the United Kingdom of an  offence  which,  if
         committed in the United Kingdom, is  punishable  with  imprisonment
         for a term of 12 months or any greater punishment....

 3. The expression 'normally  be  refused'  connotes  a  discretion  to  be
    exercised by the decision maker which,  in  this  case,  is  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer. In paragraph 15 of his determination,  relying  upon
    the reasoning found in the preceding paragraphs, the Judge concluded by
    finding that there were strong compassionate  circumstances  which  the
    Entry Clearance Officer had failed to take into account sufficient  for
    the discretion contained in paragraph 320(18) to  have  been  exercised
    differently. He proceeded to allow the  appeal  under  the  Immigration
    Rules.

 4. The challenge made by the Entry Clearance Officer in the appeal  before
    us is that, as paragraph  320(18)  affords  a  discretion,  the  Judge,
    having concluded that the Entry Clearance Officer had failed to reach a
    decision in accordance with the law, should have "remitted  the  matter
    for reconsideration". (Whilst this phraseology is common, we prefer  to
    couch it in terms to  the  effect  that  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    reached an unlawful decision and the  appellant's  application  remains
    outstanding awaiting a lawful decision.) This  process  is  a  familiar
    one, identified as a function of the Tribunal in SSHD v Abdi [1996] Imm
    AR 148 at p. 160.

 5. The decision made by the Entry Clearance  Officer  concluded  in  these
    terms:

         I  have  considered  the  compassionate   circumstances   of   your
         application. However, I  am  not  satisfied  that  they  are  of  a
         sufficiently compelling nature for me to  exercise  the  powers  of
         discretion granted to me by paragraph 320(18)  of  the  Immigration
         Rules. Therefore your application has been refused under  paragraph
         320(18) of HC 395.

 6. The basis upon which the Entry Clearance Officer reached this  decision
    covered a consideration of whether the  appellant  and  his  wife  were
    involved in a serious relationship in  which  they  maintained  regular
    contact. In finding they were not, he was not therefore satisfied  that
    the couple intended to live permanently with each other in a subsisting
    marriage. The Entry Clearance Officer considered whether the  appellant
    had made a false representation and  had  failed  to  declare  material
    facts. Having found that he  did,  he  concluded  this  undermined  his
    credibility in relation to the purpose and duration of  his  period  of
    stay. He noted that the appellant had been convicted of  at  least  one
    criminal offence that could have carried a  custodial  sentence  of  12
    months or more.

 7. There are some significant points  to  be  made  in  relation  to  this
    decision. First, the Entry Clearance Officer clearly recognised that he
    was considering para. 320(18) of the Immigration Rules by  his  express
    reference to it and the factors contained within it, that is,  criminal
    offending  and  compassionate  circumstances.  Secondly,  he  expressly
    referred to his function as exercising a  discretion.  The  Judge  also
    noted the discretionary  effect  of  the  sub-paragraph.  Thirdly,  the
    factors upon which the Entry Clearance Officer relied in  his  decision
    were all material, though not determinative, in the  exercise  of  that
    discretion. Accordingly, it can neither properly be said that the Entry
    Clearance Officer failed to recognise the discretionary power  that  he
    was exercising, nor that he failed to exercise it.

 8. Pursuant to s. 84 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act, 2002,
    grounds of challenge to an immigration decision  not  only  include  at
    s.84(i)(e) that

            the decision is otherwise not in accordance with the law

      but also at s.84(i)(f) that

         the person taking the decision should have exercised differently  a
         discretion conferred by immigration rules....

 9. These provisions make  clear  that  where  the  decision  maker  has  a
    discretion which is vested in him  under  the  Immigration  Rules,  the
    exercise of that discretion is appealable before the Tribunal. However,
    the appeal on this specific ground arises, and only  arises,  once  the
    decision maker has lawfully exercised his discretion in the  making  of
    the decision. If the decision maker fails to exercise  his  discretion,
    that failure renders his decision 'not in accordance with the law' and,
    because it is a discretion which is primarily vested in  the  Secretary
    of State, the Immigration Officer or the Entry Clearance  Officer,  the
    appropriate course is to require the decision  maker  to  complete  his
    task by reaching a lawful decision on the outstanding application.

10.  In cases where this issue arises, it is for the Tribunal to  determine
    whether the respondent is required to make a fresh and lawful  decision
    or whether to remake the decision itself by exercising  the  discretion
    vested in the Tribunal. This  requires  the  original  decision  to  be
    examined by the Tribunal,  not  as  to  whether  the  Judge  agrees  or
    disagrees with the outcome, but  to  distinguish  between  those  cases
    where the decision maker has not exercised his discretion  at  all  and
    those where he has done so but in a manner that permits the  discretion
    to be exercised differently.

11. There are a number of ways in which this distinction can be  approached
    and, in particular, whether the impugned  decision  has  been  lawfully
    made.  This may be done:

        i)  by reference to the criteria by which a decision is susceptible
           to a successful application for judicial review;
       ii)  by considering whether the decision maker has  appreciated  the
           powers vested in  him  by  reaching  a  decision  that  properly
           recognises them, or
      iii)  put simply, by considering whether the decision maker has  done
           the job required of him regardless of whether,  in  the  appeal,
           the Judge agrees or disagrees with his decision.

12. For the reasons  that  we  have  given,  we  are  satisfied  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer (a) recognised the part of the Immigration Rules that
    he was applying;  (b)  acknowledged  that  this  involved  him  in  the
    exercise of a discretion;  (c)  identified  the  factors  that  he  was
    required to take into account in reaching his decision which,  in  this
    case, included compassionate  circumstances  and  the  relevance  of  a
    period of imprisonment. He then (d) balanced those factors one  against
    the other and (e)  reached  a  conclusion  that  they  were  not  of  a
    sufficiently compelling nature for the exercise of  the  discretion  in
    favour of the appellant. This was  a  classic  example  of  the  lawful
    exercise of a discretion. Whatever the  merits  of  the  decision,  the
    process by which it  was  made  would  not  have  been  susceptible  to
    judicial review, because the decision maker properly noted his function
    and what he was required to do when fulfilling it and then proceeded to
    reach a decision on that basis.

13. The lawful decision that was  made  incorporated  the  outcome  of  the
    consideration of a discretion under the  Immigration  Rules.   It  was,
    therefore, open to the Judge to determine that  the  discretion  should
    have been exercised differently, that is to say to review the  exercise
    of the discretion.  He did so, with the result as it happened  in  this
    case, that he reversed the decision of the Entry Clearance Officer.

14. It follows that the respondent is misconceived in his contention in the
    grounds of appeal that the correct course of action was for  the  Judge
    to conclude the decision was not in accordance  with  the  law  thereby
    requiring the Entry Clearance Officer to make a fresh decision.

15. We go on to consider the Entry Clearance Officer's further challenge in
    the renewed grounds of appeal.  In refusing permission to appeal in the
    First-tier  Tribunal,  the  Judge  did  so  on  the  basis   that   the
    determination relied upon by the Entry Clearance Officer in his grounds
    of appeal, PS (para. 320 (11) discretion: care needed) [2010] UKUT  440
    (IAC), was 'plainly inconsistent' with s. 86 (3)(b) of the 2002 Act.

16. Section 86(3)(b) provides:

            The Tribunal must allow the appeal in so far as it  thinks  that
-
              b) a discretion exercised in making a decision  against  which
                 the  appeal  is  brought...should   have   been   exercised
                 differently.

17. In PS (paragraph 320(11) discretion: care needed) India [2010] UKUT 440
    (IAC), the Tribunal (Kenneth Parker J and SIJ Spencer)  considered  the
    discretionary bar contained within paragraph 320(11) of the  Rules  and
    its application in the uncertain circumstances there  identified,  only
    partially relieved by the promulgation of guidance which  provided  for
    refusal of entry clearance or leave to enter  where  an  applicant  has
    been an immigration offender or in breach  of  the  UK  immigration  or
    other law and where there are aggravating circumstances.  The  guidance
    set out  a  non-exhaustive  list  of  aggravating  circumstances  which
    included absconding.  The decision of the Entry Clearance  Officer  had
    simply recited that the appellant had illegally entered and had  sought
    to remain in the United Kingdom indefinitely:


           "Given that you entered as a clandestine and  sought  to  remain
           indefinitely (which was refused) I am satisfied  that  you  have
           significantly  sought  to  frustrate  the  intentions   of   the
           immigration rules."

18. The Entry Clearance Officer, in making his decision, failed to refer to
    the guidance under paragraph 320(11) and it was unclear whether he  had
    addressed his  mind  to  the  relevant  question,  namely  whether  the
    appellant's breach of UK immigration law was sufficiently aggravated so
    as to justify the refusal.  By not addressing the correct question, the
    Entry Clearance  Officer  did  not  carry  out  an  adequate  balancing
    exercise required by the guidelines.  Whilst the  Judge  endorsed  this
    approach, his decision was vitiated by the same legal error.

19. Hence, the Upper Tribunal in PS found that the Entry Clearance  Officer
    had failed to make a  lawful  decision.  In  those  circumstances,  the
    remedy available was clear: the Entry Clearance Officer was required to
    reach a lawful decision on the outstanding application and  the  appeal
    was allowed to that limited extent.

20. It follows that the decision in PS is not inconsistent with s.86(3)(b);
    rather, it complements it by providing the remedy in a case  where  the
    Tribunal finds the decision-making process had  not  even  reached  the
    stage of there being a (lawful) decision.  It is only after this  stage
    has been reached, and an appeal on a discretionary basis  arises,  that
    s. 86(3)(b) comes into play.

21. Not all discretionary  powers  open  to  the  Secretary  of  State  are
    appealable in the Tribunal.  Before its deletion on 13  February  2012,
    paragraph  395C  afforded  a  discretion  to  a  decision  maker   when
    considering removal.  If the decision to remove was made under s. 10 of
    the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 (or, latterly, s. 47  of  the  2006
    Act), the Immigration Rules provided the appellant with a decision that
    was appealable to the Tribunal.  We understand that  the  Secretary  of
    State also applied the paragraph 395C  criteria  to  removal  decisions
    which were not made under ss. 10 or 47.  These decisions, however, were
    made outside the Immigration Rules and did not give rise to a  decision
    appealable to the Tribunal.  Where, for example, the Secretary of State
    has decided to consider paragraph 395C in the  context  of  an  illegal
    entrant, (whose removal does not involve the operation  of  s.10),  the
    Tribunal has no power to review the exercise of the discretion.

22.  There  are  thus  four  possible  situations  where  the  Tribunal  is
    considering an appeal arising from  the  exercise  of  a  discretionary
    power:

            i) the decision maker has failed to make a  lawful  decision  in
               the purported exercise of the discretionary power  vested  in
               him and a lawful decision is required;
           ii) the decision maker has lawfully exercised his discretion  and
               the Tribunal has no jurisdiction to intervene;
          iii) the decision maker has lawfully exercised his discretion  and
               the Tribunal upholds the exercise of his discretion;
           iv) the decision maker has lawfully exercised his discretion  and
               the Tribunal reaches its decision exercising  its  discretion
               differently.


23. It is for a Tribunal to decide into which  of  those  four  a  decision
    falls to be determined.  It is only if (i) applies that  the  Judge  is
    required, on Abdi lines, to allow the appeal to the extent of  deciding
    the respondent needs to make a fresh decision.  Under this head  alone,
    it makes no difference whether the discretion is one  the  exercise  of
    which the Tribunal has power to review.  In  the  present  appeal,  the
    Entry Clearance Officer made a  lawful  decision  and  the  Immigration
    Judge was, on appeal,  permitted  to  make  his  own  decision  by  the
    exercise of his discretion and, in doing  so,  to  reach  a  conclusion
    different from that of the Entry Clearance Officer. In so deciding, the
    Judge made no error on a point of law.

24. None of the other grounds of appeal was pursued before us and for  good
    reason.  The Entry Clearance Officer relied on r. 26 of the Asylum  and
    Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 which permits the Tribunal,
    on receipt of an application for permission  to  appeal,  to  review  a
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal if it is  satisfied  there  was  an
    error of law in the decision.  Review was not  appropriate  in  a  case
    such as this where, as we have found, the determination did not contain
    an error of law.  Further, s. 11(5)(d)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts  and
    Enforcement Act  2007  provides  that  a  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to review, or not  to  review,  an  earlier  decision  of  the
    Tribunal, is an excluded decision for the purposes of an appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal.  With the greatest respect  to  the  draftsman  of  the
    grounds of appeal, the suggestion that r. 26  ought  to  have  led  the
    First-tier Tribunal to review its decision is  simply  unarguable.  The
    Judge made a direction, as he was permitted to do, that  the  appellant
    be granted  entry  clearance.  Given  his  findings  that  this  was  a
    subsisting  marriage,  that  the  appellant's  wife  gave  unchallenged
    evidence that the  appellant  was  permitted  to  reside  with  her  in
    accommodation she rented and was only required to register his presence
    there and that his wife's earnings were substantially in excess of  the
    minimum income support level so that there was nothing to show that she
    would not be able to support both herself and the appellant  after  his
    arrival in the United Kingdom without recourse  to  public  funds,  the
    requirements of para. 281 of the Rules were  met.  This  justified  the
    direction being made.  Nor was the Judge in error  in  commenting  upon
    "one other small factor"  being  what  he  described  as  a  developing
    official  attitude  directed  away  from  the  prosecution  of  foreign
    nationals who agree to administrative removal.  It was clearly of  only
    marginal significance, if any, and could not reasonably  have  affected
    the outcome of the appeal.

      DECISION

    The Entry Clearance Officer's appeal is dismissed.


                                                                      Signed

                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                                                31 July 2012

