
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


R (on the application of RK) v Birmingham  City  Council  AAJR  [2013]  UKUT
00307 (IAC)


             IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW



|Heard at Field House                            |                           |
|On 18-21 February 2013                          |                           |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                       THE QUEEN ON THE application OF

                                     RK
                                                                    Claimant
                                     and

                           BIRMINGHAM CITY COUNCIL

                                                                   Defendant


Representation:

For the Claimant: Mr R De Mello, instructed by Bhatia Best Solicitors
For the Defendant:     Ms P Etiebet, instructed by Birmingham City Council






                                  JUDGMENT


 1. The claimant, to whom I shall refer as "RK" throughout  this  judgment,
    claims to be a citizen  of  Iran.   By  a  claim  form  issued  at  the
    Administrative  Court,  Birmingham  on  17  June  2010,  RK  sought   a
    declaration that the then defendant (the Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Home Department) "abide by a determination of  Immigration  Judge  Khan
    promulgated on 4 March 2010 which concluded that the claimant's date of
    birth is 15 May 1994."  RK also sought a declaration that the Secretary
    of State should treat him as a minor and grant him discretionary  leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom.  It is unnecessary here to set out  in
    detail the history of the litigation given  that  the  only  issue  now
    before the Upper Tribunal (the determination of RK's chronological age)
    is removed  from  the  original  subject  matter  of  the  claim.   The
    defendant in the proceedings is no longer the Secretary  of  State  for
    the Home Department, but Birmingham City Council which,  on  13  August
    2009 and on 23  November  2010,  produced  age  assessment  reports  in
    respect of RK with which he does not agree.   The  proceedings  against
    the Secretary of State were withdrawn on 13  July  2010  following  the
    acceptance by the Secretary of State that RK was a minor; the Secretary
    of State subsequently granted RK discretionary leave to remain  in  the
    United Kingdom until 15 November 2011. I understand that his  leave  to
    remain has not been extended beyond that date.

 2. As noted above, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Khan) had  dismissed  an
    appeal by RK against the decision of the Secretary of  State  dated  12
    August 2009 refusing RK's claim for asylum and  making  directions  for
    his removal  from  the  United  Kingdom  by  way  of  directions  under
    paragraphs 8-10 of schedule 2 of the  Immigration  Act  1971.   In  the
    course of his determination dismissing the appeal (and  which  has  not
    been appealed to the Upper Tribunal), Judge Khan made a finding that RK
    was born on 15 May 1994 (that is,  RK's  claimed  date  of  birth)  but
    Birmingham City Council (which had assumed responsibility for RK's care
    under the Children Act 1989) refused to treat RK as  a  minor.   During
    subsequent proceedings in the Administrative Court  and  the  Court  of
    Appeal, Birmingham City Council continued to assert that RK's  date  of
    birth is  25  January  1990.   The  judicial  review  proceedings  were
    transferred  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  by  an  order  of   Mr   Justice
    Hickinbottom on 3 June 2011.  At  the  fact-finding  hearing  on  18-21
    February 2013, Mr R De Mello of Counsel appeared for the  claimant  and
    Ms Etiebet of Counsel appeared for the defendant.

 3. Neither party to these proceedings carries any burden of proof.  It  is
    for the court to determine whether the applicant was  a  child  at  the
    material time with reference to all relevant evidence and  by  applying
    the standard of proof of the balance of probabilities  (see  R  (CJ)  v
    Cardiff County Council) [2011] EWCA Civ 1590). The Court of Appeal in R
    (CJ) observed:



   1. In R (A and M) v Croydon and Lambert Borough Councils [2009] UKSC 8,
      [2009] I WLR 2557, the Supreme Court settled the question whether,  in
      the event of a challenge to the decision of a local  authority  as  to
      the claimant's age, the High Court was required either  to  reach  its
      own decision as to the claimant's age or, alternatively, the challenge
      was  by  way  of  review   of   the   local   authority's   assessment
      on Wednesbury principles  alone.  Baroness  Hale  gave  the  leading
      judgment with which the other members of the Supreme Court agreed.  At
      paragraphs 26  and  27  Baroness  Hale  explained  the  difference  in
      approach required for the evaluative judgment whether a child was  "in
      need" within the mean of section 20 of the 1989 Act and  the  decision
      upon the precedent question of fact whether the  individual  concerned
      was a child. She said this:
           "26. ... the 1989 Act draws a  clear  and  sensible  distinction
           between different kinds of  question.  The  question  whether  a
           child  is  "in  need"  requires  a  number  of  different  value
           judgments ... but where the issue is not what  order  the  court
           should make but what service should the local authority  provide
           it is entirely reasonable to  assume  that  Parliament  intended
           such  evaluative  questions  to  be  determined  by  the  Public
           Authority, subject to the control of the courts on the  ordinary
           principles of judicial review. Within the limits of fair process
           and "Wednesbury reasonableness" there are no clear-cut right or
           wrong answers.
           27. But the  question  whether  a  person  is  a  "child"  is  a
           different kind of question. There is a right or a wrong  answer.
           It may be difficult  to  determine  what  that  answer  is.  The
           decision-makers may have to do their best on the basis  of  less
           than perfect or conclusive evidence but that  is  true  of  many
           questions of fact which regularly come before the  courts.  That
           does not prevent them from being questions for the courts rather
           than for other kinds of decision-makers."
      Lord Hope, in his concurring judgment, said at paragraph 51:
           "51. It seems to me that the question whether or not a person is
           a child for the purposes of section 20 of  the  1989  Act  is  a
           question of fact which must ultimately be decided by the  court.
           There is no denying the difficulties that the social  worker  is
           likely to face in carrying out an  assessment  of  the  question
           whether an unaccompanied asylum seeker is or is  not  under  the
           age of  18.  Reliable  documentary  evidence  is  almost  always
           lacking in  such  cases.  So  the  process  has  to  be  one  of
           assessment. This involves  the  application  of  judgment  on  a
           variety of factors, as Stanley Burnton J recognised in R (B)  v
           Merton London Borough Council [2003] 4 All ER 280, para 37. But
           the question is not whether the person can properly be described
           as a child. Section 105 (1) of the Act provides:  "in  this  Act
           ... 'child' means, subject to paragraph  16  of  Schedule  1,  a
           person under the age of 18". The question is whether the  person
           is, or is not, under the age of 18. However difficult it may  be
           to resolve the issue, it admits of only one answer. As it  is  a
           question of fact, ultimately this  must  be  a  matter  for  the
           court."



 4. I had a consolidated  bundle  of  documents  in  two  separate  folders
    together with skeleton arguments and  a  number  of  additional  papers
    which were handed to me by  both  parties  during  the  course  of  the
    hearing.  I heard the oral evidence of witnesses for both  RK  and  the
    defendant and the oral submissions of Mr De Mello and Ms Etiebet.   The
    method by which I have sought to consider and analyse the evidence  and
    to determine RK's age is as follows.  I have had regard to the oral and
    documentary evidence as a  totality.   It  is  only  after  a  thorough
    consideration of all the evidence that I have reached any  findings  of
    fact.  However, for the purposes of structuring my judgment only and in
    order to make it as concise as possible, I have summarised the evidence
    of each witness, have made my findings  of  fact  in  respect  of  that
    evidence and then have considered the extent to  which  those  findings
    may support the case of RK or that  of  the  defendant.   I  have  then
    sought to bring together the various findings and observations  by  way
    of concluding paragraphs.  I stress  that,  although  I  have  in  this
    judgment  weighed  the  evidence  of  each  witness  immediately  after
    recording their evidence, my findings have only been  reached  after  a
    thorough consideration of  all  the  evidence.  Further,  although  for
    practical reasons the witnesses did not appear in the  usual  order,  I
    have considered their evidence in this judgment in the order  in  which
    they appeared at the hearing.

 5. The first witness to give evidence for the claimant was Mr  Paul  Levy.
    Mr Levy is an independent social worker and he has  prepared  a  report
    which is dated 17 December 2010.  In  that  report,  he  sets  out  his
    qualifications and gives details of the documents which had  been  sent
    to him in preparation for his meeting with RK.   I  note  that  he  had
    before him Judge  Khan's  determination,  a  report  of  Dr  Birch  and
    "information from [RK] Home Office interview and  the  Birmingham  City
    Council social worker's age assessment dated 23 November  2010..."   He
    refers to two age assessment which had been completed by Oxford  County
    Council social workers and to which I will refer later.  He notes  that
    Oxford initially assessed RK in June 2008 as a child but had  later  (8
    August 2008) assessed him as an adult "after receiving information from
    an unnamed dentist." RK had been in  the  care  of  Oxfordshire  County
    Council after he had arrived in the United Kingdom on 15 June 2008.

 6. Mr Levy's report that RK attended the interview with Ms Lizzy  Bell,  a
    Project Worker from the Children's Society and Mr James Whitehouse from
    the Refugee Council's Children Panel.   At  first,  the  interview  was
    conducted in English  but  the  services  of  an  interpreter  (Kurdish
    Sorani) were required because Mr Levy considered that RK's English  did
    not enable him to "totally engage in the interview."  Mr Levy  recorded
    that RK was "of slim build and visually appears to be  approximately  5
    ft 3 inches/  5  ft  3  inches."   He  noted  that  previous  documents
    indicated a similar height for RK but  he  appeared  to  attach  little
    weight to the apparent lack  of  growth  as  this  would  "need  to  be
    provided by a qualified paediatrician and  cannot  be  answered  within
    this assessment."  Mr Levy asked RK about his shaving habits.  Ms  Bell
    also joined in a discussion regarding RK's pastimes and interests.   RK
    told Mr Levy he was not fully aware of why he was being  "age  assessed
    again."  Mr Levy explained that  "dental  information"  indicated  that
    "people's wisdom teeth usually become fully developed between the  ages
    of 17 to 21 rather than 14 years old."  The parties are agreed that the
    claimant's four wisdom teeth had erupted by at least November 2008.  Mr
    Levy explained to RK that the dental assessment  had  led  to  his  age
    being re-assessed.

 7. Mr Levy asked RK about his family in Iran and recorded RK's answers  in
    detail.  He concluded his report by making a further reference  to  the
    eruption of RK's wisdom teeth and noted that "both the unknown  dentist
    and Dr Birch [who gave evidence for the claimant - see  below]"  agreed
    that, in European young people, eruption of  wisdom  teeth  take  place
    between the ages of 17-21 years.  He records that, "the British  Dental
    Health Foundation's opinion would  be  that  it  is  'unusual  but  not
    impossible' for a 14 year old to have  wisdom  teeth.   This  leaves  a
    reason of doubt to [RK] being a child due to  the  development  of  his
    wisdom teeth (sic)."  Mr Levy went on to note that "RK's lack of growth
    since appearing in the UK appears to suggest that he  has  reached  his
    mature height and the reason for his height development  not  following
    an expected growth pattern is outside of my  professional  remit."   He
    considered  that  RK's  story  about  his  brother's  death   and   the
    imprisonment  of  his  father,  mother  and  sister  in  Iran   "lacked
    substance."  In the  penultimate  paragraph  of  his  report,  Mr  Levy
    recorded his observations of RK's interaction with Ms Bell.   He  noted
    that Ms Bell herself is "a young adult" and that  "RK's  demeanour  did
    not appear as an adult to adult with Ms Bell but rather a young  person
    to an adult allowing her to express a nurturing approach  to  him  when
    she asked why he was not wearing a warm jacket on a cold day."  Mr Levy
    concluded that, "this interaction was one that  indicated  that  RK  is
    functioning as a young person between the age of sixteen and eighteen."
     Mr Levy considered that, "RK's lack of physical growth in  nearly  two
    years and his teeth development leads me to believe he is closer to  18
    years of age than 16."

 8. Cross-examined by Ms Etiebet, Mr Levy said that he could  not  remember
    whether he had actually measured RK during the  interview.   He  agreed
    that his assessment that RK was about 5 ft 3 inches  tall  indicated  a
    metric equivalent of 160 centimetres.  It was put to Mr Levy  that  the
    answers RK had given regarding his shaving habits (RK told Mr Levy that
    he had last shaved "three days ago" a response challenged  by  Mr  Levy
    who told RK that he did not accept the answer) indicated  that  RK  was
    trying to persuade Mr Levy that he was younger than he looked.  Mr Levy
    replied that, "I accept that he was lying [regarding his shaving]."

 9. Ms Etiebet asked Mr Levy about a screening  interview  between  RK  and
    officers of UKBA which had taken place on 3 July 2008.   The  interview
    concludes with the following exchange:



|                      Question       |                Answer    |
|On 03.06.08, you told the officers   |I was afraid of being     |
|that you are Ali Ahmad, d.o.b.       |deported to my country.   |
|25.1.90.  Why?                       |                          |
|You knew that you were in France     |Yes I was told by the     |
|before coming to the United Kingdom? |officers who fingerprinted|
|                                     |me.                       |
|Have you understood all the          |Yes                       |
|questions?                           |                          |
|Is there anything you would wish to  |I am an Iranian.          |
|say or add?                          |                          |


10. Mr Levy said that he believed that RK had lied to the officers who  had
    taken his fingerprints in France and that his motive for doing  so  may
    have been to avoid being deported from that country.  Mr Levy was  also
    asked about the discrepancy in his  interview  with  RK  where  RK  had
    stated that his date of birth was 21.3.1373 [in the  Iranian  calendar]
    whereas it had been recorded by Dr Birch and Judge Khan  as  25.2.1373.
    Mr Levy agreed that it was "unusual" to  forget  one's  date  of  birth
    especially given the fact that, despite his limited education,  RK  had
    been shown to have good ability in arithmetic.

11. It was put to Mr Levy  by  Ms  Etiebet  that  the  interaction  he  had
    observed between RK and Ms Bell was an unreliable indicator of RK's age
    or maturity given that RK may have been "playacting."  Mr Levy did  not
    agree.

12. I have considered the extent to which Mr Levy's  evidence  may  support
    the respective cases of the parties.  I found Mr Levy to be  a  helpful
    witness who was  quick  to  acknowledge  the  limitations  of  his  own
    expertise and the difficulties facing all professionals in  this  field
    in establishing a young person's chronological age.   I  attach  little
    weight to the observations which he made as to RK's height  because  it
    seems likely that he did not measure RK but simply estimated his height
    by looking at him.  I note, however, that his observation that  RK  had
    not "grown since his arrival in the UK  in  2008"  is  to  some  extent
    consistent with evidence led by the defendant.  It was also clear  that
    RK  had  lied  to  Mr  Levy  regarding  the  fact  that  he  had   been
    fingerprinted in France and Mr Levy acknowledged this.   Prudently,  in
    the light of that untruth and the fact that he did not believe what  RK
    had said about his shaving habits, Mr Levy had approached the remainder
    of what RK told him with some caution.

13. What is striking about Mr Levy's report is that the  only  part  of  it
    which strongly supports the claimant's claimed  date  of  birth  arises
    from Mr Levy's observations of RK's interaction with Ms Bell.  To  have
    attached such significance to this observation goes rather against  the
    generally cautious approach otherwise adopted.  Mr Levy  has  concluded
    that the appellant  was  on  a  scale  between  16-18  years  primarily
    (perhaps even solely) because of his demeanour and interaction with  Ms
    Bell.   Expert  witnesses,  like  decision  makers,   should   exercise
    considerable caution in attaching excessive weight to the demeanour and
    appearance as an indicator of chronological age. I find that Mr  Levy's
    conclusion relies too  heavily  upon  his  brief  observation  of  RK's
    interaction with Ms Bell.  Such observations may be useful  (see  AM  v
    Solihull Metropolitan Borough  Council  [2012]  UKUT  00118  (IAC),  in
    particular at [19]) but, as the Tribunal noted in that case,  the  most
    useful observations are likely to be those which are conducted  over  a
    long period of time of the subject "going about his ordinary life."[19]
    In the present case, Mr Levy (i) made his  observation  briefly  during
    the course of a single interview and (ii) he does not  appear  to  have
    been alive to the possibility that RK had  been  "playing  up"  in  the
    presence of a sympathetic older person (Ms Bell).  As a consequence,  I
    do not consider that this part of the report offers strong support  for
    RK's case.  On the other hand, Mr  Levy's  unequivocal  record  of  the
    claimant having lied at their interview  together  with  what  he  says
    about the dental records supports the defendant.

14. I next heard evidence from one of the  defendant's  witness,  Ms  Sally
    McDonagh.  She adopted her written statement [tab 35] as her  evidence-
    in-chief.  Ms McDonagh works for SLC Group  and  is  Locations  Manager
    assisting in providing accommodation for young  people  for  Birmingham
    City Council.  At [tab 21]  and  exhibited  to  the  age  re-assessment
    report prepared by the defendant in  respect  of  RK  is  exhibited  an
    earlier statement made Ms McDonagh and upon which she also relies.   At
    the time that she wrote that statement, Ms McDonagh had been working as
    Operations Manager for Urgency Housing Organisation Limited.  That work
    had brought her into close contact with RK when he came to live in  the
    Birmingham area.  RK had been placed  at  the  Broadway  semi-supported
    accommodation project in September 2010.  Ms McDonagh explained that at
    about that time and in common with several  other  young  unaccompanied
    asylum seekers  in  the  care  of  the  Council,  RK  had  applied  for
    Educational Maintenance Allowance (EMA) whilst  he  was  a  student  at
    Bourneville College.  RK had told Ms McDonagh that  a  teacher  at  the
    college had told him to complete the form  indicating  that  he  was  a
    British citizen who had lived in the United Kingdom for more than three
    years.  However, as Ms McDonagh's first statement notes, "project staff
    [spoke] to RK to explain that this could be construed as  a  fraudulent
    claim due to  his  actual  status.   [RK]  was  able  to  discuss  this
    confidently declaring that as a child he had only done what his teacher
    had told him to do."  Ms McDonagh considered that RK had  continued  to
    use "well-developed manipulative strategies to obtain what he  believes
    to be his right."  RK's demands had been "extreme", expecting staff  to
    shop, cook and clean for him.

15. Cross-examined by Mr De Mello, Ms McDonagh said that she  had  believed
    that RK had been over 18 years of age when she first had  contact  with
    him.  She said that she was aware that a number of young  unaccompanied
    asylum seekers who had applied for EMA  had  incorrectly  claimed  that
    they were refugees; RK, on the other hand, had gone as far as to  claim
    in his EMA application that he is a British citizen.

16. I found Ms McDonagh to be a helpful witness and found her  evidence  to
    be truthful and consistent.  The EMA application form completed  by  RK
    has been produced in the smaller bundle of documents  prepared  by  the
    defendant.  The application form appears to have been  supported  by  a
    letter sent  by  Urgency  Housing  Organisation  Limited  which  simply
    confirmed that RK was a resident at Broadway.  On the form  itself  (at
    A8), box A has been ticked indicating that the applicant is "a  British
    citizen and I have lived in the UK for at least three  years  prior  to
    the start of  my  learning  programme."   The  form  concludes  with  a
    declaration by the  claimant  which,  inter  alia,  confirms  that  the
    information  given  is  correct  and  complete  to  the  best  of   the
    applicant's knowledge and belief.  The form carries a warning that,  if
    false or incomplete information  is  provided,  the  applicant  may  be
    prosecuted.  In  addition,  there  was  in  the  papers  a  note  on  a
    Birmingham City Council file written by a Margaret Jenkins which reads,
    "I have checked our records and can confirm that  RK  applied  for  the
    education and  maintenance  allowance  (EMA)  year  10/11.   The  total
    payments he received for this academic year was �630."

17. I accept that Ms McDonagh became aware that RK had  completed  the  EMA
    form inaccurately.  I find that she had a conversation with  RK  during
    which he told her that he had been given help in completing the form by
    a teacher at Bourneville College.  I shall deal further  with  the  EMA
    application  below.   I  attach  limited  weight   to   Ms   McDonagh's
    observations that she believed RK was over 18 when she first  met  him;
    her opinion was based upon RK's demeanour and  her  conversations  with
    him although I do note that, unlike Mr Levy, she had the opportunity in
    her work to observe RK mixing with young men of a similar  age  over  a
    period of time.

18. The defendant's witness, Margarita  Kostadinova,  adopted  her  witness
    statement [tab 36].  Ms  Kostadinova  is  a  Project  Co-Ordinator  for
    Urgency Housing and it was in that role that she  had  encountered  RK.
    In her statement, Ms Kostadinova  refers,  in  turn,  to  RK's  written
    statement [46] in which he had said that, "I can confirm  that  I  have
    not lied on my EMA form, this form was completed for me by Zainab,  she
    is a friend of mine and is in my class, Margarita Kostadinova,  who  is
    the manager of the home, checked the form and told me to post the form.
     I am surprised at the allegations are being made that I  lied  on  the
    form, if this was the case then Margarita  should  have  corrected  the
    form or told me that the  form  was  completed  incorrectly."   In  her
    statement, Ms Kostadinova said that  she  "clearly  told  RK  that  his
    disclosure was incorrect."  She repeatedly denied in cross  examination
    that she had any part whatever in completing or checking  the  accuracy
    of the form.  In response  to  a  question  which  I  put  to  her,  Ms
    Kostadinova said that, in  her  experience,  the  most  common  problem
    amongst young, unaccompanied asylum seekers who  applied  for  EMA  was
    that they claimed that they were refugees when they were, in fact, only
    asylum seekers.

19. I found Ms Kostadinova to be a truthful witness.  There  is  clearly  a
    conflict with what she says regarding the EMA application form and what
    RK has said.  As noted above in the discussion of Mr Levy's evidence, I
    find that RK has lied  to  Mr  Levy  regarding  the  fingerprinting  in
    France.  Considering the evidence of Ms Kostadinova (which  was  clear,
    consistent  and  betrays  no  motive  whatever  for  being  other  than
    truthful) against that of RK (who I find below has a propensity to  lie
    when he believes that doing so would gain him a material  advantage)  I
    prefer the evidence of Ms Kostadinova.    I accept that Ms  Kostadinova
    was aware  of  previous  problems  with  EMA  applications  (ie.  where
    applicants had wrongly stated that they  were  refugees)  and  this  is
    likely to have led her to be careful to check such details had she  had
    sight of RK's application form.  I find that she  did  not  check  RK's
    form at all.  I find that this is example of RK telling a lie and  then
    seeking to blame others when that lie was exposed. It  is  a  trait  in
    RK's conduct to which several witnesses drew attention.

20. The next witness to give evidence was RK himself.  He has provided  two
    written statements. [tabs 29 and 33].  In his first statement dated  28
    June 2010, RK explains how he was "happy" when  the  Immigration  Judge
    had accepted that he was a child.   He  had  been  upset  when  he  was
    removed from Oxford to Birmingham.  He  claimed  at  that  time  to  be
    receiving treatment for asthma and insomnia.  He claimed to  have  been
    "coughing up blood and passing blood" [7].  In  his  second  statement,
    dated 12 January 2011, RK discusses  the  age  assessment  prepared  by
    Birmingham City Council.  He claimed that he was not  given  any  prior
    notice of a visit to his home on 5 November 2010  by  social  services.
    He complained that he was not ready for an age assessment  but  it  had
    been conducted in any event.  At [7] he discusses the  application  for
    EMA and says, "I did not say that  I  was  British  because  I  am  not
    British.  I told [social workers from Birmingham City Council] that the
    [Bourneville]  College  helped  me  complete  the  form  together  with
    Margarita, who works at the home.  I confirm I would not  have  made  a
    claim for EMA, if I was informed that  I  was  not  eligible  for  this
    payment."  The statement goes on  to  discuss  RK's  relationship  with
    Swaran Singh who, RK claims, had never "spoken to me nicely" [11].   RK
    elaborated upon his poor  relationship  with  Mr  Singh  in  answer  to
    questions put to him by Mr De Mello in-chief.

21. RK was cross examined by Ms Etiebet regarding the  screening  interview
    conducted by officers at the Home Office [defendant's  smaller  bundle,
    tab 4].  Asked to identify his own signature, RK said, "it  looks  like
    my signature. I can't recall."  Asked whether he remembered saying that
    he had left Iran on 1 June 2008 [5.1] RK replied, "I think it  must  be
    true.  I can't remember now.  I could remember then."  In the screening
    interview, RK had said, "I left Iran on 1.6.08 by car to Turkey where I
    arrived three days later.  I stayed in Turkey for five nights.  I  left
    Turkey by lorry and travelled to the UK.  It took five days  to  arrive
    in the UK.  I changed the lorry once, after I left Turkey.   I  arrived
    in the UK on 15.6.2008."  Ms Etiebet asked RK why he had not  indicated
    in that account of his journey that he had passed  through  France  and
    been fingerprinted there.  RK could not remember.  It  was  put  to  RK
    that the French authorities had fingerprinted him on 3 June 2008,  that
    is at a time when RK himself claimed that he had  been  en  route  from
    Iran to Turkey.  RK could not recall.  He said repeatedly that he could
    not remember whether he had been fingerprinted anywhere else other than
    in the United Kingdom.  He could not remember telling  the  Immigration
    Judge at the First-tier Tribunal hearing that  he  had  never  been  in
    France and had not been fingerprinted outside the United  Kingdom.   He
    was asked why he had failed to deny that  his  date  of  birth  was  25
    January 1990 and that his name was Ali Ahmad [as he  had  informed  the
    French authorities]; when asked to comment, he had only  asserted  that
    he was an Iranian citizen.  RK said that he could not  remember  making
    those statements to the Home Office officials.

22. Ms Etiebet asked RK about the second  Oxfordshire  County  Council  age
    assessment of 8 August 2008.  This assessment had concluded that RK had
    been born on 15 May 1990.  RK said that he was  completely  unaware  of
    the assessment as he had never been told about it.

23. Ms Etiebet asked RK in what circumstances he had come to know the dates
    of birth of his parents.  RK could not remember.  Ms  Etiebet  referred
    RK to the first Oxfordshire County Council assessment of 19  June  2008
    where the record of a conversation between the  social  worker  and  RK
    records  that,  "when  asked  how  he  knew  years  of  birth,   albeit
    approximate, but was not  able  to  confirm  the  ages  of  his  family
    members, RK states he was told by his parents  approximately  one  year
    ago of their years of birth.  He was not aware of their  reasoning,  if
    any, of giving him this information."  In the  same  paragraph,  it  is
    recorded that RK's father and mother had been born in 1966.  Ms Etiebet
    asked RK why he had given a different  answer  to  that  which  he  had
    provided to Oxfordshire County Council.  RK could  not  recall  why  he
    should have done so.  RK said that he knew when  he  himself  had  been
    born because his mother had told him "fifty times or more."  His mother
    had his birth certificate, but, being illiterate, he had been unable to
    read it.  He had been  unable  to  obtain  the  certificate  from  Iran
    because he was not in  contact  with  his  family  there.   Ms  Etiebet
    referred RK to the "Child in Care/Young  Persons  Review"  prepared  by
    Sally McDonagh dated 29  December  2010  [tab  38]  under  the  heading
    "Update  review  of  contact  arrangements".    The   report   records,
    "according to RK he would like to trace his family  in  Iran.   In  the
    report for Broadway, Margarita states that  RK  does  not  want  to  be
    referred to the Red Cross to  try  and  trace  his  family.   This  was
    following a discussion with Margarita who had explained  what  the  Red
    Cross do."  RK said that, if anyone  could  help  him  to  contact  his
    family in Iran, he would be  very  happy.   He  denied,  however,  ever
    having discussed this with Margarita at Urgency Housing.   He  said  it
    was another example of  Mr  Singh  and  his  colleagues  "writing  down
    whatever they like."    However, RK acknowledged that Ms McDonagh,  the
    author of  the  review,  would  have  had  no  reason  to  record  RK's
    statements incorrectly.  Ms Etiebet referred RK to the  Birmingham  age
    assessment of 13 August 2009.  This records RK having told  the  social
    workers that his brother had been killed in  2005.   The  report  notes
    that RK's brother was born in 1985 and died  at  the  age  of  20.   RK
    denied that he had ever said that his brother was killed  in  any  year
    other than 2006.  He was referred to a statement supplied by Ms  Lizzie
    Bell [tab 32].  This statement contains details of a project  supported
    by the Children's Society involving young asylum seekers and  to  which
    RK had contributed.  Under the heading "Case Study" it is  stated  that
    RK was born on 15 May 1994.  It then continues, "RK's story began  when
    he was just 10 years old.  'I have an older brother (1985)  and  sister
    (1988).  My father was involved with the Iranian government.  I am  not
    sure what he did but when I was 10 my brother  was  shot  (killed).   I
    wasn't told much about this but I had lost  my  brother  this  made  me
    sad."  Ms Etiebet asked RK why he claimed his brother had been shot  in
    2006 when, if his brother had died when RK was 10 years old, this would
    mean he had died in 2004.  RK denied that he had  ever  said  that  his
    brother had died in  2004  or  even  suggested  this.   He  said,  "the
    Children's Society got it wrong."  He also said that it was  a  mistake
    for the Children's Society to  have  said  that  his  father  had  been
    "involved with the Iranian government."  That had never been the  case.



24. RK said that Margarita Kostadinova had  helped  him  complete  the  EMA
    application.  He said that the part of the form which recorded that  he
    was a British citizen had been completed by Margarita.   He  said  that
    she was not telling the truth when she denied that  she  had  completed
    the form.  He said, "it has all been planned against  me."   He  denied
    that the form was filled  in,  in  his  own  handwriting.   Ms  Etiebet
    referred RK to Ms McDonagh's statement [11] where she noted  that,  "it
    was reported to me that [RK] has stated that he had "filled the form in
    as his teacher had told him to."  RK denied that he had had any part in
    completing the form himself.

25. Ms Etiebet referred RK to an e-mail [tab 21] written to Swaran Singh by
    Donna Blyth, a tutor at Bourneville College.   Referring  to  RK's  EMA
    application, Ms Blyth had said that, "the letter  he  changed  for  EMA
    (sic) was from the place he lives confirming that he does  indeed  live
    there.  I only saw this because he showed it to  me.   I  do  not  have
    copies of any paperwork as this is between EMA  and  the  learner.   We
    would never tell a learner to lie on the EMA forms as obviously that is
    fraud."  RK said that Donna Blyth was a liar and that she had completed
    the form.  I note that Donna Blyth's e-mail had been sent  in  response
    to an e-mail from Swaran Singh asking her  to  comment  on  RK's  claim
    that, in applying for EMA, he had  "acted  on  the  advice  of  college
    teaching staff to state on the form that he was a British  citizen  and
    had been in the UK for at least three years."  RK said, "this is all  a
    plan against me.  They knew it was wrong so why  did  they  let  it  go
    through?"  He was asked who exactly had a "plan" against him.  RK  said
    that he had been plotted against by Swaran Singh.  He did  not  believe
    that the teachers at Bourneville College had sought to harm or  deceive
    him.  He then said, "I do not accuse [Donna Blyth]  of  lying.   But  I
    have not done that.  She knew that I did not have a  good  relationship
    with Swaran Singh."  He suggested that Sally McDonagh had been part  of
    a plot against him with Swaran Singh.

26. RK claimed that he did not understand the difference between a  refugee
    and an asylum seeker.  He denied that he had lied about his citizenship
    on the EMA form so as to avoid telling Bourneville College that he  was
    an asylum seeker.  He denied ever telling Bourneville College  that  he
    was an orphan form Oxford.  Ms Etiebet referred RK again to the  e-mail
    from Donna Blyth in which she says,  "....the  enrolling  tutor  thinks
    that [RK] was alone.  He told her that he had moved to Birmingham  from
    Oxford when his parents died.  He has told me they  died  when  he  was
    10."  RK denied that he had ever said that.  Ms Etiebet went on to show
    RK the manuscript document annexed to  the  Birmingham  age  assessment
    dated 9 September 2010.  RK  acknowledged  that  he  had  written  this
    document himself.  The letter begins as follows:

         "Dear Teacher,

         My name is [RK].  I am 16 years old and I came from Iran.  I  don't
         have a father or mother.  I was 10 years old  when  my  father  and
         mother died.  I don't have any brothers or sisters."

27. RK said that he remembered the day when he had written this.   He  said
    that all of the students in his class had told the  teacher  that  they
    could not write down their real life  stories  because  they  were  too
    personal and upsetting so Donna Blyth had told them to  "just  come  up
    with a story."  Ms Etiebet referred  RK  to  the  exchange  of  e-mails
    between Robert Smith of Bourneville College and Robina  Shah,  formerly
    of the Immigration Advisory Service (IAS) who had acted as RK's lawyer.
     Ms Shah's e-mail asks Mr Smith  whether  "Donna  [Blyth]  is  able  to
    comment on whether there  was  a  discussion  in  the  classroom  which
    students had reservations about writing about their lives."  The  reply
    from Mr Smith reads, "Donna [Blyth] is clear that no reservations  were
    expressed when students were asked to complete  the  piece  of  written
    work to test their literacy.  Donna also explained  that  all  students
    are told that they should not write anything in this 'test  work'  that
    they would not want others to be able to read.  The content of the work
    is a matter of personal choice."  RK said, "I am sure that every single
    student there said that they could not  write  the  truth  about  their
    lives."  He denied that Donna Blyth had lied  in  her  response  to  Mr
    Smith but believed there had been "a different interpretation."

28. The claimant gave his evidence through a Kurdish Sorani interpreter but
    occasionally he spoke in English.  When discussing his family in  Iran,
    the claimant occasionally became upset and  I  halted  the  proceedings
    until he recovered.  Several times, the claimant asked for questions to
    be  repeated.   I  was  satisfied  that  the  claimant  understood  the
    questions which were put to him.  I am aware that,  whatever  his  true
    date of birth, RK is a young man and I have no doubt that  he  found  a
    lengthy cross examination a trying experience. I find that RK is not  a
    witness of truth.  I find that this Tribunal may not rely upon any part
    of his evidence.  I make that finding for  the  following  reasons.   I
    have set out in some detail the responses which RK  gave  to  questions
    put to him in cross-examination.  In my analysis of the evidence of the
    previous witnesses, I have recorded that RK had lied to  Mr  Levy  when
    asked  about  having  been  fingerprinted  in  France.   During  cross-
    examination on the same issue, RK  was  at  first  evasive  ("I  cannot
    recall", "it may be my signature I don't know.").  Given that  RK  does
    not claim to suffer from any cognitive impairment and  that  he  is  an
    apparently healthy young man, it was bizarre that he  should  not  have
    been able to remember being fingerprinted  in  France.   He  grudgingly
    acknowledged that the screening interview contained an accurate  record
    of his encounter with Home Office officials when he had made his  claim
    for asylum.  He appeared at  that  time  to  have  had  no  problem  in
    remembering that he had been fingerprinted.  I find that he was evasive
    in cross-examination because he  was  well  aware  that  the  screening
    interview contained particulars which were wholly at odds with evidence
    which he had given at  other  times.   Indeed,  RK's  evidence  in  the
    screening interview itself is not internally consistent.  The interview
    opens with an account of how RK left Iran  on  1  June  2008  and  then
    stayed in Turkey for eight days.  However, RK subsequently acknowledged
    that he had been fingerprinted on 3 June 2008.  The  Immigration  Judge
    who heard RK's asylum appeal rejected entirely RK's denial that he  had
    been fingerprinted in France.  It is plain from what RK has  told  this
    Tribunal that the  Immigration  Judge  was  right  to  do  so.   It  is
    extraordinary that RK should  continue  to  claim  that  he  could  not
    remember having been fingerprinted when  the  evidence  (including  his
    own) overwhelmingly indicated that he had been. Indeed, I find that his
    pretended failure of memory is part of a pattern of  conduct  reflected
    elsewhere in the evidence. It seems that RK has calculated that he  can
    say or do whatever he wants because he is confident that,  if  anything
    goes wrong, he can blame others, in  particular  those  who  have  been
    working to help and support him.

29. It is also worth remembering that the first Oxfordshire age  assessment
    of June 2008 had concluded that RK was only 14 years old.   It  was  in
    the following month (July 2008) that  RK  had  attended  his  screening
    interview.  By that time, RK was being treated by Oxfordshire as  a  14
    year old minor. I find that this factual context is likely to  explain,
    at least in part, RK's conduct at the screening interview.  I find that
    RK was candid with  the  Home  Office  officials  who  interviewed  him
    because he considered that his status as a minor was by then secure; it
    did not appear to have occurred to him  that  the  date  of  birth  (25
    January 1990) he had  given  in  France  might  return  to  haunt  him.
    Significantly,  RK  has  become  much  more  defensive  regarding   the
    fingerprinting since the age assessment of Oxfordshire was reversed and
    the new age subsequently  adopted  by  Birmingham  City  Council.  When
    inconsistencies in RK's evidence or between his evidence  and  that  of
    others are put to  him,  he  will  either  (i)  blame  others  for  the
    discrepancy or (ii) blatantly deny previous  statements  which  he  has
    made and which have  been  recorded  or  (iii)  claim  that  he  cannot
    remember.  It is perhaps an indication of RK's intellectual  immaturity
    (rather than his chronological age)  that  that  he  should  ignore  or
    refuse to acknowledge that different  agencies  (even  those  operating
    across national borders) may share evidence about him.

30. In the light of my findings regarding his lack of credibility, wherever
    RK's evidence conflicts with that of other witnesses, I find  that  the
    evidence of those other witnesses is to be preferred in every instance.
     RK claimed that he was given no warning of the social  workers  coming
    to his home to carry out the age assessment.  Mr Singh, the lead social
    worker from Birmingham City Council, together with Ms McDonagh  and  Ms
    Kostadinova, Emergency Housing, did not support  that  evidence  and  I
    find that their version of events is to be preferred.  Likewise,  I  do
    not believe the  claimant  when  he  says  that  he  was  unaware  that
    Oxfordshire County Council had  revised  its  age  assessment.   During
    cross-examination over the course of only three  successive  questions,
    RK was compelled to change his testimony about the way in which he  had
    come to discover the dates of birth of his parents.  Again,  I  do  not
    believe RK when he told me that he remains very eager  to  contact  his
    family in Iran but that he has never been offered help  by  appropriate
    agencies.  I find that RK was told about  these  services  by  the  Red
    Cross but that he has chosen not to avail himself of those services.  I
    consider it likely that his reason for doing so  arises,  at  least  in
    part, from a fear that  (i)  if  his  family  is  contacted  by  social
    services or the immigration authorities, they may reveal his true  date
    of birth; (ii) that he will have no excuse for failing  to  obtain  his
    birth certificate which he claims is in the possession of  his  mother.
    Looking at RK's  evidence  as  a  whole,  I  find  that  these  reasons
    constitute a strong motive for RK persistently lying about  his  family
    and his failure to contact them.

31. Several witnesses for both parties have noted that, whilst  RK  is  not
    well-educated, he is intelligent and numerate.  However,  under  cross-
    examination RK quickly got into difficulties  when  items  of  previous
    evidence which he has provided were shown to give differing  dates  not
    only for his date of birth but also for his  brother's  alleged  death.
    First, RK could not remember the month in which his  brother  had  been
    killed, something which I find very  surprising  in  itself  given  the
    significance of that event in his  own  life.   He  then  struggled  to
    reconcile the different dates of his brother's death which emerged from
    the various accounts he has given and which place  his  death  at  some
    time between 2004 and 2006.  RK told me that he had always claimed that
    his brother had died in 2006 but that claim is  not  supported  by  the
    evidence.  When challenged in cross examination, RK either claimed that
    he could not remember what he  had  said  or  denied  having  made  the
    disputed statement at all.  It is telling that the greatest discrepancy
    concerning his brother's death was with the details RK had given to the
    officers of the Children's Society involved in the young asylum  seeker
    project (see paragraph 22 above).   I consider that to be an example of
    RK dropping his guard in circumstances when he  did  not  believe  that
    what he said would ever come  to  the  attention  of  those  who  might
    consider re-assessing his age.

32. Perhaps the most blatant example of RK's tendency to  deceive  concerns
    his application for EMA.  RK displayed considerable  audacity  when  he
    chose not  merely to copy what was apparently a common  deceit  amongst
    young asylum seekers in describing himself as a refugee (in fact, quite
    a subtle deceit and, in some cases,  no  doubt  a  genuine  error)  but
    rather to go one step further than that  and  claim  to  be  a  British
    citizen.  That was a claim that could not be explained away by pleading
    ignorance of the difference between asylum seekers  and  refugees.   RK
    clearly had a motive to obtain EMA; Ms McDonagh noted that he had  very
    limited financial resources and complained to  her  several  times.   I
    find that RK knew that he was lying when he told  the  EMA  authorities
    that he was a British citizen.  I find that he has lied  again  to  the
    Tribunal when he had sought to cast the blame for the error on  to  his
    teachers and Ms Kostadinova.  I have no doubt that Ms  Kostadinova  did
    not see the EMA application form before it was submitted  nor  was  she
    ever asked by RK  to  check  it.   Likewise,  I  accept  Donna  Blyth's
    evidence (in the form of the e-mail) that she had no involvement in the
    completion of the form.  I have to say that I am also surprised,  given
    that the EMA application led to RK receiving �630 to which he  was  not
    entitled,  he  has  not  faced  investigation  by  the  police;  it  is
    disturbing that RK's assumption that his deception would not (at  least
    in the short term) be detected by the EMA authorities appears  to  have
    been an accurate one.

33. The appellant's credibility was further  undermined  by  what  he  said
    about the essay which he had written at Bourneville  College.   On  the
    one hand, I have RK's evidence that every member of the class had  told
    the teacher that they would have to make up their accounts because they
    were unwilling to tell the truth about what had happened to  them.   On
    the other hand, I have the unequivocal evidence  of  Donna  Blyth  that
    none of the students  registered  any  complaint  and  that  they  were
    expressly told not to give fictional accounts.  I prefer  the  evidence
    of Donna Blyth and find also that the contents of RK's own essay simply
    add  to  the  internal  inconsistencies  to  be  found  throughout  his
    evidence.

34. I heard evidence from Mr James Whitehouse who is a  Children's  Advisor
    working for the Refugee Council, Birmingham.  Mr Whitehouse worked with
    RK for about 2 years, having first met him on 13 August 2008.   He  has
    provided RK with advice and  support.   His  written  statement  of  10
    August 2010 deals primarily with difficulties that RK was  experiencing
    at that time with NASS accommodation.  Questioned by Mr  De  Mello,  Mr
    Whitehouse said that he had been shocked when  he  had  first  seen  RK
    because he "looked  so  slight".   Cross-examined  by  Ms  Etiebet,  Mr
    Whitehouse confirmed that he had written a  letter  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in February 2010  requesting  an  adjournment  of  the  asylum
    proceedings.  That application is considered in the Immigration Judge's
    determination at  [8]  et  seq.   The  Immigration  Judge  refused  the
    application.  At [8] the Immigration Judge noted that "[the letter from
    Mr Whitehouse] said that the appellant's state of mind meant  the  lack
    of capacity to proceed with the hearing on 23 February."  Mr Whitehouse
    did not recall using the word "capacity".  He had been  aware  that  RK
    had threatened suicide in August 2009.  At [14] the  Immigration  Judge
    had noted that, "there was no evidence in the form of an expert  report
    to substantiate  his  claim  [that  the  appellant  lacked  the  mental
    capacity to proceed with the hearing].  I decided that it would not  be
    in the interests of justice to yet again adjourn  the  hearing  of  the
    appeal for the vague possibility that the appellant might at some  time
    in the future be able to obtain legal representation."  It was  put  to
    Mr Whitehouse that he had "overegged the  pudding"  when  he  indicated
    that RK  lacked  mental  capacity.   On  the  contrary,  Mr  Whitehouse
    believed that he had "not egged the pudding enough"; there had been  no
    adjournment, notwithstanding his letter.  He said, "I felt he could not
    get through the hearing but he did.  I thought he was a child."

35.  Ms  Etiebet  asked  Mr  Whitehouse  whether  he  was  aware  that  the
    Immigration Judge had found that RK was not  a  truthful  witness.   Mr
    Whitehouse replied, "I am aware that he rejected the  claim  but  found
    him to be a child."  Asked about RK's credibility, Mr  Whitehouse  said
    that he was "not in a position to judge.   I  cannot  make  that  value
    judgment.  I never thought whether he was credible or not.  I would not
    go into his credibility.  I considered only that he was a  child."   Mr
    Whitehouse said that he did not "go around trying to find  reasons  why
    RK was not a child."

36. I am sure that Mr Whitehouse came to the Tribunal with the intention of
    assisting it.  However, he adopted a defensive  attitude  under  cross-
    examination.  I have no doubt that Mr Whitehouse was seeking to  assist
    RK when he sought an adjournment of the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing.
    However, in the absence of any  medical  evidence  indicating  that  RK
    lacked mental capacity, it was  not  surprising  that  the  Immigration
    Judge refused to adjourn the hearing.  Since Mr Whitehouse did not have
    any medical evidence to assist him, I find that he did exaggerate  RK's
    difficulties although I accept that he did so in order to assist RK  by
    putting  off  the  appeal  hearing  until   RK   might   secure   legal
    representation.  I find that Mr Whitehouse  has  accepted  uncritically
    and at face value RK's claim that he was a child and he has  chosen  to
    ignore any evidence which might suggest that he was not or that he  was
    both willing and able to deceive  those  in  authority.   I  intend  no
    criticism of Mr Whitehouse because I am aware  that  adopting  a  "non-
    oppressive" and non-judgmental approach to the young people  with  whom
    he deals may be a necessary part of gaining their trust. However, it is
    an approach which makes it difficult for  Mr  Whitehouse  to  offer  an
    objective opinion especially in  proceedings  where  a  young  person's
    credibility may be highly relevant. I find that his evidence was  given
    truthfully but has to be evaluated in the context of his role  as  RK's
    unquestioning supporter.

37. Ms Lizzie Bell adopted her written statement  [tab  32].   Ms  Bell  is
    described in her statement as a "Strong Voices,  Strong  Lives  Project
    Worker" for the Children's Society (this is the project referred to  at
    paragraph 22 above).  Her statement is dated  21  December  2010.   She
    noted that RK was "generally full of energy and enjoys a lot  of  adult
    attention."  He was "very keen to help staff and volunteers  and  would
    always help us carry boxes and bags into the centre or to arrive  early
    to decorate the rooms at parties etc."  She noted that RK  could  "kick
    up a fuss and show real teen-like behaviour."  She noted that he  would
    "try to make staff members feel guilty about not being able  to  attend
    appointments with him."  She noted that RK  was  "keen  to  access  his
    entitlements."  On this latter point, Ms Bell said in answer to  cross-
    examination  by  Ms  Etiebet  that  she  did  not  consider  RK  to  be
    "manipulative."  She also said that she was "prepared to accept that RK
    was the age he said he was."

38. Ms Bell had witnessed RK being measured by Dr Birch in the IAS offices.
     She could not remember whether he had been wearing shoes at the  time.
    Asked to examine conflicting statements made by RK regarding  the  role
    of his father in Iran (the statements  indicated  variously  that  RK's
    father had been opposed to and worked for the  Iranian  government)  Ms
    Bell said, "for  the  purpose  of  the  Children's  Society  marketing,
    accurate detail of an asylum seeker's story does not matter."  She said
    that six colleagues had agreed that RK was a child and it was  "not  my
    job" to assess the credibility of RK's statements.  Asked  whether  she
    thought individuals such as Ms McDonagh were in a  better  position  to
    comment on RK's age, Ms Bell disagreed.  She said that Birmingham  City
    Council had "a poor record" of dealing with child asylum seekers.   She
    asserted that  the  Children's  Society  officers  were  "in  a  unique
    position" to judge the age of the  young  men  with  whom  they  worked
    because they were able to observe them interacting  with  their  peers.
    She believed that her assessment of RK's age should be given value  for
    that reason.  Pressed on the question of  RK's  deceptive  conduct,  Ms
    Bell said "yes, I suppose he could be manipulative but  that  does  not
    mean he is an adult."  She said that  the  average  age  of  the  young
    people attending regular events at the Children's Society was about  17
    years.

39. I acknowledge that Ms Bell has had a close working relationship with RK
    who appears to trust her.  She is herself  a  young  adult  and  it  is
    perhaps not surprising that she is well placed to understand RK's  view
    of the world as a consequence.  She has also  had  the  opportunity  of
    seeing RK interacting with other individuals of  a  similar  age.   Her
    observation that other young men at the Children's Society Project  had
    not complained to her that RK is not the age he claims to be should  be
    given weight.  However, as with Mr Whitehouse, the value of  Ms  Bell's
    evidence is diminished by her refusal to engage with  negative  aspects
    of RK's behaviour.  Ms Bell was right to point  out  that  it  was  for
    others, not her, to assess RK's chronological age.  However,  whilst  a
    non-judgmental position may be necessary to enable those  working  with
    young people to win their trust, problems arise in the context of legal
    proceedings such as these when that position is extended to  defending,
    without question, the young person against what is perceived as harmful
    criticism by third parties. I  find  that  her  evidence  needs  to  be
    approached with caution given her role as uncritical  advocate  for  RK
    who has accepted that he had been born in 1990 simply because  he  told
    her that he had been.

40. I heard evidence from Tracey Anne  Webb  who  is  a  Higher  Scientific
    Officer working  for  the  Home  Office  (Immigration  and  Nationality
    Directorate).   On  12  August  2009,  Ms  Webb  compared  a   set   of
    fingerprints in the name of RK (d.o.b. 5 April 1994) taken  on  3  July
    2008 at the Asylum Screening Unit, Croydon against a set of  prints  in
    the name Ali Ahmad (d.o.b. 25 January 1990) taken on  3  June  2008  at
    Coquelles,  France.   She  found  that  "such   a   number   of   ridge
    characteristics [are] in agreement to leave me in no  doubt  they  were
    both made by the same person."  Her witness statement/report appears at
    tab 6 of the bundle.  Mr De  Mello,  for  RK,  did  not  challenge  the
    evidence of Ms Webb.  RK now accepts that he had  been  interviewed  at
    Coquelles on 3 June 2008 when he had given the name of Ali Ahmad and  a
    date of birth of 25 January 1990.

41. Dr Diana Birch  has  prepared  two  age  assessment  reports  dated  19
    November 2008 and 16 December 2010 respectively [tabs 23/24].   In  the
    first report of 19 November 2008, she  records  RK's  height  as  158.5
    centimetres.  She said she always used the same technique for measuring
    the height of the clients.  The subject is asked to stand with  his  or
    her back to a wall in bare feet, Dr Birch ensuring that the head was at
    the same angle on each occasion. The same metal ruler had been used  to
    carry out the measurements.  By the time she prepared her second report
    on 16 December 2010, RK's height had (as measured by the same technique
    described above) increased to 163  centimetres.   This  represented  an
    increase of 4.5 centimetres over the period of two years.

42. In her first report, Dr Birch concluded that the appellant was aged 14-
    16 years.  She reached a  similar  conclusion  in  her  second  report,
    concluding that RK "is, in fact, about 17 years of age."

43. She was cross-examined by Ms Etiebet regarding the  emergence  of  RK's
    molar teeth.  She acknowledged that the emergence of  the  third  molar
    occurred between 17-21 years but  she  considered  that  emergence  was
    "very variable" depending on racial origin.  Ms Etiebet also  asked  Dr
    Birch to consider the health assessment review carried out by RK's  GP,
    Dr Agarwal, on behalf of Birmingham City Council and which is dated  16
    June 2011.  This recorded RK's height as 161 centimetres.  She was also
    asked about the estimates  of  RK's  height  of  160  centimetres  (see
    above).  Dr Birch said that she was confident that  her  own  means  of
    measurement had produced accurate results on both occasions.

44. Although Dr Birch has produced two lengthy reports, the claimant relies
    upon her evidence for her measurements of his height only. Although she
    was cross examined on  other  matters  (see  paragraph  42  above),  RK
    himself  does  no  seek  to  rely  upon  the  findings  regarding   his
    chronological age contained in her reports.

45. As is apparent from my analysis of the evidence so  far,  a  number  of
    different measurements of RK's height have  been  recorded.   A  GP  in
    October 2010 recorded RK's height at 160 centimetres, Mr Levy at around
    5  feet  3  inches  and  Dr  Simaroo  (or  his  nurse)  at  around  161
    centimetres.   I have considered what weight  should  be  given  to  Dr
    Birch's measurements.  I accept that Dr Birch has measured  RK  on  two
    separate occasions using the same metal ruler and that the same  method
    (see paragraph 40 above) was used on both occasions.  I do not have any
    evidence at all regarding the method by which the measurements  by  the
    GP and Dr Simaroo have been carried out although Mr Singh and  Ms  Bell
    on different occasions saw measuring apparatus being used.   I consider
    that mere approximations of RK's  height  (e.g.  Mr  Levy's,  which  he
    described as a "guess") should be given less weight  than  measurements
    carried out  by  clinicians,  whilst  measurements  for  which  I  have
    specific details of the method employed and which have been  tested  by
    cross examination (Dr Birch) should be given yet more weight.  Mr  Levy
    described his own assessment as a  "guess".     However,  the  Tribunal
    should approach with caution the use of evidence of growth as  tool  in
    age assessment.  In A v London  Borough  of  Croydon  [2009]  EWHC  939
    (Admin) at [25] Collins J noted,  with  approval,  the  evidence  of  a
    paediatrician, Dr Stern:


      Dr Stern is a  most  distinguished  paediatrician.  He  is  consultant
      paediatrician emeritus to the Guy's and St  Thomas'  Hospitals  Trust.
      Measurements of height and weight  are  in  his  view  not  completely
      reliable  unless  carried  out  by  a  properly   trained   paediatric
      auxologist. In any event, assessments of growth and  maturity  are  in
      his view unacceptably unreliable. Height is particularly difficult  to
      use as a reliable indication since much will depend on the  height  of
      each parent. There is in his view no reliable scientific basis for the
      estimation of age. That is a view which is entirely in accordance with
      the guidance given by the RCPCH. A contrary  view  has  no  scientific
      support. Further, as Dr Stern says, and again this  accords  with  the
      general medical opinion, all the factors relied on to  assess  age  in
      reality can only assess maturity and maturity  and  chronological  age
      are two different things. He makes what seems to me  to  be  a  cogent
      point when he says this in paragraph 10.4 of his report:-
      "The large majority ... are asylum seekers from developing  countries.
      Many of them have been subjected to deprivation  and  some  to  severe
      psychological stresses. I would expect these adverse  events  to  have
      significant effects  upon  development,  tending  to  delay  it.  Such
      effects would be particularly marked  with  respect  to  psychological
      maturity. The consequence of this would be that  those  clients  would
      have both younger psychological profiles and/or  earlier  measures  of
      physical maturity than their true chronological age."
      It is Dr Stern's view that a paediatrician is unlikely to be able to
      reach a conclusion which is superior to that reached by an experienced
      social worker, provided, of course, that the social worker is properly
      trained and experienced and conducted the necessary interview in an
      appropriate fashion.




46. Although Dr Birch has an impressive curriculum vitae  relating  to  her
    work with children, she is not a paediatric  auxologist  nor  does  she
    claim to possess the expertise of such a specialist.   Her measurements
    of height should be given weight for the reasons I  have  stated  above
    and they are, perhaps, more reliable than any other measurement we have
    for RK but they still fall short of the  "gold  standard"  provided  by
    clinical auxology.  Moreover, even if we had measurements of  RK  taken
    by an auxologist, then, as the judgment in A indicates, the rate of his
    growth  would  still  not  provide  a   reliable   indicator   of   his
    chronological age.  As with the eruption of molar  teeth  (see  below),
    perhaps the most that can be said of an individual's growth  in  height
    as an indictor of chronological age is that proof of the  cessation  of
    growth tends  to  indicate  the  achievement  of  a  physical  maturity
    generally associated with adulthood. However, even so it is clear  that
    some individuals continue to grow after they have reached the age of 18
    whilst others have stopped growing before they achieve legal  majority.
    Further, the rate of growth (in height  and  weight)  of  young  asylum
    seekers may be distorted by their having  access  to,  for  example,  a
    better diet in the United Kingdom. In the case of RK, the fact that  he
    continued to grow between the two measurements taken by Dr Birch offers
    some support for his claimed age but that the value of that support  is
    severely limited by the caveats I have indicated.  Those  same  caveats
    apply equally to what Mr Singh (see paragraph 48 et seq below) says  in
    his age assessment as they do to the evidence of Dr Birch.

47. As regards the eruption of RK's fourth molar teeth, it is common ground
    between the parties that these teeth had completed eruption by November
    2008 (for the claimant, it had been Dr Birch who had recorded that fact
    in her report of November 2008). The report of the unknown  dentist  in
    Oxfordshire indicates that the eruption had been  completed  by  August
    2008; it had been this report or comment which had led  Oxfordshire  to
    re-assess RK's age. By his own account, RK had  been  14  years  and  6
    months old in November 2008.  Documentary  evidence  regarding  African
    subjects prepared by  a  Dr  Pearsall  and  adduced  by  the  defendant
    indicates that all four wisdom molar teeth had erupted in 50% of  those
    studied by the age  of  18.5  years;  it  would  be  "unusual  but  not
    impossible" for a 14 year old to have a complete set of wisdom teeth.

48. As with weight and height, evidence of  the  eruption  of  molar  teeth
    should  be  assessed  with  caution;  variations   do   occur   between
    individuals (as  with  height,  possibly  influenced  by  environmental
    factors) and we do not have study data specific to  the  population  of
    which RK is a member. However, in the light of the evidence before  me,
    I consider that it possible to conclude that the fact RK's molar  teeth
    had completed the process of eruption by November 2008  indicates  that
    he was more likely to be close to adulthood by that date rather than as
    much as 3.5 years from the age  of  18  years  as  he  himself  claims.
    Further, this evidence should, in my view, be given greater weight than
    that of Dr Birch relating to RK's height because it concerns a  process
    which had reached completion (see paragraph 46 above).

49. I heard evidence from Swaran Singh, a social  worker  employed  by  the
    defendant.  Mr Singh prepared the age assessment reports of  30  August
    2009 and 23 November 2010 which are the subject of  these  proceedings.
    He has also prepared a statement (tab 38) dated 1 March 2011  which  he
    adopted as his evidence-in-chief.

50. Cross-examined by Mr De Mello, Mr Singh said that he was not present at
    Dr Simaroo's review health assessment of RK on 16 June 2011.  Mr  Singh
    said that Dr Simaroo had not been asked to estimate RK's  chronological
    age at that assessment.  As far as Mr Singh  was  aware,  RK  had  been
    accompanied by his legal representative.   At  the  conclusion  of  his
    report  of  November  2010,  Mr  Singh  wrote,  "[RK's]  lack  of   any
    significant growth in height over two years; this  is  more  consistent
    with RK being an adult as opposed to being a child.  It is  my  opinion
    that he has reached his full height growth and would  indicate  he  has
    reached maturity."  Mr Singh said that he had based that conclusion  on
    the GP/nurse measurements which he had had available to him at the time
    of writing the report.

51. Mr Singh was asked about his relationship with RK.  He said that he had
    done everything to help RK who had been a  demanding  client.   He  had
    felt no need to "step aside" from involvement with RK although  he  was
    aware that the relationship was difficult; the  council's  social  work
    team was too small for social workers to be  transferred  from  problem
    cases.  Mr Singh was asked about paragraph 62 of his report of November
    2010 ("It is concluded that RK is an adult and his date  of  birth  is,
    most probably the one he initially gave in France, that  is  25.01.1990
    which would make RK 20 years old.") Mr Singh said he thought  that  the
    date of birth given by RK in France was "the best informed."

52. I heard evidence from Diane Bayona Bazurto, a social worker employed by
    Birmingham City Council who, together with Mr Singh,  had  written  the
    age assessment reports.  She adopted her statement [tab 37].  She  said
    that, should she disagree with her co-reporter,  she  would  refuse  to
    sign a report.  Asked by Ms Etiebet about the date of birth given by RK
    during his interview in France, Ms Bazurto said, "rather than make  one
    up ourselves, we look for anything which he had said before  which  was
    consistent with our own assessment within the age range."   Ms  Bazurto
    said she had carried out about 40 -  50  age  assessments,  the  "great
    majority" having led to an assessment of under 18 years of age.

53. Cross-examined by Mr De Mello, Ms Bazurto acknowledged that there  were
    difficulties in the relationship between RK and  Mr  Singh.   She  said
    that the issues which had arisen between them were not  "unusual."   Ms
    Bazurto said that she could "not remember saying that RK had  told  the
    truth when in France."  Pressed by Mr De Mello,  she  said,  concerning
    the date of birth of 25 January 1990, that "yes, it is probably  true."



54. Since the task of the Tribunal is to determine RK's chronological  age,
    I am less concerned with upholding  or  rejecting  the  age  assessment
    reports than with considering their contents,  together  with  all  the
    other relevant evidence, in order to reach my age  assessment.  I  find
    that Mr Singh and Ms Bazurto are well aware of the pitfalls involved in
    assessing  chronological  age.   However,  the  assessments  are  based
    largely upon RK's demeanour and physical indicators.   I  have  already
    highlighted  the  probative  limitations  of  physical  indicators  and
    demeanour.

55. The oral evidence of Mr Singh and Ms Bazurto was also  to  some  extent
    influenced by the same non-judgmental approach which characterised  the
    evidence of Ms Bell and Mr Whitehouse. This may  originate  from  their
    training as social workers and, as with  the  other  witnesses  from  a
    similar background, a tension in their work is only created  when  they
    are required to step out of their supportive roles and give an opinion,
    informed by objective analysis of evidence, a fact with which the young
    person in their care may not agree.  Ms  Bazurto,  in  particular,  was
    reluctant to agree with Ms Etiebet that RK had lied to her  and  others
    even when shown proof of his deceit.  Likewise,  whilst  Mr  Singh  had
    stated in his report of November 2010 that "[RK's]  date  of  birth  is
    probably the one he first gave  in  France",  he  retreated  from  this
    statement under cross examination, saying that 25 January 1990 was  the
    "best informed" date of birth available for RK; he denied that  he  had
    chosen that particular date because he believed that it is RK's  actual
    date of birth, saying only that it he had adopted it  only  because  it
    was consistent with the other evidence. In my view, 25 January 1990  is
    either RK's date of birth or it is not. To choose that date rather than
    any other because it appears consistent with other  evidence  may  lead
    one to ignore other possible dates which may be  more  consistent  with
    the evidence. However, as I explain below, I find that Mr Singh and  Ms
    Bazurto have chosen the correct date  of  RK's  birth  albeit  for  not
    entirely cogent reasons.

56. The last witness to give evidence was Robina Shah who adopted her three
    statements of 22 June 2010, 14 January 2011 and 10 March  2011  as  her
    evidence-in-chief.  Ms Shah is a solicitor who was  formerly  the  RK's
    case worker at the Immigration Advisory Service (IAS).  She  had  acted
    for RK in the early stages of this judicial review. She still  sees  RK
    occasionally but he is no longer her client.

57. Ms Shah spoke about the essay which RK had  written  for  his  teachers
    [tab 21] and her e-mail correspondence with Donna  Blyth  (see  above).
    Ms Shah said she believed that RK had not wished others to know that he
    was an asylum seeker.  She said, "he doesn't want anyone  to  know  his
    private business."  For example, RK had been approached by the  BBC  to
    take part in a documentary but he had told her, "I do not  want  to  be
    known as a refugee."

58. Ms Shah was asked about RK's application for EMA.  She said,  "I  don't
    say that he made the application fraudulently.  He really  believed  he
    was entitled to it.  It took me a long time to explain to him  that  he
    was not.  As soon as  he  found  out  that  he  was  not  entitled,  it
    stopped."  Cross examined by Ms Etiebet, Ms Shah agreed  that  RK  must
    have known at the time of his application that he  was  not  a  British
    citizen.

59. Ms Shah has formed a good relationship with RK  whilst  acting  as  his
    solicitor.  However, because her  first  concern  is  to  protect  RK's
    welfare and also in the light  of  her  earlier  involvement  in  these
    proceedings, her views on RK's age, no doubt genuinely held, should  be
    approached with caution.   Under  cross-examination,  she  acknowledged
    that RK had been fully aware that he is not a British citizen  when  he
    made his application for EMA but  I  was  unable  to  detect  that  her
    awareness of RK's lack of truthfulness in any way informed her  opinion
    of his age.

60. I have analysed the evidence of each witness in turn but  now  seek  to
    draw together my  findings  and  observations.   First,  RK  is  not  a
    truthful witness.   He  has  given  untrue  particulars  about  himself
    (sometimes, for example, as  with  his  claim  that  he  is  a  British
    citizen, outrageously false) when he has believed doing so might  bring
    him some benefit.  On those occasions when his deceit has been exposed,
    he has sought to cast the blame on to others.

61. RK's credibility  is  so  poor,  therefore,  that  his  age  cannot  be
    determined solely on the basis  of  his  evidence.   Consequently,  the
    Tribunal has had to look to other evidence to inform its assessment.  I
    have already explained the problem of  attaching  too  much  weight  to
    physical indicators. The evidence of those who work to  support  RK  in
    his daily life may be also limited in value  for  the  reasons  I  have
    given (see,  in  particular,  paragraphs  35-38).  In  any  event,  the
    evidence of those witnesses and that of Mr Levy amounts to little  more
    than opinions drawn largely from RK's demeanour and what  he  has  told
    them. As for Immigration Judge Khan's conclusion that RK had been  born
    in 1994, I agree with Ms Etiebet's submission that his  age  assessment
    also is nothing more than an opinion, derived from the  conclusions  of
    Dr Birch upon which even RK himself no longer relies.  I also note  the
    comments of His Honour Judge  Owen  R  (on  the  application  of  K)  v
    Birmingham City  Council  [2011]  EWHC  1559,  in  which  both  RK  and
    Birmingham City Council were parties:

        It is well recognised, and certainly by both  sides  in  this  case
        before me, as I understood Mr  De  Mello's  submissions,  that  the
        claimant's credibility is highly material, if not  fundamental,  to
        the fair and proper assessment of his age. Yet that clear  question
        mark does not appear, arguably at the  very  least,  to  have  been
        given any appropriate weight by the immigration judge  who  appears
        to have approached the  issue  of  age  as  being  a  separate  and
        unrelated (to  questions  concerning  credibility  or  reliability)
        issue.

62. At [40] of his determination, Immigration Judge Khan had written:

         "I find that the  appellant's  untruthfulness  when  questioned  in
         France and his subsequent denial that he  was  fingerprinted  there
         affects the credibility of his claim under Section 8  of  the  2004
         Act.  Indeed, when he was interviewed initially,  he  said  in  his
         screening interview that he had been fingerprinted in France and he
         gave a false name because he was afraid of being  deported  to  his
         own country.  The fact that the appellant has  been  untruthful  on
         more than one occasion caused me  to  believe  that  he  cannot  be
         accepted as a witness  of  truth,  looking  at  the  whole  of  the
         evidence in the round."

63. Earlier, at [32] Judge Khan had written:

         "I therefore accept as a finding of fact that  the  appellant  lied
         when he denied in his substantive asylum interview that he had  not
         been fingerprinted and I also find that he lied to  me  during  the
         appeal hearing when he denied the same.  What I do find is that  he
         gave a false name in France when detected by an Immigration Officer
         and he also gave a false date of birth.  The point is that although
         he was clearly the same person and there is the fingerprint  match,
         I am not satisfied that the appellant gave his true date  of  birth
         to the Immigration Officer in France."

64. Other than noting that RK was afraid that he would be  deported  if  he
    told the  truth,  Judge  Khan  gives  no  reasons  for  coming  to  the
    conclusion that RK had not only lied whilst in the United  Kingdom  but
    that he had also lied when fingerprinted  in  France.   As  Ms  Etiebet
    pointed out, RK has adduced no evidence to support his  assertion  that
    he feared that he would be deported from France if  he  gave  his  true
    name and date of birth. Indeed, it is difficult to  see  why  RK  would
    lied to the officers in France that he was an adult  when  he  is  well
    aware here in the United Kingdom of the benefits to be gained by  being
    treated as an asylum- seeking child; it is not clear why he appears  to
    have believed that a neighbouring European Union  country  would  treat
    him so differently.

65. It is also not apparent why RK should  have  offered  the  officers  in
    France a completely different name from that he  has  used  during  his
    time in the United Kingdom.  RK was not arrested  or  detained  by  the
    authorities in France nor has  he  adduced  any  evidence  which  would
    indicate that he had reason to believe that he would be.  I have  found
    that he has  a  propensity  to  tell  lies  when  it  might  bring  him
    advantage, but he had no motive for lying to the  officers  in  France.
    As far as the fingerprinting encounter might affect  his  ambitions  to
    enter the United  Kingdom  and  seek  support  here,  it  was  entirely
    neutral. Indeed, the question of motive goes further than  that.  Given
    that I find that nothing that RK has said about  his  age  or  identity
    whilst he has been in the United Kingdom is reliable, I cannot see that
    RK had any motive to go to the trouble of inventing yet  another  false
    account solely for the benefit of strangers with whom he  was  probably
    in contact for no more than a few minutes and whom he had no reason  to
    fear. Certainly those officers made a record of the details he provided
    but RK does not seem to have considered that those details  would  ever
    come to light after he had entered the United Kingdom. If he was afraid
    that the officers would arrest, detain and deport him from France, then
    again nothing was to be gained by going to  the  trouble  of  inventing
    another false  name  and  date  of  birth.  Likewise,  if  he  believed
    (correctly as it  turned  out)  that,  having  fingerprinted  him,  the
    officers would leave him alone, then again there was no reason to  give
    false answers.  With those observations in mind, one is  drawn  towards
    the conclusion that, if he did not  lie,  then  RK  gave  the  officers
    accurate particulars of his identity and date of birth.

66. During submissions, I suggested to Mr De Mello that there may  be  some
    significance in the reply that RK gave to the final question put to him
    at the screening interview ("is there  anything  you  wish  to  say  or
    add?").  RK had replied only "I am an  Iranian."   RK  had  been  given
    every opportunity in the interview to correct  the  name  and  date  of
    birth he had given in France but he chose not to do so; he only  sought
    to put the record straight as regards his nationality.  This  may  seem
    odd given that neither the screening interview (see paragraph 9  above)
    nor the witness  statement  of  Ms  Webb  make  any  reference  to  the
    nationality of "Ali Ahmed."  However,  RK  was  also  asked  about  the
    fingerprinting in France in his substantive asylum interview (Questions
    75 et seq) and it is clear from that record that the French record  (we
    have only Ms Webb's quotation from that record and have  not  seen  the
    record itself) is likely to have indicated that RK was not Iranian, but
    Iraqi. It was put to RK at Question 77 that he had  claimed  in  France
    that he was of Iraqi nationality; his response was to deny that he  had
    been fingerprinted at all and that the screening interview record was a
    fiction concocted by the interpreter.

67. Mr De Mello acknowledged that RK's answers at the  screening  interview
    were "a problem".  I find that RK did not seek to correct his  name  or
    date of birth because the particulars which he had given in France were
    accurate. That is a finding which is not inconsistent with any  of  the
    evidence in this appeal, save for the unreliable evidence of RK himself
    and the opinion evidence of several of RK's  witnesses,  the  value  of
    which is limited. It is also  not  inconsistent  with  Dr  Birch's  two
    measurements of RK's height. It is a finding that is wholly  consistent
    with the evidence of the emergence of  his  molar  teeth.  It  follows,
    therefore, that Mr Singh and Ms Bazurto could  have  gone  further  and
    found that RK had been born on 25 January 1990  because,  on  the  only
    occasion on which I find that he told the whole  truth  about  himself,
    that had been the date he provided.

68. I find that RK was born on 25 January 1990 and I make a declaration  to
    that effect accordingly.  The parties should  make  representations  in
    writing to me regarding costs within  fourteen  days  of  receiving  my
    judgment.



[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

20 April 2013

