
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


Chomanga (binding effect of unappealed decisions) Zimbabwe [2011] UKUT
00312 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |Determination Promulgated |
|On 6 June 2011                         |30 June 2011              |
|                                       |                          |

                                   Before

                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE LATTER

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                               Shamen Chomanga
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:         Mr G Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:      Ms B Asanovic, Counsel instructed by D J Webb &
Co,                    Solicitors

The parties are bound by unappealed  findings  of  fact  in  an  immigration
judge's decision. It is therefore not open to  the  respondent  following  a
successful and unchallenged  appeal  by  an  appellant  to  make  a  further
adverse decision on the same issue relying on the same  evidence  as  before
unless there is evidence of fraud or one of  the  exceptions  identified  in
para 35 of the judgment of the Court of Appeal in Secretary of  State  v  TB
[2008] EWCA 997 applies.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.      This  is  an  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State  against   the
    determination of Immigration  Judge  Callender  Smith  who  allowed  Ms
    Chomanga's appeal on both immigration and human rights grounds  against
    the decision made on 22 December 2010 cancelling her leave to remain in
    the UK.

2.      In this determination I will refer  to  the  parties  as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal, Ms Chomanga as the  appellant  and  the
    Secretary of State as the respondent.

Background

3.      The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe born on 12  March  1965.   On
    26 July 2006 she was granted leave to remain in the UK  until  26  July
    2011 on the grounds of her UK ancestry.  In support of her  application
    she had submitted firstly, her birth certificate showing  her  date  of
    birth as 12 March 1965, her place of birth Bulawayo  and  her  mother's
    maiden name Maud Ford and  secondly,  her  mother's  birth  certificate
    showing her place of birth as  Salisbury,  Rhodesia  but  that  of  her
    father (the appellant's maternal grandfather) as England.  This enabled
    the appellant to show that one of her grandparents had been born in the
    UK and that she could meet the requirements for leave to  remain  as  a
    person with UK ancestry.

4.      However,  information  later  became  available  from  the  Zimbabwe
    Central Registry in a letter dated 26 August 2010 that these  documents
    were not authentic and on 15  September  2010  the  respondent  made  a
    decision under para 323(ii) of HC 395 to curtail the appellant's leave
    to remain.

5.      The appellant appealed against that  decision  and  her  appeal  was
    heard on 29 October 2010 by IJ Ross.  At that hearing  the  respondent
    was not represented. In para 2 of his determination the judge  set  out
    the respondent's  reasons  for  curtailing  the  appellant's  leave  as
    follows:

         "The reason given for the decision was that information had  become
         available from the Zimbabwe Central Registry of Births  and  Deaths
         that her own birth certificate and the certificate  of  her  mother
         Maud Ford which had been submitted with  her  original  application
         for entry had been found not to be authentic.  The two certificates
         were found to belong to someone else."


    The appellant submitted a bundle of documents in support of her  appeal
    including a witness statement in which  she  maintained  her  ancestry,
    asserting that although the documents  she  had  submitted  might  have
    contained errors they were genuine.  She gave oral evidence  confirming
    that she had come to the UK as a visitor in December 1998 and that  her
    children Nelson, then aged 18, and Christine, 21, were living with  her
    but neither had any status in the UK.  The judge  also  heard  evidence
    from the appellant's partner Mr Bestman, a naturalised British  citizen
    from Nigeria.  He said that he and the appellant were  engaged  and  he
    was in the process of seeking a divorce from his wife.


6.      So far as the immigration appeal was concerned the  judge  directed
    himself that the burden of proving that the documents relied on by  the
    appellant in respect of her claim for ancestry in  the  United  Kingdom
    were false rested on the respondent and must be proved to a high degree
    of probability.  The respondent was not  represented  at  the  hearing.
    The judge noted that the respondent had not submitted any  evidence  to
    support the contention that the documents in question were forged.  The
    letter from the Central Registry in Zimbabwe had not been produced  and
    the judge found that it therefore followed  that  the  appeal  must  be
    allowed on immigration grounds.

7.      He went on to consider article 8,  finding  that  the  removing  the
    appellant to Zimbabwe would be an interference  with  her  private  and
    family life.  He considered the  issue  of  proportionality,  reminding
    himself that the burden  was  on  the  respondent  to  prove  that  the
    decision was proportionate.  He said that he did not  accept  that  the
    appellant and Mr Bestman were living together in a relationship akin to
    marriage but that they were good friends who had had a relationship  in
    the past. He was not satisfied that they were  partners  or  that  they
    lived together as claimed.

8.      He then said in para 17 of his determination:

        "Although the appellant has lived in the United Kingdom for  twelve
         years, she was only granted permission to remain in July 2006,  her
         entry and remaining in the UK up to that date was  tainted  by  bad
         faith in the sense that she  came  as  a  visitor  and  stayed  on.
         Another factor which would be very important in deciding the  issue
         of proportionality is the question of  whether  the  appellant  has
         submitted  forged  documents  in  support  of  her  claim   to   UK
         ancestry.  This issue has not been resolved because the  respondent
         has not submitted the documents on which the  decision  was  based.
         I consider therefore that it would be premature for me  to  make  a
         decision on proportionality until this issue is  finally  resolved.
         If the Home Office wish to take steps to curtail  her  leave  again
         and  produce  the  relevant  documents,  then   they   or   another
         immigration judge can  also  determine  the  issue  of  article  8,
         having determined the issue of  ancestry.   It  seems  to  me  that
         unusually on the facts of this case  I  should  not  determine  the
         article 8 claim.  Since I have allowed the appeal  in  relation  to
         the immigration issue, there is no real prejudice to the  appellant
         in not resolving the issues under article 8."

9.      Following that decision the respondent  reviewed  the  position  and
    made a further decision dated 22  December  2010  which  was  then  the
    subject of the appeal heard by IJ Callender Smith on 28 February  2011.
    The reasons for the decision were set out in the  reasons  for  refusal
    letter dated 22 December 2010 as follows:

        "However, information has now become available  from  the  Zimbabwe
         Central Registry verification of births  and  death  registrations,
         [and] confirms that your own birth certificate and the  certificate
         for Maud Ford, which you  submitted  with  your  application,  have
         been found not to be authentic.


         Your  birth  certificate,  entry  number  BYO/634/65,  confirms  it
         belongs to someone else and the certificate for  Maud  Ford,  entry
         number - SMS/166/45, also confirms it belongs to someone else,  and
         with the year of birth 1945 being spelt incorrectly.


         Furthermore on both certificates it states the birthplace as Andrew
         Fleming Hospital, Salisbury, however this hospital was  not  opened
         until 1974, although the dates of birth on  the  certificates  show
         1945 and 1965, therefore in view of these facts it has been decided
         that you do not continue to meet  the  requirements  of  the  rules
         under which your leave to remain was granted."


10.    The judge referred to the respondent's decision and said  that  there
    was a complete lack of any evidence from the respondent to support  the
    assertions made in the reasons for refusal letter  and  commented  that
    this would seem to be the second occasion this had occurred (para  10).
    He noted that on 15 September 2010 the  respondent  had  curtailed  the
    appellant's leave on  exactly  the  same  grounds  as  in  the  current
    appeal.  She had appealed that decision and her appeal had been allowed
    by IJ Ross.  It  was  argued  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  that  the
    respondent's reliance on the Central Registry letter was  an  abuse  of
    process and that IJ Ross'  determination  should  be  regarded  as  the
    authoritative determination as to the findings  of  fact  made  on  the
    basis of the evidence available at  the  time  of  that  hearing.   The
    letter  from  the  Central  Registry  had  been  in  the   respondent's
    possession when that appeal was  heard  and  no  explanation  had  been
    provided why the letter was not served on the appellant or the Tribunal
    prior to that appeal hearing.

11.    The judge said that the respondent had created an  abuse  of  process
    in failing to submit this evidence for the  second  time,  particularly
    when the  consequences  of  an  adverse  decision  in  respect  of  the
    appellant were that she could be returned to Zimbabwe  (para  20).   As
    the respondent had produced no evidence, he  failed  to  discharge  the
    onus of showing that the appellant had obtained leave by deception  and
    the immigration appeal  was  allowed.       The  judge  then  turned to
    consider article 8.  On  the  basis  of  the  evidence  before  him  he
    accepted that there was a current relationship  between  the  appellant
    and Mr Bestman and that they were engaged  to  be  married.   He  also
    accepted that the appellant's  son  Nelson  had  been  granted  refugee
    status in January 2011 and there was a similar application pending from
    her daughter.  He found that removing the appellant to  Zimbabwe  would
    not be proportionate in the light of her private and family life  built
    up over the length of time she had spent in the  UK.   The  appeal  was
    allowed on article 8 grounds.

The Grounds and Submissions

12.    The respondent's first ground argues that the judge  gave  inadequate
    reasons for finding that the respondent's  decision  was  an  abuse  of
    process.  The decision was incapable of amounting to such an  abuse  as
    it was not the respondent who had  brought  the  proceedings.   In  the
    alternative it is argued in  the  light  of  EG (Abuse  of  process  -
    legitimate expectation) Serbia and Montenegro [2005] UKAIT  00074  that
    the concept had a limited  application  in  the  field  of  immigration
    appeals, the only relevant  jurisdiction  being  whether  the  decision
    under appeal was "otherwise not in accordance with the law".  The judge
    failed to direct himself, so it is argued, on the current  law  on  the
    concept of abuse of process and had not performed the necessary enquiry
    in accordance with principles summarised by Burnett J in  Modi  v  UKBA
    [2010] EWHC 1996 (Admin).  The second ground argues that when assessing
    article 8 the judge failed to consider whether  the  appellant  had  a
    protected family life with her children in the UK  such  as  to  engage
    article 8 and then failed when assessing proportionality to  take  into
    account the fact that forged documents had been submitted.  It is  also
    argued that the judge also erred by failing  to  consider  whether  the
    family could  continue  its  family  life  in  her  partner's  country,
    Nigeria.

13.   Permission to appeal was granted by the First-tier  Tribunal  (Senior
    Immigration Judge Spencer) for the following reasons:

        "I am prepared to grant permission to appeal given  the  importance
         of ensuring that  reliance  upon  false  documents  should  not  be
         permitted  to  be  successful  by  the  Tribunal.   It  does  seem,
         however, that the grounds  of  appeal  may  be  based  on  a  false
         premise, namely that within the standard bundle  the  Secretary  of
         State adduced two documents from Zimbabwe which were considered  to
         support the refusal.  The Secretary of State  was  not  represented
         before the immigration judge, however, and he noted in  para  7  of
         his determination that the respondent failed to provide any of  the
         evidence  being  relied  on  for  the  decision.    There   is   no
         respondent's bundle in the file.


         I am satisfied that the immigration judge may have made a  material
         error on a point of law."

14.    At the hearing before me the appellant relied on a skeleton  argument
    dated 6 June 2011 and  Mr  Saunders  produced  a  bundle  of  documents
    including the appeal papers, the letter of  26  August  2010  from  the
    Central Registry in Zimbabwe, the two birth certificates in dispute and
    an internal file note showing that these documents had  been  forwarded
    to the Tribunal on 31 January 2011.

15.    The fact that  the  documents  were  sent  to  and  received  by  the
    Tribunal is confirmed by the appeal file.  The covering letter from the
    respondent is stamped as received at Arnhem House on  1  February  2011
    and there is a note that the file is in the  pending  hold  for  Sutton
    with a hearing date of 28 February 2011.  There is also a stamp to show
    that the papers were received at Sutton on 2 March 2011 but it is clear
    that they were not linked to the appeal file before either the  hearing
    (listed at Taylor House, not Sutton) on 28 February 2011 or  the  issue
    of the judge's determination on 3 March 2011.  It then appears that the
    papers were sent on to Field House where they were received on 11 March
    2011 and they were finally linked  to  the  file  after  permission  to
    appeal was granted.

16.    Mr  Saunders  submitted  that  in  these  circumstances,  whilst  the
    judge's comment that there had been an abuse of process might have been
    justified if in fact the respondent had not filed these documents,  the
    fact remained that they had been forwarded and not linked to the appeal
    file.  The decision of IJ Ross left it open to the respondent to make a
    further decision and she had done so.  The test for showing an abuse of
    process as set out in para 57 of Modi had not  been  met.   As  far  as
    article 8 was concerned, a decision on proportionality was inextricably
    linked to the appellant's immigration history and  the  judge  had  not
    taken into account, albeit through no fault of his, the  evidence  that
    the appellant had relied on forged documents.

17.    Ms Asanovic argued that the documents from the Central  Registry  had
    been available to the respondent before the date of hearing  before  IJ
    Ross and in the light of the failure to prove the allegation of forgery
    he had allowed the appeal on immigration grounds.   In  any  event  the
    document from the Central Registry was heavily redacted and  would  not
    have made any difference to the  outcome  of  the  appeal  and  as  the
    appellant's son had been granted refugee status, it could  not  now  be
    proportionate to expect her to return to Zimbabwe.

Assessment of the Issues

18.    The issue at the heart of this appeal is whether it was open  to  the
    respondent to make a further decision on whether the appellant had used
    false documents in support of her application for leave  to  remain  on
    the ground of UK ancestry, having  failed  to  establish  this  in  the
    appeal before IJ Ross.  The issue of abuse of  process  was  argued  in
    front of IJ Callender Smith but he was not referred to the judgment  of
    the Court of Appeal in Secretary of State for the Home Department v  TB
    (Jamaica) [2008] EWCA 977.  The facts in that  appeal  can  briefly  be
    summarised as follows.  The applicant was  arrested  and  sentenced  to
    four years three months imprisonment for supplying class A drugs.   The
    respondent decided to  make  a  deportation  order  and  the  applicant
    appealed on asylum and human rights grounds.  The respondent failed  to
    raise in the appeal the issue of whether  the  applicant  was  excluded
    from the protection of the  Refugee  Convention  by  article  33(2)  or
    whether he was subject to the presumptions in s.72 of the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  The judge allowed the appeal on  both
    asylum and human rights grounds.

19.    The respondent did not seek to have  that  decision  reconsidered  or
    set  aside  but  subsequently  wrote  to  the  applicant's   solicitors
    indicating that she proposed to rely on the  presumption  in  s.72  and
    giving   the   appellant   the   opportunity    of    making    further
    representations.  She then decided that article 33(2)  of  the  Refugee
    Convention applied to the applicant,  refused  asylum  and  decided  to
    grant  temporary  admission  only.   Her  decision  was  challenged  on
    judicial review and in the High Court it was  held  that  this  was  an
    abuse of process.  On appeal to the Court of Appeal,  the  Court  noted
    that it had been open to the respondent to seek  to  establish  article
    33(2) at the hearing of the appeal and to appeal the  determination  of
    the judge on the ground that she had  failed  to  apply  the  statutory
    presumption and thereby erred in law.  Stanley  Burnton  LJ  summarised
    the issues of principle as follows:

        "32.    As a matter of principle, it cannot be right for  the  Home
             Secretary to be able to circumvent the decision of the IAT  by
             administrative decision.  If she could do  so,  the  statutory
             appeal system would be undermined; indeed, in a case  such  as
             the present, the decision of  the  immigration  judge  on  the
             application  of  the  Refugee   Convention   would   be   made
             irrelevant.  That would be  inconsistent  with  the  statutory
             scheme.


         33.    The principle that the decision of the Tribunal  is  binding
             on the parties, and in particular on the Home  Secretary,  has
             been consistently upheld by the Courts.  In R (Mersin) v  Home
             Secretary [2000] EWHC Admin 348, Elias J said:


                 'In my opinion there is a clear duty on the  Secretary  of
                  State  to  give  effect  to  the   Special   Adjudicator's
                  decision.  If he can refuse to  do  so  in  the  event  of
                  changed circumstances or because there is another  country
                  to which the applicant can be sent, there is still a  duty
                  unless and until that situation arises.  It  would  wholly
                  undermine the rule of law if he could  simply  ignore  the
                  ruling of the Special Adjudicator  without  appealing  it,
                  and indeed Mr Catchpole [Counsel for the  Home  Secretary]
                  does not suggest that he can.  Nor in my opinion could  he
                  deliberately delay giving effect to the ruling in the hope
                  that something might turn up to justify  not  implementing
                  it.  In my judgment, once the adjudicator  had  determined
                  the application in the applicant's favour,  the  applicant
                  had a right to be granted refugee status, at least  unless
                  and until there was a change in the position.'


         34.    In R (Boafo) v Home Secretary [2002] EWCA Civ, [2002] 1  WLR
             44, Auld LJ said at [26] in a judgment with  which  the  other
             members of the court agreed, '... an unappealed decision of an
             Adjudicator is binding on the parties.'  In R (Saribal) v Home
             Secretary [2002] EWHC 1542 (Admin), [2002] INLR 596,  Moses  J
             said:


                 '17.    The decision in ex  parte  Boafo  demonstrates  an
                      important   principle   at   the   heart   of   these
                      proceedings.  The Secretary of State is not  entitled
                      to disregard the determination of the IAT and  refuse
                      a claimant's right to indefinite leave to remain as a
                      refugee unless he can set aside that determination by
                      appropriate   procedure   founded   on    appropriate
                      evidence.'


         35.    Of course, different considerations may apply where there is
             relevant fresh evidence that was not available at the date  of
             hearing, or a change in the law,  and  the  principle  has  no
             application where there is a change in circumstances or  there
             are new events after the date of  decision:  see  Auld  LJ  in
             Boafo at [28].  But this is not such a case.


         36.    The judge described the attempt by the Secretary of State to
             raise the s.72 issue after the  immigration  judge's  decision
             and to refuse leave to enter and to  remain  as  an  abuse  of
             process.  That is an expression normally reserved  for  abuses
             of the process of the courts.  The Secretary of State's action
             might be castigated as an abuse of power, but I  would  prefer
             to avoid pejorative expressions of  uncertain  denotation  and
             application and to hold simply that the Secretary of State was
             bound by the decision of the immigration judge  and  that  her
             subsequent action was unlawful  on  the  ground  that  it  was
             inconsistent with that decision.  It follows that the  judge's
             conclusion was correct.  The Home Secretary is bound to  grant
             TB  the  leave  to  which  the  immigration  judge's  decision
             entitled him."

20.    I am satisfied that the application of these principles resolves  the
    issues which have arisen in this appeal and that  the  arguments  about
    abuse of process raised in the grounds are largely  beside  the  point.
    The respondent was bound by the findings made by IJ Ross  who  was  not
    satisfied that she had produced  any  or  any  sufficient  evidence  to
    maintain the assertion that the appellant had  obtained  her  leave  to
    remain on the basis of UK ancestry by submitting false documents.   The
    respondent had had the opportunity of filing  evidence  in  support  of
    that contention but had failed  to  do  so  or  indeed  to  attend  the
    hearing.  By making a further decision by  relying  on  evidence  which
    could and should have been produced at that hearing, the respondent was
    in substance attempting to circumvent  the  judge's  decision.   It  is
    right that in para 17 of his determination the judge expressed the view
    that it was open to the respondent to curtail the leave  again  and  to
    produce the relevant documents on any  subsequent  appeal  but  in  the
    light of TB that view was incorrect.  He said that the issue of falsity
    had not been resolved but it had by the respondent's failure to produce
    evidence and by the immigration appeal being allowed.   These  comments
    made obiter by the judge did not give the respondent the power to  take
    a course of action not open to her under the law.

21.    None of the exceptions to the general principle  that  an  unappealed
    decision is binding set out in para 35 of Stanley Burnton LJ's judgment
    apply in the present case.  There was no fresh evidence which  was  not
    available at the date of the hearing, no  change  in  the  law  and  no
    relevant change of circumstances  or  new  events  after  the  date  of
    decision.  This was also not a case where there was subsequent evidence
    of fraud: see EB (fresh evidence  -  fraud-  directions)  Ghana  [2005]
    UKAIT 000131.  The issue before IJ Ross was whether false documents had
    been relied on and the evidence  on  which  the  respondent  based  her
    subsequent decision was exactly the same  as  the  evidence  previously
    relied on.

22.    For these reasons I  am  not  satisfied  that  it  was  open  to  the
    respondent to curtail  the  appellant's  current  leave  following  the
    dismissal of the appeal by IJ Ross by making a fresh decision based  on
    precisely the same evidence.  It is correct that there was a procedural
    irregularity in that the documents submitted by the respondent for  the
    appeal before IJ Callender Smith did not reach him before he determined
    the appeal or issued his determination but even  if  they  had  and  in
    particular if his attention being drawn to TB, he would inevitably have
    allowed the immigration appeal.  As the issue of whether the  appellant
    had submitted false documents had been resolved,  it  is  not  arguable
    that he left any relevant matter out of account  when  considering  the
    appeal on article 8 grounds.

23. I adopt the comments of Stanley Burnton LJ in para 36 of his  judgment.
    This is not a case where the respondent's actions can be categorised as
    an abuse of process but as a failure to apply  the  law  in  accordance
    with the principles set out in TB.

Decision

24.    In so far as there was  a  procedural  irregularity  in  the  hearing
    before IJ Callender Smith, it had no bearing  on  the  outcome  of  the
    appeal.  The respondent's appeal is dismissed and the judge's  decision
    to allow the appeal  on  both  immigration  and  human  rights  grounds
    stands.


         Senior Immigration Judge Latter
         (Judge of the Upper Tribunal)



