

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

          Khanum & Others (paragraph 353B) [2013] UKUT 00311 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 11 February 2013                           |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                AYSHA KHANUM
                                RAHIM DHANANI
                             NARGISBANO DHANANI
                                ARYAN DHANANI
                              THANDIWE QONGWANE
                                 VILAN PATEL

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Z Malik, instructed by Malik Law Chambers,
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Hayes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
Paragraph 353B of HC 395 is not designed to replace paragraph  395C.   In  a
case where there are no outstanding further submissions  and  appeal  rights
are exhausted, the decision whether or not to carry  out  a  review  (within
the scope of para 353B) is entirely a matter of discretion of the  Secretary
of State and is not justiciable.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   These appeals all raise common issues as  to  the  scope  of  paragraph
    353B of the Immigration  Rules.   All  four  principal  appellants  (Mr
    Dhanani's wife and son are dependants on his appeal) appealed to judges
    of the First-tier Tribunal against decisions of the Secretary of  State
    to remove them from the United Kingdom  as  overstayers.   The  appeals
    were all dismissed, but permission was granted to appeal to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis of the arguments set  out  by  Mr  Malik  in  his
    grounds, and which he developed before us.

2.   Mr Malik has identified three  issues  of  principle  which,  he  says,
    require determination.

    (a)  Whether a decision to remove an overstayer is, "not in  accordance
         with the law", if  the  Secretary  of  State  makes  that  decision
         without giving any consideration to paragraph 353B of the Statement
         of Changes in Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended).


    (b)  Whether, on an appeal against a decision to remove  an  overstayer
         made by the Secretary of State after considering paragraph 353B,  a
         First-tier Judge should determine  whether  the  discretion  should
         have been exercised differently.


    (c)  Whether a decision which is  unlawful  at  common  law  is  always
         incompatible with Article 8.

3.   He developed these points further in his skeleton argument and  in  his
    submissions before us.

4.   Mr Malik argued that although issue (b) had not been argued before  the
    First-tier Judges, these were lead cases and there were other cases  in
    the pipeline and it was desirable for the Tribunal  to  deal  with  the
    point today.  The facts of the cases were not  in  dispute.   All  were
    people in respect of whom a decision to remove as overstayers had  been
    made.  There was not a question of any other  breach  while  they  were
    overstaying.  It was beyond dispute that there was an in-country  right
    of appeal in each case.



Law and Policy

Statute


         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002


         "82. Right of Appeal:  general


             (1)   Where an immigration decision is made  in  respect  of  a
                 person he may appeal to the Tribunal;


             (2)   In this Part 'immigration decision' means -


                  (g)  a decision that a person is to be  removed  from  the
                      United Kingdom by way  of  directions  under  section
                      10(1)(a), (b), (ba) or (c)  of  the  Immigration  and
                      Asylum Act 1999 (c.33) (removal of person  unlawfully
                      in United Kingdom).
              ...


         84.  Grounds of appeal


             (1)  An appeal under  section  82(1)  against  an  immigration
                  decision must be brought on one or more of  the  following
                  grounds -
             ...
                  (e)  that the decision is otherwise not in accordance with
                      the law;


                  (f)  that the  person  taking  the  decision  should  have
                      exercised  differently  a  discretion  conferred   by
                      immigration rules.
             ...


         85.  Matters to be considered


             (1)  An appeal under section 82(1) against a decision shall be
                  treated by the Tribunal as including an appeal against any
                  decision in respect of which the appellant has a right  of
                  appeal under section 82(1).
             ...


         86.  Determination of appeal


             (1)  This section applies on an appeal under section 82(1), 83
                  or 83A


             (2)  The Tribunal must determine -


                  (a)  any matter raised as a ground of appeal  (whether  or
                      not by virtue of section 85 and


                  (b)  any matter which section 85 requires it to consider.


             (3)  The Tribunal must allow the appeal  in  so  far  as  [it]
                  thinks that -
                  (a)  a decision against which the appeal is brought or  is
                      treated as being brought was not in  accordance  with
                      the law (including immigration rules), or


                  (b)  a discretion exercised in making a  decision  against
                      which the appeal is brought or is  treated  as  being
                      brought should have been exercised differently.


             (4)  For the purposes of subsection  (3)  a  decision  that  a
                  person should be removed from the United Kingdom  under  a
                  provision shall not be regarded as unlawful  if  it  could
                  have been lawfully made  by  reference  to  removal  under
                  another provision.


             (5)  In so far as subsection (3) does not apply, the  Tribunal
                  shall dismiss the appeal.


             (6)  Refusal to depart from or  to  authorise  departure  from
                  immigration rules is not the exercise of a discretion  for
                  the purposes of subsection (3)(b).


         87.  Successful appeal: direction


             (1)  If the Tribunal allows an appeal under section 82, 83  or
                  83A it may give a direction  for  the  purpose  of  giving
                  effect to its decision.


             ...".


Immigration Rules

         "395C.   Before a decision  to  remove  under  section  10  of  the
                Immigration and  Asylum  Act  1999  or  section  47  of  the
                Immigration, Asylum  and  Nationality  Act  2006  is  given,
                regard will be had to all the relevant factors known to  the
                Secretary of State, including:


              (i) age;


              (ii)     length of residence in the United Kingdom;


              (iii)    strength of connections with the United Kingdom;


              (iv)     personal history, including  character,  conduct  and
                    employment record;


              (v) domestic circumstances;


              (vi)     previous  criminal  record  and  the  nature  of  any
                    offence of which the person has been convicted;


              (vii)    compassionate circumstances;


              (viii)   any representations received on the person's behalf.
                In the  case  of  family  members,  the  factors  listed  in
                paragraph 365-368 must also be taken into account.


                (deleted on 13 February 2012).


    Fresh Claims
         "353.    When a human rights or asylum claim has  been  refused  or
               withdrawn or treated as withdrawn under  paragraph  333C  of
               these Rules and any appeal relating  to  that  claim  is  no
               longer pending, the decision maker will consider any further
               submissions and, if rejected, will  then  determine  whether
               they amount to a fresh claim. The submissions will amount to
               a fresh claim if they are significantly different  from  the
               material  that   has   previously   been   considered.   The
               submissions will only  be  significantly  different  if  the
               content:
                (i)    had not already been considered; and
                (ii)    taken  together  with  the   previously   considered
                    material,  created  a  realistic  prospect  of  success,
                    notwithstanding its rejection.
                This paragraph does not apply to claims made overseas.
         353A.    Consideration of further submissions shall be  subject  to
                the procedures set out in these Rules. An applicant who  has
                made further submissions shall not  be  removed  before  the
                Secretary of State  has  considered  the  submissions  under
                paragraph 353 or otherwise.

    Exceptional Circumstances

         353B.    Where further submissions have been made and the  decision
                maker has established whether or not they amount to a  fresh
                claim under paragraph 353 of these Rules, or in  cases  with
                no outstanding further submissions whose appeal rights  have
                been exhausted and  which  are  subject  to  a  review,  the
                decision maker will also have regard to the migrant's:
                (i)    character, conduct  and  associations  including  any
                    criminal record and the nature of any offence  of  which
                    the migrant concerned has been convicted;
                (ii)    compliance  with  any  conditions  attached  to  any
                    previous  grant  of  leave  to  enter  or   remain   and
                    compliance with any conditions of temporary admission or
                    immigration bail where applicable;
                (iii)  length of time spent in the United Kingdom spent  for
                    reasons beyond the migrant's  control  after  the  human
                    rights or asylum claim has been submitted or refused; in
                    deciding whether  there  are  exceptional  circumstances
                    which mean that removal from the United  Kingdom  is  no
                    longer appropriate.
             This paragraph does not apply to submissions made overseas.
             This paragraph does not apply where the person  is  liable  to
             deportation."
             (Inserted from 13 February 2012).
Policy Documents
5.   At paragraph 7.7 of the Explanatory  Memorandum  to  the  Statement  of
    Changes in Immigration Rules presented to Parliament on 19 January 2012
    (HC 1733) it is said that the effect of the decisions of the  Court  of
    Appeal in Mirza [2011] EWCA Civ 159 and Sapkota [2011] EWCA Civ 1320 is
    to require the UKBA to make  approximately  20,000  additional  removal
    decisions every year.  The Secretary of State's view is that  if  there
    are reasons why a person should not be removed the onus  should  be  on
    him  to  make  the  relevant  application  rather  than  requiring  the
    Secretary of State  to  have  the  responsibility  of  identifying  and
    considering all factors known to her and identifying those which may be
    relevant.  For these reasons paragraph 395C was being deleted, and  the
    UKBA was changing its processes so that refusal and  removal  decisions
    could be made as required by Sapkota.  It is said that the burden is on
    the migrant to apply specifically for consideration  if  he  has  other
    reasons why he claims he should not be removed from the United Kingdom,
    for example compassionate factors or protection issues.

6.    Paragraph  7.10  refers  to  the  situation  where   a   migrant   has
    unsuccessfully made an application on human rights  or  asylum  grounds
    and the case is being reviewed.  The notion of a review arises again in
    paragraph 53.1 of the Enforcement Instructions Guidance and  of  course
    in the wording of paragraph 353B itself.
7.   Paragraph 53.1 of the Enforcement Instructions Guidance  addresses  the
    issue  of  when  to  consider  exceptional  circumstances.   There   is
    reference there to exceptional circumstances being considered in  cases
    where an asylum or human rights claim has been refused,  appeal  rights
    have been exhausted and no further submissions exist, as  part  of  the
    process of asylum case owners keeping their  cases  under  review.   In
    such cases it is said that paragraph 353B should be applied.
8.   Mr Malik took us to the relevant statutory provisions.   It  was  clear
    that there was  a  right  of  appeal  under  section  82(2)(g)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 against a decision that  a
    person was to be removed from the United Kingdom by way  of  directions
    under section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act  1999.   As  regards
    the relevant grounds of appeal, under section 84(1)(e) of the same Act,
    an appeal  could  be  brought  on  the  basis  that  the  decision  was
    "otherwise not in accordance with the  law",  and  under  sub-paragraph
    (f), on the basis that the  person  taking  the  decision  should  have
    exercised differently a  discretion  conferred  by  Immigration  Rules.
    Section 85 of the same Act made  it  clear  what  matters  were  to  be
    considered on an appeal under section 82(1),  and  it  was  clear  from
    section 86(2) that any matter raised as a ground of appeal required  to
    be determined by the Tribunal.  It was clear from section 86(3)(a) that
    the appeal must be allowed  if  the  Tribunal  found  that  a  decision
    against which the appeal was brought was not in accordance with the law
    (including the Immigration Rules),  or  under  (b)  that  a  discretion
    exercised in making a decision against which the appeal was brought  or
    was treated as being brought should have  been  exercised  differently.
    It was also clear from section 86(6) that a refusal to depart  from  or
    to authorise departure from Immigration Rules was not the exercise of a
    discretion for the purposes of section 86(3)(b).  Under  section  87(1)
    the Tribunal was empowered to make  a  direction  for  the  purpose  of
    giving effect to its decision if it allowed an appeal under section 82,
    section 83 or section 83A, and it was clear  from  (2)  that  a  person
    responsible for making an immigration decision was required to  act  in
    accordance with any relevant direction under sub-section (1).   It  was
    therefore the case that if the judge were persuaded that  a  discretion
    should have been exercised differently he  or  she  could  require  the
    Secretary of State to grant leave to remain.

9.   Mr Malik went  on  to  refer  to  the  Explanatory  Memorandum  to  the
    Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules of 19 January 2012 (HC 1733).
     This, among other things, explained why paragraph 395C of HC  395  had
    been deleted, as set out in particular at paragraphs 7.7 and 7.8 of the
    memorandum.  It was clear from paragraph 7.9 that the burden was on the
    migrant to apply specifically for consideration of  other  reasons  why
    they claimed they should not be removed from the United Kingdom.

10.   Paragraph  7.10  explained  the  reasoning  behind  the  enactment  of
    paragraph 353B.  The instant cases were  examples  of  an  unsuccessful
    application being reviewed.   Letters  had  been  sent  requesting  the
    Secretary of State to review their cases.  There was nothing express in
    the Rules as to what was meant by the term "review" but it was  perhaps
    implicit in the power to remove overstayers under  section  10.   There
    was not an obligation to review but a review had been  carried  out  in
    these cases.  There would be a review within paragraph 353B  where  the
    Secretary of State issued a removal decision after an application by an
    overstayer, and produced a decision reviewing all the circumstances  of
    the case.  If an application had been refused and then the Secretary of
    State did nothing, perhaps for a two year period  for  example,  during
    those two years the matter would not be subject to review, but when the
    Secretary of State picked the case up and  reviewed  the  circumstances
    then it would.  In all four cases applications had been  made  but  the
    removal decision was not the direct consequence of those applications.

11.  There were two categories of case under paragraph 353B.  The first  was
    where further submissions had been made  and  the  decision  maker  had
    established whether or  not  they  amounted  to  a  fresh  claim  under
    paragraph 353.  The second category comprised cases with no outstanding
    further submissions whose appeal rights had been  exhausted  and  which
    were subject to a review.  In each case the decision maker  would  have
    regard to the matters set out in the three sub-paragraphs to  paragraph
    353B.  It was argued that,  for  example  in  Mrs  Khanum's  case,  the
    Secretary of State's letter of 22 March 2012 was a review of the  case.
    Paragraph 353B had been taken  into  account  in  that  letter.   If  a
    reasoned decision was issued by the Secretary of State then that was  a
    review under paragraph 353B, not being a decision on an application but
    a subsequent decision.  If  the  decision  on  22  March  2012  in  Mrs
    Khanum's case or the letter of 16 May 2012 in the Dhananis'  case  were
    not reviews then it was unclear what else they could be.

12.  It was argued that paragraph 353B applied to all cases of  overstayers.
     The words "before deciding to  make  a  removal  decision  against  an
    overstayer" could effectively be read  into  paragraph  353B.   It  was
    intended to extend to illegal entrants as well and was not  limited  to
    overstayers.  If the Secretary of State was not reviewing the case then
    she was not obliged to take the factors set out in paragraph 353B  into
    account.

13.  Tab 3 of the bundle was chapter  53  of  the  Enforcement  Instructions
    Guidance.  Paragraph 53.1 set out the criteria  for  when  to  consider
    exceptional circumstances.  In such cases  paragraph  353B  was  to  be
    considered.  As regards the suggestion that this was the  process  with
    which the second part  of  paragraph  353B  was  concerned,  there  was
    nothing in the IDIs about what "review" meant.  Paragraph  53.1.1  went
    on to set out how the discretion was to be exercised.  The leave  under
    chapter 53.1.2 could be leave under the Rules: paragraph 353B.

14.  It was argued that what was said by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Mirza,
    which had approved the determination of the Tribunal in EO (Deportation
    appeals: scope and process)  Turkey  [2007]  UKAIT  00062  was  equally
    applicable to paragraph 353B.  Mr Malik placed reliance  on  paragraphs
    13 and 14 and also 18 and 19 in  Mirza.   If  the  Secretary  of  State
    granted leave without reference to paragraph 353B in a case to which it
    did not apply, the leave would be under paragraph 353B.  It  should  be
    considered why paragraph 353B had been enacted if it did not  apply  at
    some stage in these cases.  It  was  argued  that  paragraph  8  in  TE
    (Eritrea) [2009] EWCA Civ 174 was equally applicable in this  case,  as
    was true of the strictures set out at paragraph 18.  When assessing the
    Article 8 claim, the judge should have considered whether the  decision
    was not in accordance with the law.

15.   When  the  Secretary  of  State  considered  further  submissions  she
    exercised discretion in considering whether to grant leave or  make  an
    appealable decision.  It was the same kind of discretion as set out  at
    section 84(1)(f).

16.  With regard to the Article 8 issue, Mr Malik argued that the  issue  of
    whether a  decision  which  was  unlawful  at  common  law  was  always
    incompatible with Article 8 had been touched on in SC (Article 8  -  in
    accordance with the law) Zimbabwe [2012] UKUT 00056 (IAC) and also more
    recently by the Court of Appeal in Gurung [2013] EWCA Civ 9.  There was
    further support for the argument  in  Patel  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  741  at
    paragraph 17.  If a decision was unlawful at common  law  then  it  was
    unfair.  Further support  was  to  be  found  at  paragraph  24  in  ZH
    (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4.  Failure to have regard to a relevant  policy
    rendered the decision not in accordance with  the  law.   There  was  a
    breach of the Convention in that case also.

17.  Mr Malik also referred to what  had  been  said  in  Halford  v  United
    Kingdom [1997] 2 EHRR 245 at paragraph 49.  This was supported in MM  v
    the Netherlands (application number 39339/98, 8 April 2003).  If  there
    was no compliance with the domestic law then the decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the law.  In Sorvisto  v  Finland  [2009]  ECHR  59  at
    paragraph 107, a similar point was made.  A decision which  was  unfair
    at common law could not be lawful for the purposes of Article 8.  As to
    the argument that the decision maker had  been  entitled  to  make  the
    decision and there was an arguable failure of procedure only, Mr  Malik
    referred to the decision in Patel where this had not  been  considered.
    There was an error by the judge in not identifying the  argument  which
    had not been put to him.  There was  an  obligation  on  the  judge  to
    determine every issue.

18.  In Mrs Khanum's case, there was reference to Odelola  [2009]  UKHL  25,
    at paragraph 10 of  the  decision  letter.   Paragraph  353B  had  been
    considered.  The judge could review the exercise  of  discretion.   The
    decision in Dhanani was in similar terms.  The decision in Qongwane was
    slightly different in that there was no reference to paragraphs 353B as
    such, but there was a reference to the chapter 53 factors so the matter
    had been considered in the light of  those  factors.   There  had  been
    consideration given to the issue as the precise wording of the Rule had
    been used and if not then in the alternative the decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the law if the reference was seen as being  limited  to
    the chapter 53 criteria only.  The natural meaning of the word "review"
    should be given.

19.  In his submissions Mr Hayes relied upon and developed  points  made  in
    his skeleton argument.  He argued, with  regard  to  Mr  Malik's  first
    ground, that there had been a substantial narrowing of the exercise  of
    any pre-removal decision given the terms of paragraph 353B.  Paragraphs
    7.6 to 7.9 of the Explanatory Memorandum explained why  paragraph  395C
    in particular had been deleted.  It was a response to the  decision  of
    the Court of Appeal in Mirza and also the decision in Sapkota.  It  was
    not agreed that it was replaced by paragraph 353B.  It was confined  to
    a particularly narrow set of circumstances, as adumbrated at  paragraph
    10 of the skeleton.  Further submissions did not  come  until  after  a
    removal decision had been made.  There was support for that proposition
    within the Rule.  Where leave was sought on  the  basis  of  Article  8
    refusal after an overstayer decision there was no right of  appeal  and
    then there could be further submissions. There  was  required  to  have
    been a removal decision.  There was nothing  before  the  Secretary  of
    State.  The person had had a right of appeal exercised and that was the
    intention behind  the  Rule.   The  term  "subject  to  a  review"  was
    undefined.  It was for the Secretary of State to decide when to review.
     With regard to chapter 53 of the  Enforcement  Instructions  Guidance,
    the words  "in  all  other  cases"  in  the  penultimate  paragraph  of
    paragraph 53.1 should have been deleted and should not  have  remained.
    It appeared to be the review in the Rule.

20.  After the lunch adjournment Mr Hayes was able to  assist  with  certain
    matters of which we had requested clarification.  The word "review"  in
    paragraph  353B  was  undefined.   There  was  no  definition  in   the
    legislation or the guidance.  It was kept there so as to afford a  wide
    discretion to the Secretary of State in reviewing paragraph 353B cases.
     Also, voluntary departure was seen as the initial choice of a migrant.

21.  As regards the phrase "the process of asylum case owners keeping  their
    cases  under  review"  at  paragraph  53.1,   there   were   only   two
    circumstances where the Secretary of State would hold a review  without
    a triggering factor, and these were first family cases where  the  case
    was unconcluded, where there would be a review  every  36  months,  and
    secondly where a case was six years old and unconcluded.  In any  other
    case there were no circumstances where a cold review would  occur.   In
    these relevant cases the  person  concerned  would  neither  have  been
    removed nor granted leave.

22.  With regard to the meaning of  the  phrase  "appeal  rights  exhausted"
    this was not a statutory term and was not defined in any guidance.   It
    could have similar circularity as section 104 and the notion of pending
    appeals.  It was a question of there being no longer an appeal  pending
    or the appeal process having ended.  That did not include a person  who
    had never had an appeal right.

23.  He argued that paragraph 353B did not bite unless  further  submissions
    were made.  It was not accepted that it applied as paragraph  395C  had
    done  to  initial  decisions.   He  referred  to  the  points  made  at
    paragraphs 17 and 18 of his skeleton.  The intention of the wording was
    that no-one with an appeal would be able to rely on paragraph  353B  at
    all.  To allow this would go against the decision to  remove  paragraph
    395C and would influence what could be considered in a  paragraph  353B
    decision.  Mr Hayes argued that where there had never  been  a  pending
    appeal paragraph 353B would not apply, referring  to  paragraph  18  of
    Mirza in this regard.  The decision that would  be  made  on  a  review
    under paragraph 353B would be that removal from the United Kingdom  was
    no longer appropriate.  It would not be an immigration decision, so  it
    would  not  be  appealable.   He  agreed  that  the  words  "no  longer
    appropriate" implied that a removal decision had already been made.  It
    was likely to have been a mistake that paragraph 353B was considered in
    Mrs Khanum and Mr Dhanani's cases.  There was  a  misinterpretation  of
    chapter 53 or of the true interpretation to be made of paragraph  353B.
    The cases did not fall within section 84(1)(e) or (f).  The use of  the
    term "exceptional circumstances" denoted that it was discretionary  and
    a matter for the Secretary of  State.   There  was  however  the  first
    sentence of paragraph 19 of Mirza which indicated  that  the  judge  as
    well as the Home Office would consider the criteria.  However, Mr Hayes
    argued that on a proper interpretation there was a  discretion  outside
    the Rule.  If there were errors in the decision concerning  exceptional
    circumstances, such  as  in  respect  of  whether  a  person  had  been
    imprisoned or not, it would be a matter of it being not  in  accordance
    with  the  law  as  opposed  to  involving  a  different  exercise   of
    discretion.  The Rule did not intend judges to exercise discretion.  Mr
    Hayes referred to paragraph 10 in Mahad [2009] UKSC 16.

24.  It was a high test, as was argued at paragraph 25 and 26 of  Mr  Hayes'
    skeleton and it was very unlikely that there would be  a  case  falling
    within the exercise of discretion.  With regard  to  Mr  Malik's  third
    ground, this should not be allowed or permitted as a ground as  it  had
    not been argued before the judge.

25.  By way of reply Mr Malik argued first that even on Mr  Hayes'  argument
    Mrs Khanum would succeed as there was an immigration decision  made  in
    her case and the appeal had been dismissed.

26.  As regards the meaning of the phrase "appeal  rights  exhausted",  this
    meant by statute that there was no right of appeal.  There had to  have
    been a decision, and there were decisions in these cases.   That  would
    not include, for example, refusal of  an  application  where  a  person
    failed to pay a fee, but would in relation to merits.   If  a  decision
    was made on merits and it was not  an  appealable  decision  then  that
    would fall within it.  Mrs Khanum had had an appealable decision.  Miss
    Qongwane had not.

27.   With  regard  to  Mr  Hayes'  argument  that  the  appellants  had  no
    appealable decision, Mr Malik disagreed.  If  the  Secretary  of  State
    exercised a discretion in a person's favour then she would grant  leave
    and, if not, then she would issue a removal  decision  which  would  be
    appealable.  There was  no  obligation  to  make  a  decision,  but  if
    submissions were made to the Secretary of State and she was invited  to
    take them into account she must take the factors in paragraph 353B into
    account in making a decision.  The  meaning  of  "further  submissions"
    must mean the same in the second part as in the first part of paragraph
    353B.  If for example the Secretary of State was invited  to  review  a
    person's case then that was different from  further  submissions.   The
    Secretary of State would either grant leave or remove the  person  from
    the United Kingdom.  Further submissions would  have  to  amount  to  a
    fresh asylum or human rights claim.  It would have to be a human rights
    or asylum claim for there to be a fresh claim.

28.   With  regard  to  exceptional  circumstances,  Mr  Malik  referred  to
    paragraph 15 and onwards of Gurung.  If there was a discretion then  it
    could be considered.  The judge would not  be  exercising  the  initial
    discretion, but reviewing it.

29.  We reserved our determination.

30.  Our main concern in these cases is as to the proper  interpretation  of
    paragraph 353B of the Immigration Rules.  The  paragraph  was  inserted
    into the Rules from 13 February 2012, the same date on which  paragraph
    395C of the Immigration Rules was deleted.  Mr Malik has argued, basing
    himself on what was said by the AIT in EO (subsequently approved by the
    Court of Appeal in Mirza) that  on  determining  an  appeal  against  a
    decision to give directions under section  10  of  the  1999  Act,  the
    Tribunal should first consider whether  the  decision  shows  that  the
    decision maker took into account the factors set out in paragraph  395C
    and exercise the discretion on the basis of them.  If it  did  not  the
    appeal should be allowed on the basis that it  was  not  in  accordance
    with the law: if the decision was made  properly  the  Tribunal  should
    next consider whether the removal of the  appellant  would  breach  his
    rights under the Refugee Convention or the European Convention on Human
    Rights and if not, thirdly, whether the discretion under paragraph 395C
    should be exercised differently.  Mr Malik argued that  what  was  true
    for paragraph 395C is equally true for paragraph 353B.

31.  Mr Hayes tells us that the notion  of  review  in  the  asylum  process
    refers exclusively to family cases where the case is  unconcluded  i.e.
    there has never been removal nor a grant of leave, in  which  case  the
    case is reviewed every 36 months, and in other cases where the case  is
    six years old and is unconcluded.  He says that in no other cases would
    a cold review occur.  We understand a "cold review" to  mean  a  review
    unprompted by any submissions or contact from  an  appellant  or  their
    representative.

32.  The next paragraph in  the  Enforcement  Instructions  Guidance  states
    that in all other cases where exceptional  circumstances  are  claimed,
    officers must consider any representations submitted and have regard to
    the factors outlined in paragraph 353B.  It  may  be  that  that  is  a
    reference to what  we  have  described  above  as  the  first  part  of
    paragraph 353B, where  further  submissions  have  been  made  and  the
    decision maker has established whether or not they amount  to  a  fresh
    claim, in which case the  three  specific  matters  set  out  below  at
    paragraph 353B are to be considered.

33.  We do not think  the  argument  that  paragraph  353B  is  designed  to
    replace paragraph 395C can properly be  maintained.   The  reasons  for
    deleting  paragraph  395C  are  clearly  set  out  in  the  Explanatory
    Memorandum.  There is no  suggestion  there  that  paragraph  353B  was
    designed to replace paragraph 395C.  Paragraph 395C was concerned  with
    a range of factors that the Secretary of State would take into  account
    before making a decision to remove under section 10 of the 1999 Act  or
    section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality  Act  2006.   The
    more restricted list of factors set out  at  paragraph  353B  comprises
    matters to  be  taken  into  account  in  deciding  whether  there  are
    exceptional circumstances meaning that removal from the United  Kingdom
    is no longer appropriate. As the Explanatory  Memorandum  makes  clear,
    the Secretary of State regards the onus as being on  the  appellant  to
    draw to her attention relevant factors, for  example  compassionate  or
    protection issues, rather than herself being required to  identify  and
    consider factors known to  her  and  identifying  those  which  may  be
    relevant.  Whether the matters set out at  (i),  (ii),  and  (iii)  are
    likely ever to identify exceptional circumstances must be a  matter  of
    some debate, but we think it is sufficiently clear that  the  Secretary
    of State at least envisages the possibility of relevant matters  making
    out exceptional circumstances.

34.  The fact that we have concluded that paragraph 353B cannot be  regarded
    as the logical successor to paragraph 395C does not of course  conclude
    matters.  It remains necessary to consider the meaning of such  phrases
    as "no outstanding further submissions", "whose appeal rights have been
    exhausted", and "subject to a review".

35.  Although paragraph 353B appears in part 12  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    which is headed "Procedure and Rights of Appeal", it  seems  to  us  to
    have very little to do with rights of appeal and perhaps  not  a  great
    deal to do with procedure either.  In two  alternative  situations  the
    three relevant issues will fall to be considered.

36.  The first of these is where further submissions have been made and  the
    decision maker has established whether or not they amount  to  a  fresh
    claim under paragraph 353 and the second  situation  is  the  one  with
    which we are particularly concerned in this case.   The  three  phrases
    that we have set out above require consideration.  The concept  of  "no
    outstanding further submissions" must, we think, simply  mean  that  if
    further submissions have been made then they have been considered under
    the first part of the Rule.  Paragraph 353A  makes  it  clear  that  an
    applicant  to  whom  that  paragraph  applies  who  has  made   further
    submissions shall not be  removed  before  the  submissions  have  been
    considered under paragraph 353 or otherwise.  In our view  the  matters
    that arise for consideration under paragraph  353B  occur  by  contrast
    when a person has reached the end of the line.  If it  has  been  found
    that the further submissions amount to a fresh claim then of  course  a
    fresh decision will be made which will attract a right of appeal.   But
    where the decision maker decides that they do not give rise to a  fresh
    claim he or she is nevertheless required to consider the three  matters
    set out below at paragraph 353B.  Equally, when a person has  not  made
    further submissions, these matters require to be considered in the case
    of a person whose appeal rights  have  been  exhausted  and  which  are
    subject to a review.

37.  As regards the phrase "whose appeal rights  have  been  exhausted",  we
    take this to refer to a person who  has  no  further  right  of  appeal
    before  the  Tribunal.   No  clear  understanding  emerged   from   our
    discussion with Mr Malik as to the applicability of this phrase to, for
    example a person who had an application refused because a fee  has  not
    been paid or a person with a right of appeal who  had  never  exercised
    it, but for all practical purposes we think it  matters  little  if  at
    all.  This is because the case must  be  one  which  is  subject  to  a
    "review".

38.  We have set out above what we are told by Mr Hayes  about  the  meaning
    of this phrase as understood by the Home Office.  We think this must be
    right, given that  we  are  dealing  with  cases  where  there  are  no
    outstanding further submissions  and  where  appeal  rights  have  been
    exhausted.  There is no formal process of review, and the matter  seems
    to us to be entirely a matter of discretion of the Secretary  of  State
    as to whether a decision maker conducts a review or not.  We understand
    Mr Malik to agree with this point.  If there is a review then it  would
    appear to be an entirely internal matter.  If the  Secretary  of  State
    chooses to write to a claimant indicating that she has  carried  out  a
    review but does not consider that the matters set out at paragraph 353B
    are such as to identify exceptional circumstances, meaning that removal
    from the United Kingdom is no longer appropriate, that is  clearly  not
    an immigration decision within the meaning of section 82(2) of the 2002
    Act.  Such a case would  be  one  where  an  immigration  decision  had
    (probably) previously been made, since paragraph 353B  requires  appeal
    rights to have been  exhausted,  and  a  decision  not  to  exercise  a
    discretion in the circumstances envisaged in paragraph 353B  is  not  a
    decision coming within section 82(2), and it does not fall  within  the
    statutory appeals system. It is, of course, a  world  away  from  cases
    where a person has made an application (or submissions)  and  awaits  a
    result; it would also be different if the result of any review was that
    a decision was taken that a person  should  be  granted  some  sort  of
    leave.  But, given that there are people who choose to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom when they have no right to do so, the  existence  of  an
    interval of time during which their case may or may not be reviewed  is
    inevitable; and a person who does nothing in that  time  to  bring  his
    case to the notice of the Secretary of State is obviously not a  person
    who is entitled to any sort of further decision.

39.  We turn again then to the three issues identified by Mr  Malik  in  his
    grounds and submissions.

40.  On our understanding of paragraph 353B, the relevant part of which  for
    the purposes  of  these  appeals  is  the  second  part  of  the  first
    paragraph, there is no obligation on the Secretary  of  State  to  give
    consideration to the three sub-paragraphs of paragraph 353B  where  the
    decision is made to remove an overstayer.  There is  no  obligation  to
    carry out a review and there is no obligation to reveal the outcome  of
    any  review  that  takes  place.   Properly  applied,  we  can  see  no
    circumstances in which a person would become aware that his or her case
    had  been  considered  by  a  decision  maker   in   these   particular
    circumstances.  He would be a person who  had  no  outstanding  further
    submissions and whose appeal rights were exhausted.  He would  have  no
    reason to suppose that a review would be carried out and would have  no
    awareness of the outcome of any review.

41.  This raises the question not so much of  the  generic  issue  which  we
    have considered above, but what the position is when the  Secretary  of
    State refuses to consider paragraph 353B in the context  of  an  appeal
    against a decision to remove an overstayer.  It will be clear from what
    we have said above that we consider the Secretary of State  was  wholly
    wrong to give consideration to paragraph  353B  in  these  cases.   The
    paragraph did not, on its own terms, apply to them.  On the other hand,
    it is difficult to see that a person could be disadvantaged in any  way
    by consideration of the factors set out in that paragraph.

42.  Clearly there  is  a  right  of  appeal,  under  section  82(2)(g).   A
    particular question following from that is whether, under section 84 of
    the Act there is a ground of appeal under  (e)  that  the  decision  is
    otherwise not in accordance with the law, or under (f) that the  person
    taking the decision should  have  exercised  differently  a  discretion
    conferred by Immigration Rules.  We see no basis for either  ground  of
    appeal being remotely arguable in this context.  Hence we  do  not  see
    the paragraph 353B review  process  as  involving  the  exercise  of  a
    discretion conferred by Immigration Rules; nor, in those circumstances,
    can the decision resulting from the review be said to be otherwise  not
    in accordance with the law.  It is not a decision that  gives  rise  to
    any consequences in law.

43.  As regards issue (c), the question  of  whether  a  decision  which  is
    unlawful at common law  is  always  incompatible  with  Article  8,  if
    engaged at all, the matter is not before us, as was argued by Mr Hayes.
     It is entirely academic to  the  outcome  of  these  appeals  for  the
    reasons set out above.  Bearing in mind what was said by Lord Dyson M R
    in Gurung, at paragraph 52, in  view  of  our  decision  on  the  other
    matters, we do not  see  the  point  as  requiring  decision  in  these
    appeals.

The Individual Appeals

44.  Mrs Khanum's appeal was heard by a First-tier Judge on  18  June  2012.
    She appealed against a decision of 22 March 2012 to remove her from the
    United Kingdom as an overstayer.  The judge referred to a decision of 3
    November 2011, but we are confident that the proper position is as  set
    out above.  In the removal decision at paragraph 10 there is  reference
    to the decision of the House of Lords in Odelola [2009] UKHL 25 and the
    fact that paragraph 395C was deleted from the Immigration Rules  on  13
    February 2012.  It was said that  nonetheless  consideration  had  been
    given to the issues that she had raised in accordance with the guidance
    in chapter 53 of the EIG and also that consideration had been given  to
    paragraph 353B.  It  was  not  accepted  that  there  were  exceptional
    circumstances  in  her  case  which  would  mean   that   removal   was
    inappropriate.  At paragraph 76 of her determination  the  judge  noted
    that the respondent  had  set  out  in  the  refusal  consideration  of
    paragraph 353B and that the  conclusions  following  consideration  had
    been challenged but not the accuracy  of  the  factual  basis  for  the
    conclusions and she therefore found that the facts were as stated.

45.  As we have concluded above where there has been a decision giving  rise
    to an appeal under section 82(2)(g), as there can be said to have  been
    in this case, and where in the course of that review  the  factors  set
    out at paragraph 353B have been  considered,  it  is  not  open  to  an
    appellant to argue that  the  discretion  should  have  been  exercised
    differently. The appeal therefore remains dismissed.

46.  As regards Miss Qongwane, she appealed to a  panel  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the Secretary of State's decision of 23  May  2012  to
    remove her from the United Kingdom  as  an  overstayer.   In  her  case
    reference was again made in the decision letter to Odelola,  and  there
    is no reference to paragraph 353B.  However the three factors  set  out
    at paragraph 353B are  mentioned  in  the  letter,  together  with  the
    question of whether  any  representations  had  been  received  on  the
    person's behalf, in the context of chapter 53 of the EIG.  There is  no
    mention of these matters in the panel's determination.

47.  Again we consider that the Secretary  of  State  was  not  required  to
    consider paragraph 353B which  in  effect  was  however  done,  without
    citing it, in setting out the relevant considerations and coming  to  a
    conclusion on them.  The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal  among
    other things argued that the discretion  under  paragraph  395C  should
    have been exercised  in  the  appellant's  favour.   This  is  somewhat
    surprising, bearing in mind that paragraph 395C had been  deleted  from
    the Immigration Rules on 13 February 2012, as the decision letter  made
    clear.  The ground was clearly wrong.  In light of what we have had  to
    say about paragraph 353B, we do not consider that the  challenge  to  a
    discretion under a Rule which had already been deleted can properly  be
    said to be a challenge to the exercise of discretion under an  entirely
    different Rule which contains different criteria.  We do not think that
    the panel erred in not addressing an issue  that  was  not  before  it.
    Again therefore the decision of the panel in this case  dismissing  the
    appeal is maintained.

48.  Mr Dhanani and his wife and son appealed to a judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the Secretary of State's decision of 16  May  2012  to
    remove him from the United Kingdom as an overstayer.  As in  the  cases
    of Mrs Khanum and Miss Qongwane, Odelola was considered  together  with
    the guidance in chapter 53 and  specifically  paragraph  353B.   Again,
    somewhat curiously, the grounds of appeal contend that the Secretary of
    State should have exercised her discretion under paragraph 395C in  the
    appellant's  favour,  despite  that  provision  having   already   been
    repealed.  In  his  determination  the  judge  did  not  refer  to  the
    paragraph 353B consideration in the refusal letter.  Again however  the
    grounds of appeal to him did not challenge  the  Secretary  of  State's
    conclusions in that regard, addressing themselves rather to an  already
    deleted provision and we do not consider an error of law in the judge's
    decision has been identified.

49.  Mr Patel appealed against a decision of 14 August 2012  to  remove  him
    from the United Kingdom as an overstayer.  There  is  no  reference  to
    paragraph 353B in any decision letter.  It can be  seen  from  what  we
    have said above that we do not consider that there was a  necessity  or
    requirement for there to be any consideration of paragraph 353B in  any
    of these cases, and as a consequence the judge cannot be said  to  have
    erred in not considering a failure to  exercise  a  discretion  by  the
    Secretary of State.  This appeal is also dismissed.



Signed                                  Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Allen




