

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

 EK (Article 4 ECHR: Anti-Trafficking Convention) Tanzania [2013] UKUT 00313
                                    (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 13 March 2013                              |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                                LORD TURNBULL
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

                                     EK
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms K Cronin & Mr A Slatter, instructed by Islington
Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Ms E O'Bryan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


(1)   Trafficking, as defined in Article 3(a) of  the  Palermo  Protocol  of
    2000, falls within the ambit of Article 4 of the ECHR  (prohibition  of
    slavery and forced labour), as held in  Rantsev  v  Cyprus  and  Russia
    [2010] ECHR 22.

(2)   There is no distinction, for the purposes  of  Article  4,  between  a
    domestic worker who was trafficked by way of forced labour and one  who
    arrived voluntarily and was then subjected to forced labour.

(3)   Quite apart  from  the  duties  arising  under  Article  4,  which  in
    particular are set out in  IDIs,  the  Secretary  of  State's  duty  to
    provide assistance under the Anti-Trafficking Convention is engaged  no
    later than the point at  which  a  decision  is  made  that  there  are
    conclusive grounds to believe a particular appellant to be a victim  of
    trafficking.

(4)   The duties arising under  the  Convention  include  an  obligation  to
    adopt such measures as may be necessary  to  assist  victims  in  their
    physical, psychological and social recovery (Article  12  paragraph  1)
    and to issue a renewable residence permit to victims if their  stay  is
    necessary owing to their personal situation (Article  14),  which  must
    include consideration of his or her medical needs.

(5)   The immigration decision in the present case was made  without  taking
    account of (i) the link between the  appellant's  precarious  state  of
    health and the breach of the respondent's  protective  obligations,  in
    terms of her policy regarding foreign domestic workers and Article 4 of
    the ECHR; and (ii) the duties engaged under Articles 12, 14 and  16  of
    the Anti-Trafficking Convention.  As a result, that decision was not in
    accordance with the law.

(6)   Where there is no error of law in a First-tier judge's conclusions  on
    a discrete issue or issues, the conclusion that there is  an  error  in
    respect of another issue or issues does not require  a  re-visiting  of
    the issue(s) where no error was found, when the  decision  is  re-made.
    Kizhakudan [2012] EWCA Civ 566 distinguished.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Tanzania born on 15 November 1982.  She
      appealed to a judge of the First-tier Tribunal against  the  Secretary
      of State's decision of 16 July 2010 to  remove  her  from  the  United
      Kingdom by way of directions under section 10 of the  Immigration  and
      Asylum Act 1999.

   2. The appellant's history and the subsequent findings of the  First-tier
      Judge are set out in the error of law determination which  is  annexed
      to this determination.

   3. Before moving to the main issues in the appeal we  mention  one  point
      which arises  from  the  error  of  law  determination,  in  that  the
      Secretary of State was  directed  to  produce  any  guidance  she  had
      established in respect of  Article  14.1  of  the  Council  of  Europe
      Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings.

   4. Ms O'Bryan was unaware of this direction, not having seen the error of
      law determination.  This must be a matter of  concern,  first  on  the
      basis that the  Secretary  of  State  had  been  directed  to  produce
      relevant evidence which has  not  been  done,  and  secondly  that  Ms
      O'Bryan did not have the previous determination, although we  can  see
      that it was sent to Angel Square on  16  May  2012,  and  clearly  the
      appellant had received it.  We express the hope  that  in  future  the
      Secretary of State will take note of directions that are issued and do
      her best to  comply  with  them,  with  reasons  being  given  for  an
      inability to comply, if such is the case.

Preliminary Issue

   5. The first issue on  which  Ms  Cronin  addressed  us  was  the  matter
      adumbrated  in  her  skeleton  argument,  comprising   a   preliminary
      application to vary the direction given at the error of law hearing so
      that not just Article 4 of the European Convention on Human Rights was
      for consideration by the Tribunal today but also Articles 3 and 8.  It
      was not sought to re-argue the asylum issue and the appellant reserved
      her position on that.

   6. Ms Cronin argued that the error of law findings were  wholly  premised
      on the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal  and  not  on  the  new
      evidence before the Upper Tribunal at the earlier hearing.  She argued
      that the new  evidence  was  relevant  to  show  that  the  First-tier
      Tribunal had made mistakes of fact concerning risk and the appellant's
      circumstances and medical condition which gave rise to unfairness  and
      error.  She argued that the direction could be  corrected  under  Rule
      5(2) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008  (the  UT
      Rules).  She argued that  the  existing  directions  ran  contrary  to
      section 12(3)(b) of the Tribunals, Courts and  Enforcement  Act  2007,
      unlawfully fettered the Upper Tribunal's  jurisdiction,  referring  to
      section 12(4) of the TCEA, and  the  Upper  Tribunal's  obligation  to
      allow the appeal if the decision against which the appeal was  brought
      was not in accordance with the  law,  referring  to  the  Nationality,
      Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,  section  86(3),  and  unlawfully
      fettered the Upper Tribunal's capacity to consider evidence about  any
      matter which it thought relevant to the  substance  of  the  decision,
      referring to the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, section
      85(4).  Ms Cronin referred in particular to Kizhakudan [2012] EWCA Civ
      566 and subsequent guidance by the Tribunal in Ferrer [2012] UKUT  304
      (IAC), in particular at paragraph 31.

   7. Ms Cronin also argued that the direction was erroneously  premised  on
      the assumption that the Article 4 issues were properly severable  from
      the Article 3  and  Article  8  claims.   She  argued  that  the  UK's
      obligations  under  the  Anti-Trafficking  Convention  and  Article  4
      concerned issues and responsibilities which engaged  such  matters  as
      private life, risk and need for  protection  which  also  engaged  the
      United Kingdom's obligations under Articles  3  and  8  of  the  Human
      Rights Convention.  It would therefore be  contrary  to  law  and  the
      principles of fairness to make a direction  purporting  to  decide  in
      advance  of  the  consideration  of  all  the  evidence  and  all  the
      submissions of the parties that the Upper Tribunal had concluded  that
      a re-hearing would only concern Article 4.

   8. On this issue Ms O'Bryan argued that the directions made by the  Upper
      Tribunal after the earlier hearing were very clear.  If the  appellant
      sought to provide further evidence from Kalayaan[1] then it needed  to
      do so before the First-tier Judge.  The issues had been properly  gone
      into at the earlier hearing and there had been the concluding decision
      that the Tribunal would  only  be  concerned  with  Article  4  today.
      Article 8 issues could be argued in the context of Article 4  but  the
      Article 3 and Article 8 arguments could  not  be  re-instigated  as  a
      discrete argument in an attempt to get a second bite at the cherry.

   9. By way of reply Ms Cronin argued that most of the  evidence  had  been
      produced at the error of law hearing and  it  had  been  unclear  then
      whether it would be only an  error  of  law  hearing  or  a  rolled-up
      hearing.  At that stage two witnesses had provided oral evidence.   It
      was unclear what view had been taken of their evidence.  The  evidence
      produced had included evidence from a psychologist.  The purpose of  a
      One-Stop Procedure  was  to  have  all  matters  dealt  with  in  this
      Tribunal.  This approach was invited in the decision of the  Court  of
      Appeal in Kizhakudan.  Compliance with the Rules had  to  be  done  in
      order to have fresh evidence  allowed  in  and  the  premise  for  its
      availability was the grant of leave and this had been set  down  as  a
      potential guidance case on Article 4  and  on  that  basis  additional
      funding from the Legal Services Commission had  been  provided  for  a
      report and it was unlikely that that would have been  provided  for  a
      hearing before the First-tier  Judge.   That  evidence  had  not  been
      considered by the First-tier Judge or the Secretary of  State.   There
      was a failure in the refusal letter to consider the  United  Kingdom's
      obligations under  Article  4  and  the  Anti-Trafficking  Convention.
      Further, if this was a case designed to  give  guidance  the  Tribunal
      might well wish to have regard to, and deliberate on the  relationship
      between Article 4 and other Articles of  the  European  Convention  on
      Human Rights in order to assist.

Discussion

  10. Section 12 of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 states as
      follows:

            "12. Proceedings on appeal to Upper Tribunal

                 1)  Subsection  (2)  applies  if  the  Upper  Tribunal,  in
                    deciding an appeal under  section  11,  finds  that  the
                    making of the decision concerned involved the making  of
                    an error on a point of law.

                 2) The Upper Tribunal -

                 a) may (but need not) set aside the decision of the  First-
                    tier Tribunal, and

                 b) if it does, must either -


                      i) remit the case to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  with
                         directions for its reconsideration, or

                     ii) re-make the decision.

                 3) In acting under subsection (2)(b)(i), the Upper Tribunal
                    may also -

                 a) direct that the members of the First-tier  Tribunal  who
                    are chosen to reconsider the case are not to be the same
                    as those who made the decision that has been set aside;

                 b)  give  procedural  directions  in  connection  with  the
                    reconsideration of the case by the First-tier Tribunal.

                 4)  In  acting  under  subsection  (2)(b)(ii),  the   Upper
                    Tribunal -

                 a) may make any  decision  which  the  First-tier  Tribunal
                    could make if the First-tier Tribunal were re-making the
                    decision, and


                 b)  may  make  such  findings  of  fact  as  it   considers
                    appropriate."

  11. Ms Cronin argues  that  the  direction  made  by  the  Upper  Tribunal
      following the hearing on 27  February  2012  is  contrary  to  section
      12(3)(b) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007  (the  2007
      Act).  However, it can be seen that section 12(3) relates to the Upper
      Tribunal acting under subsection (2)(b)(i), which is where  the  Upper
      Tribunal remits the case to the First-tier Tribunal.  That was not the
      case here, and therefore section 12(3)(b) is  not  relevant  to  these
      proceedings.

  12. Section 12(4) is, as can  be  seen,  relevant  to  a  case  where  the
      Tribunal acts under subsection (2)(b)(ii) where, as in this  case  the
      Upper Tribunal  is  re-making  the  decision.   The  argument  that  a
      direction made by the Upper Tribunal in the  instant  case  unlawfully
      fetters its discretion fails however to take account of the power that
      the Upper Tribunal has to limit the ambit of a further hearing on  the
      basis of error of law decisions that are  made.   Consequently  it  is
      equally open to the Upper Tribunal to remit to the First-tier  or  re-
      make the decision on the basis of limiting the issues before itself or
      the First-tier Tribunal.  The argument made is at best a circular one.



  13. As regards the argument in respect of section 86(3) of the  2002  Act,
      if the point in question did not amount to an error of law within  the
      First-tier Judge's decision, then there can be  no  quarrel  with  the
      limiting of  the  ambit  of  the  further  hearing.   The  same  point
      essentially applies in relation to the section 85(4) point.

  14. We turn to the case law, in particular Kizhakudan.  We start from  the
      premise that where the Upper Tribunal finds an error  of  law  in  the
      determination of a First-tier Judge, and when it concludes in  respect
      of matters that are argued to be errors  of  law  in  the  grounds  of
      appeal that they are not in fact errors of law, that in re-making  the
      decision it is open to the Upper Tribunal or incumbent upon it, to re-
      determine only the matters in respect of  which  errors  of  law  were
      committed by the First-tier Judge.  We  understand  that  Ms  Cronin's
      argument takes issue with the above propositions, and therefore it  is
      necessary  to  consider  Kizhakudan  in  order  to  see  whether   the
      assumption we have made is wrong.

  15. That case concerned an appeal by a student who  succeeded  before  the
      First-tier Judge on the basis of an argument  which  was  subsequently
      found to be wrong.  The argument that found favour with the First-tier
      Judge was that the effect of relevant policy guidance  emanating  from
      the Secretary of State was to allow an appellant 60 days to  find  new
      student sponsorship.  As this argument found favour  with  the  judge,
      other arguments that the appellant's representative would  have  made,
      including an Article 8 argument, went unmentioned.

  16. By the time the  Secretary  of  State's  challenge  to  this  decision
      reached the Upper Tribunal, it was common ground that  the  First-tier
      Judge had erred.  The Upper Tribunal Judge was asked to  consider  the
      Article 8 point on the basis that it was a de novo hearing and he  was
      therefore required to consider the appeal under the Immigration  Rules
      and under Article 8 whether or not any human rights arguments had been
      made before the First-tier Judge.  The Upper Tribunal  Judge  did  not
      accept this submission and declined to consider Article 8.

  17. The Court of Appeal considered that the Upper Tribunal Judge was wrong
      to look for an error of law committed by  the  First-tier  Judge  with
      respect to the Article 8 point.  It said as follows:

           "28.  ...He, SIJ Waumsley, had no need for any further error  of
           law to give him jurisdiction to deal anew with  Mr  Kizhakudan's
           appeal.  He already had  the  common  ground  error  of  law  in
           relation to  the  proper  interpretation  of  the  Secretary  of
           State's policy guidance (paragraph 1 of his determination).   He
           therefore was in the position where he had either to re-make the
           decision for himself, or to remit the matter back to the  First-
           tier Tribunal: see section 12(2)(b) of the 2007  Act.   What  he
           was not required to do was to look at the matter solely  through
           the lens of the argument before IJ Widdup, as though  he  needed
           to find a second error of law, this time with respect to Article
           8, before he could be  permitted  to  consider  that  issue  for
           himself."

  18. The Court of Appeal went on to say as follows:

           "30.   However,  SIJ  Waumsley  considered  that  he  could  not
           consider article 8 unless IJ Widdup had erred in law in  failing
           to consider it.  He  therefore  put  it  out  of  his  hands  to
           consider whether he ought to look at  the  matter  in  terms  of
           article  8.   In  my  judgment,  however,  SIJ  Waumsley  had  a
           discretion to consider the article 8 point, even if, as  he  was
           entitled to think, the point had not been properly raised in the
           First-tier Tribunal, nor by  any  respondent's  notice.   It  is
           plain, however,  that  SIJ  Waumsley  refused  to  consider  his
           discretion.  Whether or not any of the thoughts which led to the
           way he expressed the matter in his permission to appeal decision
           entered sub silentio into his thinking does not matter;  but  it
           is of course a matter of concern that they may have done so.  In
           any event, he never reached a consideration of his discretion."

  19. We do not think that the situation before the court in  Kizhakudan  is
      the same as that before us.  We are concerned with a  case  where  the
      First-tier Judge's conclusions on Article 3, Article 8 and the Refugee
      Convention did  not  contain  any  error  of  law.   We  do  not  read
      Kizhakudan as requiring us in the circumstances where  the  conclusion
      was reached that the judge did err in respect of Article 4,  to  treat
      that as a gateway to opening up all the matters in  respect  of  which
      errors of law were found not to exist in  the  judge's  determination.
      In Kizhakudan the Upper Tribunal Judge erred in refusing to consider a
      point that had not been  considered,  because  it  had  not  been  put
      before,  the  First-tier  Judge.   That  in  our  view  is  materially
      different from the situation in the instant case where the  First-tier
      Judge did consider Articles 3 and 8 of the Refugee Convention and  did
      not err in law in his assessment of those matters.

  20. If we are wrong in distinguishing Kizhakudan as we  do,  it  is  clear
      from paragraph 30 of that decision that an  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  in
      that situation has a discretion to consider the  relevant  issue.   We
      consider that  it  is  sufficiently  clear  that  the  discretion  was
      properly considered in this case, and as we hope we made clear when we
      conveyed our conclusions on this point to the representatives  at  the
      hearing today, we have again exercised discretion as to whether or not
      to re-visit the Articles 3 and 8 arguments but have concluded that  it
      is not necessary for us to do so and that the appeal will  proceed  on
      the basis of argument in respect of Article  4  of  the  Human  Rights
      Convention and the Anti-Trafficking Convention.


The Main Issues

   21. The substantive  part  of  the  hearing  before  the  Upper  Tribunal
      concerned the re-making of the decision on the appellant's appeal  in
      light  of  the  submission  that  both  Article  4  of  the  European
      Convention on Human Rights ("the  Convention")  and  the  Council  of
      Europe's Convention against Trafficking in Human Beings  ("the  Anti-
      Trafficking Convention") were engaged in the circumstances which  had
      befallen her. The foundation stone for the argument was  the  finding
      made by the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  at  paragraph  24(i)  of  her
      determination, recorded as follows:

           "the Appellant is a citizen of Tanzania who was  trafficked  into
           domestic servitude to the UK by Mrs Zainab Alibhai  so  that  she
           could work for her parents, Mr and Mrs Dhanji. She was then later
           trafficked internally by Mrs Miriam Kilumanga;"

      These findings were amply justified by the evidence before the First-
      tier Tribunal and are not the subject of any challenge by the
      respondent.




The Background to the Respondent's  Immigration  Policy  Concerning  Foreign
Domestic Workers

   22. The appellant first came to the United Kingdom in July of  2006.  The
      European Convention on Human Rights was  incorporated  into  domestic
      law by the Human Rights Act of  1998,  whereas  the  Anti-Trafficking
      Convention was not ratified by the United  Kingdom  government  until
      December 2008. In these circumstances Ms Cronin set out a history of
      the United Kingdom government's awareness of the issue  of  abuse  of
      foreign domestic workers brought to this country, and of the measures
      taken to combat it. She drew our attention  to  the  House  of  Lords
      debate on 28 November 1990, when the  government  explained  its  new
      policy initiative in the following terms:

           "In all cases the domestic worker will  be  required  to  obtain
           entry clearance before  setting  out  and  the  entry  clearance
           officer will interview the domestic worker  to  satisfy  himself
           about the arrangement. The entry  clearance  officer        will
           also ensure that the domestic worker receives and understands an
           information leaflet explaining his or her rights.  This  leaflet
           will be available in a number of languages and its contents will
           also be explained orally to those domestic  workers  who  cannot
           read. A copy of the  leaflet  will  also  go  to  the  employer,
           together with a  covering  letter  explaining  its  purpose  and
           emphasising the serious view that the  Government  take  of  the
           need to abide by the laws of this country. The leaflet should be
           printed in a way which emphasises that domestic  workers  should
           keep their passports themselves in a safe place  and  that  they
           may be entitled to at least  one  week's  notice  of  dismissal.
           Secondly, the leaflet should explain  how  to  obtain  treatment
           from the National Health Service."


   23.      By 1994 further safeguards were introduced. With  the  intention
      of ensuring that there was no misunderstanding by the employers about
      their obligations to their  employees,  the  government  of  the  day
      required that domestic workers were to be given a copy of a statement
      of the main terms and conditions of their  employment  at  the  entry
      clearance interview and were to be asked to confirm that they  agreed
      to those terms and conditions. By  2002  a  right  was  available  to
      domestic workers to  change  their  employer  whilst  in  the  United
      Kingdom during the currency of  their  visa.  This  right  was  again
      introduced in recognition of the evidenced vulnerability  of  foreign
      domestic workers to abuse and exploitation.

   24.      By the date of the appellant's application for  leave  to  enter
      the United Kingdom the relevant Immigration Directorate  Instructions
      ("IDI") (Chapter 5 Section 12 Domestic Workers in Private Households)
      included the following:


           "3.2 Information Leaflet


           Applications for  entry  clearance  from  domestic  workers  are
           subject to a set procedure. They will be  interviewed  on  their
           own, at least on their first application, to establish that they
           understand the terms and conditions of the employment  and  that
           they  are  willing  to  go  to  the  United  Kingdom.  If  their
           application is successful, they will  be  given  an  information
           leaflet explaining  their  rights  under  the  United  Kingdom's
           criminal and employment laws -  further  information  about  the
           leaflets is available below."

      The copy leaflet produced by  Ms  Cronin  for  illustrative  purposes
      showed that information was provided concerning, how to  contact  the
      United Kingdom immigration authorities, the employment  rights  which
      domestic workers would have in the UK and how to contact Trade  Union
      organisations, the entitlement to the protection of the criminal law,
      the entitlement to free medical care, and information on the services
      provided by Kalayaan, an organisation  providing  independent  advice
      and support  on  immigration  and  employment  problems,  along  with
      contact details. Furthermore, the instructions to the Entry Clearance
      Officer included at paragraph 2.6 the following:

            "2.6 Maintenance and accommodation

                 The entry clearance officer will require  the  employer  to
                 sign a written undertaking that the employee will  be  able
                 to maintain and accommodate themselves without recourse  to
                 public funds and that the domestic worker will be  provided
                 with a separate bedroom if living in."


The Appellant's Circumstances

   25.      The appellant's history and circumstances were summarised by the
      First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  in  her  determination  and  were  again
      referred to in the Upper Tribunal  error  of  law  determination.  In
      addition to the other new material provided to the Upper Tribunal  in
      advance of that hearing there  was  an  updated  statement  from  the
      appellant dated 22 February  2012.  A  further  short  statement  was
      available to us dated 4 March 2013.


   26.      To put the submissions made on the appellant's behalf in context
      it may be helpful to summarise the salient features of  her  history.
      The appellant came from an impoverished background  in  Tanzania  and
      had little by way of  education.  As  a  young  woman  in  her  early
      twenties she came to work as a domestic assistant for a woman by  the
      name of Zainab Alibhai in Dar-es -Salaam. In July 2006, after working
      for around two years for this lady, the appellant accompanied her  to
      the United Kingdom, having acquired a domestic worker visa permitting
      her to stay until 5 November 2006. The  appellant  was  tricked  into
      accompanying Mrs Alibhai on a false pretence  and  was  left  in  the
      United Kingdom with Mrs Alibhai's parents, Mr and Mrs Dhanji. She was
      required to work for  them  attending  to  all  domestic  duties  and
      cooking all meals. She worked from 7am until around 10.30  at  night.
      She was fed only stale food, scraps or leftovers and was required  to
      sleep on a thin mattress on the kitchen floor, although there was  an
      unused spare bedroom in the house. The mattress had to be  rolled  up
      each night and kept outside in a garage. The  appellant  received  no
      wages from the Dhanji family and was only allowed out of their  house
      to attend church on Sundays. The appellant's passport was kept by the
      Dhanji family. Although she asked to be allowed to return to Tanzania
      on a number of occasions she was told that she could not do so  until
      at least July 2007. The appellant  was  on  occasions  unwell  whilst
      living in the Dhanji household but was required to work nevertheless.
      She was told that there was no one she could complain  to  about  her
      conditions and that if she went to the police to complain they  would
      not help her.


   27.      In the summer of 2007, with the assistance of a lady she had met
      at church, the appellant ran away from the Dhanjis leaving all of her
      possessions behind. She was given accommodation at the house of a Mrs
      Miriam Kilumanga. After some time, and with  the  assistance  of  the
      Tanzanian Embassy, she recovered her passport from the  Dhanjis.  She
      then realised that her original visa had only been for a duration  of
      6 months and had now expired. Conditions at the  Kilumanga  household
      were little better than before. The appellant was manipulated by  Mrs
      Kilumanga and required to work as a domestic worker  for  her.  Again
      she was often required to sleep on a mattress on the floor. By  early
      2008 the appellant was aware that the poor health  she  had  suffered
      from at the Dhanji household was worsening. She asked  Mrs  Kilumanga
      for help and was told that it was difficult for her  to  get  medical
      attention without paying for it, as she did  not  have  a  visa.  The
      appellant had no money. By the latter half of 2008 the appellant  was
      aware of having real difficulties in breathing and  sleeping  on  her
      left side. Her breathing was noticeably noisy. In September  of  2008
      she was taken by Mrs Kilumanga to see a solicitor in connection  with
      her claim against the Dhanjis.  Mrs  Kilumanga  interpreted  for  the
      appellant as she could  speak  very  little  English.  The  appellant
      understood the solicitor to have observed that she needed to go to  a
      hospital or see a doctor. On her  return  home  Mrs  Kilumanga  again
      insisted that it was very  difficult  for  the  appellant  to  obtain
      medical assistance as she did not  have  the  correct  paperwork.  By
      early October 2008 the appellant was so ill that she  was  eventually
      taken to hospital as an emergency by Mrs Kilumanga and  was  admitted
      for a two week period. On her return to the Kilumanga  household  she
      was again put to work, despite her  physically  weak  condition.  She
      continued to attend for hospital appointments  until  July  2009.  In
      March  2010,  with  the  assistance  of  the  organisation  known  as
      Kalayaan, the appellant was able to leave the Kilumanga household and
      was given accommodation by the Poppy Project. By this time her health
      was very poor and this aspect of the appellant's  circumstances  will
      be returned to below.


   28.      Given the appellant's experiences in the United Kingdom, and  to
      lay a foundation  for  the  argument  which  came  to  be  presented,
      evidence was put before us concerning the circumstances in which  the
      appellant came to be granted a visa in 2006. The appellant's  account
      was that all of the arrangements were instigated by Mrs  Alibhai  and
      that she simply did as she was instructed. She  explained  that  when
      she attended for interview at the High  Commission  in  Dar-es-Salaam
      she was accompanied by Mrs Alibhai. She was interviewed in English by
      a gentleman who sat behind a glass screen. An interpreter translated.
      The interview was not in private and Mrs Alibhai was  sitting  behind
      her in the waiting area. The appellant was not told anything about  a
      contract of employment, how she should be treated, or  how  much  she
      should be paid in the United Kingdom. She was not told what to do  if
      she needed any help or advice and was not given any form  of  written
      information. The appellant had never left Tanzania previously.




   The Appellant's Submissions


      Article 4 of the Convention


   29.      The submissions presented  on  the  appellant's  behalf  can  be
      summarised at this stage and expanded upon later. Ms Cronin submitted
      that the appellant's rights in terms of Article 4 of  the  Convention
      had been breached on account both of her being  trafficked  into  the
      United Kingdom and then subsequently trafficked within  the  country.
      What  Article  4  covered  in  its  prohibition  against  "forced  or
      compulsory labour" could be seen from the terms of  the  Protocol  to
      Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, especially Women
      and Children ("the Palermo Protocol")  and  the  case  of  Rantsev  v
      Cyprus and Russia (2010) 51 EHHR 1. Article 4 required states to take
      operational measures to protect both victims and potential victims of
      trafficking. The United Kingdom government had recognised the need to
      do so and had put in place  the  plainly  proportionate  arrangements
      concerning interview of a  domestic  worker  by  an  Entry  Clearance
      Officer and the provision of relevant information in  writing,  in  a
      language which could be understood. The respondent was in  breach  of
      her own policy, and was in breach of the protective duty  owed  under
      Article 4 of the Convention to potential victims of  trafficking,  by
      failing to provide the appellant with information  which  would  have
      minimised the risk of her being subjected to exploitative labour  and
      being re-trafficked in the United Kingdom. The  submission  was  that
      this breach led to the appellant being  denied  assistance,  benefits
      and rights and to her being exposed to  harm  and  danger.  In  these
      circumstances it was argued that the rights conferred  by  Article  4
      having been engaged and having been violated, an  obligation  on  the
      part of the State to provide reparation had become crystallised. That
      obligation encompassed the right to recovery.

      The Anti-Trafficking Convention

   30.      Separately, it was submitted that in ratifying and  implementing
      the  Anti-  Trafficking  Convention,  the  United   Kingdom   assumed
      protective and remedial  obligations  to  trafficking  victims  which
      extended to the provision of medical treatment  and  assistance  with
      the victim's recovery. Articles 12, 14 and 16 were relied upon and it
      was contended that it would not be consistent  with  the  obligations
      undertaken in this convention to return the appellant to Tanzania  in
      her present precarious state of health.



The Respondent's Submissions

   31.      The respondent's submissions can  also  be  summarised  at  this
      stage. Ms O'Bryan pointed out that  the  Anti-Trafficking  Convention
      was not ratified by the United Kingdom government until December 2008
      and submitted that the IDI which were  in  place  in  2006  were  not
      designed with the obligations undertaken in terms of this  convention
      in mind. She submitted that neither the  IDI  nor  the  leaflet  were
      designed to prevent trafficking, they were designed to prevent  abuse
      of legal employees. She went on to explain  that  following  on  from
      signing the Anti-Trafficking Convention a range of other measures had
      been introduced with the intention of  combating  trafficking.  These
      included the setting up of the National  Referral  Mechanism  as  the
      framework for identifying victims of human trafficking  and  ensuring
      that they received the appropriate protection and support.


   32.      Ms O'Bryan's submission was that there had  been  no  breach  of
      Article 4 of the Convention. Even if any  breach  of  the  procedures
      which were in place could be established, there was no  link  between
      such a breach and the harm caused  to  the  appellant,  although  she
      accepted that the appellant had suffered greatly at the hands of  her
      first employer.  Ms O'Bryan submitted that the  sort  of  information
      contained within the leaflet would have  been  of  no  value  to  the
      appellant anyway. She went on to draw  attention  to  the  fact  that
      Kalayaan had been involved with  the  appellant  since  around  March
      2009, when they arranged for the appellant to attend English classes.
      Despite this they did  not  place  her  with  the  National  Referral
      Mechanism for victims of trafficking until May 2010, around the  same
      time as she made a  claim  for  asylum.  Had  they  taken  this  step
      earlier, for example when they arranged the English classes,  it  was
      said that responses appropriate to the appellant's needs  would  have
      been put in place. These would have  included  accommodation  support
      and medical advice and treatment. In so far as the appellant's health
      and personal circumstances were concerned, and whether these had  any
      impact on the question of refusal to grant a  resident's  permit,  Ms
      O'Bryan contended that all such matters  had  been  fully  ventilated
      before the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  In  her  submission  the  same
      applied to the question  of  return  with  dignity  as  envisaged  by
      Article 16 of the Anti-Trafficking Convention.

Discussion

      Article 4 of the Convention

   33.      Article 4 of the Convention provides, in  so  far  as  relevant,
   that:

            "1. No one shall be held in slavery or servitude.

            2. No one shall be required  to  perform  forced  or  compulsory
labour"

      In the case of Rantsev  v  Cyprus  and  Russia  [2010]  ECHR  22,  the
      European Court of Human Rights  considered  the  relationship  between
      trafficking in human beings and Article 4 of the Convention.  It  took
      as the meaning of trafficking the definition given in Article 3(a) of
      the Palermo Protocol, which definition was in turn adopted by the Anti-
      Trafficking Convention:

           "the  recruitment,  transportation,  transfer,   harbouring   or
           receipt of  persons, by means of the threat or use of  force  or
           other forms of coercion, of abduction, of fraud,  of  deception,
           of the abuse of power or of a position of  vulnerability  or  of
           the giving or receiving of payments or benefits to  achieve  the
           consent of a person having control over another person, for  the
           purpose  of  exploitation.  Exploitation  shall  include,  at  a
           minimum, the exploitation of the prostitution of others or other
           forms of sexual exploitation, forced labour or services, slavery
           or practices similar to slavery, servitude  or  the  removal  of
           organs."

      The Court noted that  trafficking  by  its  very  nature  and  aim  of
      exploitation, is based on the exercise  of  powers  attaching  to  the
      right of ownership. It described trafficking as conduct which  treated
      human beings as commodities to be bought and sold and  put  to  forced
      labour, often for little or no payment. It concluded that  trafficking
      itself, within the meaning of the Palermo Protocol,  fell  within  the
      scope of Article 4 of the Convention.

   34.      The facts in the case of Rantsev concerned a young Russian woman
      by the name of Rantseva, who voluntarily travelled to Cyprus in  2001
      to take up employment  in  a  cabaret  in  terms  of  a  contract  of
      employment which she had concluded. She was permitted to enter Cyprus
      as the beneficiary  of  a  Cypriot  visa  scheme  to  facilitate  the
      employment of "artistes". Only a  few  weeks  after  her  arrival  Ms
      Rantseva died in circumstances which were never  properly  explained.
      Concern had been widespread in Cyprus for  many  years  prior  to  Ms
      Rantseva's entry regarding  the  extent  to  which  young  women  had
      legally entered Cyprus to work as "artistes", but had in fact  worked
      as prostitutes. In a report later prepared by the  Cypriot  Ombudsman
      the visa scheme came to be blamed for the entry of thousands of young
      foreign  women  into  Cyprus  where  they  were  exploited  by  their
      employers under cruel living and working conditions.


   35.      The Court pointed out that Article 4 of the Convention imposed a
      positive obligation on Member States to put in place  an  appropriate
      legislative and administrative framework to ensure the practical  and
      effective protection of the rights of victims or potential victims of
      trafficking. It explained that a  Member  State's  immigration  rules
      must   address   relevant   concerns   relating   to   encouragement,
      facilitation or tolerance of trafficking.  Although  it  acknowledged
      that  adequate  Cypriot  legislation   was   in   place   prohibiting
      trafficking  and  sexual  exploitation,  the  court  concluded   that
      weaknesses in the Cypriot general legal and administrative  framework
      and in the adequacy of the immigration policy applied, had the result
      that the regime of artistes' visas in Cyprus did not afford practical
      and effective protection against  trafficking  and  exploitation.  In
      these circumstances it held that a violation  of  Article  4  of  the
      Convention had occurred.



      United Kingdom Immigration Policy

   36.      Having noted the European Court of Human  Rights  decision  that
      trafficking itself falls  within  the  scope  of  Article  4  of  the
      Convention and looked at  the  facts  in  Rantsev,  we  turn  to  the
      respondent's submission that the  IDI  in  place  in  2006  were  not
      designed  to  provide  protection  to  someone  in  the   appellant's
      circumstances. We recognise of course that the immigration policy  in
      place in 2006 was not  intended  to  reflect  the  subsequent  duties
      undertaken through ratification of the  Anti-Trafficking  Convention.
      However, the State's obligation to  ensure  practical  and  effective
      protection of the rights of potential victims of trafficking was  not
      created by this convention, and nor did it come into  being  in  2010
      with the issuing of the judgement in  Rantsev.  The  Court  explained
      what Article 4 of the Convention had  always  required.  It  is  also
      clear that the United Kingdom government had  been  aware,  since  at
      least 1990, of the need to provide  appropriate  protection,  through
      its immigration policy and rules, to domestic  workers  who  were  at
      risk of being brought into this country and then being  subjected  to
      exploitation in the form of forced labour. That conclusion  is  clear
      from the terms of the parliamentary debate held on 28  November  1990
      to which we were referred. The debate is peppered with references  to
      attempts  to  avoid  "exploitation"  of  foreign  domestic   workers.
      Examples of what was meant by that term can be seen in the references
      to; being compelled to work  excessive  hours;  sexual  abuse;  being
      virtually treated as slaves and being kept prisoner. The contribution
      made by various agencies was acknowledged, with Kalayaan and the Anti-
      Slavery  Society  being  singled  out  for  specific  mention.   What
      Parliament was seeking to provide in the course of  this  debate  was
      the very protection afforded by Article 4 of the Convention,  whether
      viewed through this lens or not.


   37.      It was in this debate that the benefits of  the  leaflet  to  be
      issued to domestic workers were canvassed.  It  was  noted  that  the
      leaflet would set out the legal rights of domestic  workers  and  the
      other rights available to them. Particular attention was drawn by the
      Government Minister to the fact that the leaflet would explain how to
      obtain treatment from the National Health Service.


   38.      It is true that there are three components  to  trafficking  for
      the purposes of this discussion:


        i.  the action of recruitment, transportation etc. of persons;
       ii.  by means of threat, force, deception etc;
      iii.  for the purpose of exploitation forced labour etc.


      Could there possibly though be  a  distinction  to  be  made  for  the
      purposes of Article 4 of the Convention, between a domestic worker who
      was trafficked for exploitation by way of forced labour  and  one  who
      arrived voluntarily and was then subjected to forced  labour?  Plainly
      the answer is there could not be. The protection afforded in terms  of
      Article 4 of the Convention  is  against  being  required  to  perform
      forced labour. It is a  right  which  all  domestic  workers  possess,
      regardless of whether the other components  of  trafficking  apply  or
      not. The fact that the appellant had been trafficked in terms  of  the
      Palermo Protocol definition cannot mean that she  was  somehow  to  be
      denied the genuine protection which the IDI sought to provide in 2006.
      It was the right in terms of Article 4 of  the  Convention  which  the
      victims of trafficking  possessed  which  the  Court  in  Rantsev  was
      addressing. It was this same concern to prevent exploitation by way of
      forced labour which Parliament addressed in  1990.  That  concern  was
      then addressed by the respondent's policy and the IDI.

   39.      We accordingly conclude that the IDI in force at the time of the
      appellant's interview in Tanzania were issued as part of the  efforts
      made by the United Kingdom government  to  combat  the  exploitation,
      including exploitation by forced labour, of foreign domestic  workers
      brought into the United Kingdom. These efforts were put in  place  in
      light of the concern which had  been  raised  both  publicly  and  in
      Parliament about the  extent  to  which  abuse  of  this  nature  was
      prevalent. To this extent these arrangements were of the  sort  which
      the Court in Rantsev explained each State must have in place in order
      to comply with Article 4 of the Convention.


   40.      In her statement as put before us, the appellant  explained  how
      the interview which she had with  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  was
      conducted. On her account no information was given to her  concerning
      her rights in the United Kingdom and no leaflet was given to her.  In
      the report from Kalayaan presented to us reference was  made  to  the
      research which they had conducted concerning  the  implementation  of
      the protective provisions provided for in the IDI. They  noted  that,
      as reported to them by domestic workers  interviewed  in  the  United
      Kingdom, the majority had not been interviewed at the entry clearance
      stage and had not received the leaflet. Their findings were given  in
      evidence to the "Home Affairs Select Committee Inquiry into The Trade
      in Human Beings: Human Trafficking in  the  UK",  which  reported  in
      2009.


   41.      On the basis of the information placed before us, we accept that
      the appellant  was  given  no  information  at  her  entry  clearance
      interview concerning her rights in the United  Kingdom  and  was  not
      given a copy of the leaflet referred to in the relevant IDI. We  also
      note that we have been  provided  with  a  copy  of  the  undertaking
      apparently accepted from Mrs Alibhai by the Entry  Clearance  Officer
      in purported compliance with the requirement of paragraph 2.6 of  the
      IDI. It does not conform to the requirements of  that  paragraph,  as
      the Entry Clearance Officer has not, as directed to  do,  caused  the
      employer to sign an undertaking  which  includes  an  acknowledgement
      that the domestic worker will be provided with a separate bedroom. As
      submitted to us by Ms Cronin, we see this as further evidence of  the
      inadequate attention which was given to  the  implementation  of  the
      respondent's protective measures by the Entry Clearance Officer.


   42.      In the circumstances which we have set out it is clear that  the
      appellant was the victim of trafficking, as defined  by  the  Palermo
      Protocol. The respondent accepts  this.  For  the  reasons  explained
      above, we agree with Ms Cronin, that in  the  appellant's  case,  the
      failure to comply with the protective arrangements set out in the IDI
      constituted a breach of the respondent's policy designed  to  provide
      protection to individuals in her  circumstances.  We  have  not  been
      adjudicating  upon  the  extent  to  which  the   visa   arrangements
      concerning foreign domestic workers, as were in place in 2006,  would
      have provided practical and effective protection  against  the  known
      risk of trafficking and exploitation. In Rantsev  the  finding  of  a
      violation of Article 4 of the Convention arose out of the  inadequacy
      of the immigration policy which was in place. In the appellant's case
      the same finding arises  out  of  the  failure  to  comply  with  the
      arrangements which were put in place to provide the protection  which
      Article 4 of the Convention guarantees.


      The Consequences of the Respondent's Breach of Policy and Article 4

   43.      The submission made on the  respondent's  behalf  was  that  any
      breach of policy or obligation was of no moment, as  the  information
      contained in the leaflet discussed would have been of no value to the
      appellant. We reject this submission. In the first place it flies  in
      the face of the very purpose for which the leaflet was  designed,  as
      explained in the Parliamentary debate to which we were  referred.  An
      examination of the leaflet also assists. At the very beginning of the
      leaflet (or booklet as  it  describes  itself)  contact  details  for
      Kalayaan are given. It explains that the organisation provides  free,
      confidential, independent  advice  and  support  on  immigration  and
      employment problems.  The  leaflet  then  proceeds  with  information
      provided under  various  headings.  The  following  headings  are  of
      particular relevance:

         i.      "Will the law protect me if a crime is  committed  against
            me?"

           Under this heading it is pointed out that everyone has  the  full
           protection of the law, whatever their nationality  or  conditions
           of stay. It points out that it     is against the law to  keep  a
           domestic worker locked in the house against their will.

       ii.  "Can my employer keep my passport?"

           Under this heading it is emphasised that the  domestic  worker's
           passport is an important document which their  employer  is  not
           permitted to keep against their will.

      iii.  "What employment rights do I have?"

           Under this heading the domestic worker is informed  that  he  or
           she has the right to be paid the agreed rate, which must  be  at
           least the national Minimum Wage, and cannot be  forced  to  work
           excessive hours.

       iv.  "What if I need medical attention?"

           Under this heading the domestic worker is informed  that  he  or
           she is entitled to free medical care and the  need  to  register
           with a doctor to obtain it is explained. It gives information on
           how to contact a doctor and explains what to do in an emergency.

   44.      The appellant was not permitted to leave the Dhanji's house  for
      long periods, her passport was kept from her, she received no payment
      and was required to work excessive hours. She was  required  to  work
      excessive hours at the Kilumanga household. She received  no  payment
      and was dependent on Mrs Kilumanga for all of her food and  clothing.
      She was told by Mrs Kilumanga that  she  could  not  receive  medical
      treatment without payment. Each of the  four  parts  of  the  leaflet
      mentioned would have provided important information to the  appellant
      which she could have used to address her circumstances. In our  view,
      Ms Cronin was  correct  to  submit  that  in  these  circumstances  a
      sufficient link has been established between the respondent's failure
      to abide by the protective obligations required of her by  Article  4
      of the Convention and the harm which the appellant came to suffer  in
      the United Kingdom. We reject the contention that this link,  flowing
      from breach of a duty imposed on the State, was somehow broken by the
      fact that Kalayaan did not  direct  the  appellant  towards  suitable
      medical care. The question is what consequence  does  the  breach  of
      Article 4 of the Convention, with these results, have in the  current
      process?


   45.      The First-tier Tribunal Judge rejected the suggestion  that  the
      appellant would be at risk of being re-trafficked in Tanzania. We are
      not persuaded that this finding is open to review by us  and  in  any
      event we see no reason to think that any risk of this sort which  the
      appellant might be subject to would  be  such  as  to  re-engage  the
      United Kingdom's obligations in terms of Article 4 of the Convention.
      We therefore find it difficult to  agree  with  Ms  Cronin  that  the
      removal of the appellant would constitute a  further  breach  of  the
      protective obligations inherent  in  Article  4  of  the  Convention.
      However, it was argued that the principle of reparation  was  engaged
      in light of the violation of the appellant's rights which had already
      occurred and that this  impacted  on  the  question  of  whether  the
      appellant should be removed.

      The Duty to Provide Reparation

   46.      Ms Cronin's submission was that the State has an  obligation  to
      make reparation for the consequence of its breaches of  international
      law, including human rights violations for which it  is  responsible.
      She cited Oppenheim's International Law, 9th Edition at page 528. She
      also drew attention to the general principles identified in the Study
      concerning the rights to restitution, compensation and rehabilitation
      for victims of gross  violations  of  human  rights  and  fundamental
      freedoms by the Special Rapporteur to the United  Nations  Commission
      on Human Rights, published in 1993. The 4th principle identified was:

           "4. Reparation should respond to the needs  and  wishes  of  the
           victims. It  shall  be  proportionate  to  the  gravity  of  the
           violations  and  the   resulting   harm   and   shall   include:
           restitution,  compensation,  rehabilitation,  satisfaction   and
           guarantees of non-repetition."

      We would not consider these propositions  to  be  controversial,  nor
      were they challenged by the respondent. In developing  this  argument
      Ms Cronin went on to refer  to  the  report  by  the  United  Nations
      Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons,  especially  women  and
      children, submitted to the seventeenth session of the United  Nations
      Human Rights  Council  in  June  2011.  That  report  included  draft
      recommendations  on  the  basic  principles  on    the  right  to  an
      effective remedy for victims of trafficking. Paragraph 24 was in the
      following terms:

           "24. Recovery is a crucial form  of  reparation  for  trafficked
           persons, which   includes medical  and  psychological  care,  as
           well as legal and social services.  By  definition,  trafficking
           often  involves  physical  and  sexual  violence,  physical  and
           emotional coercion, threats and intimidation, which  has  severe
           physical and psychological  consequences  on  the  victims.  The
           Recommended Principles and Guidelines on Human Rights and  Human
           Trafficking are  thus explicit in acknowledging that  the  right
           to fair and adequate remedies includes the means for as  full  a
           rehabilitation as possible."

      The 2011 report was followed up in August of  the  same  year  by  the
      Special Rapporteur's report to the sixty-sixth session of the  General
      Assembly of the United Nations, in which she again drew  attention  to
      the fact that whilst   discussions on the right to an effective remedy
      for victims of trafficking tended to focus on compensation,  this  was
      just one aspect of the right,  which  also  encompassed  recovery.  In
      paragraph 17 of her report she stated the following:

            "17. Recovery includes medical and psychological care,  as  well
      as legal and     social services. As trafficking often  causes  severe
      physical and psychological   consequences    for the victims, recovery
      is a crucial form of   remedy."

      The Appellant's Health

   47.      In order to understand the import of these propositions for  the
      case brought by the appellant it is necessary to revisit the evidence
      concerning her health. Some evidence concerning the appellant's state
      of health was led before the First-tier Tribunal Judge. She  set  out
      her findings on this topic at  paragraph  37  of  her  determination.
      These included the finding that although the appellant suffered  from
      tuberculosis and some of the after-effects  of  this  condition,  the
      disease had been "successfully treated". She also held that there was
      no evidence to show that the  appellant  would  not  have  access  in
      Tanzania to the medicinal and on-going treatment she receives in  the
      United Kingdom. It was argued that the Judge  had  misunderstood  the
      medical evidence before her but in any event had not considered it in
      the context of the obligation of reparation arising out of  a  breach
      of Article 4 of the Convention.

   48.      Substantial additional evidence was tendered on the  appellant's
      behalf in advance of the error of law hearing held in February  2012.
      That evidence included the following medical reports:

        i. a report dated 10 August 2011, from Dr Roxanne  Agnew-Davies,  a
           Clinical Psychologist specialising in the field of the impact of
           violence or trauma on women's mental health,


       ii. a report dated 20 January  2012,  from  Dr  Robert  Davidson,  a
           Consultant Physician at the Lister Unit for Infectious  Diseases
           and Tropical medicine at the Northpark Hospital in Harrow,

      iii. a report dated  27  February  2012,  from  Ms  Shelly  Lees,  an
           anthropologist  whose  work  has  included  an  examination   of
           Tanzanian culture and gender issues, as well as  refugee  health
           in the United Kingdom,

      The additional evidence was tendered in terms of Rule 15(2)(a) of  the
Upper       Tribunal Rules of Procedure, an adjournment for the  purpose  of
obtaining   additional evidence having been granted  on  27  July  2011.  No
objection was    taken to the appellant relying on  any  of  the  additional
evidence adduced and   Ms Cronin relied heavily on  the  additional  medical
evidence.

   49.      The evidence now available gives a much fuller  picture  of  the
      appellant's health than was before the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  Dr
      Davidson was responsible for the appellant's care from  the  time  of
      her first admission in October  2008,  when  she  presented  as  very
      unwell and thin.  X-ray  examination  demonstrated  the  presence  of
      extensive tuberculosis throughout her left lung, with  changes  which
      must have been present for several months and which were described as
      very severe.  She required inpatient treatment for a  period  of  two
      weeks  and  thereafter  attended  for  regular  outpatient  treatment
      throughout the rest of 2008 and until the middle of  2009,  by  which
      stage her condition was confirmed as irreversible. In March 2010  the
      appellant again required hospital admission, when the left upper lobe
      of her lung  was  found  to  be  extremely  abnormal  and  completely
      collapsed.  A bronchoscopy identified that the left  upper  lobe  and
      lingula airways had completely disappeared.  There was no possibility
      of re-expansion of the destroyed upper lobe.   Subsequent  outpatient
      re-assessment led to the conclusion that she  has  a  persistent  and
      permanent left upper lobe lung collapse, due to obliteration  of  her
      airways.  This has led to a troublesome cough, intractable  pain  and
      breathlessness. Dr Davidson reported that the  appellant's  case  was
      unusually severe in its progression,  having  caused  more  permanent
      lung damage than he would see in 95% of his  cases.  In  such  severe
      cases he observed that he would usually see  some  other  aggravating
      factor, such as the patient sleeping rough.  He  expressed  the  view
      that had treatment been started, perhaps as little  as  three  months
      earlier, it would have been likely that a  considerable  function  of
      the left lung would have been saved.


   50.      Dr Davidson also provided evidence as to the prognosis  for  the
      appellant. He explained that she  will  be  susceptible  to  repeated
      chest infections in the years ahead.  He noted that in the  event  of
      such infections being contracted they  would  need  to  be  carefully
      controlled and monitored so as  to  reduce  any  risk  of  associated
      complications.  The medical attention  necessary  would  need  to  be
      highly specialised because of the complexity of the appellant's case.
       She will be restricted in the physical tasks she can perform because
      of the breathlessness which results from exertion. His view was  that
      it was very unlikely that  the  appellant  will  live  a  normal  and
      productive life given her respiratory symptoms and her  chest  pains.
      He estimated that she will need two to five  courses  of  antibiotics
      each year to prevent severe infection  and  is  likely  to  have  one
      hospital admission each year for life threatening infection.   In  Dr
      Davidson's opinion, there is  a  50%  probability  of  the  appellant
      requiring to have either the left upper lobe removed  or  the  entire
      left lung removed within the next five years. Even in the absence  of
      thoracic  surgery,  the  appellant   will   require   very   frequent
      attendances at a thoracic centre for assessment in order  to  monitor
      whether she has developed pulmonary hypertension due to chronic  lung
      disease and to treat  intercurrent  infections.   He  explained  that
      pulmonary hypertension leads to a form of heart failure which results
      from chronic lung disease, but can be avoided if the lung disease  is
      carefully monitored and treated on a specialist basis.


   51.      In her report Dr Agnew-Davies explained  that  she  conducted  a
      number of lengthy interviews with the  appellant,  during  which  she
      applied a range of standardised psychological tests.  Her  conclusion
      was that the appellant  is  suffering  from  a  severe,  complex  and
      chronic form of post-traumatic distress disorder,  which  is  further
      complicated by a severe, chronic, major depressive disorder  with  an
      unspecified  time  of  onset.  Dr  Agnew-Davies  concluded  that  the
      conditions which the appellant suffers from render  her  at  enduring
      risk of exploitation, that she should be  regarded  as  a  vulnerable
      adult and that she will remain so indefinitely, such that at  present
      in the United Kingdom she is entitled to  support  according  to  the
      safe-guarding procedures of the  local  authority.   Dr  Agnew-Davies
      expressed the opinion that in light of the appellant's mental  health
      problems and consequent psychosocial vulnerability, she will need  an
      enduring period of safety without risk  of  disruption  in  order  to
      maximise her rehabilitative potential.   Her  opinion  was  that  the
      appellant would require long term treatment including, at some  point
      in the future, a referral to a specialist trauma focused service such
      as is provided by various specialist centres in the United Kingdom.


   52.      Dr Davidson is head of the largest tuberculosis service  in  the
      United Kingdom. In addition he has substantial experience of  working
      in various  different  African  countries,  to  the  extent  that  he
      considered himself to be very aware of the extent  to  which  medical
      facilities  are  available  in  East  Africa.   He   explained   that
      thoracotomy and lobectomy are hazardous, major operations even in the
      United Kingdom.  He did not expect these operations to  be  available
      to be safely carried out in most parts of Tanzania. Were  surgery  to
      be required, it  would  have  to  be  done  urgently  if  not  as  an
      emergency.  He observed that operations done in  these  circumstances
      carry higher risk.  He noted that if urgent surgery was required,  it
      would be necessary very speedily to refer the appellant to  a  centre
      where such surgery could be safely carried out.  In  light  of  these
      features Dr Davison concluded that it was unlikely that the appellant
      will have a normal life expectancy if she is not looked  after  in  a
      city where thoracic medical and surgery expertise is at hand. Without
      expert thoracic and infectious diseases care she  would  have  a  50%
      chance of dying before the age of 50.  With  expert  care,  including
      thoracic surgery such as would be available in the United Kingdom, he
      estimated a 90%  chance  that  the  appellant  would  live  into  her
      seventies.


   53.      In the report  from  Ms  Shelly  Lees,  she  explained  that  in
      addition to publishing on Tanzanian culture and gender issues, she is
      a trained nurse and has worked as a nurse tutor in Tanzania.  She  is
      familiar with the services provided by  hospitals  in  Tanzania.  She
      reported that mental health services in  Tanzania  are  of  extremely
      poor quality, that there is a severe shortage of health workers  with
      mental health experience and no expertise is available in trauma care
      in the public health service.   Mental  health  problems  are  highly
      stigmatised  in  Tanzania.  In   relation   to   the   treatment   of
      tuberculosis, Ms Lees  acknowledged  that  there  is  good  treatment
      available in relation to basic levels of the  disease  but  expressed
      the view that there is  a  complete  lack  of  the  more  specialised
      treatment which the appellant now requires.  She  drew  attention  to
      recent information concerning  the  poor  availability  of  essential
      drugs at government hospitals and reported that  there  is  only  one
      cardiothoracic centre in Tanzania and that it only has the  expertise
      to conduct uncomplicated thoracic surgery.  The centre does not  have
      the expertise to conduct a complicated  anaesthetic  procedure.   For
      these reasons she expressed the opinion that the appellant would  not
      be able to have the thoracic surgery contemplated by Dr  Davidson  in
      Tanzania.


   54.      An up to date  report,  dated  6  March  2013,  noted  that  the
      appellant had  required  hospital  admissions  to  treat  respiratory
      infection in both January and February 2013, on  the  later  occasion
      being admitted to the critical care unit.


   55.       In  the  light  of  the  fuller  information  available  to  us
      concerning the appellant's health it seems clear  that  the  findings
      made by the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  to  which  we  referred  in
      paragraph 47, are incorrect.


   56.      Ms Cronin's submission on behalf of the appellant was  that  her
      medical conditions were  attributable  to  her  mistreatment  by  her
      traffickers. The severity of her  condition  being  similar  to  that
      found in persons who had been sleeping rough struck a chord with  the
      manner in which she had lived in the Dhanji household. There  was  no
      challenge to these submissions on the part of the respondent, and  it
      seems clear, that at the very least, the appellant's  lung  condition
      grew much worse during the time she lived with her traffickers.


   57.      In our  view,  one  of  the  most  significant  aspects  of  the
      appellant's medical history was her late presentation. The  appellant
      had been complaining of being unwell since  she  was  living  in  the
      Dhanji household. It was only in October 2008, when she  was  plainly
      severely ill, that  she  was  taken  to  an  accident  and  emergency
      department by Mrs Kilumanga. It is obvious, both from the appellant's
      own statements and from Dr Davidson's report on her  condition,  that
      she must have been very unwell and weak for a considerable period  of
      time. The appellant claims that  she  asked  Mrs  Kilumanga  on  many
      occasions about medical assistance but was always told that she could
      not get help without paying for it.


   58.      Given the obvious and serious condition which was developing, we
      accept  without  hesitation  that  the  appellant  did  wish  medical
      assistance. In his report Dr Davidson commented  that  the  appellant
      was a model patient who was adherent and co-operative at every stage.
      She gave no indication of a tendency  to  self-neglect,  such  as  he
      would expect in the case of a person who presented  at  such  a  late
      stage  of  their  illness.  In  our  view,  the  only  comprehensible
      explanation for the appellant never obtaining  any  form  of  medical
      help is the one which she gives herself. This brings into very  sharp
      focus the effect of the failure on the part of  the  Entry  Clearance
      Officer to inform the appellant  that  she  had  the  right  to  free
      medical treatment in the United Kingdom. The tragedy, as Dr  Davidson
      expressed it, is that had she been  able  to  seek  treatment  a  few
      months earlier her lung function could probably have been  saved  and
      the very worrying future consequences avoided.


   59.      In these circumstances the submission made was that there was an
      obligation to facilitate recovery  encompassed  within  the  duty  of
      reparation, and that this should lead to the appellant being able  to
      remain in the United Kingdom. If she did so she could access  medical
      facilities suitable for her needs which, if not capable of  remedying
      her health, would at least permit it  to  remain  stable.  Given  the
      extent to which the  appellant's  health  has  deteriorated  and  the
      danger to her life which is present,  there  is  a  clear  underlying
      sense of justice in  the  propositions  advanced  by  Ms  Cronin.  In
      addition, the concept of rehabilitation, or recovery, as part  of  an
      effective remedy for victims  of  trafficking  is  supported  by  the
      various references to the  reports  of  the  United  Nations  Special
      Rapporteurs to which our attention was drawn. These  reports  provide
      helpful guidance on the ways in which States should  be  expected  to
      respond to human rights violations. The reference in  the  report  to
      the sixty-sixth  session  of  the  General  Assembly  to  the  severe
      physical and psychological  harm  caused  to  victims,  resulting  in
      recovery being seen as a crucial form of remedy,  seems  particularly
      apposite in the appellant's case. The more difficult question is what
      remedy is  the  Upper  Tribunal,  as  a  body  governed  by  statute,
      empowered to  provide?  This  question  can  be  returned  to  having
      considered the remaining branch of the appellant's submissions.

      The Anti-Trafficking Convention

   60.       The  respondent's  submission  was  that  the  Anti-Trafficking
      Convention had no part to play in the appellant's case, since it  was
      not ratified by the United Kingdom until 2008, at a point  after  the
      appellant's  entry  into  the  United  Kingdom.  In  our  view   this
      submission fails to engage with the terms and purpose  of  the  Anti-
      Trafficking Convention.  In  ratifying  this  convention  the  United
      Kingdom government bound itself not only to  take  steps  to  prevent
      trafficking but also to take various steps to provide  assistance  to
      victims of trafficking within this country. It is also  important  to
      recognise two  further  points.  Firstly,  after  the  appellant  was
      referred to the National Referral Mechanism for Potential Victims  of
      Trafficking, a decision was made on 25 November 2010 that there  were
      conclusive grounds to believe that she was a victim  of  trafficking.
      Secondly, in terms of the unchallenged determination  of  the  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge, the appellant was also trafficked internally  by
      Mrs Kilumanga (paragraph 24(i)). The  respondent's  duty  to  provide
      assistance under the Anti-Trafficking Convention was engaged no later
      than the  point  at  which  a  decision  was  made  that  there  were
      conclusive grounds to believe that the  appellant  was  a  victim  of
      trafficking.


   61.      The purposes of  the  Anti-Trafficking  Convention  include,  to
      protect the human rights of the victims of trafficking and to  design
      a framework for the protection and assistance of victims  (Article  1
      Paragraph 1b). It  applies  to  all  forms  of  trafficking,  whether
      national or transnational (Article 2). It  requires  all  Parties  to
      adopt such measures as may be necessary to assist  victims  in  their
      physical, psychological and social recovery (Article 12 Paragraph 1).
      It requires all Parties to issue  a  renewable  residence  permit  to
      victims if their stay is necessary owing to their personal  situation
      (Article 14). It provides that when  a  Party  returns  a  victim  to
      another State, such return shall be with due regard for  the  rights,
      safety and dignity of that person (Article 16 Paragraph 2).


   62.      As a victim of trafficking the appellant is owed certain  duties
      by the respondent under the Anti-Trafficking Convention. She has been
      provided with medical care to assist with  her  recovery  but  it  is
      clear that she will continue to require on-going care, in relation to
      both her physical health and her mental health.  Article  14  of  the
      Anti-Trafficking Convention obliges the  respondent  to  provide  the
      appellant  with  a  residence  permit  if  she  considers  that   the
      appellant's stay is necessary owing to  her  personal  situation.  Ms
      Cronin submitted that a  victim's  personal  situation  must  include
      consideration of  his  or  her  medical  needs.  This  submission  is
      consistent with what is said at  paragraph  184  of  the  Explanatory
      Report to the Anti-Trafficking Convention, where it is stated that:


           "184. The personal situation requirement takes  in  a  range  of
           situations, depending on whether  it  is  the  victim's  safety,
           state of health, family situation or some other factor which has
           to be taken into account."


      We accordingly accept Ms Cronin's submission on this point. It is also
      helpful to take account of what  is  said  in  paragraph  183  of  the
      Explanatory Report concerning what it is about the  victim's  personal
      circumstances that should engage the Party's  obligation  to  grant  a
      residence permit. It is in these terms:


           "183. Thus, for the victim to be granted a residence permit, and
           depending on the approach the Party adopts, either the  victim's
           personal  circumstances  must  be  such   that   it   would   be
           unreasonable to compel them to leave the     national territory,
           or there has to be an  investigation  or  prosecution  with  the
           victim co-operating with the authorities. Parties likewise  have
           the  possibility  of   issuing   residence   permits   in   both
           situations."


   63.      We heard submissions in relation to  the  severity  of  harm  or
      anticipated harm which would be necessary show a breach of Article  3
      of the Convention, and the considerations which need to be taken into
      account if such a claim is based on a lack of medical facilities in a
      receiving country, under reference to the cases of Sufi  and  Elmi  v
      The United Kingdom (2012) E.H.R.R. 209, MSS v Belgium [2011] ECHR 108
      and N v The United Kingdom (2008) 47 E.H.R.R. 39. We saw force in  Ms
      Cronin's submission that the questions in  the  present  case,  which
      arise out of the finding that Article 4 of the  Convention  has  been
      engaged and the finding that the duties of assistance under the Anti-
      Trafficking Convention are engaged, do not fall to be  determined  by
      the approach taken in the case of N v The  United  Kingdom.  For  one
      thing, the guidance given in paragraph 183 of the Explanatory  Report
      seems to contemplate a quite different standard from  the  very  high
      one  described  in  N  v  The  United  Kingdom.   In  addition,   the
      appellant's circumstances and the  basis  of  her  claims  are  quite
      different from those in the cases mentioned. We are dealing  with  an
      admitted victim of trafficking in relation to whom we have held there
      has been a breach of the obligations imposed on  the  United  Kingdom
      government by Article 4  of  the  Convention,  which  breach  we  are
      satisfied has exposed  the  victim  to  harm  in  this  country.  The
      appellant's  entitlement   to   reparation   and   the   respondent's
      obligations under the Anti-Trafficking Convention are  considerations
      which had no counterpart in the other cases under discussion.


   64.       It seems to us that the duty owed under Article 14 of the Anti-
      Trafficking Convention may overlap with the duty owed  under  Article
      16 of that convention. Ms Cronin submitted that the  duty  to  return
      with due regard to "dignity" involved the consideration of a right in
      which other protective  rights,  such  as  safety  and  health,  were
      subsumed. She therefore submitted that consideration of matters  such
      as these would inform what it meant  to  return  a  person  with  due
      regard for their dignity. Although  no  authority  was  available  to
      assist in understanding what dignity meant in these circumstances, it
      seemed to us that the analysis provided by Ms Cronin was helpful.  In
      our view, it is appropriate to start from the appreciation  that  the
      appellant's medical condition is linked to the breach of  her  rights
      under Article 4 of the Convention, in  other  words  that  the  State
      should recognise a  degree  of  responsibility  for  it.   From  this
      starting point it is difficult to see that to remove the appellant at
      this stage, when she suffers from such serious  physical  and  mental
      health problems, from the  care  of  the  medical  regime  which  she
      presently benefits from,  and  to  return  her  to  a  country  where
      facilities for the proper care of her present and  likely  needs  are
      absent, to the extent  that  her  life  expectancy  will  be  greatly
      reduced, can be seen as a return with due regard for her dignity. The
      reality of the appellant's situation is that she is a very ill  woman
      who will require on-going care of a specialised nature and is  likely
      to have to undergo major surgery of  a  dangerous  sort.  It  is  now
      clear, from the combined evidence of Dr Davidson and  Ms  Lees,  that
      the sort of specialist  care  which  the  appellant  will  definitely
      require on an on-going basis, as well as the  specialist  care  which
      she  is  likely  to  need  on  an  emergency  basis  to  combat  life
      threatening infection and the specialist care which she is likely  to
      need in the context of the anticipated major surgery, is unlikely  to
      be available to her in Tanzania. For the same reasons, it is  equally
      difficult to  resist  the  conclusion  that,  having  regard  to  the
      appellant's personal situation, it would be  unreasonable  to  compel
      her to leave the United Kingdom at this time.

Conclusions

   65.      The considerations which arise in the appellant's case out of an
      examination of  Articles  12,  14  and  16  of  the  Anti-Trafficking
      Convention can be taken along with the considerations which arise out
      of  her  case  brought  under  Article  4  of  the  Convention.   The
      respondent's reasons for refusal letter was dated 26  November  2010,
      one day after it had been decided that she was to  be  treated  as  a
      victim of trafficking. That question of course had been live with the
      National Referral Mechanism for the  previous  six  months.  Although
      these facts are  all  referred  to  in  the  respondent's  letter  of
      refusal, there is no  reference  at  all  to  any  suggestion  of  an
      obligation on the respondent's part, either under Article  4  of  the
      Convention or under the Anti-Trafficking Convention. The only context
      in which Article 4 of the Convention was considered was in connection
      with a risk of re-trafficking in Tanzania. Although  it  was  pointed
      out that there were non-governmental agencies working in Tanzania  to
      provide assistance to victims of trafficking, no mention was made  of
      the obligations which the United Kingdom had undertaken in  terms  of
      Article 12, 14 or 16 of the Anti-Trafficking Convention. Indeed, this
      convention was not mentioned in any capacity, despite it being stated
      that  the  question  of  whether  the  appellant  should  be  granted
      discretionary  leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  had  been
      considered.


   66.      The respondent's decisions to  refuse  to  grant  the  appellant
      leave and to decline to accept that she was in need  of  humanitarian
      protection were made without taking account of the history of  events
      as we have held them to be. In particular, the decisions  were  taken
      without taking account of the link between the appellant's precarious
      state of health and the breach of  the  respondent's  own  protective
      obligations in terms of policy and Article 4 of the Convention.  They
      were taken without consideration of the  duties  which  were  engaged
      under Articles 12, 14 and 16 of the Anti-Trafficking  Convention.  We
      therefore hold,  in  terms  of  section  86(3)  of  the  Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, that the decision  appealed  against
      was not in accordance with the law.


   67.      In these circumstances we find  the  comments  by  Lord  Justice
      Carnwath in R(S) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2007]
      INLR 450, as approved  by  the  court  in  KA  (Afghanistan)  v  Home
      Secretary (CA) [2013] 1 WLR 615 at paragraphs 12 and  13   to  be  of
      value and application. Whilst it is not  open  to  this  Tribunal  to
      declare that the respondent must grant the appellant leave to  remain
      indefinitely or for any particular  period,  it  is  open  to  us  to
      determine that a legally material  factor  in  the  exercise  of  the
      respondent's  discretion  on  that  matter  is  the   correction   of
      injustice. It seems to  us  that  injustice  would  be  done  if  the
      appellant were to be returned  without  having  the  benefit  of  the
      recovery aspect of the reparation to which she  is  entitled  arising
      from the breach of Article 4 of the Convention. Separately, it  seems
      to us that to return the appellant to Tanzania in her  present  state
      of  health  would,  having  regard  to  her  personal  situation,  be
      unreasonable, just as to do so would not be in  conformity  with  the
      obligation to return with due regard for her dignity.


   68.      We will therefore allow the appeal by re-making the decision  of
      the First-tier Tribunal Judge to the extent that we  hold  there  has
      been a breach of the  appellant's  rights  under  Article  4  of  the
      Convention and to the extent that we hold her  removal  would  engage
      the respondent's duties under Articles 12, 14 and  16  of  the  Anti-
      Trafficking  Convention.  In  these  circumstances,  drawing  on  the
      approach taken in the case of AA (Afghanistan) v Secretary  of  State
      for the Home Department [2007] EWCA Civ. 12, we will make a direction
      under section 87 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002,
      directing the Secretary of State to grant a period of  leave  to  the
      appellant, the length of which should be decided upon in light of the
      determination by this Tribunal, and of  any  further  representations
      made by the appellant within a period of 21 days.




   69.      We would like to conclude by thanking  both  Ms  Cronin  and  Ms
      O'Bryan for the considerable assistance  and  guidance  given  to  us
      during the course of the hearing in this case.

Signed                                  Date: 13 June 2013

Lord Turnbull







                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-KH-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/16743/2010


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 27 February 2012                           |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

                                     EK
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms K Cronin and Mr A Slatter, instructed by North
                    Kensington Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr G Saunders, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                        DETERMINATION AND DIRECTIONS


1.    The  appellant  is  a  national  of  Tanzania.   She  appealed  to  an
    Immigration Judge against the Secretary of State's decision of 16  July
    2010 to remove her from the United Kingdom by way of  directions.   The
    appellant claimed to be a victim of trafficking and to be  at  risk  on
    return to Tanzania.  The judge dismissed her appeal in all regards.  An
    initial application for  permission  to  appeal  was  refused,  but  on
    renewal permission was granted, reference being  made  specifically  to
    arguable issues in respect of the judge's findings in  the  context  of
    the Convention against Trafficking in Human Beings and Article 4 of the
    European  Convention  on  Human  Rights.   He  was  grateful  to  those
    instructing Ms Cronin and Mr Slatter for reconstituting the Home Office
    bundle, and he had been  able  to  read  that.   He  did  not  seek  an
    adjournment on the issue of whether or not there was an error of law in
    the determination.

2.    After consideration we stated that we found there to be errors of  law
    with respect to grounds 1 and 2, the two issues adumbrated in the grant
    of permission, but said that we wished to hear submissions in  relation
    to the other matters.

3.    Ms Cronin argued first that the  judge  had  erred  on  the  issue  of
    whether or not the appellant was a member of a particular social group.
      The  judge  had  dealt  with  this  point  at  paragraph  24  of  her
    determination.  She had concluded that the group in question must  have
    a distinct identity in the society in question and found that that  was
    not the case here.  Earlier on  she  had  accepted  that  Tanzania  had
    legislation expressly  defining  certain  protections  for  trafficking
    victims, so it was argued that her identity was established as a matter
    of  law  in  Tanzania.   There  was  a  legal  definition   and   legal
    undertakings by the Tanzanian Government and reference was made also to
    the US Watch List Reports and the  states'  responses  to  trafficking.
    They had a visibility and an identity and they were a cohort people who
    were owed responsibilities and obligations by their respective  states.



4.    Ms Cronin also argued that the conclusions of the Tribunal in SB  were
    inconsistent with what had been said by the Supreme Court in Fornah and
    K in that  the  former  appeared  to  suggest  that  the  Qualification
    Directive was to be read as providing two sets of criteria  to  be  met
    whereas the House of Lords said there was only one.  It  was,  however,
    less relevant in this case,  as  on  the  appellant's  argument  either
    subdivision in the Qualification Directive would be met.

5.    Ms Cronin relied on what was set  out  in  the  skeleton  argument  as
    well.  It was clear from the grant of leave that the  Tribunal  was  of
    the view that this was essentially a human rights claim and  there  was
    an easy fit of this case into the human rights  jurisprudence,  so  she
    had not emphasised the asylum claim which was a less easy fit, although
    she did not concede it.

6.    Ms Cronin went on to make submissions with  regard  to  the  issue  of
    harm  as  dealt  with  at  paragraphs  25  and  26   of   the   judge's
    determination.  There  she  had  considered  effective  protection  and
    relocation.  The  errors  here  were  essentially  material  Wednesbury
    errors.  The judge had accepted that the appellant had been  mistreated
    by the two families involved in the trafficking.  It was necessary then
    to see if there was any material change  in  circumstances  on  return,
    according to the test set out  in  the  Qualification  Directive.   The
    judge had not approached the issue of future harm by reference  to  the
    proven existence of past harm.   If  that  had  been  done,  she  would
    probably have found, in respect of the two families, that they remained
    in a position to do harm to the appellant  as  they  had  done  in  the
    United Kingdom.  She had less capacity to deal with that risk in future
    than she had had before she left for the United Kingdom, as her decline
    in health made  her  more  open  to  exploitation.   This  was  a  real
    difference from the context of the  facts  of  the  case.   The  Dhanji
    family would have a real interest in exacting some retribution from the
    appellant.  She feared violence.  The Tribunal could find it was a real
    fear but not objectively well-founded, but there was  other  harm  they
    could do.  The judge had erred in limiting her consideration to a  risk
    of violence and not addressing, for example, harm by the potential they
    had to charge the appellant with dishonesty  which  would  redress  the
    public shame to them and turn the tables. There was evidence of  police
    corruption and that had been accepted and that was a working basis  for
    the effecting of those harms.  The reasoning as to  why  there  was  no
    incentive to harm her was marred by Wednesbury error, in that it failed
    to consider the enormity of what she had done  to  the  Dhanji  family.
    There was a huge gulf  between  her  and  them.   They  had  both  been
    arrested and interviewed by the police and adverse findings in  respect
    of them had been made by the Employment Tribunal,  and  this  had  been
    publicised in Tanzania.  The Dhanjis were elderly and had had  to  move
    back to Tanzania and lost their carers allowance in the United  Kingdom
    and other advantages of living here so they had lost a  lot  and  these
    losses were continuing.  The sting of the events would continue  to  be
    felt by them.

7.    As regards the question of any risk of further loss to the Dhanjis  in
    Tanzania, it was argued that the judge on the evidence could  not  rule
    out their desire to rectify the image created.  Newspaper articles went
    up to 2010.  Their shame had a currency therefore.  There had  been  no
    deliberation on that point in the determination.  There would be likely
    to be an ongoing desire for retribution.  The Employment  Tribunal  had
    found that they  had  a  relative,  their  solicitor,  using  underhand
    methods to secure the  appellant's  removal  from  the  United  Kingdom
    before she could claim  against  them,  and  they  therefore  could  be
    regarded as a manipulative family.

8.    As regards the appellant's claimed fear of Mrs  Kilumanga,  Ms  Cronin
    accepted on the evidence before the judge that there was no basis for a
    challenge, although she had more recent evidence.

9.    It was also argued that there was an error  in  paragraph  25  of  the
    judge's determination  in  dealing  with  the  potential  risk  of  the
    appellant being exploited or harmed  or  attacked  on  account  of  her
    assumed wealth.  The judge seemed to assume there would be  no  problem
    although not all newspapers said that she had not received  the  award.
    They assumed that she would get it.  The Tribunal was referred to pages
    114 and 116 of the bundle referring to the Dhanjis being  "yet  to  pay
    up", and the judge had  also  failed  to  consider  page  112  and  the
    compounding of the initial trafficking by the second  trafficker.   The
    appellant was a person who would be easy pickings and would not be able
    to take care of the money and would be  easily  relieved  of  it.   She
    therefore had a potential damages award and a publicity campaign by the
    second exploitative employer making the award a liability and a  future
    risk on  return.   The  judge  had  failed  to  evaluate  the  evidence
    properly.

10.   Paragraphs 26 and 27 contained clear Wednesbury errors.  There was  no
    consideration of the appellant's vulnerability  and  powerlessness  and
    the power of the two families  and  no  consideration  of  her  serious
    medical condition which was relevant to her ability to relocate.  There
    was no consideration of the availability of medical  treatment  in  the
    areas  of  proposed  relocation.  The  judge  failed  to  revisit   the
    background evidence set out at  paragraphs  18  to  21  concerning  the
    effectiveness of state protection and relocation.  The  judge  referred
    to the fact that the appellant suffered from tuberculosis, but did  not
    deal with her illness.  At paragraph 20 she failed to consider that the
    evidence there was not a commendation for effective  protection  but  a
    rebuke.  Tanzania had demonstrated a failure over a period to show  any
    proper indication of seeking to improve and set out minimum standards.

11.   In his submissions Mr Saunders  argued,  with  respect  to  particular
    social group, that if the appellant was in a social group it was formed
    by the harm she had suffered.  The judge was right  to  deal  with  the
    matter as she had done.  The appellant's group did not have a  distinct
    identity.  It was necessary to consider how she was trafficked.  It was
    accepted that she had been trafficked, but it was not by the usual  way
    of gangs and commercial gain but a series of unfortunate  circumstances
    and a gradual process which is far different when one  considered  risk
    as a consequence of her identity then and a gang  situation.   She  was
    not identifiable as a person who had previously been  trafficked.   Her
    capacities were now much diminished due to  health  problems  and  this
    would impact on her ability to resist what might befall her,  but  that
    did not make her a likely trafficking target.

12.   As regards the feared danger from the family, the evidence  was  still
    very much as it had been at interview.  The appellant  had  said  "they
    would wouldn't they".  In the bundle at page 342, paragraph  3.2,  this
    was an assumption too far.  It was perhaps the case that they would but
    there was no real indication.  There was, as  the  judge  had  said  at
    paragraph 25(i)(c), no evidence of the  dismissal  of  the  appellant's
    aunt from Mrs Alibhai, her employment being a direct consequence of the
    appellant's departure from employment with Mr and  Mrs  Dhanji.   There
    was therefore no general risk of re-trafficking shown or risk from  the
    family beyond an assumption.  As regards the  issue  of  the  appellant
    being perceived to be wealthy, she  would  return  to  poverty  as  her
    parents were subsistence farmers.   If she lived like  them  on  return
    then that  is  what  she  would  be,  a  poor  person  with  diminished
    capacities, shy, humble and forlorn, it was accepted.  She would not be
    returning in triumph with a lot of money nor would she be perceived  as
    such.  As regards the authorities  in  Tanzania  and  their  duties  to
    trafficked women, the judge's findings on that were sound.  The picture
    was mixed and the appellant would have potentially or probably recourse
    to  her  family  albeit  in  some  difficulty  materially.   She  would
    therefore have access to some medical facilities.  An Article  3  claim
    on the basis of human rights breaches was her best claim but there  was
    sufficient medical care and  the  test  of  whether  the  standards  in
    Tanzania were those of the United Kingdom was not the legal test.   The
    test set out in D was not met.

13.   By way of reply Ms Cronin argued that in their very nature  Wednesbury
    errors would not address outcomes but it was rather a question  of  the
    process than the conclusion.  It was  argued  that  in  order  for  the
    determination to be sustainable and lawful, it  was  necessary  to  see
    evidence of deliberation on the matters  on  the  part  of  the  judge.
    Relevant matters had not been considered so it was essentially a matter
    of emissions and an evaluation by  the  judge  which  were  all  highly
    material.

14.   The issue of particular social group was relevant in  the  context  of
    the Qualification Directive.  The people in that  group  had  a  common
    background of being trafficked and this could  not  be  changed.   They
    also had a distinct identity.  They were defined in the legislation  so
    they were defined as being different.

15.   Asylum was not at foreground, but there were matters of moment  and  a
    consistent argument and it was a simple issue in law.  There was a  lot
    of case law. Particular social group  is  not  a  ground  for  creating
    artificial barriers within it.  It was a failsafe ground.  This was not
    a gang type case but was typical of domestic worker trafficking, so  it
    was consistent with the type of trafficking and typical of the risk  to
    domestic workers.  Publicity identified her as a person  who  had  been
    trafficked and she had a clear public profile.

16.   Ms Cronin referred to Ms Lea's report which had not  been  before  the
    judge.  This showed that there were friends in Tanzania who  were  well
    aware of the case and  it  had  been  publicised  by  Tanzania  women's
    organisations and the appellant perceived as returning well off.  There
    were therefore material errors of law in the determination.

17.   At that point Ms Cronin realised that she had  in  fact  been  working
    from the wrong set of grounds and it was agreed  that  she  could  deal
    with the other matters after evidence was  taken  from  the  witnesses.
    The reason why we decided to take the evidence was that although we had
    not yet concluded on the issue of error of law, they had attended today
    on the basis that it was proposed to be a rolled up hearing, and  money
    and time would be wasted if their evidence was not taken.  For  reasons
    which we shall set out subsequently, we do not set out  their  evidence
    here.

18.   With regard to the other grounds,  Ms  Cronin  noted  the  distinction
    between domestic and foreign cases as regards evaluating whether return
    is  lawful.   She  referred  to  the  lack  of  jurisprudence  in   the
    proceedings established from 15 February 2010 with regard to preserving
    findings from an earlier determination.  The appellant wished  to  have
    free range to argue the Article 3, 4 and 8 points.  The issues of  risk
    were varied potentially there was  a  direct  list  of  harm  from  the
    traffickers and their associates and also on the basis of her return as
    a trafficking victim in respect of whom there might be others with  ill
    intent.  There were clear medical  risks,  both  physical  and  mental,
    including a suicide risk and there was also a re-trafficking risk.   It
    was common ground that she had been trafficked on two occasions and was
    credible.

19.   Mr Saunders confirmed this in general but questioned  whether  it  had
    been found that the appellant was trafficked by the second person.

20.   Ms Cronin emphasised the errors that she said existed in the  findings
    of risk and argued that it will be wrong to preserve  the  findings  in
    circumstances  where  the  Tribunal  had  had  misgivings  as  to   the
    instrument by reference to which risk was to  be  evaluated.   Risk  in
    relation to Articles 3, 4 and 8  had  to  be  assessed.   There  was  a
    different evaluative exercise in respect of each.  It was  argued  that
    it was very difficult to preserve a credibility finding as  opposed  to
    an holistic finding with regard to all the protection issues.  The  two
    could not be severed.  The judge had erred, as had been  found  by  the
    Tribunal in respect of the trafficking Convention and Article 4 of  the
    Human Rights Convention and that meant the evaluation of  medical  harm
    was tainted, for example Article  16  of  the  Convention  allowed  for
    return with due regard to the person's safety and dignity and this  led
    to a need for a different evaluation of risk, not  just  safety  but  a
    sense of personal integrity also.  The judge had erred  in  respect  of
    trafficking and all the issues attached to that and as  such  a  victim
    the appellant was a person invested with rights and  attached  to  that
    status was a change in how one should look at risk.  There had been  no
    consideration or proper understanding of what in a sense was the United
    Kingdom's complicity in some of the harm done to the  appellant.   Only
    after the hearing had there been acceptance of a "technical" breach  of
    Article 4 in the failure to investigate and  prosecute.   If  the  risk
    findings were preserved, it would be in the context  of  a  significant
    concession about risk and it would not  have  been  properly  evaluated
    with reference to risk.  There was a comparison which was  returned  to
    between foreign and domestic cases concerning Articles 3, 4 and  8  and
    these were core issues.

21.   The Tribunal was therefore asked to start the case  again  except  for
    the agreed facts.  Otherwise it should be a de novo  hearing.   Further
    evaluation was needed based on the fresh  evidence  and  the  important
    concession.  It needed a proper legal analysis and holistic analysis of
    risk.  There were issues of  law  and  fact  where  the  law  had  been
    misapplied it would be unsafe to carry the findings of fact forward.

22.   With regard to Article 8 and Article 3 there was a  risk  to  physical
    integrity and mental and psychological harm.  The appellant was at risk
    from the traffickers and there  was  the  issue  of  available  medical
    treatment also.  The judge had assumed that the case was only about the
    appellant suffering from tuberculosis and having recovered.   That  was
    clearly wrong and it was not open to the judge to find this on all  the
    evidence.  The documentation from 2008 to 2010 concerned  the  progress
    the appellant had made after the initial tuberculosis  treatment.   She
    had lost her lung in 2010.  The judge had not taken this into  account.
    There was new evidence about the implications  of  this.   The  finding
    about medical risk was unsafe.

23.   It was a very different balancing exercise under Article 4  which  did
    not assume people would be refused.  As  regards  the  resident  permit
    issues, these did not have to relate to private life  risk  or  medical
    circumstances.  It was a matter of personal circumstances.   It  was  a
    question of the weight to be given to particular  factors.   There  was
    some medical evidence before the Immigration Judge, and it  was  argued
    there was enough to show that she had erred.  She had failed to look at
    whether there was medical  treatment  for  the  appellant's  particular
    condition.  Paragraph 38 contained an error in respect of Article 4 and
    it was  argued  that  the  errors  elsewhere  affected  the  Article  8
    assessment.  It could be said the decision was not in  accordance  with
    the law if there was a breach of Article  4.   The  Article  4  finding
    would affect the Article 8  finding  as  the  issue  had  not  been  in
    accordance to the law was relevant to both.  The issues and evaluations
    were intentionally linked so they could not properly be severed.

24.   Mr Saunders argued that if the  judge  erred  on  Article  4  and  the
    decision was not in accordance with the law then the appellant had  got
    as much as she could get out of Article 8.

25.   We reserved our determination.

26.   As we have noted above, we have found that the judge erred firstly  in
    failing to determine the appellant's ground of appeal relating  to  the
    Council of Europe Convention against Trafficking in Human Beings  of  1
    April 2004 (Council of Europe Treaty series number 197)(The  Convention
    against Trafficking) and also erred  in  respect  of  her  findings  in
    connection with Article 4 of the European Convention on Human Rights in
    respect of her findings in that regard.

27.   Ms Cronin argues that the judge also erred with respect to  the  other
    issues raised in the grounds of  appeal,  particularly  concerned  with
    risk on return, protection, particular social group and  Article  8  of
    the Human Rights Convention, and argued that in any event the nature of
    the errors in respect of the Convention against Trafficking and Article
    4 was such as to mean that the entire appeal would have to be  reheard.



28.   The judge made it clear at paragraph 23 of her determination that  she
    found the  appellant  to  be  a  credible  witness.   Earlier  she  had
    summarised the appellant's claim, at paragraph 14 of the determination.
     The appellant had been offered full time employment as  a  cleaner  by
    Mrs Zainab Alibhai and her husband in Tanzania, and worked for them for
    two years together with other staff in their  household.   Mrs Alibhai
    told the appellant that she was to accompany her to the United  Kingdom
    and she was told she would be paid 100,000 Tanzanian shillings a month.
    When she arrived in London she was taken by Mrs Alibhai to her parents,
    Mr and Mrs Dhanji, and then taken to another house where there  was  to
    be a wedding and she worked there for a week.  Mrs Alibhai left a  week
    after the wedding and did not have the surgery which she had  mentioned
    to the appellant she was going to have, either before she left Tanzania
    or after she came to the United Kingdom, but in respect  of  which  she
    had  wanted  the  appellant's  assistance  with  her  mobility.     The
    appellant was told that she would now be working for Mr and Mrs Dhanji,
    and after Mrs Alibhai left Mrs Dhanji  told  her  that  she  would  be
    working from 7 o'clock in the morning until 10.30 in  the  evening  and
    she was expected to clean  the  house  thoroughly  every  day,  massage
    Mrs Dhanji twice a day, deal with the households laundry, cook, garden
    and prepare Mr and Mrs Dhanji for bed.  She only had three  breaks  for
    food in the day when she ate leftovers and  stale  bread.   Her  living
    conditions were extremely poor and she did not receive  any  wages  nor
    was she given any leave or  time  off  work.   Initially  she  was  not
    allowed to attend church but was later permitted to do so.

29.   After two and a half months she  told  Mr  and  Mrs  Dhanji  that  she
    wanted to return to Tanzania but she was told she would not be  allowed
    to do so until July 2007 when her visa expired.  She  was  not  allowed
    contact with  her  parents  by  telephone  as  they  said  it  was  too
    expensive.  She wrote letters to  her  father  telling  him  about  her
    unhappiness and these were posted by Mr and Mrs  Dhanji's  daughter-in-
    law who felt sorry for her.

30.   She was also required to work on demand at the  homes  of  the  Dhanji
    relatives, and when Mrs Alibhai returned to the United  Kingdom  for  a
    few months she told the appellant she would not be allowed to return to
    Tanzania until July 2007.

31.   The appellant worked for Mr and Mrs Dhanji between July 2006  and  May
    2007.  One day she  was  approached  at  church  by  a  member  of  the
    congregation who took her to see Mrs Marion Kilumanga, the  Chairperson
    of the Tanzanian Women's Association (TAWA), and Mrs Kilumanga informed
    the Tanzanian Embassy about the appellant's situation.  It  was  agreed
    that the appellant would leave the Dhanji's employment and she  did  so
    and went to stay with Mrs Kilumanga at her home.  The Tanzanian Embassy
    contacted Mr and Mrs Dhanji to tell them that the appellant  would  not
    be returning to their employment, and she stayed with Kalayeen and  her
    family until she was returned to the Poppy Project.

32.   The Acting High Commissioner  of  the  Tanzanian  Embassy  arranged  a
    meeting in June 2007, which was attended by Mr Dhanji.  He  offered  to
    pay the appellant a total of 380, but she asked to be  paid  125  per
    week for the period she had worked, and no  agreement  was  reached  on
    this point.  The Dhanjis initially refused to return her  passport  but
    this was eventually given to her along with her flight ticket, with the
    help of the embassy and TAWA.   She was keen to return to  Tanzania  at
    this time but was unable to  use  the  flight  ticket  because  of  her
    outstanding problems, and she became aware at this time that  her  visa
    had expired.

33.   The Dhanjis did not  respond  to  a  letter  of  grievance  which  the
    appellant sent to them in July 2008, and  she  attended  an  Employment
    Tribunal hearing on 8 August of that year which resulted in a ruling in
    her favour and the award of 58,585.80 in recognition of the injury she
    had suffered and also for her  unpaid  wages  together  with  interest.
    This award had not been enforced because Mr  and  Mrs  Dhanji  were  in
    receipt of state benefits.  The appellant's case was  reported  to  the
    Harrow Police on 17 March 2009 but the investigation  was  now  closed.
    This had led the appellant to make an application to the European Court
    of Human Rights against the United Kingdom Government.

34.   Mrs Kilumanga arranged for the appellant to  give  several  interviews
    about her situation which were reported on the  internet.   She  stayed
    with Mrs Kilumanga for three years between My 2007 and May 2010 and was
    expected to carry out domestic duties  for  her.   She  was  eventually
    referred to the Poppy Project by Kalayaan  which  is  a  charity  which
    gives advice and support to migrants who enter the United Kingdom on  a
    domestic worker visa.

35.   The judge made it clear  that  she  had  read  detailed  reports  from
    Kalayaan and the Poppy Project.  There was  mention  of  what  Kalayaan
    does, and the Poppy Project is the leading service provider for victims
    of trafficking providing support and housing to women  trafficked  into
    the United Kingdom for sexual exploitation or domestic servitude.   The
    judge also heard evidence from  Miss  Camille  Kumar,  the  appellant's
    senior support worker.   The  judge  accepted  their  assessment  taken
    together with the appellant's own evidence that she had been  exploited
    in the United Kingdom and was trafficked  here  by  Mrs  Alibhai  as  a
    domestic worker for her parents Mr and Mrs Dhanji.  This had also  been
    accepted by the respondent at paragraph 15 of the refusal letter.   The
    judge said it was less certain whether the Secretary of State  accepted
    that  the  appellant  had  been  similarly  mistreated  by  Mrs  Marion
    Kilumanga, but based on the evidence  the  appellant  provided  at  the
    hearing and in the statements and also evidence from  Kilumanga  and/or
    the Poppy Project, the judge  was  satisfied  that  there  was  a  real
    likelihood  that  the  appellant  was  also  internally  trafficked  by
    Mrs Kilumanga.

36.   The judge went on to find that the appellant was not  a  member  of  a
    particular social group.  She took  account  of  the  decision  of  the
    Tribunal in SD that whilst former victims  of  trafficking  and  former
    victims of trafficking for sexual exploitation were  capable  of  being
    members of a particular  social  group,  according  to  the  Tribunal's
    findings  former  victims  of  trafficking  and/or  former  victims  of
    trafficking for sexual exploitation could be members  of  a  particular
    social group the group in question was  required  to  have  a  distinct
    identity in the society in question. The  judge  did  not  accept  that
    there was a distinct identity which  would  distinguish  these  workers
    from other domestic workers or even  from  other  domestic  workers  in
    households of the  wealthy  who  might  or  might  not  be  victims  of
    trafficking and therefore found that the appellant's fear was not based
    on a Convention reason.

37.   She went on to consider whether the appellant's subjective  fears,  if
    she had them, were objectively well-founded  and  concluded  they  were
    not.  With regard to a claimed fear from Mrs Alibhai and the  Dhanjis,
    the judge found first that it was to be noted that the  appellant  left
    their employment in 2007 and whilst it was  reasonable  to  assume  Mrs
    Alibhai and the Dhanjis would have been angry with the  appellant,  she
    found that there was no evidence before her to show that  there  was  a
    real risk that their anger persisted to this day  to  the  extent  they
    would still wish to harm the appellant.  She noted that in this  regard
    it was significant that they had not suffered an financial harm arising
    from her revelations because to date they had not paid the fine imposed
    on them by the Employment Tribunal.

38.   The judge went on to note that there was some  second  or  even  third
    hand evidence that Mrs Alibhai and the  Dhanjis  were  angry  with  the
    appellant in the past, but that there was limited evidence to show that
    this meant they intended to cause  her  serious  harm.   Her  fear,  it
    seemed to the judge, was partly  based  on  information  given  by  the
    appellant's  brother  in  October  2010  when  he  allegedly  told  the
    appellant that Mrs Alibhai had said that "she would see what is  going
    to happen to her when she  comes  back  to  Tanzania".   There  was  no
    indication as to when that conversation allegedly took  place  and  the
    appellant's brother was only  reporting  a  conversation  he  had  with
    another of Mrs Alibhai's employees  at  an  unknown  date.   The  judge
    considered the date of the conversation was  a  material  consideration
    because, for example, had it taken place nearer  to  the  time  of  the
    appellant's departure from the  Dhanjis  or  nearer  the  date  of  the
    litigation before the Employment Tribunal it would show the  extent  of
    her anger at that time but not necessarily four years later.

39.   As regard the further issue of the dismissal of the  appellant's  aunt
    from Mrs Alibhai's employment, there is no evidence to demonstrate this
    was as a direct consequence of the appellant's departure  from  Mr  and
    Mrs Dhanjis employment.  The appellant's evidence was that Mrs  Alibhai
    terminated the aunt's employment within weeks of the appellant  fleeing
    the Dhanji's home and the judge therefore thought that  though  it  was
    possible that the dismissal had been in retaliation for the appellant's
    departure, again it was shortly after she  had  left  the  Dhanjis  and
    therefore several years ago and consequently of limited value as to  an
    indication of Mrs Alibhai's present anger and  adverse  intentions,  if
    any, against the appellant.

40.   The judge went on to consider  claimed  fear  of  Mrs  Kilumanga,  and
    concluded the appellant was not at real risk from  her  partly  because
    Mrs Kilumanga remained in the United Kingdom and the appellant would be
    returned to Tanzania, and also is based on reliance  on  alleged  phone
    calls made by Mrs Kilumanga's mother to the appellant's brother  asking
    about her whereabouts and it was not known why this was done and  there
    was nothing to suggest it was in order to harm the appellant.

41.   The further issue of claimed risk was the appellant's fear of  society
    in general on account of the successful outcome of the  case  she  made
    against the Dhanjis at the Employment Tribunal.   This was based on the
    fact there had been publication of the outcome of her case against  the
    Dhanjis and the large amount of monetary award made to her.  She feared
    that she could be attacked or  otherwise  harmed  in  order  for  other
    people to have access to this money.  The  judge  noted  there  were  a
    number of newspaper, internet and other  public  reports  referring  to
    her case and the award she received, but commented  that  it  was  also
    true that a number of these reports made it  clear  that  to  date  the
    appellant had not yet  received  the  financial  award.   Although  the
    paragraph is slightly inconclusive, it is proper  to  surmise  from  it
    that the judge found there was not a risk in  this  regard  essentially
    because of what was said in a number of the newspapers.

42.   The judge went on to  consider  other  factors  relevant  to  risk  on
    return.  He made the point that the appellant's fear  in  Tanzania  was
    dependent on it being known  that  she  had  returned  there,  and  the
    appellant claimed that Mrs  Alibhai  had  friends  who  worked  at  the
    airport and who would be able to recognise her on  return.   The  judge
    found that this was not reasonably likely given the lapse of time since
    she left Tanzania, and with regard to a reference by the  appellant  to
    recent photographs of her in the press, recognition  of  her  would  be
    dependent on those at the airport having seen those photographs in  the
    first place and then relating them to the appellant.  In any event, the
    only evidence that Mrs Alibhai knew anybody at the airport was based on
    her own claim that people she had invited to her house worked there and
    that might not have been true.  It was in  any  event  unclear  whether
    those people were still working at the airport, if they  ever  did,  or
    that they would be aware the  appellant  was  intending  to  return  to
    Tanzania so they could look out for her.  In any  event,  further,  she
    could return via land or sea if she feared return via the airport.

43.   As regards the risk of being  re-trafficked,  the  objective  evidence
    showed that internal trafficking did exist in Tanzania,  but  this  was
    usually for women from rural areas who were considerably  younger  than
    the appellant and when she left Tanzania she was no longer living in  a
    rural community and was herself working and could therefore not be seen
    as an economic burden on her parents.

44.   In the alternative if she were at risk the judge  found  there  was  a
    sufficiency of protection.  She noted what  was  said  in  the  refusal
    letter about the role of the police force in  Tanzania,  and  the  fact
    that the objective evidence indicated that sections  of  the  Tanzanian
    Police Force were corrupt and as a force it was not as efficient and as
    proactive as the police forces in the United Kingdom, for example.  The
    judge concluded that the circumstances were not such that it  could  be
    said  that  the  authorities  in  Tanzania  were  unwilling  to  afford
    protection to  the  appellant.   It  was  relevant  to  note  that  Mrs
    Kilumanga had successfully returned to the Tanzanian Embassy  in  order
    to assist the appellant when she escaped from the Dhanjis.

45.   The appellant had given  oral  evidence  that  it  was  common  for  a
    disgruntled person to seek revenge in Tanzania.  She gave  the  example
    of a case involving a dispute between her father and his  cousin.   The
    judge considered that the  evidence  in  that  case  which  involved  a
    potential killer  being  stopped  and  beaten  by  villagers  until  he
    disclosed the name of the person  who  had  employed  him,  it  was  an
    indication that apart from the official sources of  protection  by  the
    police and law enforcement agencies, practical protection was available
    from other sources.

46.   As regards relocation, if the appellant were  at  risk,  it  would  be
    reasonable for her to relocate  to  Iringa,  where  her  parents  still
    lived.

47.   With regard to the challenge to the judge's  findings  in  respect  of
    risk, it is argued first of all in the grounds and by  Ms  Cronin  that
    the judge in assessing risk failed to take proper account of  paragraph
    339K of HC 395 which was of relevance in light of her finding that  the
    appellant  had  been  ill-treated  by  Mrs  Alibhai  and  the  Dhanjis.
    Paragraph 339K states the fact that a person has already  been  subject
    to  persecution  or  serious  harm,  or  to  direct  threats  of   such
    persecution or such harm, will be regarded as a serious  indication  of
    the person's well-founded fear of persecution or real risk of suffering
    serious harm, unless there are  good  reasons  to  consider  that  such
    persecution or serious harm will not be repeated.

48.   It is also argued that the judge  failed  to  take  into  account  the
    damage to the reputation of Mrs Alibhai and the Dhanjis  by  the  media
    interest in the case and the impact on them of being named  and  shamed
    in the media.  The further point is made that the words "she would  see
    what was going to happen to her when she comes back to Tanzania" was  a
    material consideration taken as a threat, as stated in paragraph 32  of
    the appellant's appeal statement.  The  judge  is  criticised  for  not
    having clarified with the appellant whether she knew when  her  brother
    was given that information.  Issue was also taken with  regard  to  the
    judge's reasoning in respect of risk of the appellant being  identified
    at the airport.

49.   We see these as being matters of disagreement only.  It  was  open  to
    the judge to find that there was no evidence to show a real  risk  that
    the Dhanjis and Mrs Alibhai remained angry with the  appellant  to  the
    extent that she faced a real risk of harm from them.  It was  the  case
    that they had  not  suffered  the  financial  penalty  imposed  by  the
    Employment Tribunal since they did not have the money.  The  judge  was
    clearly aware of the fact that there  had  been  adverse  publicity  in
    respect  of  the  Dhanjis  concerning   this   case,   but   the   only
    manifestations of any anger appear to be the remark made by Mrs Alibhai
    to the appellant's brother, at an unknown date.  We do not consider  it
    was a duty incumbent on the judge to find out when that was.  It was  a
    matter for the appellant's representatives to adduce evidence  in  that
    regard, and that was not done, and the judge's  findings  at  paragraph
    25(i)(b) were open to her.  Likewise,  it  would  appear  that  if  the
    appellant's aunt were dismissed  from  Mrs Alibhai's  employment  this
    seems to be shortly after she left the Dhanjis and again, as the  judge
    said, was of limited value as an indication of  Mrs  Alibhai's  present
    adverse intentions in respect of the appellant.  It is  the  case  that
    the judge did not factor into this or into the issue to  be  considered
    next, risk from society in general, the increased vulnerability, as  it
    is now said to be, of the appellant.  In this regard it is  appropriate
    to look at the medical evidence that was before the judge as this is of
    significance both with regard to this point  and  also  in  respect  of
    Article 8 and Article 3. In the medical evidence in 2008 and 2009 there
    was a letter from  Dr  Dhasmana,  Specialist  Registrar,  The  Imperial
    College Healthcare NHS Trust TP Service, St Mary's Hospital, Chest and
    Allergy Department, which  refers  to  the  appellant's  background  of
    pulmonary tuberculosis treated  without  complication  between  October
    2008 and July 2009.   He refers to the collapse of what is in  fact  an
    obsolete segment of the left upper lobe and  to  persistence  of  pain.
    The indications for lobectomy were not there.  It would seem  that  the
    pain would remain a chronic problem.   Medication was diagnosed.   That
    was the most recent medical letter on the file before  the  Immigration
    Judge.   Earlier letters in 2010 refer to the  persistent  collapse  of
    the left upper lobe and that the factors referred to in a letter of  21
    April 2010 that the appellant had not lost weight and various follow up
    appointments.  In the Poppy Project report of 23 September  2010  there
    is reference to the appellant disclosing experiencing severe  pains  in
    her chest, shoulder and upper back,  general  exhaustion  and  lack  of
    motivation, nightmares, panic attacks, irregular heartbeat,  congestion
    in her throat, insomnia, isolation  and  detachment,  frequent  crying,
    high uncontrollable levels of anger, headaches, dizziness,  significant
    weight loss and loss of appetite.  We consider that it  is  clear  from
    her presentation that she also suffers from  persistent  low  mood  and
    anxiety and is in constant chronic pain that has become so severe  that
    it  impacts  on  her  ability  to  attend  classes  and   appointments.
    Reference is made to the diagnosis of advanced tuberculosis in 2008 and
    ongoing complications from that.  There is reference to her awaiting  a
    further operation to remove parts of the collapsed lung which might  be
    attributing to the pain she experienced.  It is said that Mrs Kilumanga
    acted as the interpreter for all her appointments, she  said  hospitals
    did not provide interpreters, Mrs  Kilumanga  neglected  to  relay  all
    information accurately to the appellant, leaving her unclear about  her
    health status.  Dr Dhasmana refers to reviewing the  appellant  via  an
    interpreter, but does not say whether that was Mrs Kilumanga or not.

50.   However, in the absence of evidence to  show  a  real  risk  from  Mrs
    Alibhai or the Dhanjis, we do  not  consider  that  the  state  of  the
    appellant's health at the time of the hearing was such as  to  show  an
    increased vulnerability in that regard.  As regards Ms Cronin's further
    argument of risk to the  appellant  from  the  Dhanjis  on  account  of
    possible charges of dishonesty, we have found no reference to  that  in
    the skeleton argument before the judge and  it  seems  to  us,  in  any
    event,  to  be  essentially  based  on  surmise.   The  fact  that  the
    employment Tribunal found that the Dhanjis had used  underhand  methods
    to secure the appellant's removal from  the  United  Kingdom  with  the
    assistance of a solicitor, although it is demonstrative of a degree  of
    manipulativeness, in no sense in our view goes to show that  the  judge
    could or should have considered risk in this regard  as  there  was  no
    evidence to sustain it.  It is relevant also to note the fact  that  as
    referred to in the Poppy Project report, the appellant's  brother  told
    her that domestic workers from Mrs Alibhai's house  had  told  him  the
    Dhanjis had recently purchased a  house  in  Tanzania  and  were  often
    travelling between the UK  and  Tanzania,  which  hardly  points  to  a
    settled presence there.  As regards the claimed mental fragility of the
    appellant, we have set out what was said in the Poppy Project report in
    this regard, we note that it was written by a senior support worker who
    does not claim to have any professional qualification or  expertise  in
    psychological, psychiatric or medical issues of any kind and that is of
    further relevance to the issue of  the  claimed  vulnerability  of  the
    appellant.

51.   In this regard we consider also the argument that the appellant is  at
    risk from society in general on account of the  successful  outcome  of
    the case made against the Dhanjis.   It  is  the  case,  as  Ms  Cronin
    pointed out, that not all the newspaper articles referring to this made
    the point the appellant had not been paid by the Dhanjis, we regard the
    claimed risk in this regard again as properly having been concluded  to
    be essentially conjectural.  We are not aware of  any  evidence  before
    the judge to show risk in this regard other than speculation as to  the
    way in which people in Tanzania might react towards a person  known  to
    have money.  This falls well short of amounting to a real risk, and  we
    consider the judge properly found an absence of risk in this regard.

52.   Likewise, we consider that  the  claimed  risk  on  account  of  being
    identified at the airport was properly  dealt  with  by  the  judge  at
    paragraph 26(i).  As the judge pointed out, there has been a five  year
    lapse of time since the appellant left Tanzania, recognition of her  at
    the airport would depend on people  at  the  airport  having  seen  the
    photographs and relating them to the appellant, it is  unclear  whether
    those people, if they ever did work at the airport, were still doing so
    or they would be aware that she would be returning to Tanzania so as to
    look out for her.

53.   We also consider the findings on risk of internal  trafficking  to  be
    open to the judge for the reasons set out at  paragraph  26(iii).   The
    judge noted that internal trafficking in Tanzania  normally  occurs  to
    women from rural areas who are considerably younger than the  appellant
    and this it seems was based on what was said in the US State Department
    Report.  This was a proper source for the judge to take evidence  from,
    and the grounds in this regard amount to disagreement only in our view.

54.   In the circumstances, therefore, we consider it  has  not  been  shown
    that the judge erred in her findings on risk on return to Tanzania.  As
    a consequence it does not  seem  to  us  there  is  any  point  to  our
    revisiting her findings on particular social group  and  protection  or
    relocation.  If there is no risk then there is no need  for  protection
    or relocation, and it is academic whether or not  the  appellant  is  a
    member of a particular social group.

55.   We turn to the Article 8  findings.   The  judge  concluded  that  the
    appellant had established a private life through  the  friendships  she
    had made and through her contact with Kalayeen and the  Poppy  Project.
    As regards the proportionality of removal, the judge took into  account
    firstly the fact that the appellant would  be  in  a  position  to  re-
    establish a private life, albeit it  a  different  one,  on  return  to
    Tanzania, where her parents, brother and various other relatives  live,
    albeit that she said that her parents would only be able  to  give  her
    moral and not financial support; secondly, that she had kept  in  touch
    with her family during her time of difficulty and had  begun  to  study
    English which would assist her in  gaining  employment;  thirdly,  that
    although she had suffered from tuberculosis and suffered from  some  of
    the after effects of this disease it had been successfully treated  and
    she was undergoing continuing treatment such as  physiotherapy  and  it
    was the case that there was available medical  treatment  in  Tanzania.
    The judge noted that both Kalayaan and the Poppy  Project  referred  to
    her poor emotional state but that was not  backed  up  by  any  medical
    evidence saying she would not be able to work; fifthly,  that  she  was
    receiving  treatment  for  the  pain  she  had   resulting   from   her
    tuberculosis and there was no evidence adduced to show that she was not
    have access in Tanzania to medicine or other ongoing treatment she  had
    in the United Kingdom.  The objective evidence showed that tuberculosis
    was recognised as a serious  illness  in  Tanzania  and  it  was  being
    addressed by  the  Tanzanian  authorities  and  also  by  international
    organisations and NGOs.  It had been asserted by Mr Noorali of the  IOM
    that no help would  be  available  to  the  appellant,  but  the  judge
    considered this information had to be weighed against information  from
    other sources which have attested to the existence of such  facilities,
    albeit in a limited form.  The judge  had  earlier,  at  paragraph  18,
    subparagraph iii, noted background evidence stating that  the  IOM  and
    its NGO partners assisted 304 victims of trafficking during the  period
    reported by the US State Department Report of 2009 and during the  year
    96 victims were  provided  with  counselling,  medical  screenings  and
    educational opportunities.

56.   It seems to us that while dealing first  of  all  with  the  issue  of
    support, the judge dealt properly  with  this  issue.   She  noted  the
    evidence from the State Department Report which contrasted to an extent
    with that of Mr Noorali.  She noted  the  medical  evidence,  which  is
    summarised at paragraph 37(iii)(iv) and we consider that summary is  in
    accordance with the medical evidence we have set out above.  We do  not
    consider the claimed errors with respect to Article 8 are made out.

57    We turn to the two matters in relation to which we have accepted  that
    there are errors of law and Ms Cronin's argument as  to  whether  these
    errors infect the rest of the determination such that there must  be  a
    full rehearing.

58.   As regards the Convention against Trafficking, the contention  in  the
    grounds is that the judge failed to determine the appellant's ground of
    appeal relating to the Convention  against  Trafficking  and  this  was
    relevant to the issue of whether or not the respondent's  decision  was
    in accordance with the law.   Reference  is  made  in  the  grounds  to
    Article 14 of  the  Convention  which  provides  for  the  grant  of  a
    renewable residence permit for twelve months where  (a)  the  competent
    authority considers  that  their  stay  is  necessary  owing  to  their
    personal situation; and (b) the competent  authorities  considers  that
    their stay is necessary for the purpose of their co-operation with  the
    competent  authorities  in  investigation  or   criminal   proceedings.
    Article 16 provides that when a  party  returns  a  victim  to  another
    state, such return shall be with due regard to the rights,  safety  and
    dignity of that person and for the  status  of  any  legal  proceedings
    related to the fact that the person is a victim and shall preferably be
    voluntary.   It is argued that the judge should have  considered  these
    rights consequent upon identification as a victim of trafficking by the
    Secretary of State and the judge.  The  judge  did  not  refer  to  the
    Convention or determine any arguments related to it.

59.   As regards Article 4 of the European Convention against Human  Rights,
     the argument is that the judge  misdirected  herself  when  concluding
    that there had to be a real likelihood that the  appellant  remained  a
    potential victim of trafficking before Article 4 could be engaged.   It
    is argued  that  the  judge  seemingly  considered  that  the  positive
    obligations owed by the UK to the appellant as a victim of  trafficking
    were not a matter that she needed to consider because of the  existence
    of an outstanding  application  before  the  European  Court  of  Human
    Rights.  The point is made that the whole purpose of Article  4  is  to
    require public authorities, including courts, to give  effect  to  this
    Article.  It is also argued the judge failed to consider  the  remedial
    and protective duties arising under Article 4 and that these relate not
    solely to prevention but include consideration of the specific needs of
    the appellant as a victim of domestic  servitude  and  trafficking  and
    consequent protection.

60.   With regard to these issues we consider, contrary to  the  submissions
    of Ms Cronin, that they are properly severable from the  other  matters
    assessed in the determination.  It seems to us that the issues set  out
    in the Convention against Trafficking and Article 4 are  matters  which
    can be considered quite separately from the other issues considered  by
    the judge in the appeal.  Accordingly we conclude that  the  errors  by
    the judge in respect of those two matters will  be  the  subject  of  a
    rehearing without there needing to be a revisiting of the other matters
    in respect of which we have  found  no  errors  of  law.   There  will,
    therefore, be a rehearing of those issues with a time estimate of  half
    a day.




Signed                                             Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
-----------------------
[1] See [43].

