

                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

       Essa (EEA: rehabilitation/integration) [2013] UKUT 00316 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 18 June 2013                               |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                     THE PRESIDENT, THE HON MR JUSTICE BLAKE
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                                  DAHA ESSA
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr R Khubber, instructed by Irving and Co Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr S Allan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


   1. Pending any further clarification of the law by the Court of Justice,
      the relationship between residence rights and periods of imprisonment
      should be applied by judges of the Immigration and Asylum chambers as
      follows:


              i. Permanent residence within the meaning of Articles 16 to 18
                 of the Citizens  Directive  requires  the  claimant  to  be
                 continuously lawfully resident under EU law, that is to say
                 is residing in the host state as a qualified person or  the
                 family member of a qualified person for a  period  of  five
                 years.


             ii. In determining  whether  permanent  residence  is  acquired
                 voluntary absences from activities that  make  a  person  a
                 qualified person may  break  the  continuity  of  residence
                 applying the provisions  of  Article  16  (3).  Periods  of
                 enforced military service do not break  the  continuity  of
                 such residence.


            iii. Periods of penal custody following conviction and  sentence
                 and periods of remand  in  custody  that  are  followed  by
                 conviction and a sentence of imprisonment do not contribute
                 to the acquisition of permanent residence by a claimant who
                 was  a  qualified  person  shortly  before  the  period  of
                 detention. The claimant is not  employed,  self  sufficient
                 etc during these periods and imprisonment is not considered
                 as contributing to the claimant's integration in  the  host
                 state.

             iv. Periods of wrongful detention, pre-trial remand  that  lead
                 to an acquittal or a non-custodial sentence, or periods  of
                 immigration detention can count towards permanent residence
                 if the claimant qualifies before and after the detention in
                 question.

              v.  If a cumulative  period  of  five  years  residence  as  a
                 qualified  person  has  been  achieved  by   the   claimant
                 discounting periods  of  penal  custody,  it  is  uncertain
                 whether such a term will break the continuity of  residence
                 for  the  purpose  of  acquiring  the  right  of  permanent
                 residence.  By  reference  to  the  developing   principles
                 relating to ten years residence, the indications  are  that
                 it may not do so.

             vi. If permanent residence has been acquired  but  a  custodial
                 sentence is served in the period of residence between years
                 five and ten, then the period of residence in prison may be
                 counted towards the  ten  years  if  the  person  concerned
                 remains integrated with the host state by reason  of  home,
                 employment, family and social nexus.

            vii. Once a period of ten years lawful  residence  in  the  host
                 state has been acquired,  a  custodial  sentence  does  not
                 break the continuity of residence up to  the  date  of  the
                 decision to deport.


   2. The  Court  of  Justice's  reference  in  Case  C-145/09  Land  Baden-
      Wurtemberg v Tsakouridis [2011] CMLR 11 to genuine integration, should
      mean people who have resided lawfully in the Host state for five years
      and so have the right to permanent residence, rather than  people  who
      have resided for ten years.


   3.   For those who at the time of determination are or remain  a  present
      threat to public policy but where the factors relevant to  integration
      suggest that there are reasonable prospects of  rehabilitation,  those
      prospects can be a substantial relevant factor in the  proportionality
      balance as to whether deportation is justified. If the claimant cannot
      constitute a present threat when rehabilitated, and  is  well-advanced
      in rehabilitation in a host state where there is a substantial  degree
      of integration, it may well very well be disproportionate  to  proceed
      to deportation.


   4. At the other end of the scale, if there are no reasonable prospects of
      rehabilitation, the claimant is a present  threat  and  is  likely  to
      remain so for the  indefinite  future,  it  cannot  be  seen  how  the
      prospects of rehabilitation could constitute a significant  factor  in
      the balance.  Thus,  recidivist  offenders,  career  criminals,  adult
      offenders  who  have  failed  to  engage  with  treatment  programmes,
      claimants with propensity to commit sexual or violent offences and the
      like may well fall into this category.


   5. What  is  likely  to  be  valuable  to  a  judge  in  the  immigration
      jurisdiction who is considering risk factors  is  the  extent  of  any
      progress made by a person during the sentence and licence period,  and
      any material shift in OASys assessment of that person.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
Introduction

    1. The background  to  this  appeal  is  set  out  in  the  Ruling  and
       Directions (Annex 1 to this determination) that the panel issued  on
       the 24 April 2013 following the hearing of  the  previous  day.   By
       that ruling we concluded that the panel of the  First-tier  Tribunal
       who dismissed Mr Essa's appeal against deportation on the  18  April
       2011 had made a material error of law.  We indicated that the appeal
       would be remade by the Upper Tribunal on the 18 June 2013  with  the
       findings of fact made by the First-tier Tribunal preserved with  the
       exception of its decision on the risk that the  appellant  presented
       to the public and  his  prospects  of  rehabilitation.   We  further
       indicated the  material  that  we  concluded  would  be  helpful  in
       determining this whole appeal and  directed  that  the  Home  Office
       respond to the appeal by 4 pm on 4 June 2013.


    2. The appellant provided within the relevant time, an  updated  report
       from Mrs Davies the  expert  instructed  in  2011,  although  little
       information  had  been  provided  by  the   Probation   Service   as
       anticipated in Direction 38 (b).  No information  of  any  kind  had
       been received by the Home Office by 4pm on the 4 June 2013.

    3.  On the 11 June 2013 the Tribunal received a letter  from  Mr  Allan
       who had previously represented the Secretary of State.  It sought  a
       short adjournment of the case listed for the 18 June 2014 because:

        "The Secretary of State had decided, given the significance of this
        case  which  plainly  extends  beyond  the  circumstances  of   the
        individual  appellant,  to  instruct  Counsel   to   be   able   to
        satisfactorily assist the Tribunal in this matter.  I apologise for
        the shortness of notice in this regard."


          The letter  continued  that  counsel  selected  to  represent  the
       Secretary of State was not available on the  18  June  2013  and  an
       adjournment to a later date in July, August or September was sought.

    4.   The  appellant's  solicitors  understandably  objected   to   this
       application that was in due course refused and has not been  renewed
       before us on the date of the renewed hearing.  We are surprised that
       the application was made when it was.  It must have  been  perfectly
       apparent to the Secretary of State long before  the  23  April  2013
       that this was an important case.  It represented a decision  by  the
       Court of Appeal setting aside a refusal of permission to  appeal  by
       the Upper Tribunal on the basis of a novel issue of EU law. Any such
       decision of the Court of Appeal raises second appeal criteria and is
       almost certainly bound to contain an important issue  of  law.   The
       Secretary of State was represented at a contested hearing by counsel
       at the Court of Appeal, but chose to be represented by  Mr  Allan  a
       Senior Home Office Presenting Officer before us.   If  it  had  been
       intended to instruct counsel in the event that Mr Allan's submission
       before us on the 23 April  2013  that  remaking  was  not  necessary
       failed to carry the day, we should  have  been  told  then  and  not
       subsequently.


    5. We are further dismayed that no regard was  had  to  our  directions
       until very late in the  day.   We  announced  our  decision  on  the
       hearing of the 23 April  2013  that  the  appeal  would  be  re-made
       because it contained a material error of law and heard  observations
       by both parties upon a potential time table that was set in order to
       bring this long standing deportation appeal to  conclusion,  but  to
       give a reasonable opportunity to both sides to file all the material
       that we thought would be needed to enable us to properly remake this
       decision.

    6. Written directions setting out  what  had  already  been  spelt  out
       orally were sent thereafter to remind the parties of the  directions
       we had given orally but the timetable had started from the  date  on
       which the directions were first given on the 23 April 2013.  If  the
       Secretary of State fails persistently to adhere  to  directions  and
       fails to give the  Tribunal  the  assistance  it  needs  on  certain
       questions, then she cannot complain if the matter  proceeds  when  a
       reasonable opportunity to provide assistance has expired.

    7. As it is Mr Allan recognised that  the  failure  to  adhere  to  the
       directions meant that no fresh information had been provided by  the
       Home Office, and no indication given of a wish to cross examine  any
       of the witnesses called by the appellant.  In the circumstances  the
       opportunity to probe some factual issues was expressly waived.


    8.  We once again remind the Secretary of State of her obligation under
       rule 2(4) of the Upper Tribunal Rules 2008 to assist the Tribunal in
       pursuing the overriding objective of economical, fair and  efficient
       disposal of these appeals in a prompt  time  scale.   Ignoring  such
       directions until the last possible moment is a breach of such a duty
       and is very likely to  lead  to  less  weight  being  given  to  the
       Secretary of State's case than it otherwise might have been.

    9.  In the event Mr Allan did produce a helpful skeleton  argument  the
       night before the hearing for which we are grateful.   That  skeleton
       made plain that it was accepted positively by the respondent that Mr
       Essa a Dutch national of Somali  origin  has  achieved  a  right  of
       permanent residence before  the  conviction  giving  rise  to  these
       proceedings had arisen.


   10. Having regard to the oral submissions of both  parties  we  conclude
       the following issues arise for determination by us:-

               i. At what point in the proceedings does the Tribunal decide
                  whether the  highest  level  of  protection  afforded  by
                  Article 28(3) of Directive 2004/38/EC applies?


              ii. When does the duty to facilitate rehabilitation arise?

             iii. What is the appropriate decision in  this  remade  appeal
                  having regard to the present state of  the  evidence  and
                  the principles of EU law?

     Issue 1: Level of protection

   11.  It will be seen from the facts set  out  in  the  ruling  that  the
       appellant has been in the UK for approximately 12  years  (depending
       on his month of entry in 2001). It would appear that he could  argue
       that imperative grounds of public security should now apply  to  him
       as he has at the date of  hearing before us,  "resided in  the  host
       state for the previous ten years" (see Article 28 (3)  (a)  Citizens
       Directive).


   12.  Mr Allen's first submission in response was that Mr Essa could  not
       prove residence for the previous ten years because of  his  criminal
       sentence. He was first detained for the index offence in April  2007
       and spent some 50 days on remand in custody. In June 2008  following
       conviction after a trial he was sentenced to five years detention in
       a young offenders institution. He had completed his  custodial  term
       on 23 October 2010.  He was then held in immigration detention until
       February 2011 when he was released on bail subject  to  his  licence
       conditions. If you remove the 30 month  period  of  detention  as  a
       prisoner from the period of 12 years residence in the UK  Mr  Essa's
       length of present residence is  less  than  10  years.  Second,  the
       imprisonment as a criminal offender breaks  the  continuity  of  his
       residence so even if he had achieved  ten  years  residence  outside
       penal custody, it was not for the previous ten years.

   13. In the case of Jarusevicius [2012] UKUT 124 IAC the  Upper  Tribunal
       expressed the opinion obiter, that a period  of  criminal  detention
       could not break the continuity  of  residence  for  the  purpose  of
       imperative grounds as otherwise no person who faces expulsion within
       ten years of  his  release  from  such  a  sentence  could  rely  on
       imperative  grounds,  and  the  Court  of  Justice  would  not  have
       delivered its opinion on imperative grounds in  Case  C-145/09  Land
       Baden-Wurtemberg v Tsakouridis [2011] CMLR 11.

   14. Shortly afterwards the Court  of  Appeal  decided  the  case  of  FV
       (Italy) [2012] EWCA Civ 1199 where a claimant  had  resided  for  22
       years in the United  Kingdom,  was  convicted  of  manslaughter  and
       sentenced to eight years imprisonment and had served a  sentence  of
       over four years between 2001 and 2006 before a  decision  to  deport
       him was taken in 2007. It had  been  previously  conceded  that  the
       claimant lawfully resident for more than 10 years, had  a  right  of
       permanent  residence  and  so  the  test   of   imperative   grounds
       applied[1].

   15. The Secretary of State sought to withdraw this concession relying on
       a sequence of domestic authorities and the principle  of  two  years
       absence in Article 16 (4). We set out the relevant passages at Annex
       2.  Reviewing  the  authorities  including   the   observations   in
       Jarusevicius, the Court of  Appeal  concluded  that  the  period  of
       imprisonment did not break  the  continuity  of  residence  for  the
       purpose of applying the imperative grounds, and neither  should  the
       period of imprisonment be automatically discounted  from  the  total
       length of residence. The question  was  whether  a  person  who  had
       achieved a right of permanent residence remained  integrated  within
       the host state or had  acquired  another  centre  of  personal  life
       outside it (Pill LJ at [85] and [86] and Aikens LJ at [126]).

   16.  Mr Allan reminds us that two references have been made to the Court
       of Justice  by  this  Tribunal  addressing  in  different  ways  the
       question of the effect of imprisonment on residence  rights  namely:
       Case C-400/12 MG and Case C-378/12  Onuekwere.  Decisions  in  these
       cases are outstanding at the time this determination is being  made.
       We recognise that the decisions in  these  two  cases  may  lead  to
       further guidance that requires the principles we  will  set  out  in
       this decision to be revisited. However, in the light of the case law
       discussed in FV (Italy) a recent decision of  the  Court  of  Appeal
       made after the orders for reference in MG and Onuekwere, we conclude
       that we can identify the basis of decision making in this  field  of
       law that should be applied by judges of  the  First-tier  and  Upper
       Tribunal unless the Court of Justice  or  a  higher  court  provides
       guidance to the contrary.

   17.  For ease of reference we will  borrow  from  regulation  6  of  the
       Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006,  the  term
       qualified person to describe a national  of  an  EEA  state  who  is
       undertaking an activity that gives rise to  lawful  residence  under
       the Citizens Directive  after the expiry of the initial entry period
       of three  months.  We  abstract  from  the  case-law  the  following
       principles:

               i. Permanent residence within the meaning of Articles 16  to
                  18 of the Citizens Directive requires the claimant to  be
                  continuously lawfully resident under EU law, that  is  to
                  say is residing in the host state as a  qualified  person
                  or the family member of a qualified person for  a  period
                  of five years.


              ii. In determining whether permanent  residence  is  acquired
                  voluntary absences from activities that make a  person  a
                  qualified person may break the  continuity  of  residence
                  applying the provisions of Article  16  (3).  Periods  of
                  enforced military service do not break the continuity  of
                  such residence.


             iii.  Periods  of  penal  custody  following  conviction   and
                  sentence and  periods  of  remand  in  custody  that  are
                  followed by conviction and a sentence of imprisonment  do
                  not contribute to the acquisition of permanent  residence
                  by a claimant who was a qualified person  shortly  before
                  the period of detention. The claimant  is  not  employed,
                  self sufficient etc during these periods and imprisonment
                  is not  considered  as  contributing  to  the  claimant's
                  integration in the host state.

              iv. Periods of wrongful detention, pre-trial remand that lead
                  to an acquittal or a non-custodial sentence,  or  periods
                  of immigration  detention  can  count  towards  permanent
                  residence if the claimant qualifies before and after  the
                  detention in question.

               v.  If a cumulative period of  five  years  residence  as  a
                  qualified  person  has  been  achieved  by  the  claimant
                  discounting periods of penal  custody,  it  is  uncertain
                  whether  such  a  term  will  break  the  continuity   of
                  residence for the  purpose  of  acquiring  the  right  of
                  permanent  residence.  By  reference  to  the  developing
                  principles  relating  to   ten   years   residence,   the
                  indications are that it may not do so.

              vi. If permanent residence has been acquired but a  custodial
                  sentence is served in the  period  of  residence  between
                  years  five and ten, then  the  period  of  residence  in
                  prison may be counted towards the ten years if the person
                  concerned remains  integrated  with  the  host  state  by
                  reason of home, employment, family and social nexus.

             vii. Once a period of ten years lawful residence in  the  host
                  state has been acquired, a custodial  sentence  does  not
                  break the continuity of residence up to the date  of  the
                  decision to deport.

   18. For the avoidance of doubt, we should indicate that it is now clear,
       earlier decisions to the contrary  notwithstanding,  that  residence
       that straddles the coming into force of the  Directive  or  preceded
       membership of the EU by the claimant's state of origin can be  taken
       into account, as long as the time for transposing the Directive into
       domestic law has passed and the claimant is  an  EEA  national  with
       free movement rights at the date of the relevant decision (see  Case
       C 424/10 Ziolkowski [2011] CJEU at [61] to [63].


   19. Applying these principles to the primary facts in this case, we note
       that the appellant has been resident in  the  United  Kingdom  since
       2001 and the age of 12. He was admitted as the dependent child of an
       EU qualified person and has remained dependent in whole or  in  part
       on his mother with whom he resides when at liberty ever since.


   20.  It is accepted that he acquired permanent  residence  before  April
       2007, and we can find no indication in  the  evidence  that  he  has
       ceased to be integrated in the  United  Kingdom,  has  acquired  new
       links abroad, or has been out of the United Kingdom for a period  of
       two years or more.  We conclude that  in  assessing  his  length  of
       residence for the purpose of identifying the  relevant  test  to  be
       applied in his case, the whole of his residence from 2001 until  the
       date of the decision to deport can be taken into account,  including
       the thirty months of the custodial term of his sentence.

   21. FV (Italy) and the authorities cited therein, identify the  date  of
       the decision to deport as the basis for assessment of  the  relevant
       criteria and the  calculation  of  relevant  residence  is  made  by
       working back from that date.  The date of the decision to deport  is
       October 2010 and thus a few months short of 10 years from  whichever
       date he entered in 2001.

   22. Accordingly, the level of protection against expulsion  afforded  to
       the appellant is that identified by Article 28 (2) of the Directive:
       serious grounds of public  policy.  However,  in  assessing  private
       life,  degree  of  integration,  present  risk  and/or   degree   of
       rehabilitation the Tribunal can receive post-decision evidence  (see
       s.85(4) NIAA 2002 and the decision of the UT in Boodhoo and  another
       (EEA Regs: relevant evidence)  [2013] UKUT   00346  (IAC)).  We  are
       conscious that where a passage of two years has  expired  since  the
       first decision was made to deport, the Citizens Directive Article 33
       (2) requires the Member  state  to  check  that  the  individual  is
       currently and genuinely a threat to public  policy  and  there  have
       been no material change of circumstances.


     Issue 2: The duty to facilitate rehabilitation

   23.  As we observed in our ruling and directions the Court of Justice in
       Tsakouridis used the term 'genuinely integrated' to  describe  those
       for whom the prospects of rehabilitation were a  relevant  issue  in
       the assessment of the balance.


   24. Tsakouridis was a  case  where  the  Court  examined  the  issue  of
       imperative grounds relating to those who had  resided  in  the  host
       state for ten years or more. The Court of Appeal in the instant case
       did not elaborate on whether the principles apply generally or  only
       to those who had permanent rights of residence. As  the  case  below
       was determined on the basis of an assumption that the appellant  had
       rights of permanent residence, we conclude that the Court of  Appeal
       did not consider that only those  with  ten  years  residence  could
       benefit from the principle.


   25. In our directions for remaking, we invited the parties  to  consider
       the matter and suggested  that  the  test  was  genuine  integration
       rather than the precise number of years  of  residence.  Mr  Allan's
       skeleton argument  disputed  that  proposition  and  suggested  that
       genuine integration was not a novel test but only shorthand for  the
       structured approach based on length of residence.


   26. We agree that the Court's reference to genuine integration  must  be
       directed at qualified persons and  their  family  members  who  have
       resided in the host state as such for five years or more. People who
       have just arrived in the host state, have not yet  become  qualified
       persons, or have not been a qualified person  for  five  years,  can
       always  be  removed  for  non-exercise  of  free   movement   rights
       irrespective of public good grounds to curtail free movement rights.
       If their presence during this time makes them a  present  threat  to
       public policy it would be inconsistent  with  the  purposes  of  the
       Directive to weigh in the balance against deportation  their  future
       prospects of rehabilitation.

   27. If they achieve rehabilitation on return to their  state  of  origin
       with whom they have not yet lost links then  they can  always  apply
       to revoke the deportation order against them  that  would  otherwise
       prevent them exercising free movement rights in the  host  state  in
       the future.

   28. However, we conclude that it is not necessary for  the  claimant  to
       have resided 10 years, although the longer the residence the greater
       the degree of integration is likely to be,  and  the  weightier  the
       prospects of rehabilitation would be as a factor against removal. We
       observe that the EU permanent right of residence means what is says.
       After it is acquired it is no longer necessary for the EEA  national
       to be a qualified person exercising an  economic  activity  or  self
       sufficiency in order to qualify for residence.


   29. In the light of the Secretary of State's express recognition that Mr
       Essa acquired permanent residence before April 2007, we do not  need
       to explore the difficult questions that may arise at  the  periphery
       of the decided cases.

   30. The problem area concerns  those  EEA  nationals  and  their  family
       members who have been resident in the host state for five  years  or
       more but who have not been engaging in activity that  makes  them  a
       qualified person for a continuous period during  that  period.  They
       may have resided in the host state for many years beyond the minimum
       five years and achieved a substantial degree  of  integration  there
       and loss of contact with their state of origin.  We will reserve the
       question of whether the prospects of rehabilitation can be a  factor
       in these cases for future consideration.

   31.  We accept Mr Allan's further submission that even in a  case  where
       it clearly applies as a consideration, such as the present one,  the
       prospects  of  rehabilitation  are  only  one  factor  and   not   a
       determinative consideration. Since this is a novel principle  to  be
       applied by judges of both chambers without much substantive guidance
       we have considered the  issues  at  a  level  of  generality  before
       applying the following principles to  the case in hand.

   32.  We observe that for any deportation of an EEA  national  or  family
       member of such national to  be  justified  on  public  good  grounds
       (irrespective of whether permanent residence has been achieved)  the
       claimant must represent a present threat to public policy. The  fact
       of a criminal conviction is not enough. It is not permissible in  an
       EEA case to deport a claimant on the  basis  of  criminal  offending
       simply to deter others.  This tends to mean,  in  case  of  criminal
       conduct short of the most serious threats to the  public  safety  of
       the state, that a candidate for EEA  deportation  must  represent  a
       present threat  by  reason  of  a  propensity  to  re-offend  or  an
       unacceptably high risk of re-offending.  In such a case, if there is
       acceptable evidence  of  rehabilitation,  the  prospects  of  future
       rehabilitation do not enter the balance,  save  possibly  as  future
       protective  factors  to  ensure  that  the  rehabilitation   remains
       durable.

   33.  It is only where rehabilitation is  incomplete  or  uncertain  that
       future prospects may play a role in the overall assessment.  Here we
       must take our guidance from the Court of Justice in  Tskouridis  and
       the Court of Appeal in the present case remitting the matter to this
       Tribunal.  It is in the interests of the citizen, the host state and
       the Union itself for an offender to cease to offend.  This  is  most
       likely  to  be  the  case  with  young  offenders   who   commit   a
       disproportionate number of offences, but  many  of  whom  will  stop
       offending as they mature and comparatively few  of  whom  go  on  to
       become hardened criminals and persistent  recidivist  offenders.  We
       can exclude consideration of offenders beneath the age of 18 as  EEA
       law will prevent their deportation save in the unusual event that it
       is in their own  interest  (Article  28  (3)  (b)  of  the  Citizens
       Directive).

   34.  If the very factors that contribute to his integration that  assist
       in   rehabilitation   of   such   offenders   (family    ties    and
       responsibilities, accommodation,  education,  training,  employment,
       active membership of a community and the like) will  assist  in  the
       completion of a process  of  rehabilitation,  then  that  can  be  a
       substantial factor in the balance. If the claimant cannot constitute
       a  present  threat  when  rehabilitated,  and  is  well-advanced  in
       rehabilitation in a host state where there is a  substantial  degree
       of integration, it may well very well be disproportionate to proceed
       to deportation.

   35. At the other end of the scale, if there are no reasonable  prospects
       of rehabilitation, the claimant is a present threat and is likely to
       remain so for the indefinite future, we cannot see how the prospects
       of rehabilitation could  constitute  a  significant  factor  in  the
       balance.  Thus  recidivist  offenders,   career   criminals,   adult
       offenders who have  failed  to  engage  with  treatment  programmes,
       claimants with impulses to commit sexual or violent offences and the
       like may well fall into this category.

   36.  The difficult category will be those offenders with  mental  health
       issues that medical science considers to be treatable, and  who  are
       receiving  the  appropriate  treatment  but   whose   prospects   of
       rehabilitation are somewhat  distant  at  the  date  of  assessment.
       Although the Court of Appeal  have  made  clear  that  there  is  no
       general duty on the Secretary of State  to  explain  positively  how
       deportation would assist rehabilitation, the interface  of  criminal
       law, mental health law, immigration and free movement  law  make  it
       likely that this will be an era  where  tribunal  judges  will  need
       particular information as to the consequences of deportation for the
       individual. If a proven  treatment  programme  is  interrupted  with
       adverse effects on future prospects, if the claimant is  transferred
       from a secure environment in the  host  state  to  an  insecure  one
       outside  it,  if   facilities   elsewhere   are   sub-standard   and
       ineffective, these may well be factors against deportation.  If  the
       conduct is at the highest level of dangerousness,  if  prospects  of
       future release are years away and speculative, if the conduct or the
       illness has resulted in the loss of the kind  of  social  ties  that
       sustain integration, and there are  appropriate  facilities  in  the
       state of origin to which the claimant could be transferred,  it  may
       well be that the balance comes out in favour  of  removal,  and  the
       social costs to the host  state  of  the  long  term  detention  and
       treatment of  such offenders may be a factor in that balance.


   Issue 3: Application to the present case

     The evidence

   37. The most detailed accounts of the appellant's conduct  and  attitude
       before, during and following his sentence come from the two  reports
       of Ms Davies the Chartered Forensic Psychologist dated 23 March 2011
       (44 pages excluding appendices) and an addendum of 20 May  2013  (23
       pages). Ms Davies has assessed the information that she has gathered
       using the Historical Risk Management Tool (HCR-20) developed in 1997
       to assess risk of violence ('actual attempted or threatened harm  to
       a person or persons') for which she gives the literature  reference.
       This assessment examines 20 factors under the  headings:  historical
       risk factors  (10),  clinical  risk  factors  (5),  risk  management
       factors (5) and protective factors (5) before going on  to  make  an
       overall assessment of risk.  She explains  that  historical  factors
       are the more static and unchanging ones, whilst clinical factors are
       more dynamic in  nature  and  associated  with  the  possibility  of
       change.  In the most recent report she has produced  a  sequence  of
       tables designed to show changes between 2011 and 2013.  Mr Allan was
       able to demonstrate that there were some errors in Table 2 C4, Table
       3 R1 and R2, that might  distort  the  progress  made.   During  the
       course of the hearing Ms. Davies was able to email  the  appellant's
       instructing solicitors and acknowledge that the errors were  in  the
       tables rather than the discussion of the factors in the  report  and
       she confirms her overall opinion of risk having regard to them.


   38.  We found Ms Davies's report to be reliable  and  helpful.  She  was
       clearly comprehensive and objective in  her  assessments,  explained
       her methodology and terminology, and had the benefit of  considering
       data obtained from prison and probation service.

   39. By contrast the report  by  Ms  Meadows  the  offender  manager  was
       shorter (8 pages), more of a pro-forma  summary  of  scores  than  a
       personal assessment, and undated  although  it  must  have  been  in
       existence before November 2010 and  apparently  based  on  an  OASys
       assessment last conducted 26 March 2010.  Judges of both immigration
       chambers who do not also sit as criminal judges  or  have  extensive
       knowledge of the tools used by the National  Probation  Service  may
       need a little more by way of background information to  be  able  to
       evaluate such material.  Although  we  understood  there  are  sound
       management  reasons  why  the  full  data  extracted  in  an   OASys
       assessment is not provided to the offender, what would  be  valuable
       to a judge considering risk factors is the extent  of  any  progress
       made during the sentence and licence period, and any material  shift
       in OASys assessment that we understand  from  the  London  Probation
       trust at least to be conducted regularly at intervals of  between  6
       months and 12 months.   The  failure  to  properly  understand  such
       reports is not limited to the untutored judiciary. Mr Allan  accepts
       that the observation in  the  Home  Office  decision  letter  of  20
       November 2010 that the  overall  score  of  low  risk  of  offending
       'conflicts with the written comments of the  offender  manager'  was
       inappropriate.   It  is  perfectly  possible  to  have  an   overall
       assessment of low risk of offending despite the presence of historic
       risk factors and initial disruptive behaviour in prison; there is no
       conflict with the assessment made in the same report, that the  risk
       of potential harm to the public,  were  the  offender  to  commit  a
       future violent offence, is high.


   40. We accept that the overall assessment is whether the risk of serious
       harm to the public by the claimant re-offending is sufficiently high
       to be unacceptable in all  the  circumstances,  in  which  case  the
       offender remains a present risk to public policy.

   41. However, by far the biggest problem with the data  available  to  us
       emanating from the Probation Service is that it is out of date.   No
       fresh assessment has been conducted since 2010, and the  limited  up
       date  information  contained  in   the   correspondence   that   the
       appellant's solicitors have had with the probation service does  not
       tell us much other than there was no unexplained failure  to  report
       to  the  licence  officer,  no  offending  or  breach   of   licence
       conditions.  We are unable to resolve a factual issue live  in  2010
       whether the claimant had failed to take up a victim awareness course
       or whether on reflection it was considered not appropriate  that  he
       be offered such a course.

   42.  We are disappointed not to have had the benefit of a more  thorough
       assessment from the Probation Service of his  behaviour  on  licence
       but we must decide the case on the materials  available  to  us  and
       this we now do.

   43. We take account of the witness statements of the appellant  and  his
       family and the fact that there has been no application made to cross
       examine any of the makers. They present a consistent picture.

    The offence and the risk assessment arising from it

   44.  The appellant was born in October 1988 and was 12 when  he  arrived
       in the UK to reside with his mother and a number of  other  siblings
       in 2001. He attended school and left with  seven or eight GCSEs  and
       started at college before his arrest on the index offence

   45.  He was 18 when he  committed  the  index  offence  of  knife  point
       robbery in January 2007, and by  that  stage  he  had  one  previous
       conviction aged 17 for handling stolen goods. He contested his guilt
       at trial; showed no remorse or awareness of the terrifying nature of
       his conduct on his victim  who  was  trapped  in  an  empty  railway
       carriage at the time of the events. He continued to deny  guilt  for
       some time after sentence.

   46.  From April 2007 to October 2010, he was in detention on  remand  or
       serving the custodial part of his sentence of five  years  detention
       in a young offenders'  institution.  From  the  data  we  have  been
       provided with from his successive prisons,  he  seems  generally  to
       have been regarded as polite, well  mannered,  cooperative  and  was
       given  enhanced  status,  however  there  have  been  a  number   of
       adjudications for un-cooperative and abusive behaviour  including  a
       number of warnings whilst he was at HMP Highpoint in 2010.

   47.  In 2010 before  completion  of  his  custodial  term  his  offender
       manager assessed that there was  some  suspicion  of   inappropriate
       life styles prior to April 2007 and the offending indicates reckless
       and risk-taking behaviour.

   48.  He had only been released on bail for some two months when he  came
       before the First-tier panel in March 2011  who  were  not  convinced
       that his recent behaviour was motivated by  factors  other  than  to
       avoid deportation and would be durable.

   49. He has successfully completed his period of  licence  from  February
       2011  to  April  2013.  He  has  complied  with  the  terms  of  his
       immigration bail since February 2011 including being detained on two
       occasions in 2011 and 2012 when it was anticipated that his  removal
       was imminent. He has had some employment since his  release  but  he
       states that the uncertainty as to  his  future  and  his  recall  to
       immigration detention  have  interrupted  the  prospects  of  stable
       employment for the time being.

   50. We have no doubt that Mr Essa constituted a serious threat to public
       order when he committed the index offence and was sentenced in  June
       2008. He had committed a robbery by threatening his  victim  with  a
       knife with a six inch blade.  He did not  use  the  knife  to  cause
       physical injury and was not considered a dangerous offender  by  the
       trial judge. However, possession of such weapons in a  public  place
       itself constitutes a threat  to  public  order,  and  potentially  a
       serious one. He remained in denial about his conduct and the  threat
       that he represented to others and the risk of harm to others  if  he
       committed a future violent  offence  was  sufficiently  serious  and
       insufficiently mitigated by insight and rehabilitation to  make  him
       eligible for deportation.

   51.  He had made significant advances in his rehabilitation by the  time
       he appeared before the panel in March 2011, although  it  was  faced
       with a difficult issue of assessing  how  far  those  advances  were
       durable.

   52. There have been further substantial advances between March 2011  and
       June 2013.  We summarise them:

          i. He has complied with his conditions of licence  and  bail  even
             when he faced the threat of imminent removal.


         ii. He has remained at home with his mother and continued  to  have
             close contact and support from his siblings and wider family.


        iii. He has acknowledged his guilt; the impact of his  offending  on
             others, and the need to sustain a law abiding  and  responsible
             life style. Ms Davies was satisfied that he has improved victim
             empathy. We note however that  he  has  continued  to  minimise
             guilt in that he still denies to Ms Davis that he was  actually
             in possession of a knife as opposed to pretending to the victim
             that he had a knife.

         iv. He has taken some employment although there is substance in his
             observation that it is difficult to enter stable employment  in
             his precarious circumstances.

          v. He has recently (January 2013)  started a relationship  with  a
             girl friend that may prove  to  be  durable  and  a  source  of
             stability, although Ms Davies discounts  such a relationship as
             a protective factor until it has lasted 12 months.


   53.  Ms Davies's overall conclusion is that his risk of re-offending has
       reduced and she now considers him  to  be  a  low  risk  of  violent
       recidivism and in the low risk range for general recidivism  and  at
       the current time presents a low risk of harm to others. She gives an
       indication of the kind of warning signs that would  be  apparent  if
       there was deterioration in this  prognosis  including  inappropriate
       peer group associations, feeling under pressure  to  prove  himself,
       reporting  that  he  is  being  unfairly  treated,  poor   emotional
       management evidenced  by  verbal  outbursts  (9.2.1).  There  is  no
       evidence  of  substance  abuse,  mental  illness,   psychopathy   or
       personality disorder (5.1.10 to 5.1.13). Among the factors  that  Ms
       Davies identifies as of significance in this assessment are:


         'He  told  me  that   being   kind   and   maintaining   supportive
         relationships with his family is what is important to him  now.  He
         acknowledged that it has been hard for his mother to see him  going
         through the process of deportation and he  accepted  responsibility
         for the hurt he has caused her.' (5.2.4)


         'Mr Essa appears to have good familial support  and  has  abstained
         from associations with an antisocial peer group since  his  release
         from detention.' (7.3.2)


         'Mr. Essa is assessed at being at increased risk of re-offending if
         deported given the lack of familial support that he would  receive.
         Social support helps provide a sense of belonging, approval, safety
         and affection. Social support can offer a buffer against  stressful
         life changes and helps a person to manage and reduce stress. Family
         relationships are of particular importance'. (8.7)


   54. There is no countervailing information  or  assessment  since  March
       2011. We conclude that, with the benefit  of  the  27  month  period
       since the panel examined his case, his progress and  family  support
       has been proven to be genuine and durable. His remaining  family  in
       the Netherlands have not played the same kind of role  in  his  life
       that his mother, siblings and  more  extended  family  have  in  the
       United Kingdom.


   55.  He is now 24 years of age and we  are  satisfied  more  mature  and
       aware of the consequences of his actions than he was in 2007. We are
       aware that his licence period has concluded and if  he  succeeds  in
       this appeal   neither the discipline of  immigration  bail  nor  the
       prospect of undermining his appeal will operate as a control  factor
       in  the  future.  We  agree  with  Ms.  Davies's   assessment   that
       deportation would undermine important aspects of his support network
       and progress to date, and  would  remove  an  incentive  to  durable
       rehabilitation that exists while he remains in a host state. He  can
       be under no doubt what the consequences would be if  he  offends  in
       the future.

   56.  We recognise that there is room for further progress in employment,
       personal relationships,  and  independent  living  but  the  support
       factors to encourage him to develop stability in  these  aspects  of
       his life are stronger in the United Kingdom than the Netherlands.

    Conclusions

   57.  Making our own assessment on the material now available  to  us  we
       conclude:-
          i. The appellant would constitute a threat  to  public  policy  in
             this case if he were to commit a  future  violent  offence.  We
             consider that the current assessment of the risk of  his  doing
             so is low and this assessment has been tested  by  his  release
             into the community for over two years.


         ii. The appellant has resided in the United Kingdom  for  13  years
             and just over half his life. He has strong  family  connections
             here and is well integrated. His prospects  of  preserving  and
             developing his rehabilitation  are  significantly  improved  by
             continued residence here. Deportation to the Netherlands  would
             remove important support factors and incentives to  behave  and
             would  appear  to  be  positively  detrimental  to  his  future
             rehabilitation.

        iii. In all the circumstances of his case, deportation now  for  the
             conduct leading to his conviction would be disproportionate.

   58. We accordingly re-make the appeal by allowing it.  Both  members  of
       the panel have contributed to this decision


                               Signed                                  Date




                                Chamber President

                                   Annex 1

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |                             |
|On 23 April 2013                              |                             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                  THE PRESIDENT, THE HON MR JUSTICE BLAKE
                           UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                                  DAHA ESSA
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Khubber, instructed by Irving and Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Allan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            RULING AND DIRECTIONS

Introduction
    1. Mr Essa is a citizen of the Netherlands who was born in  Somalia  in
       1988.  He was brought by his mother to the Netherlands in 1989  when
       he  was  a  few  months  old.  He  and  his  family  obtained  Dutch
       nationality in due course.


    2. In 2000 his mother followed two of his elder siblings to the  United
       Kingdom and in 2001 brought over the appellant then  aged  about  12
       and two more of his siblings.  He has lived in  the  United  Kingdom
       ever since.

    3. His family in the United Kingdom consists of his mother,  his  aunt,
       his brothers Abdullah and Abdirhaman, his sisters Khadra, Iman Amina
       and Amal. Khadra and Iman at least are married  and  have  children.
       His father and another sister Fardusa live in the  Netherlands.  The
       appellant's evidence was that the  family  have  lost  contact  with
       Fardusa and that his father is disabled and lives with accommodation
       owned by friends in the Netherlands and only makes sporadic  contact
       with the family in the United Kingdom.

    4. The appellant continued his education in the United Kingdom  and  in
       September 2006 started studying for a BTEC  in  travel  and  Tourism
       with  the  Tower  Hamlets   College,   having   started   an   early
       qualification in a college at  Maida  Vale.  In  June  2006  he  was
       convicted of handling a stolen mobile phone and was given a fine and
       made the subject of a referral order.  In  March  2007  he  was  the
       subject of further  proceedings  for  failing  to  comply  with  the
       referral order.

    5. In about April 2007 he was arrested by the police  on  suspicion  or
       robbery. This eventually led to his appearance at Snaresbrook  Crown
       Court on 23 April 2008 where after a trial he  was  convicted  of  a
       count of robbery that occurred on  14  January  2007.   The  robbery
       involved threatening the victim in an enclosed space  with  a  knife
       with a blade of some 6-7 inches. The judge concluded  that  although
       he could not be treated as a dangerous offender within  the  meaning
       of criminal legislation, this was an offence at the high end of  the
       range of knife point robbery and a sentence of five years in a young
       offender's institution was imposed.

    6. It was this sentence that led the Secretary of State to conclude  on
       12 October 2010 that the appellant represented a present  threat  to
       public order and should be deported to the Netherlands.

    7. The appellant's appeal against this decision came before a panel  of
       the First-tier Tribunal (FtT) on 31 March 2011 and it was  dismissed
       in decision sent  out  18  April  2011.   We  shall  return  to  the
       subsequent history of this appeal later.

    8. At the time of the panel's decision the  appellant  had  served  the
       custodial part  of  his  sentence  but  was  initially  detained  in
       immigration detention until granted bail to his mother's address  in
       February 2011.  He has remained on immigration bail ever since apart
       from two short periods when he was returned to  immigration  custody
       to effect his removal.  Whilst he has been at liberty  he  has  been
       supervised on licence by a probation officer. His licence conditions
       formally came to an end the day that the appeal came before us.

    9. The panel concluded that:
               i. The appellant represented a sufficient  risk  of  further
                  acts of violence  endangering  the  public  to  make  his
                  presence in the UK a serious threat to public policy.


              ii. Deportation was proportionate to  the  interference  with
                  private and family life and here combining  consideration
                  of proportionality under the ECHR and the EU Directive.

   10. It did not separately consider the  impact  of  deportation  on  the
       appellant's rehabilitation. It was prepared to assume  that  he  had
       the right of permanent  residence  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  so
       engaged the higher test of 'serious grounds of public policy'.

   11.  After the panel had dismissed his appeal permission  to  appeal  to
       the Upper Tribunal was successively refused by  the  First-tier  and
       Upper Tribunal. The appellant then sought  judicial  review  of  the
       Upper Tribunal's refusal of leave to appeal and on 12  January  2012
       at an oral hearing Mitting J concluded  it  was  arguable  that  the
       grounds relied on came within the criteria for challenge established
       by the Supreme Court in Cart v Upper Tribunal [2011] UKSC  28.   The
       substantive application was opposed by the Secretary  of  State  and
       came before Lang J on 1 June 2012 who refused it.

   12. The appellant appealed to the Court of Appeal  who  on  21  December
       2012 allowed the appeal and found that the FtT had made an error  of
       law  and  accordingly  quashed  the  Upper  Tribunal's  refusal   of
       permission and directed the Tribunal to reconsider the matter.

   13. On 12 February 2013 Upper Tribunal Judge Southern granted permission
       to appeal and the matter then came before us for hearing.

   14.  The reason that the Court of Appeal quashed  the  Upper  Tribunal's
       refusal of permission to appeal was that the FtT had not  considered
       for  itself  what  the  effect  of  deportation  would  be  on   the
       appellant's rehabilitation. Such a factor has emerged as a  relevant
       consideration in the exercise of the proportionality question to  be
       considered under Directive 2004/38/EC Article 28.

   15. The principle was first considered in the UK in the decision of  the
       Court of Appeal in Batista [2010] EWCA Civ 896; 29 July 2010. It was
       considered by Advocate General Bot in his opinion in  Case  C-145/09
       Land Baden-Wurtemberg v Tsakouridis [2011] CMLR 11  given on 8  June
       2010 and adopted by the Court of Justice in  its  decision  of    23
       November 2010  where it described it at [50] as


         ' the risk of compromising the social rehabilitation of  the  Union
         citizen in the State in which he has become genuinely integrated  ,
         which as the AG observes in point 95 of his Opinion, is not only in
         his interest but also that of the European Union in general'.

   16.  The ambit of  the duty to consider this factor, and the  weight  to
       be attached to it as  an  element  in  the  proportionality  balance
       remain to be decided on a case by case basis, but as yet there is no
       jurisprudence from the Upper Tribunal applying the principle in  the
       relevant factual context.


   17. Before Lang J, it was argued for the Secretary of  State  that  even
       though no submissions had been directed to this duty, the FtT had in
       effect considered it  when they gave their reasons for rejecting the
       private and family  life  claim  of  the  appellant  advanced  under
       Article 8 of the ECHR at [64] of the panel's determination.

   18.  The same argument was advanced in the Court of Appeal. Maurice  Kay
       LJ at [15] considered the submission arguable but in the end did not
       hit its target. The FtT had been bound to consider the issue  as  an
       established aspect of EU law  but  had  not  done  so.  It  was  not
       suggested to the Court of Appeal that even if the  FtT  had  not  in
       fact considered the issue at all  it  could  have  made  no  overall
       difference to the result.

   19.  Mr Allan provided helpful written submissions  for the  purpose  of
       this hearing that may be summarised as:-
          a. It was accepted that the FtT had made the error  identified  by
             the Court of Appeal.
          b. The error was not material to the outcome of the decision as it
             was not a weighty matter in the context of the panel's  overall
             findings.
          c. The panel  had  in  substance  considered  that  there  was  no
             obstacle to the appellant living in  the  Netherlands  and  his
             family in the UK could visit and support him  from  there  when
             considering his Article 8 claim.
          d. Accordingly, the Tribunal should not exercise its discretion to
             remake the case.
          e. Alternatively, if it were to remake the case it  should  do  so
             summarily on the basis of the FtT's findings of fact.

    Issue 1: Error of Law:

   20.  We find that the panel did make an error of law, as established  by
       the Court of Appeal although from the written submissions  presented
       to it, it does not appear  that  it  was  invited  to  consider  the
       principle or the decision in Tsakouridis.


         Issue 2: was the error material?

   21.  The error was in respect of an  issue  that  was  relevant  to  the
       central decision in the case: whether the  appellant  represented  a
       present threat  by  reason  of  his  propensity  to  commit  violent
       offences and if so whether deportation was proportionate.


   22. The question of the propensity of the appellant  to  offend  was  an
       issue very much canvassed before it. It formed  the  cornerstone  of
       the Secretary of State's case  that  the  appellant  was  a  present
       threat. In that context it had the results of the  last  OASyS  risk
       assessment performed on 26 March 2010 by NOMS whilst  the  appellant
       was serving his sentence and  a  much  more  detailed  report  of  a
       chartered forensic psychologist Lisa Davies, dated 23 March 2011, to
       whom we shall make further reference.

   23. If the panel's error went  to  a  relevant  issue,  central  to  the
       decision in question, then in our judgment it would  be  a  material
       error unless it could be said that it would have made no  difference
       to the outcome.

   24. It was  Mr  Allen's  submission  that  it  would  not  have  made  a
       difference, it was Mr Khubber's that it  would  or  it  might.   The
       latter submission is sufficient to establish materiality. Unless  it
       can be said that it could not make such a difference it would  be  a
       material error.

   25. Having focussed the submissions to this issue  at  the  hearing  and
       given the matter anxious consideration, we  indicated  that  we  had
       reached the view that the error was material.   We  now  give  brief
       reasons for this conclusion.

   26. In our judgment there was clear evidence before the Tribunal in  the
       shape of Mrs Davies's report that stability  of  home  and  personal
       support from family members were factors  against  stress  that  was
       itself a risk factor for re-offending (see R1 at Bundle 217;  R3  at
       Bundle 221;  R5 at Bundle 222).

   27. She noted the OASyS assessment of a low risk of offending but a high
       risk of harm to the public if he did re-offend. She  explained  that
       applying the static or historic factors there  was  a  low  risk  of
       violent recidivism. She then explained to these  factors  she  added
       the clinical or dynamic factors, that is to  say  factors  that  can
       change.

   28. She concluded at 6.1 (Bundle 225):-

         'When  assessing  the  relevance  of  clinical  risk  factors   and
         accounting for his current presentation and future plans the HCR-20
         would indicate that Mr Essa has, in my opinion, a moderate risk  of
         violent recidivism at the current time. I have assessed his risk as
         moderate with weighting given his current lack of insight into  his
         offending and his current inability to provide an active account of
         his actions. Mr Essa's risk is  likely  to  reduce  if  he  remains
         engaged in offending behaviour  work  with  his  probation  officer
         during his licence period".


             (emphasis supplied)

   29.  On the evidence before the panel, deportation  to  the  Netherlands
       would result in a significant diminution of family support for  this
       appellant  and  a  withdrawal  of  the  discipline  of  the  licence
       conditions and the benefits of regular supervision in the community;
       when combined,  this had the capacity  to  reduce  the  risk  of  re
       offending he presented in March 2011.

   30. If the combination of support from family members and the  probation
       service significantly reduced the appellant's risk of  offending  at
       all or violent offending in particular,  then  both  the  threat  he
       represented at present and  the  proportionality  of  expelling  him
       would be undermined, possibly to a significant degree.

   31.   The  panel  did  not  consider  the  impact  of   deportation   on
       rehabilitation. It did not refer to Mrs Davies conclusions about the
       impact of supervision on licence on current  moderate  risk  factors
       and it perhaps failed to understand the overall  evaluation  of  her
       report as they found it 'not entirely clear'.

   32.   In  the  light  of  Mrs  Davies  evidence,  and  the  evidence  of
       substantial contact and support that  the  family  provided  to  the
       appellant: a home with his mother, many  prison  visits  during  his
       detention, financial support on release, some help  in  establishing
       himself in work after release,  we  cannot  but  conclude  that  the
       panel's assessment of threat and future prospects  might  well  have
       been different.

   33.  Accordingly we set aside the FtT's decision. It is  then  necessary
       to consider how the matter should be remade.

     Issue 3  Re-making

   34.  Neither side invited us to remit the appeal to the FtT to start all
       over again.  We agree. The hearing below was fair and  the  findings
       of fact rational so far as they went. There has been a  considerable
       passage of time  and  a  definitive  answer  is  important  to  both
       parties. The issues  of  evaluation  are  somewhat  novel.  We  will
       therefore re-make the decision ourselves.


   35.  Re-making requires us to evaluate what the  impact  of  deportation
       would be on rehabilitation. We are further conscious that two  years
       have passed since the panel's decision and the  appellant  tells  us
       that he has kept in  touch  with  his  licence  supervisor  and  has
       successfully completed the licence period without recall.

   36. We would be  bound  to  take  this  information  into  account  when
       assessing precisely what the impact of probation  supervision  would
       be or has been.  We are conscious that  Union  law  requires  us  to
       consider the present threat that the appellant  presents  to  public
       policy, and that must be assessed at the end of the process close to
       the moment of proposed expulsion.

   37. Accordingly we cannot re-make the decision summarily, simply  adding
       one formal consideration to the balance of factors presently decided
       against the appellant.  Although we can preserve the panel's primary
       findings of fact, and do not need to start again, we must decide how
       much weight should be given to the rehabilitation prospects in  this
       case, weighing this against the other factors in the proportionality
       exercise including the present level of threat he presents.

     Directions

   38.  The panel will remake this appeal for itself  on  Tuesday  18  June
       2013 at Field House 10.00 listed for half a day.  There is  no  need
       for an interpreter. We indicate:


          a. We preserve the findings of fact of the FtT save that  we  will
             reach our own  decisions  on  present  risk  and  prospects  of
             rehabilitation.


          b.  We  would  value  information  from  the   probation   service
             supervising him and any update from Mrs Davies in the light  of
             any progress made.

          c. We anticipate considering analysis of OASyS assessments and the
             conclusions of Mrs Davies's 2011 report.  If  the  Home  Office
             challenge those observations and conclusions it should  explain
             how and why and may need to present appropriate evidence of its
             own to do so.

          d. We would welcome any information on  how  offenders  who  would
             otherwise be released on licence in the UK could be  supervised
             if deported to the Netherlands. We are  aware  of  the  general
             predicament posed in non EU cases see R (ota Hindawi) v  Parole
             Board [2012] EWHC 3894 Admin, 17 December 2012 Blake J.



   39.  In order  for the next hearing to be  effective  and  result  in  a
       final decision on this appeal we further direct:-

          a. The appellant must file any supplementary evidence he wishes by
             4.00pm 21 May 2013.  The  evidence  should  be  served  on  the
             tribunal and marked for the attention of the President  and  on
             Mr Allen who has indicated he will retain  possession  of  this
             case.


          b. By 4.00pm 4 June 2013 the Home Office must:

               i.  serve any evidence that it intends to rely  in  response
                  to the appellant's case;
              ii.  indicate whether it seeks to cross examine any witnesses
                  of the appellant;
             iii. indicate whether  it challenges the assumption of the FtT
                  that the appellant was genuinely integrated into the  UK.
                  Having regard to the terms of the judgment in Tsakouridis
                  we provisionally  think  this  is  the  appropriate  test
                  rather  than  whether  he  had  a  right   of   permanent
                  residence.

          c. Skeleton argument from the  appellant  to  be  served  by  4.00
             Monday 10 June and from the respondent by 4.00pm 14 June 2013.


          d. We acknowledge  safe  receipt  of  the  appellant's  bundle  of
             authorities.







                               Date:  24 April 2013




                                   Annex 2


Extract from the decision of the Court of Appeal in FV (Italy) [2012] EWCA
Civ 100

Per Pill LJ

   1. In Jarusevicius (EEA Reg 21 -  effect  of  imprisonment)  [2012]  UKUT
      00120(IAC) ("J"), the Upper Tribunal (Immigration &  Asylum  Chamber),
      Blake J President, presiding, considered the  effect  of  more  recent
      decisions,  including  Tsakouridis.  (PI   post-dated   the   Tribunal
      decision). J claimed to have entered the United Kingdom  in  September
      2004. In July 2010, he was sentenced to  42  months  imprisonment  for
      conspiracy to handle stolen goods.  He  had  previously  committed  an
      offence of driving a motor vehicle with excess alcohol. There  was  no
      evidence of  residence  in  accordance  with  the  Regulations  for  a
      continuous period of 5 years. It was held that J had not acquired  the
      right of permanent residence. The Tribunal concluded that, if he had:
      "Whilst we could not envisage this class of  conduct  giving  rise  to
      imperative grounds of public policy, we conclude that the Tribunal was
      in the alternative entitled to conclude in this case that it  amounted
      to serious grounds." (paragraph 67).
   1. The Upper Tribunal concluded that the time spent in detention in J was
      necessary if the 5 year period for acquisition of a right of permanent
      residence was to  be  established  and  did  not  count  towards  such
      accrual. Without  it,  5  years  continuous  residence  had  not  been
      acquired. The Upper Tribunal also stated:
      "58. We conclude that the decision in Tsakouridis neither requires nor
      entitles us to reach a contrary result.  That case was one  where  the
      right to  permanent  residence  had  been  acquired  long  before  the
      claimant spent time in prison. The right was not  lost  by  his  short
      absence abroad and nor was it  lost  by  his  remand  in  custody  and
      subsequent sentence on return. We note that in the calculation of  the
      ten years residence, EU law requires the decision maker to count  back
      from the date of the decision to deport,  whilst  the  acquisition  of
      permanent residence means counting forward from the date  that  it  is
      first established by economic activity or other means under Article  7
      of the Directive.
      59. In our judgment all the cases cited  draw  a  distinction  between
      acquisition of the right to reside permanently and the  loss  of  that
      right. The learning from the Court of Justice suggests that:-
      i) once a right of permanent residence has accrued it is not lost by a
      remand in custody or a short sentence or a sequence  of  them  (Nazli,
      Dogan);
      ii) prison is not to be equated to voluntary  unemployment   that  may
      lead to loss of worker status and the loss  of  continuity  of  lawful
      residence  for  the  purpose  of  acquiring  the  right  of  permanent
      residence (Orfanopoulos and Oliveri);
      iii)  the continuity of  residence  for  the  purpose  of   regulation
      21(4)(a)  (ten  years  residence)   is  not  broken  by  a  period  of
      imprisonment (Tsakouridis).
      60. This may mean that the conclusions of the decisions of the AIT  in
      LG and CC (Italy) and the  UTIAC  in   SO  that  in  addition  to  not
      counting  towards  the  five  year  period,  prison  also  broke   the
      continuity of residence for that period may have to be re-examined. It
      is one thing to conclude that a period spent  serving  a  sentence  of
      imprisonment is not lawful residence for the purpose of  acquiring  an
      EU right of residence, it is another to conclude that lawful residence
      prior to such a sentence could not be aggregated with lawful residence
      after service of it. It is difficult to see why if such  a  period  of
      imprisonment does not break "continuous" residence for the purpose  of
      regulation 21(4)(a), it should do so for  the  purpose  of  regulation
      15(1)(a). Equally it is difficult to reconcile the conclusion  of  the
      AIT in LG and CC that service of a sentence of imprisonment in the  10
      years before the decision to deport prevents the greater protection of
      "imperative grounds" arising, with  the  conclusion  of  the  CJEU  in
      Tsakouridis reached on the basis that it could. In a case  where  this
      issue is central to the outcome,  it  may  be  necessary  to  consider
      whether the UT is able to reach its own conclusion on the  matter,  or
      should make a reference to the CJEU or  is  bound  by  a  CA  decision
      pending any reference that is made by that court."
      I respectfully  agree  with  the  Tribunal's  statement  at  paragraph
      59(iii) and also with the need to reconsider the effect of a period of
      imprisonment in the 10 years before the decision  to  deport,  in  the
      light of Tsakouridis and now PI.
.......
   1. To draw from that finding a conclusion  that  established  rights  are
      defeated by 2 years imprisonment is  in  my  view  impermissible.  The
      analogy is also inconsistent with the principle stated in recitals  23
      and 24 of the Directive, affirmed in Tsakouridis and PI.  The  2  year
      period in article 16(4) may have some value as a  marker  but,  in  my
      judgment, to transpose it into a rule that a  2  year  gap  caused  by
      imprisonment  necessarily  defeats  established   rights   cannot   be
      justified. In relation to the right of permanent  residence,  it  runs
      quite contrary to the wording of article 16(4),  which  provides  that
      the right is lost only by two years absence. In relation  to  10  year
      rights, it is inconsistent with the approach directed in Tsakouridis.
   1. In Tsakouridis, article 16(4) was mentioned at paragraph 30  but  only
      by repeating the referring  court's  mention  of  the  possibility  of
      analogy. The submission is, in  my  judgment,  inconsistent  with  the
      Court's reasoning and ruling in Tsakouridis and in PI.  In  PI,  there
      had  been  2  years  custody  immediately  before  the  administrative
      decision to deport was taken and nothing was made of that.
   1. In Tsakouridis, at paragraph 43, the Grand Chamber applied the concept
      of the  "degree  of  integration  into  the  host  Member  State"  and
      highlighted the relevance of length of residence. Length of  residence
      creates a presumption of integration.  The  respondent  relies  on  16
      years  presence  in  the  United  Kingdom   before   imprisonment   as
      demonstrating a high degree of integration. There must be  an  overall
      qualitative assessment. Part of the time having been spent  in  prison
      was a factor but only a factor. It would become a lottery if a  period
      in prison during the 10  year  period  before  the  deportation  order
      excluded other factors from consideration. The question is whether the
      Union citizen is still integrated.
   1. In my judgment, some domestic authority does need  reconsideration  in
      the light of Tsakouridis and PI. There is no doubt that to establish a
      permanent right of residence under regulation 21(3)(a), residence must
      be in accordance with the Regulations. Once  permanent  residence  has
      been established, the test to be applied under regulation 21(4),  read
      with regulation 21(5) and (6),  is  the  integration  test  stated  in
      recitals 23 and 24 as explained in Tsakouridis. For reasons  given,  I
      do not consider that either HR (Portugal) or  Cesar  C  requires  this
      court to reach a different conclusion on the present facts.
   1.  A  qualitative  assessment  must  be  made  and  integration  is  not
      necessarily defeated by time spent, whether in prison or  out  of  the
      country, during which residence in accordance with the Regulations  is
      not  being  exercised.  That  follows,  in  my  judgment,   from   the
      integration test and from the absence of findings in those cases  that
      periods of imprisonment, or periods of absence, during  the  10  years
      preceding the deportation order, necessarily defeat  ten  year  rights
      under the Directive. Rights of residence will, however,  be  defeated,
      under regulation 15(2) by absence from the host  Member  State  for  a
      period exceeding two consecutive years. It may be that ten year rights
      go with them.
   1. The question whether the requirement of  a  continuous  period  of  10
      years residence is established at the date of the decision to  deport,
      turns on the degree of integration established at that time. This is a
      question of fact for the Tribunal. Following the test in  Tsakouridis,
      periods of absence within  the  10  years  immediately  preceding  the
      decision do not of themselves disqualify and neither does a period  of
      imprisonment. The period of imprisonment is, however,  relevant  as  a
      factor to be considered when deciding upon integration at the date  of
      decision. Integration will not normally be established by  time  spent
      in prison save that it may have limited relevance by  contributing  to
      the severance of links with the country of origin. If integration  has
      been established prior to the custodial term, it will not  necessarily
      be lost by that term.
   1. The factors to be considered are set out by the Grand Chamber  in  the
      two cases cited. In PI, two years and four months in prison before the
      decision was made did not of itself defeat integration.  The  decision
      turns on an  overall  qualitative  assessment  having  regard  to  all
      relevant  factors,  including  the   length   of   residence,   family
      connections and any interruptions  in  integration.  The  respondent's
      children are in the United Kingdom. Severance of links with the  state
      of origin is also a factor. Moreover, it follows from  the  Tribunal's
      approach in LG, with which on this point I respectfully agree, that  a
      state should not be  allowed  to  defeat  a  claim  by  deferring  the
      deportation order until the period of imprisonment has been served.
Per Aikens LJ
   1. What conclusions can be drawn from all these cases? First, both HR and
      Cesar C state that the quality of residence must be the same for  both
      the 5 year continuous period (to obtain PRR) and the  10  year  period
      (to obtain the "enhanced protection"): it has to be "legal  residence"
      ie. residence for the purpose of the Directive. Secondly,  neither  of
      the decisions of this court in HR and Cesar C deal directly  with  the
      present problem of whether a period  of  imprisonment  during  the  10
      years immediately prior to the decision to deport means that  the  EEA
      national must lose  the  "enhanced  protection"  given  by  Regulation
      21(4)(a) in circumstances where that person has  established  his  PRR
      and has not lost it. (It will be recalled that in HR it  was  conceded
      that the appellant could not establish that he had ever  obtained  his
      right to PRR by five years continuous residence, because to do  so  he
      would have had to count his time in prison). Thirdly, although the AIT
      in LG & CC held that time in prison  in  LG's  case  could  not  count
      towards the ten year period, that decision was based principally on an
      extrapolation of the reasoning in HR, itself based  on  a  concession,
      and was made before the CJEU gave its ruling in Tsakouridis. Fourthly,
      the latter ruling indicates that a period  in  prison  during  the  10
      years  immediately  prior  to  the  decision  to   deport   does   not
      automatically mean that the  EEA  national  must  lose  his  "enhanced
      protection". All factors  have  to  be  taken  into  account  and  the
      touchstone is whether there has been a transfer to  another  state  of
      the centre of the personal, family or occupational  interests  of  the
      person concerned and/or the integrating links previously  forged  with
      the Member State have been broken.
   1. Fifthly, in construing Regulation 21(4)(a) we are, in principle, bound
      to follow the CJEU's statements  on  the  way  Article  28(3)  of  the
      Directive is to be understood and applied in individual  cases.  There
      is no tension between the wording of the Directive and the Regulation.
      Therefore the only question that might arise is whether we  are  bound
      by any domestic decision to construe and apply Regulation 21(4)(a)  in
      a way that is (or might seem  to  be)  inconsistent  with  the  CJEU's
      opinion in Tsakouridis. In my view, we are clearly free to follow  the
      guidance in the CJEU's  decision.  We  are  not  bound  by  the  AIT's
      decision in LG & CC. Moreover, that decision came before the CJEU  set
      out the relevant principles in Tsakouridis. This court's  decision  in
      HR did  not  deal  with  the  same  precise  factual  situation  which
      confronts us. In any event, as has been said subsequently, notably  by
      this court in Cesar C, the ratio of HR is narrow. In my  view  we  are
      therefore not bound by this court's decision in HR, given the facts of
      the present case.
   1. How are these conclusions to be applied in this case? Before both  the
      2007 and 2008 Tribunals it was assumed that FV had "resided" in the UK
      for 10 years prior to the decision to deport. Effectively,  therefore,
      the SSHD made a concession of both law and fact to  that  effect.  The
      result of my analysis and that of Pill LJ is that the SSHD was correct
      in law to have conceded that FV's period in prison from 2002-2006  did
      not automatically preclude a conclusion that he had resided in the  UK
      for 10 years prior to the decision to deport. But what of  the  facts?
      If the matter were to be remitted to the UT to  reconsider  the  facts
      and if the UT applies the opinion of the CJEU in Tsakouridis, then the
      UT would have to make an overall assessment of FV's  position  in  the
      ten  years  prior  to  2007,  with  a  view  to  seeing  whether  FV's
      integrating links with the UK had been broken  and/or  the  centre  of
      FV's personal, family or occupational interests had  been  transferred
      to  another  State.  This  would,  in  theory,   require   a   factual
      investigation of the whole period from 1997 - 2007. Pill LJ has stated
      (in relation to the question of whether the SSHD can now argue that FV
      never had a PRR), that it would be unjust to require FV to prove facts
      to establish that he had a PRR in accordance  with  Regulation  15(1),
      bearing in mind it would mean adducing evidence  relating  to  matters
      before 2001. I respectfully agree with that conclusion.  Even  if,  on
      the way the CJEU expressed its opinion in Tsakouridis,  some  kind  of
      evidential burden was  placed  on  the  SSHD  to  show  a  rupture  in
      integration or a transfer of the centre of FV's interests  to  another
      State, in my judgment it would be unjust to require FV to have to deal
      with factual issues prior to 2001 on this point, just as it  would  on
      the PRR point, so many years after the events and five years after the
      2007 Tribunal decision in which no point was taken by the SSHD on  the
      10 year residence question. I think that the consequence  of  this  is
      that we must be entitled to  assume  that  there  was  no  rupture  of
      integration or transfer of the centre  of  FV's  interest  to  another
      State up to 2001.
   1. If that is so, then what has changed in the period from 2001  to  2007
      when the relevant decision was made? There is, effectively,  only  the
      period of imprisonment from 2002-2006 to consider.  There  can  be  no
      factual dispute about that aspect. To my mind, if, as we must  assume,
      FV had a right to PRR before he was imprisoned, he was then integrated
      in the UK. On the facts of this case, I fail to see how a period of  4
      years in prison in 2002-2006 could lead  to  a  conclusion  that  FV's
      existing "integrating links" with the UK had thereby been  broken;  or
      that the fact of FV's imprisonment could  show  that  his  "centre  of
      interest" had thereby become transferred to another Member  State.  As
      Pill LJ has pointed out, FV has been present in this  country  for  27
      years, for 14 of which he was the husband of a UK citizen and  he  has
      children here. Nor can he be held responsible for  any  delay  in  the
      decision to deport him since his conviction and imprisonment in 2002.

-----------------------
[1] Since the hearing the UT has been informed that the Secretary  of  state
has been granted permission to appeal  to  the  Supreme  Court  against  the
decision of the Court of Appeal but the appeal has been stayed  pending  the
outcome of the reference in Case C-400/12 MG and Case C-378/12 Onuekwere.

