
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Zulfiqar ('Foreign criminal'; British citizen) [2020] UKUT 00312 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 August 2020                              |                              |
|Heard at Field House                          |                              |
|On 27 August 2020                             |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |

                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

                               SAJID ZULFIQAR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                    -and-


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


   Representation:

   For the Appellant:      Mr S Muquit, Counsel,  instructed  by  Turpin  &
   Miller LLP
   For the Respondent:   Mr T Lindsay, Senior Presenting Officer

   1.  The  meaning  of  'foreign  criminal'  is  not  consistent  over  the
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and the  UK  Borders  Act
      2007.
   2. Section 32 of the 2007 Act creates a designated class of offender that
      is a  foreign  criminal  and  establishes  the  consequences  of  such
      designation. That is, for the  purposes  of  section  3(5)(a)  of  the
      Immigration Act 1971, the deportation of that person is  conducive  to
      the public good and the respondent must make a  deportation  order  in
      respect of that person.
   3. A temporal link is established by section 32(1) requiring the  foreign
      offender not to be a British citizen at the date of conviction.
   4. Part 5A of the 2002 Act prescribes a domestically refined approach  to
      the public interest considerations which the Tribunal is  required  to
      take into account when considering article 8 in a deportation  appeal.
      Unlike the 2007 Act it is not a  statutory  change  to  the  power  to
      deport, rather it is a domestic refinement as to the consideration  of
      the public interest question.
   5. Part 5A establishes no temporal link to the date of conviction, rather
      the relevant date for establishing whether an offender  is  a  foreign
      criminal is the date of the decision subject to  the  exercise  of  an
      appeal on human rights grounds under section 82(1)(b) of the 2002 Act.
   6. In such a case, the weight to be given to former  British  citizenship
      is case-sensitive.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 A. Introduction

 1. Both members of the panel have contributed to this decision.

 2. This is an appeal against a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
    Feeney ('the Judge') sent to the parties on 13 November 2019 dismissing
    the appellant's appeal against a decision of the respondent to refuse an
    application for leave to remain on human rights (article 8 ECHR) grounds
    and to deport him to Pakistan.

 3. Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal McClure granted permission
    to appeal on all grounds advanced by the appellant by a decision sent to
    the parties on 11 December 2019.

 B. Remote hearing

 4. The hearing before us was a Skype for Business video conference hearing
    held during the Covid-19 pandemic. On the first day, 5 August 2020, we
    were present in a hearing room situated in the Birmingham Civil Justice
    Centre. The hearing was not concluded on the day and resumed with us
    sitting at Field House on 27 August 2020. On both occasions the hearing
    rooms and the buildings were open to the public. Both hearings and their
    starting time were publicly listed. We were addressed by the
    representatives in exactly the same way as if we were together in the
    hearing room. We are satisfied: that this constituted a hearing in open
    court; that the open justice principle has been secured; that no party
    has been prejudiced; and that, insofar as there has been any restriction
    on a right or interest, it is justified as necessary and proportionate.

 5. The parties agreed that all relevant documents were before us. The video
    and audio link were connected between the representatives and the
    Tribunal throughout the hearing. At the conclusion of the hearing both
    parties confirmed that the hearing had been completed fairly.

 6. No member of the public attended the hearing either remotely or in
    person. Mr. Muquit confirmed at a preliminary hearing in March 2020 that
    there was no request for the appellant to be produced from HMP Norwich
    to attend the hearing. We accept that the appellant was content to rely
    upon his representative's attendance before us on his behalf and further
    accept that the appellant has remained thoroughly engaged in his appeal.

 C. Anonymity

 7. The Judge was not requested to issue an anonymity direction. The
    applicant requested such direction before this Tribunal relying upon the
    media coverage of the index offence, murder, at the time of his trial
    and thereafter, particularly on what are identified by the applicant to
    be far-right anti-immigrant websites. He further relied upon the impact
    of publication upon his wife and her two children.

 8. We are mindful of Guidance Note 2013 No 1 concerned with the issuing of
    an anonymity direction and we observe that the starting point for
    consideration of such a direction in this Chamber of the Upper Tribunal,
    as in all courts and tribunals, is open justice. The principle of open
    justice is fundamental to the common law. The rationale for this is to
    protect the rights of the parties and to maintain public confidence in
    the administration of justice. Revelation of the identity of the parties
    is an important part of open justice: Re: Guardian News & Media Ltd
    [2010] UKSC 1, [2010] 2 AC 697. Such revelation has an important
    practical benefit in ensuring public scrutiny of and confidence in the
    justice system.

 9. In the present case the appellant's private and family life are
    interests which must be respected. On the other side, publication of our
    decision and the accompanying identification of the appellant is a
    matter of general public interest as it accords with the principle of
    open justice.

10. At the hearing on 5 August 2020 we refused the appellant's application
    for anonymity, concluding that the appellant's concern as to the
    identification of his wife and her children to the wider public could
    properly be addressed by the less draconian use of referring to them in
    this decision by initials. In reaching our decision we observe that
    paragraph 18 of the Guidance Note confirms that the identity of children
    whether they are appellants or the children of an appellant (or
    otherwise concerned with the proceedings), will not normally be
    disclosed nor will their school, the names of their teacher or any
    social worker or health professional with whom they are concerned,
    unless there are good reasons in the interests of justice to do so. We
    are satisfied that there is no requirement to name either the
    appellant's wife or her children and we have ensured that no reference
    is made to where they reside, the ages of the children or what school
    they attend.

11. As for the appellant's concern that publication of his name will
    present a future risk to him from active members of the far-right, he
    has failed to demonstrate risks to his life and safety such as to
    require the principle of open justice and the right to freedom of
    expression protected by article 10 of the ECHR to be outweighed by his
    article 8 private life rights. In reaching our conclusion on this issue
    we are mindful that there is a consistent line of authority emphasising
    the importance of open justice and the permitting of media reporting of
    judicial proceedings: Khuja v Times Newspapers Ltd [2017] UKSC 49,
    [2019] A.C. 161.

 D. The appellant

12. The appellant is a national of Pakistan and is aged 40.  His father was
    naturalised as a British citizen in 1973 and his mother in 1981. At the
    time of the index offence the appellant was a dual national. He held
    British nationality having been born in this country in 1979 and is a
    citizen of Pakistan by descent.

13. He has resided in the United Kingdom since birth and attended primary
    and secondary school in this country. Upon leaving school he initially
    worked with Royal Mail and was then self-employed, operating a car
    dealership in east London.

14. Prior to the index offence, the appellant had accumulated 5 previous
    convictions for 8 offences involving taking a motor vehicle without
    consent, driving a vehicle with no insurance, driving a motor vehicle
    with excess alcohol, obtaining property by deception and possession of
    drugs.

Index offence

15. The index offence, murder, was committed in the company of two other
    men during the early hours of Sunday 7 November 2004. Following the
    incident, all three men travelled from east London to a hotel in
    Pontefract, West Yorkshire, where they were arrested. The appellant
    admitted to the police that all three men were planning to leave the
    country and travel to Pakistan to avoid arrest and prosecution. He
    further admitted to having been binge-drinking over the weekend of the
    index offence.

16. The appellant was convicted by a jury of murder, having previously
    pleaded guilty to violent disorder and assault occasioning actual bodily
    harm. He was sentenced to a mandatory term of life imprisonment with a
    minimum term of 15 years by HHJ Stephens QC at the Old Bailey on 24
    November 2005. He was further sentenced to concurrent sentences of 2
    years for violent disorder and 2 years for assault occasioning actual
    bodily harm. By means of his sentencing remarks, HHJ Stephens QC
    observed, inter alia:

         '[The victim] had the misfortune to come across the three of you at
         4.30 in the morning when he had had a good drink, perfectly
         legitimately, but was in no position to defend himself. Between
         you, you punched and kicked him to the ground. Between you, you
         then stamped on his face as he lay helpless on the ground. You
         stamped on his face so viciously and violently that the front part
         of his face became detached from his head. Witnesses who were not
         able to see the incident in full thought from what they saw and
         heard that you were playing football with something.

         Quite who did what cannot be established with any certainty, but I
         am perfectly satisfied that you were all in on this attack together
         as a team. One witness saw three people kicking and I am sure that
         all three of you were actively physically participating in the
         attack. Not content with what you did, you left Mr. Y dead or dying
         on the ground.

         You then went, as a team, to streets nearby where you damaged cars
         and other property and brought fear to the neighbourhood. You then
         went on to an Asian curry house where you assaulted a waiter and
         did more wilful damage to property. Then you, Zulfiqar, assaulted a
         gentleman who just happened to be passing by.'

17. HHJ Stephens QC accepted that the murder of Mr. Y was not racially
    aggravated and observed that there were attacks on people of several
    races:


         'Between you that morning you attacked people of all races: white,
         black and Asian. These, in my judgment, were random attacks carried
         out on people and property who had the misfortune to come across
         you in your drink-fuelled rampage.'


18. In imposing the minimum term, HHJ Stephens QC concluded:

         'I consider that it can readily be inferred from what you did to
         that unfortunate man that you intended to kill him. I accept there
         was no great premeditation, however all in all I consider that I
         should look at all that you did on that morning, including events
         after the murder of Mr. Y, and I have concluded that the
         appropriate minimum sentence in your case, the minimum term, is 15
         years ...'

19. The appellant was arrested for the index offence in November 2004, He
    has remained in custody and latterly immigration detention since this
    date.

Application for a prison transfer to Pakistan

20. The appellant applied in October 2008 to be repatriated to Pakistan
    under the terms of the Prisoner Transfer Agreement ('the Agreement')
    signed by the United Kingdom and Pakistan in August 2007 and in force
    from August 2008, save for three periods of suspension. The Agreement
    does not confer on an applicant an automatic right to transfer and the
    consent of both States is required before transfer can take place. The
    Ministry of Justice refused the application by a decision authored by
    Jason Ruffy, Cross Border Transfers, and dated 24 June 2010, which
    details, inter alia:

         'The Secretary of State has considered your application and has
         determined that it should be refused. The Secretary of State has
         taken into account that you are a dual national that has both
         British and Pakistani nationality.


         The Pakistani authorities confirmed that under the Pakistani Penal
         Code 1860 they will enforce a sentence of life imprisonment for
         murder and you would serve a minimum period of 15 years
         imprisonment following transfer, after which time your automatic
         release will be directed by the competent authority in Islamabad.
         However, the Secretary of State has determined that as a British
         national you could return to the United Kingdom following your
         release in Pakistan without sanction or supervision, which in view
         of the serious nature of your offence is not in the public interest
         ...'


21. We understand the core the Ministry of Justice's concern to be that
    upon release from a prison in Pakistan, the appellant would not have
    been subject to the supervision requirements necessary for his life
    licence in this country as required by section 28(5) of the Crime
    (Sentences) Act 1997 ('the 1997 Act'). Although licences for
    indeterminate sentence prisoners are prepared by the relevant public
    protection section of the Ministry of Justice, conditions can only be
    imposed, varied or cancelled in accordance with the recommendations of
    the Parole Board: section 31(3) of the 1997 Act. In this matter, we
    understand the Ministry of Justice to be concerned that as a British
    citizen the appellant could return to this country upon his release from
    a prison in Pakistan and in so doing would not be subject to life
    licence conditions imposed in accordance with recommendations of the
    Parole Board.

Renunciation of British citizenship

22. On 3 August 2011 the appellant applied to renounce his British
    citizenship. The respondent approved the renunciation of 21 October 2011
    being satisfied that the appellant also held Pakistani citizenship.

23. The appellant pursued repatriation but was ultimately unsuccessful.
    During such time the Agreement was suspended on several occasions: by
    the United Kingdom in 2010[1] and 2019 and by Pakistan in 2015.

Family life

24. The appellant's first marriage took place in Pakistan and ended in
    divorce. The appellant married his second wife, Z, a British citizen, by
    means of an Islamic ceremony on 5 June 2015. They had first met in 2003
    prior to Z's first marriage in 2004. Consequent to the appellant's
    arrest and imprisonment the couple enjoyed limited contact until Z
    visited the appellant in prison in January 2013 and they commenced their
    relationship in April of the same year.

25. Z has two children from her first marriage, both of whom are minors and
    British citizens. At the time of the hearing before the Judge Z's first
    husband had secured a Prohibited Steps Order preventing the children
    visiting the appellant in prison. We were orally informed by Mr. Muquit
    that this order has now been set aside consequent to an application made
    by Z, though he accepted that this was a post-decision event and not a
    matter relevant to our error of law consideration.

Applications to resume British citizenship following renunciation

26. In October 2017, the appellant applied to register to resume British
    citizenship under section 13 of the British Nationality Act 1981 ('the
    1981 Act'). The respondent rejected the application by a decision dated
    16 October 2017 detailing, inter alia:

         'As your client is unable to register his biometrics at this time
         his application must be considered invalid and therefore rejected
         in line with current policy.

         I should inform you that even had your client's application been
         valid, it would have still fallen for refusal as your client is
         unable to satisfy the Good Character requirement.

         'Good Character' is not defined in the British Nationality Act
         1981, but applicants are expected to have shown due regard for the
         laws of this country. In exceptional circumstances, we would
         disregard a recent conviction for a single, minor offence but
         normally we would not grant citizenship to a person who has been:

             1. Sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or more
                ...

         However, as your client is currently serving a lengthy custodial
         sentence having been convicted of murder, violent disorder and
         assault occasioning actual bodily harm, it would not be appropriate
         to allow discretion in your client's favour.'

27. The appellant did not challenge the decision rejecting his application.


Deportation proceedings

28. The appellant initially came to the attention of the respondent
    following his conviction and on 8 January 2007 a decision was made not
    to pursue deportation because he was a British citizen. Following his
    renunciation of British citizenship, the appellant was issued with a
    notice of decision to make a deportation order under section 32(5) of
    the UK Borders Act 2007 ('the 2007 Act') in October 2016. The appellant
    submitted human rights (article 8) representations in November 2016. In
    October 2017 the appellant applied to resume British citizenship which
    was refused by the respondent later that month.

29. The respondent concluded that as the appellant was a British citizen at
    the time of the offence he could not be considered a foreign criminal
    under the definition set out by section 32 of the 2007 Act and so
    deportation was to be pursued under the Immigration Act 1971 ('the 1971
    Act'). The appellant was therefore issued with a notice of intention to
    make a deportation order under section 3(5)(a) of the 1971 Act on 16
    January 2018 and he served human rights (article 8) representations upon
    the respondent on 14 February 2018. The respondent issued her reasons
    for refusing the appellant's human rights claim by her decision of 3
    October 2018, which is subject to this appeal.

30. Following a decision of the Parole Board the appellant was released on
    life licence in July 2020, post the hearing before the Judge, and
    presently remains in immigration detention.

 E. Relevant statutory provisions

31. Section 3(5) and (6) of the 1971 Act establishes the grounds upon which
    the respondent may order that a person is to be deported under the Act:

         '(5) A person who is not a British citizen is liable to deportation
            from the United Kingdom if-


             (a) the Secretary of State deems his deportation to be
                conducive to the public good; or


             (b) another person to whose family he belongs is or has been
                ordered to be deported.

         (6) Without prejudice to the operation of subsection (5) above, a
            person who is not a British citizen shall also be liable to
            deportation from the United Kingdom if, after he has attained
            the age of seventeen, he is convicted of an offence for which he
            is punishable with imprisonment and on his conviction is
            recommended for deportation by a court empowered by this Act to
            do so.'

32. Section 5 of the 1971 Act is concerned with the procedure for, and
    further provisions as to, deportation. Section 5(1) provides:

         '(1) Where a person is under section 3(5) or (6) above liable to
            deportation, then subject to the following provisions of this
            Act the Secretary of State may make a deportation order against
            him, that is to say an order requiring him to leave and
            prohibiting him from entering the United Kingdom; and a
            deportation order against a person shall invalidate any leave to
            enter or remain in the United Kingdom given him before the order
            is made or while it is in force.'

33. Section 32(1), (2) and (5) of the 2007 Act confirm:

         '(1) In this section 'foreign criminal' means a person -

             (a) who is not a British citizen,

             (b) who is convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence, and

             (c) to whom Condition 1 or 2 applies

         (2)  Condition 1 is that the person is sentenced to a period of
            imprisonment of at least 12 months.


         ....


         (5) The Secretary of State must make a deportation order in respect
            of a foreign criminal (subject to section 33).'

34. As to timing of an automatic deportation order, section 34(1) confirms:

         '(1) Section 32(5) requires a deportation order to be made at a
            time chosen by the Secretary of State.'

35. Section 59(4)(d) provides a mechanism as to commencement in relation to
    section 32:

         '(4) In particular, transitional provision -

             ...

             (d) in the case of an order commencing section 32 -

                  (i)  may provide for the section to apply to persons
                    convicted before the passing of this Act who are in
                    custody at the time of commencement or whose sentences
                    are suspended at the time of commencement ...'

36. In so far as is relevant to our considerations as to section 32, the UK
    Borders Act 2007 (Commencement No. 3 and Transitional Provisions) Order
    2008 SI 2008 No 1818 was made on 8 July 2008 and provides at articles 2
    and 3:

         '2.      Commencement

         The following provisions of the UK Borders Act 2007 shall come into
         force on 1 August 2008

             a) the provisions set out in the Schedule to this Order [i.e.
                sections 32 to 38 inclusive] in respect of a person to whom
                Condition 1 (within the meaning of section 32 of that Act)
                applies; and


             b) section 39 (consequential amendments)

         3.      Transitional Provision

         1) Subject to paragraph (2), section 32 applies to the extent to
            which it is commenced in article 2(a), to persons convicted
            before the passing of that Act who are in custody at the time of
            commencement or whose sentences are suspended at the time of
            commencement.


         2) Paragraph (1) does not apply to a person who has been served
            with a notice of decision to make a deportation order under s.5
            of the Immigration Act 1971 before 1 August 2008.'

37. From 28 July 2014 section 19 of the Immigration Act 2014 ('the 2014
    Act') was brought into force, amending the Nationality, Immigration and
    Asylum Act 2002 ('the 2002 Act') by introducing a new Part 5A which
    applies where the Tribunal considers article 8(2). By virtue of section
    117A, which addresses the application of Part 5A:

         '(1) This Part applies where a court or tribunal is required to
            determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-


             (a) breaches a person's right to respect for private and
                family life under Article 8, and


             (b) as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human
                Rights Act 1998.


         (2) In considering the public interest question, the court or
            tribunal must (in particular) have regard-


             (a)  in all cases, to the considerations listed in section
                117B, and


             (b) in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals,
                to the considerations listed in section 117C.


         (3) In subsection (2), "the public interest question" means the
            question of whether an interference with a person's right to
            respect for private and family life is justified under Article
            8(2).'

38. Section 117B is concerned with the application of the public interest
    consideration in all article 8 cases:

         '(1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the
            public interest.


         (2) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
            interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
            persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are
            able to speak English, because persons who can speak English-


             (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and


             (b) are better able to integrate into society.


         (3) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
            interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
            persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are
            financially independent, because such persons-


             (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and


             (b) are better able to integrate into society.


         (4) Little weight should be given to-


             (a) a private life, or


             (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner, that is
                established by a person at a time when the person is in the
                United Kingdom unlawfully.


         (5) Little weight should be given to a private life established by
            a person at a time when the person's immigration status is
            precarious.


         (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
            public interest does not require the person's removal where-


             (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
                relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave
                the United Kingdom.'

39. Section 117C details additional considerations applicable to cases
    involving foreign criminals:

         1) The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest.


         (2) The more serious the offence committed by a foreign criminal,
            the greater is the public interest in deportation of the
            criminal.


         (3) In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not been
            sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or more, the
            public interest requires C's deportation unless Exception 1 or
            Exception 2 applies.


         (4) Exception 1 applies where-


             (a) C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for
                most of C's life,


             (b) C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
                Kingdom, and


             (c) there would be very significant obstacles to C's
                integration into the country to which C is proposed to be
                deported.


         (5) Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and subsisting
            relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and
            subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child, and
            the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
            unduly harsh.


         (6) In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to a
            period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public
            interest requires deportation unless there are very compelling
            circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions 1
            and 2.


         (7) The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to be taken
            into account where a court or tribunal is considering a decision
            to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent that the reason
            for the decision was the offence or offences for which the
            criminal has been convicted.'

40. Section 117D provides the interpretation to Part 5A. Relevant to our
    considerations are:

         '(1) In this Part-


             'Article 8' means Article 8 of the European Convention on
             Human Rights;


             ...


         (2) In this Part, "foreign criminal" means a person-


             (a) who is not a British citizen,


             (b) who has been convicted in the United Kingdom of an
                offence, and


             (c) who-


                  (i) has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at
                     least 12 months,


                  (ii) has been convicted of an offence that has caused
                     serious harm, or


                  (iii) is a persistent offender.'

41. Section 82 of the 2002 Act establishes the statutory basis for a right
    of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal. Relevant to this appeal is section
    82(1)(b):

         '(1) A person ('P') may appeal to the Tribunal where -

             ...

             (b) the Secretary of State has decided to refuse a human
                rights claim made by P, ...'

42. Section 84 of the 2002 Act establishes permitted grounds of appeal,
    including:

         '(2) An appeal under section 82(1)(b) (refusal of human rights
            claim) must be brought on the ground that the decision is
            unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.'

43. Section 13 of the 1981 Act provides the mechanism by which a person can
    resume British citizenship where the renouncing of such citizenship took
    place on or after 1 January 1983:

         '(1) Subject to subsection (2), a person who has ceased to be a
            British citizen as a result of a declaration of renunciation
            shall be entitled, on an application for his registration as a
            British citizen, to be registered as such a citizen if -


             (a) he is of full capacity; and


             (b) his renunciation of British citizenship was necessary to
                enable him to retain or acquire some other citizenship or
                nationality.


         (2) A person shall not be entitled to registration under subsection
            (1) on more than one occasion.


         (3)  If a person of full capacity who has ceased to be a British
            citizen as a result of a declaration of renunciation (for
            whatever reason made) makes an application for his registration
            as such a citizen, the Secretary of State may, if he thinks fit,
            cause him to be registered as such a citizen.'

 F. Decision of the FtT

44. The hearing came before the Judge sitting at Hendon Magistrates' Court
    on 1 October 2019. The appellant attended in custody and was represented
    by Mr. Muquit. The appellant and Z gave oral evidence and were cross-
    examined.

45. The appellant contended that in 2008 he was advised that he could be
    repatriated to a prison in Pakistan to serve the remainder of his
    custodial sentence under the Arrangement. He stated that his only wish
    for doing so was because his father had returned to live in Pakistan and
    his health was deteriorating. He hoped that his father would visit him
    in prison in Pakistan and this would aid his father's mental health. He
    detailed that in March 2010 the Pakistani authorities had agreed to his
    transfer, but the United Kingdom authorities subsequently refused the
    application because he held dual nationality. By his witness statement
    dated 10 September 2019 the appellant asserted, inter alia:

         '24. On the 18 March 2010 I received confirmation that the Pakistan
            authorities had agreed for me to be repatriated to Pakistan. I
            thereafter received correspondence on the 24 June 2010 advising
            me that the Secretary of State [for Justice] had noted that I
            had dual nationality and I would need to renounce my British
            Nationality before the request could be authorised. My priority
            was my parents, their health was deteriorating and to this day I
            feel responsible for this, with the stress I had placed upon
            them. I was informed by Immigration Officers that if I renounced
            my nationality it would increase the chances of the application
            being processed successfully. I asked for this to be confirmed
            to me in writing, however, this request was not forthcoming.'

         ...


         '26. I can confirm that I would regularly speak with Jason Ruffy at
            Cross Borders Transfers in respect of my position in relation to
            repatriation. I was clearly advised by him that in the event
            that I was not repatriated within a period of three years, then
            I would be able to regain my British nationality. I was informed
            by him that if I was not moved by 2013 then I would not be going
            anywhere. I was told this in 2011. Jason Ruffy stated that my
            British citizenship would accordingly be reinstated if I was not
            sent back. We had a direct number for Jason and would speak to
            him regularly, however in around 2014 he was no longer
            contactable, and it is my understanding that he left his
            employment at Cross Border Agency.'

         ...


         '30. I confirm that I was also of the view that my Pakistani
            citizenship would expire in 2013 and therefore I would not have
            any form of nationality and would be stateless. I recall a
            conversation with an Immigration Officer, it was either Jason
            Ruffy or Christopher Binns, that informed me that I would not be
            left stateless and in any event I would revert back to being a
            British citizen by default.'

46. It was not asserted before the Judge that the appellant has lost his
    Pakistani citizenship leaving him stateless.

47. The Judge concluded, applying the correct burden and standard of proof,
    that the appellant was motivated to renounce his British citizenship
    because he wanted to transfer to Pakistan and serve his sentence in that
    country, enabling him to be close to his father. Further, she was not
    satisfied that the respondent had misrepresented the position as to
    registering to resume British citizenship or induced the appellant to
    believe that his British citizenship would be reinstated.

48. As to the relevant legal framework, the Judge understood that the
    respondent had conceded that the appellant was not a foreign criminal
    for the purposes of Part 13 of the Immigration Rules, at [12] and [16]:

         '12. There are detailed provisions within the Immigration Rules
            Part 13 as to when the respondent will consider that a person's
            circumstances are such that the public interest is outweighed.
            The Rules provide a specific framework as to how applicants with
            criminal convictions should be dealt with. However, the Rules do
            not remove the respondent's discretionary power under the 1971
            Act. Part 13 of the Immigration Rules only apply to cases
            involving a foreign criminal and as conceded by the respondent
            this does not apply to the appellant. However, in accordance
            with the guidance in NA (Pakistan) v. SSHD and ors [2016] EWCA
            Civ 662 it is sensible to examine whether the appellant could
            have succeeded under the Exceptions and then go on to consider
            whether any compelling circumstances exist as this provides a
            basis upon which to further consider the proportionality of the
            respondent's decision. Section 117B of the 2002 Act provides a
            list of considerations mandatory in all appeals concerning
            article 8 proportionality.'

         ...

         '16. ... I do however bear in mind that the appellant does not come
            within the framework of the deportation rules and so he does not
            need to provide evidence of a very strong article 8 claim over
            and above the circumstances described in the exceptions to
            deportation. In fact, the appellant can potentially succeed in a
            freestanding proportionality assessment in circumstances where
            his claim may be weaker than the exceptions as only Section 117B
            applies and not Section 117C.'

49. As to family life, the Judge found that the appellant enjoyed no
    parental responsibility for Z's children and that it was in the best
    interests of the children to remain in the United Kingdom and reside
    with their mother. She further found that the appellant enjoyed a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with Z, though it was formed after
    the appellant renounced his British citizenship. She concluded that it
    would be unduly harsh for Z to relocate to Pakistan but that it would
    not in the circumstances of this case be unduly harsh for her to remain
    in this country after the appellant's deportation to Pakistan. The Judge
    observed that Z is in good health and has been able to live her life and
    raise her children in the absence of the appellant.

50. The Judge undertook a 'very compelling circumstances' consideration of
    the appellant's article 8 rights outside of the Immigration Rules,
    though erroneously reducing the weight to be given to the public
    interest consequent to her misunderstanding as to the respondent's
    concession. She adopted the balance sheet approach recommended by Lord
    Thomas in Hesham Ali v. Secretary of State for the Home Department
    [2016] UKSC 60; [2016] 1 W.L.R. 4799. She concluded that such
    circumstances did not arise, and so the appellant's deportation would
    not be a disproportionate interference with his right to respect for his
    family and private life.

 G. Issues

51. The appellant relies upon four grounds of appeal, which are advanced as
    rationality challenges:

        I. The Judge gave unsustainable and/or inadequate reasons for
           rejecting the appellant's assertion that he was induced by the
           respondent to renounce his British citizenship and further that
           his citizenship would resume if he were not repatriated to
           Pakistan.


       II. The Judge raised a doubt as to the appellant having been informed
           as to the possibility of being repatriated when this was not a
           fact in issue.


      III. The Judge 'downgraded' the weight to be attributed to the
           appellant's family life on the basis that it was formed at a time
           when he had renounced his citizenship.


       IV. The Judge failed to lawfully consider the factors favourable to
           the appellant when considering his private life rights, such as
           his having lived his entire life in this country, his extensive
           rehabilitation and his not being a continuing risk of
           perpetrating criminal behaviour.

52. The respondent filed a rule 24 response and grounds of cross-appeal on
    21 February 2020. By means of the document the respondent submitted that
    the Judge materially misdirected herself in concluding that the
    appellant is not a foreign criminal as defined in Part 5A of the 2002
    Act. As the successful party before the First-tier Tribunal, Mr. Lindsay
    submitted that the document constituted a rule 24 response, with a cross-
    appeal in the alternative, placing reliance upon para. 46 of EG and NG
    (UT rule 17: withdrawal; rule 24: scope) Ethiopia [2013] UKUT 00143
    (IAC), the material part of which confirms:

         '46.   ... Rule 24 does not create a right of appeal to a party who
             has not asked for permission to appeal. Rule 24 is not in any
             way to do with seeking permission to appeal and it is not an
             alternative to seeking permission where permission is needed.
             It is to do with giving notice about how the respondent
             intends to respond to the appeal that the appellant has
             permission to pursue. If a respondent wants to argue that the
             First-tier Tribunal should have reached a materially different
             conclusion then the respondent needs permission to appeal.'

53. On behalf of the appellant Mr. Muquit accepted that the respondent did
    not require permission from the Tribunal to advance the contention as to
    misdirection in this matter, in circumstances where the core of the
    respondent's argument advanced by the rule 24 response is that
    consequent to the findings of fact made the Judge was correct to refuse
    the appeal, but on an issue which she lost before the Judge. Such
    approach is consistent with section 11(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and
    Enforcement Act 2007 where a right of appeal is enjoyed by any party
    only against some aspect of the actual order of the First-tier Tribunal:
    Secretary of State for the Home Department v. Devani [2020] EWCA Civ
    612; [2020] 1 W.L.R. 2613.

54. The Tribunal orally confirmed to the parties at a preliminary hearing
    held at Field House on 10 March 2020 that the respondent did not require
    permission to advance her argument as to misdirection by means of her
    rule 24 response. It was noted that neither party asserted that if there
    was an error of law as to the Judge's self-direction concerning the
    status of 'foreign criminal' that it was material. We confirmed that
    there was no cross-appeal before us.

 H. Decision on error of law

55. From the outset we are grateful to Mr. Muquit and Mr. Lindsay for their
    helpful and thorough written and oral submissions.

Renunciation of British citizenship.

56. We proceed by considering grounds 1 and 2 together. In a passage of her
    decision that was subject to considerable forensic examination before us
    by both parties, the Judge concluded as to the appellant's contention
    that he had been induced to renounce his British citizenship, at [15]:

         '15.   It may be helpful at this stage to consider the information
             I have been given regarding the appellant's decision to
             renounce his British citizenship. The appellant explains that
             he was advised in 2008 that he could apply to be repatriated
             to a prison in Pakistan. He does not explain who advised him.
             In 2010 the Pakistani authorities agreed to the repatriation.
             However, the Secretary of State explained that as the
             appellant was a British citizen he could not be repatriated.
             The appellant explained that he was told by Immigration
             Officers that if he renounced his nationality then it would
             increase the chances of a successful application. I have not
             been told who he spoke to or when. The appellant states that
             he had conversations with Jason Ruffy at Cross Border
             Transfers in respect of his position and was assured that his
             citizenship would revert in the event that he was not
             transferred. He tells me that Jason Ruffy has since left the
             department and that SAR's [subject access requests] have not
             been replied to. I have seen limited documentary evidence
             regarding the discussions the appellant is said to have had
             regarding the renunciation of his British citizenship. Given
             the significance of such an event, it is not unreasonable to
             suppose that he would have taken formal advice from a
             solicitor about the potential consequences. It is not
             unreasonable that he would have obtained written confirmation
             from the Home Office that his citizenship would be reinstated
             in the event that he was not transferred. He is not someone
             who is unfamiliar with the importance of obtaining and
             following legal advice having been involved in legal
             proceedings, albeit in a different context. It was argued that
             I should consider proportionality against the backdrop that he
             was told by officials that his citizenship would be reinstated
             if he was not transferred to Pakistan. However, on the basis
             of the evidence available to me I am not satisfied that I can
             reach that conclusion. I find the appellant made the decision
             to renounce his citizenship as he wanted to be transferred to
             Pakistan. I find his decision was motivated by the reasons he
             set out at paragraph 24 of his witness statement. Based on the
             information before me I am not satisfied that the respondent
             misrepresented the position to the appellant or that the
             respondent led him to believe that his citizenship would be
             reinstated.

57. She incorporated this finding into her article 8 assessment:

         '27.  I do bear in mind he was formerly a British citizen and that
             does carry substantial weight. Although I reject the claim
             that he renounced his citizenship on the basis of a
             misrepresentation, or an inducement made by the respondent as
             there is insufficient evidence before me to make that finding.
             I note the Home Office letter dated June 2010 but all this
             states is that as the appellant is a dual national, he will
             not be transferred to Pakistan to serve the remainder of his
             sentence as a result.'

58. We asked the representatives to identify the Home Office letter of June
    2010 referred to by the Judge, which we could not locate in the
    respondent's bundle, nor in the two bundles relied upon by the
    appellant. We were informed that it was the letter from Mr. Ruffy dated
    24 June 2010 referred to at [20] above. That is a letter from the
    Ministry of Justice and not from the Home Office, as erroneously
    identified in para. [8(i)] of the Judge's decision. We note that
    although the appellant claims at para. 24 of his statement dated 10
    September 2019 that the letter he received dated 24 June 2010 advised
    him that he would need to renounce his British citizenship before the
    transfer request could be authorised, the letter does not set out any
    such advice or suggestion.

59. Mr. Muquit accepted before us that his challenge to these paragraphs of
    the Judge's decision was on rationality grounds.

60. The appellant complains by means of ground 1 that the Judge erred in
    not accepting both his evidence and the evidence of Z and other family
    members as to his having been induced to renounce his British
    citizenship, and so 'wrongly discounted' a highly material factor
    mitigating the public interest in the appellant's deportation.

61. Having considered Mr. Muquit's submissions with care we are satisfied
    that this challenge is simply a disagreement with the Judge's factual
    findings. At the outset, we observe that the appellant and Z had little,
    if any, communication with each other at the time the appellant applied
    to renounce his British citizenship in August 2011. Z's evidence as to
    such events is reliant upon information provided to her by the
    appellant. The appellant further relied upon witness statements from
    eight family members and two friends at his hearing, of whom eight refer
    to the appellant having informed them as to events surrounding his
    renunciation of his citizenship and to his having being informed that he
    would regain his citizenship after a period of time. We again observe
    that the witnesses, though well-meaning, are simply repeating
    information provided by the appellant to them. Save for the appellant,
    the sole direct evidence on this issue is from Z who details that she
    maintained regular contact with Mr. Ruffy, said in her witness statement
    to be 'for [the appellant's] British Nationality to be reinstated' and
    that during a conversation in August 2013 she was advised that the
    appellant should apply for his British citizenship to be reinstated. She
    further detailed that Mr. Ruffy informed her that the Agreement between
    the United Kingdom and Pakistan had been suspended. We observe that Z
    does not provide explicit evidence that she was informed by an official
    that the appellant was entitled to resume his British citizenship if he
    were not transferred within 3 years, i.e. by 2014. Whilst not expressly
    addressed within the Judge's decision, we are satisfied that it is
    implicit that the hearsay evidence presented by family and friends could
    carry no positive weight in circumstances where it relied solely upon
    information provided by the appellant and his evidence as having been
    induced to renounce his British citizenship was not accepted.

62. In considering ground 2 we observe from the outset that the appellant
    has erred in fact by mistakenly referring to Mr. Ruffy and Mr. Binns as
    being immigration officers. Following discussion between the
    representatives before us we understand Mr. Ruffy to be have been
    employed at the relevant time in the Offender Safety, Rights and
    Responsibilities Group, Cross Border Transfers, Ministry of Justice and
    Mr. Binns to have been employed in the Equality, Rights and Decency
    Group, National Offender Management Service, Ministry of Justice.
    Neither of these men were agents or servants of the respondent at the
    relevant time and were clearly not immigration officers. We note that
    this mistake as to fact is further identifiable within Mr. Muquit's
    grounds of appeal where, we accept on instruction, Mr. Ruffy is
    expressly identified as one of the 'immigration officers' to whom the
    appellant spoke. The Judge was reasonably entitled to conclude that the
    documentary evidence said no more than that the appellant would not be
    transferred to Pakistan because he was a dual national. We are satisfied
    that the Ministry of Justice letter of 24 June 2010 is not capable of
    evidencing the appellant's contention that he was induced to renounce
    his citizenship upon being informed that it would resume if he were not
    transferred within a specified period.

63. The burden was upon the appellant to establish that he was materially
    influenced by the purported representations when deciding to renounce
    his British citizenship. Upon carefully considering the Judge's
    reasoning and the evidence before her we conclude that she adopted an
    exemplary approach and gave cogent, lawful reasons for her conclusion
    that the appellant had not been induced by the respondent, or the United
    Kingdom authorities, to renounce his British citizenship. On the
    evidence presented it was lawfully open to her to conclude that the
    appellant had not met the burden placed upon him and that the sole
    material influence upon his decision was his desire to act in a manner
    he considered best for his parents. In all the circumstances, the
    rationality challenges advanced by grounds 1 and 2 cannot succeed and
    are dismissed.


Is the appellant a 'foreign criminal' for the purposes of Part 5A of the
2002 Act and Part 13 of the Immigration Rules?

64. There is a threefold framework to deportation in domestic law. By means
    of section 5 of the 1971 Act, the respondent enjoys a discretionary
    power to make a deportation order, and such order may only be on the
    alternative grounds specified in section 3(5) and (6) of the 1971 Act.
    Section 32 of the 2007 Act designates a particular class of offender as
    a foreign criminal and sets out the consequences of such designation.
    The implicit amendment to section 3(5)(a) of the 1971 Act by section 32
    of the 2007 Act solely relates to the removal of the respondent's
    function of deeming a person's deportation to be conducive to the public
    good, in the case of a foreign criminal within the meaning of the 2007
    Act, and substituting an automatic deeming provision in such a case:
    Yussuf (meaning of "liable to deportation") [2018] UKUT 00117 (IAC). The
    final strand to the framework is the expulsion of persons exercising EU
    Treaty rights or their family members.

65. The respondent decided that the appellant's deportation would not
    breach the United Kingdom's obligations under article 8. The appellant's
    right of appeal against that decision was exercised under section
    82(1)(b) of the 2002 Act in relation to a decision to refuse a human
    rights claim and the ground of appeal advanced was that the decision was
    unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 ('the 1998 Act'):
    section 84(2) of the 2002 Act.

66. We initially find that the Judge erred in her understanding that the
    respondent had made a concession that the appellant was not a 'foreign
    criminal' and that Part 13 of the Rules did not apply in the appeal
    before her. Consequent to such misunderstanding she did not place the
    considerations in section 117C into her proportionality assessment. In
    terms, the decision letter of 3 October 2018 conceded only that as the
    appellant was a British citizen at the time of his offence, he could not
    be considered to be a foreign criminal under the definition set out at
    section 32 of the 2007 Act. It was for this reason that deportation was
    pursued under section 3(5)(a) of the 1971 Act. We note that in her
    decision letter the respondent proceeded to expressly rely upon Part 13
    of the Rules as well as sections 117A-D of the 2002 Act.

67. Mr. Muquit sought to persuade us that the Judge was ultimately correct
    to find that the appellant was not a foreign criminal and so Part 5A of
    the 2002 Act did not apply to him and that Part 13 of the Rules was to
    be applied as in the case of those who are not foreign criminals in the
    way adumbrated in Bah (EO (Turkey) - liability to deport) [2012] UKUT
    00196 (IAC). He submitted that the temporal quality of a criminal
    conviction in the definition of foreign criminal under the 2002 Act was
    the same as under the 2007 Act thereby establishing that both statutory
    provisions should be read as being consistent with each other. At our
    direction, the parties addressed the automatic deportation provisions
    under section 32 of the 2007 Act, though we recognise that the decision
    to deport in this matter was under the 1971 Act.

68. Before us Mr. Lindsay sought to withdraw the concession made in the
    decision letter as to the automatic deportation provisions under the
    2007 Act not being applicable to the appellant on the basis that he did
    not meet the requirements of being a foreign criminal. As the decision
    to deport was under the 1971 Act the fact that there was a concession as
    to automatic deportation is ultimately not relevant to our decision and
    so it was not a concession that determines the appeal before us. We find
    that the principles established in AK (Sierra Leone) v. Secretary of
    State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 999 are not met and
    consequently the application to withdraw the concession contained in the
    respondent's decision is refused.

69. We are satisfied that the respondent's initial concession as to the
    2007 Act was correctly made in her decision letter. The provisions
    introduced by the 2007 Act were a statutory change in deportation powers
    by which an element of the respondent's discretion was replaced by an
    automatic requirement as to deportation. The implied amendment to
    section 3(5)(a) of the 1971 Act by the 2007 Act established that where
    someone meets the requirements to be considered a foreign criminal for
    the purposes of the Act they are so designated, and their deportation
    deemed conducive to the public good so that they are subject to
    automatic deportation, save for the ability to rely upon statutory
    exceptions to deportation. As confirmed by Aikens LJ in RU (Bangladesh)
    v. Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ 651;
    [2011] Imm. A.R. 662, at [34]:

         '34.    The effect of sections 32(1)-(3) of the UKBA must be that
             if a person meets the conditions which bring him within the
             definition "foreign criminal", then his deportation is deemed
             by statute to be conducive to the public good. I therefore
             agree with Sedley LJ's statement (when sitting in the Upper
             Tribunal) in SSHD v MK [[2010] UKUT 281, at 23] that what was
             in the field of "executive policy" (because it was for the
             SSHD to decide whether it was conducive to the public good to
             deport a foreign criminal) has now become "legislative
             policy". Parliament has stated that it is conducive to the
             public good to deport "foreign criminals". I also agree with
             Sedley LJ's statement, at [24] in the same Determination, that
             where a "foreign criminal" challenges a deportation order made
             by the SSHD under section 32(5) of the UKBA , on the basis
             that his removal would infringe his ECHR rights and it would
             be disproportionate to deport him, it is not open to that
             person to argue that his deportation is not conducive to the
             public good, nor is it necessary for the SSHD to prove that it
             is. In such cases it will be so: see the proviso to section
             33(7) of the UKBA.'

70. Mr. Muquit placed reliance upon the judgment of Nicol J in R (Hussein)
    v. Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] EWHC 2492 (Admin),
    [2010] Imm AR 320 and his conclusion that section 32 of the 2007 Act,
    read in the light of the commencement provision at section 59(4)(d),
    must have been intended to cover individuals who had been convicted in
    the past as well as those who were convicted after commencement. We note
    para. [20] of Nicol J's judgment:

         '20. The statute does use the present tense in the sections to
            which Mr Husain drew attention, but in my judgment this will
            not bear the significance which he attributes to it. Section
            59(4)(d) uses the past tense - 'persons convicted before the
            passing of this Act.' I infer from this that the drafter
            contemplated that s.32 embraced those who had been convicted at
            the time of the passing of the Act. Section 59(4)(d) expressly
            allowed the Secretary of State to make a transitional provision
            in their case so as to confine the application of s.32 to those
            who were also in custody on the date of commencement, but
            section 59 is dealing with the mechanics of commencement. It
            empowered (but did not oblige) the Secretary of State to make
            certain transitional provisions. It did not itself set the
            parameters of automatic deportation. That was done by s.32.
            Thus section 32, read in the light of s.59(4)(d), must have
            been intended to cover those who had in the past been convicted
            as well as those who were convicted after commencement.'

71. Section 32 applies prospectively. Importantly, Nicol J observes the
    qualification of section 59(4)(d) as being confined to a limited
    temporal exception applied in a manner consistent with the general
    automatic deportation regime. Such qualification does not dislocate the
    temporal link of the section to the conviction as established by section
    32(1). We cannot read the contrary into the Court of Appeal's approval
    of Nicol J's judgment in AT (Pakistan) v. Secretary of State for the
    Home Department [2010] EWCA Civ 567, [2010] Imm. A.R. 675, at [9]-[11].

72. In this matter, as the appellant was convicted before the passing of
    the Act, was in custody at the time of the commencement of section 32
    and was not subject to deportation proceedings made under section 5 of
    the 1971 Act before 1 August 2008 his is a conviction that falls within
    section 32(1)(b) of the 2007 Act consequent to the relevant Commencement
    Order. However, neither section 59(4) nor the relevant Commencement
    Orders establish a limited temporal exception to the requirement that
    the appellant not be a British citizen at the time of conviction, and so
    we are in agreement that the respondent was correct to concede that the
    appellant is not a foreign criminal for the purpose of the 2007 Act
    consequent to section 32(1)(a).

73. We turn to Mr. Muquit's submission that the temporal quality of a
    criminal conviction in the definition of foreign criminal under the 2002
    Act is the same as under the 2007 Act.

74. Sections 117A to 117D in Part 5A of the 2002 Act set out the correct
    approach to considering article 8 claims. Section 117A(1) of the 2002
    Act sets out how the article 8 provisions are to be applied and is clear
    in terms. In respect of this appeal the Tribunal is to determine whether
    the respondent's decision made under the Immigration Acts breaches a
    person's right to respect for private and family life under article 8,
    and as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the 1998 Act.

75. Section 117A(2) is equally clear in terms: in considering the public
    interest question, the Tribunal must (in particular) have regard in all
    cases to the considerations listed in section 117B, and in cases
    concerning the deportation of foreign criminals, to the considerations
    listed in section 117C.

76. Section 117D sets out the interpretation of sections 117A to 117C. The
    focus of the parties' submissions upon us were directed to section
    117D(2) where the definition of a 'foreign criminal' is set out.

77. Part 5A prescribes a domestically refined approach to the public
    interest considerations which the Tribunal is required to take into
    account when considering article 8 in a deportation appeal. Unlike the
    2007 Act it is not a statutory change as to the exercise of power to
    deport, rather it is a domestic refinement as to the consideration of
    the public interest. The listed considerations are intended to be
    applied to a 'decision' made under both the 1971 Act, which applies no
    temporal link to the date of conviction, and the 2007 Act which does.
    There is no express confirmation as to the relevant time for the
    consideration of whether an offender is a foreign criminal, though we
    observe that the present tense is used at section 117D(2)(a) - 'who is
    not a British citizen' - and the past tense is used in relation to
    conviction and sentence at section 117D(2)(b),(c) save for in relation
    to 'persistent offender' at section 117D(2)(c)(iii) which is in the
    present tense. We observe at section 117D(2)(b) the phrase '... who has
    been convicted ...' is used. That is a different tense to that concerned
    with the same issue at section 32(1)(a) of the 2007 Act. We are
    satisfied that Parliament intended to use different tenses in the two
    statutes and did so because the provisions are for different purposes.
    The relevant provisions of the 2007 Act are concerned with the automatic
    deportation of foreign criminals that have been convicted and sentenced
    to a period of imprisonment of at least 12 months or convicted of a
    specified offence and sentenced to a period of imprisonment. The
    relevant provisions of the 2002 Act are concerned with the public
    interest question that arise when a Court or Tribunal is required to
    determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts breaches a
    person's right to respect for private and family life. We further
    observe that there is no express confirmation within the definition at
    section 117D(2) that the offender was not to be British at the date of
    conviction. We therefore conclude that the Judge erred in not
    considering the appellant to be a foreign criminal under Part 5A of the
    2002 Act.

78. In SC (paras A398-339D: 'foreign criminal': procedure) Albania [2020]
    UKUT 187 (IAC) the Tribunal confirmed that paragraph A398 of the Rules
    governs each of the rules in Part 13 that follows it. The expression
    'foreign criminal' in paragraph A398 is to be construed by reference to
    the definition of that expression in section 117D of the 2002 Act. The
    Tribunal affirmed the approach in OLO and Others (para 398 - 'foreign
    criminal') [2016] UKUT 00056. Consequently, as a foreign criminal
    sentenced to a mandatory term of life imprisonment the appellant fell to
    be considered under paragraph 398(a) of the Rules and could not be
    considered under either paragraphs 399 or 399A. He is therefore required
    to establish very compelling circumstances over and above those
    described in paragraphs 399 and 399A to establish that the public
    interest in deportation is outweighed. We conclude that the Judge erred
    in not considering the appeal under Part 13 of the Rules.

79. In summary we find as to whether the appellant is a 'foreign criminal'
    for the purposes of Part 5A of the 2002 Act and Part 13 of the
    Immigration Rules:

          1) The meaning of 'foreign criminal' is not consistent over the
             2002 Act and the 2007 Act.


          2) Section 32 of the 2007 Act creates a designated class of
             offender that is a foreign criminal and establishes the
             consequences of such designation. That is, for the purposes of
             section 3(5)(a) of the 1971 Act, the deportation of that
             person is conducive to the public good and the respondent must
             make a deportation order in respect of that person.


          3) A temporal link is established by section 32(1) requiring the
             foreign offender not to be a British citizen at the date of
             conviction.


          4) Part 5A of the 2002 Act prescribes a domestically refined
             approach to the public interest considerations which the
             Tribunal is required to take into account when considering
             article 8 in a deportation appeal. Unlike the 2007 Act it is
             not a statutory change to the power to deport, rather it is a
             domestic refinement as to the consideration of the public
             interest question.


          5) Part 5A establishes no temporal link to the date of
             conviction, rather the relevant date for establishing whether
             an offender is a foreign criminal is the date of the decision
             subject to the exercise of an appeal on human rights grounds
             under section 82(1)(b) of the 2002 Act.


          6) Paragraph A398 of the Rules governs each of the rules in Part
             13 that follows it. The expression 'foreign criminal' in
             paragraph A398 is to be construed by reference to the
             definition of that expression in section 117D of the 2002 Act:
             SC (paras A398-339D: 'foreign criminal': procedure) Albania.


          7) At the date of the respondent's decision in October 2018 the
             appellant was a foreign criminal as defined in section 117D(2)
             of the 2002 Act, namely that he 'is not a British citizen',
             'has been convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence' and
             'has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 12
             months.' He is therefore a foreign criminal for the purposes
             of section 117A(2)(b) and section 117C. Consequently, Part 13
             of the Rules was applicable.

80. However, as accepted by both parties, the Judge's error as to the
    appellant being a foreign criminal was not material because the nature
    of his sentence means that he cannot rely upon the statutory Exceptions
    to the public interest and the Judge proceeded to consider whether very
    compelling circumstances arose. Though she applied a lesser weight to
    the public interest than should have been applied under section 117C(6)
    of the 2002 Act and para. 398 of the Rules, this was to the benefit of
    the appellant who was still unsuccessful before her. Consequently, we
    find that the error of law was not material.

Article 8

81. There are three strands to the appellant's claim that the Judge erred
    in her assessment of the article 8 claim before her. First, the
    appellant claims the Judge 'downgraded' the weight to be attributed to
    the appellant's family life on the basis that it was formed at a time
    when he had renounced his British citizenship. Second, the appellant
    claims that the Judge failed to consider the factors favourable to the
    appellant when considering his private life rights, such as his having
    lived his entire life in this country, his extensive rehabilitation and
    his not being a continuing risk of perpetrating criminal behaviour.
    Finally, connected to that second strand, although not immediately
    apparent from the grounds of appeal, Mr Muquit submits that at para.
    [28] of her decision, the Judge noted the appellant 'is a very low risk
    of reoffending in the future ...', but concluded, at para [34], that the
    removal of the appellant is proportionate to the legitimate end sought
    to be achieved, namely the prevention of crime. We deal with each in
    turn.


Did the Judge downgrade the weight to be attributed to the appellant's
    family life?

82. The Judge accepted the appellant to be in a genuine and subsisting
    relationship with Z. At para. [22], she observed that the relationship
    was formed at a time after the appellant had renounced his citizenship
    and was a citizen of Pakistan with no status in the United Kingdom.

83. Mr. Muquit submits the appellant was not to be regarded as being in the
    United Kingdom 'unlawfully' at the time his relationship with his
    partner began because his residence throughout was either as of right
    through British citizenship or because he was made to stay by the
    respondent's direction, having not been permitted to transfer his
    custodial sentence to Pakistan. Further, Mr. Muquit seeks to pin the
    commencement of the relationship to the time they became friends,
    submitting that at the time the appellant and his wife first met, '...
    their relationship began in general they were both in the UK as British
    citizens.' It is said in the appellant's skeleton argument that at the
    time the appellant and his partner elevated their relationship, a time
    when the appellant was no longer a British citizen, his presence in the
    United Kingdom was consequent to the respondent '... not seeking to
    repatriate him and he was not then liable to deportation ...'

84. The development of the relationship between the appellant and Z is set
    out in their respective witness statements and as addressed above
    generally accepted by the Judge. We observe that they were, on their own
    account, friends from the end of 2003 to 2013, with contact over time by
    means of letter and telephone call. The appellant was married when they
    first met. Z married in 2004 and became a mother to her two children.
    Following the appellant's arrest in November 2004, having known each
    other for approximately one year, they did not meet until Z undertook a
    prison visit to the appellant in January 2013. The appellant had by this
    time renounced his British citizenship.

85. The appellant claims that there was no justification in law for the
    Judge diluting the weight to be attached to the family life established
    by him with Z. We note that the Judge's consideration was undertaken
    through the mistaken understanding that the respondent had conceded that
    the appellant was not a foreign criminal, but nevertheless she noted
    that it was sensible to examine whether the appellant could have
    succeeded under the Exceptions set out in the statutory framework and to
    then consider whether there were any compelling circumstances, as a
    basis upon which to consider whether deportation of the appellant was
    proportionate.

86. The Judge found that it would be unduly harsh for Z to relocate to
    Pakistan, at para. [23] of her decision. The Judge further concluded
    that it would not be unduly harsh for Z to remain in this country in the
    absence of the appellant, in circumstances where she has been the
    primary carer of her children, raising them in the absence of the
    appellant, and there are no concerns as to her ability to do so. She
    further noted that Z has financial and emotional support to rely upon
    when the appellant is in Pakistan and whilst weight was to be placed
    upon the lack of face to face contact, having weighed all factors no
    undue harshness arose.

87. In his grounds of appeal the appellant refers to the decision of the
    Court of Appeal in CL v. Secretary of State for the Home Department
    [2019] EWCA Civ 1925; [2020] 1 W.L.R. 858 with reference to paras. [50]
    to [66]. The Court in CL held that a judge was wrong to say that section
    117B(4) of the 2002 Act required him to attach little weight to a
    couple's relationship when that relationship has been entered into at a
    time when the applicant's immigration status is precarious. There is no
    rational basis for requiring family life established with a partner who
    is a British citizen by a person whose immigration status is precarious
    to be given less weight when there is no such requirement where the
    partner is not a British citizen. Furthermore, the Court held that the
    Strasbourg Court has made it clear that in striking the balance between
    the right to respect for family life and the State's interest in
    controlling immigration, it is necessary to consider the particular
    circumstances of the individuals concerned including their immigration
    status and history.

88. We reject the claim that the Judge diluted the weight to be attached to
    the family life established by the appellant. Broadly stated, although
    the appellant and Z had known each other since 2003 and had remained in
    contact with each other despite each of them being married to another
    person at various times over the years, their relationship developed
    from a friendship, which had grown closer over time, following the visit
    by Z to the appellant in prison in January 2013. Both the appellant and
    Z confirm in their respective witness statements that it was in April
    2013 that they discussed their feelings for each other for the first
    time, each being previously unaware of the other's personal thoughts on
    the issue. It is clear that the observation made by the Judge at para.
    [22] of her decision that the relationship between the appellant and Z
    was formed at a time after the appellant had renounced his citizenship,
    a time when he was a citizen of Pakistan who enjoyed no status in the
    United Kingdom, is properly rooted in the evidence.

89. Properly read the Judge does not say at paras. [22] to [34] of her
    decision that she attaches little weight to the relationship between the
    appellant and Z because that relationship was entered into at a time
    when the immigration status of the appellant was in anyway precarious.
    Neither does the Judge say that the appellant is to be regarded as being
    in the United Kingdom 'unlawfully' at the time his relationship with his
    partner began. We were not directed to any paragraph within the findings
    and conclusions in which the Judge stated that the weight to be attached
    to the relationship was in any way reduced because of the appellant's
    status at any point. To the contrary, insofar as the appellant's status
    is concerned the Judge expressly states at para. [27] that she has borne
    in mind that the appellant was formerly a British citizen and 'that does
    carry substantial weight'.

90. We conclude that the appellant's challenge on this issue simply amounts
    to a disagreement with the Judge's conclusion.

91. Before turning to the remaining grounds of appeal, we have considered
    the submission made by Mr. Lindsay that the Judge appeared to have taken
    an overly generous approach in para. [27] of her decision that
    'substantial weight' should be attached to the fact the appellant was
    formerly a British citizen. He submits that the Judge provides no
    reasons or authority to support the claim that the appellant's status as
    a former British citizen carries 'substantial weight'. The status of an
    individual as a British citizen prevents their deportation and so the
    question regarding the weight to be attached to their status as a
    British citizen will rarely arise. Where the question does arise because
    the status as a British citizen has come to an end, in our judgment the
    weight to be attached to such a factor is entirely fact specific. At one
    end of the spectrum are those who have British nationality, as here, by
    birth, and who have spent all of their life in the United Kingdom. The
    fact that they have lived in the United Kingdom as a British citizen for
    the majority of their life is a factor to which a Tribunal is entitled
    to attach 'substantial' or 'significant' weight, but that is not to say
    it is a factor that will be determinative of the proportionality
    assessment. At the other end of the spectrum are those who secured
    British citizenship after arrival in the United Kingdon, lived in this
    country as a British citizen but it subsequently transpires that the
    status was obtained, for example, by deception. Undoubtedly, such an
    individual could not rationally contend that 'substantial' or
    'significant' weight attaches to their former status as a British
    citizen. On the facts here, it was in our judgment open to the Judge to
    proceed on the basis that the appellant was formerly a British citizen
    and had been for over thirty years since birth, and that does carry
    substantial weight.

Did the Judge fail to consider the factors favourable to the appellant when
considering his private life rights?

92. We reject the claim made by the appellant that the Judge failed to
    lawfully consider the factors favourable to him when considering his
    private life rights. The Judge noted, at para. [17], that the appellant
    was a British citizen at birth. The Judge was satisfied that there was
    evidence before her of the appellant's social and cultural integration
    in this country, notwithstanding his offending behaviour. In considering
    whether there are very significant obstacles to the appellant's
    integration in Pakistan the Judge also noted, at para. [20], that the
    appellant has spent very little time in that country.

93. The Judge further noted at para. [20] that the appellant is likely to
    be familiar with Pakistani culture and traditions. He has possessed a
    Pakistani passport and was prepared to be repatriated to Pakistan to
    serve out the rest of his sentence in a Pakistani prison. She observed
    that the appellant is of working age, of good health and from his
    experience of working in this country has acquired transferable skills.
    She noted that the appellant can speak basic Urdu and would be able to
    acquire greater fluency in Pakistan together with attendant reading and
    writing skills. The Judge found that the appellant would be able to
    secure employment within a reasonable timeframe and it is likely that he
    does have extended family in Pakistan. The Judge accepted that although
    it may be disruptive at first, the appellant would be able to integrate
    in Pakistan at a practical level. She acknowledged there would be a
    period of adjustment, but for reasons set out in paras. [20] and [21]
    concluded that there are no very significant obstacles to the
    appellant's integration in Pakistan.

94. We observe that in her assessment the Judge did not place into the
    balance the fact that the appellant's intention consequent to having
    committed murder was to flee to Pakistan and reside there to avoid
    arrest and prosecution. It would have been reasonable for her to place
    adverse reliance upon this fact, but she did not do so.

95. The Judge assessed whether there were exceptional circumstances which
    made refusing the appellant leave to remain in this country
    disproportionate and hence incompatible with article 8. We again observe
    that at para. [27] the Judge confirmed that the appellant having been a
    former British citizen was a factor that carried substantial weight in
    the proportionality assessment.

96. In support of the submission that the appellant's previous status as a
    British citizen weighs heavily in his favour, Mr. Muquit refers to the
    decision of the Court of Appeal in CI (Nigeria) v. Secretary of State
    for the Home Department [2019] EWCA Civ 2027; [2020] Imm. A.R. 503. We
    observe the factual circumstances that arose in that appeal and the
    confirmation by the Court that in deportation appeals judges are to be
    mindful as to the importance of the particular facts surrounding an
    individual's presence and length of residence in the United Kingdom and
    features such as whether the appellant is a settled migrant who has
    spent almost his whole life in the United Kingdom and grown up with a
    British social and cultural identity. Leggatt LJ addressed the issue of
    weight to be given to such history, at [113]:

         '113. ... although little weight should generally be given to a
            private life established when a person was present in the UK
            unlawfully or without a right of permanent residence, it would
            not (as the Upper Tribunal judge recognised) be fair to adopt
            this approach on the particular facts of this case, where the
            grant of indefinite leave to remain was delayed for many years
            when CI was a child no good reason and through no fault of his.
            In determining whether it is compatible with article 8 to
            deport him from the UK, CI should not in the circumstances have
            less weight according to the fact that he has spent his
            childhood and youth in the UK than would be the case if he had
            had a vested right of residence for most of that period.'

97. Mr. Muquit further relied upon the decision of the Court of Appeal in
    Akinyemi v. Secretary of State for the Home Department (No. 2) [2019]
    EWCA Civ 2098; [2020] 1 W.L.R. 1843, in which the Court of Appeal held
    that the correct approach to the balancing exercise is to recognise that
    the public interest in the deportation of foreign criminals is a
    flexible one, and that there will be a small number of cases where the
    individual circumstances reduce the legitimate and strong public
    interest in removal. In Akinyemi (No. 2) the Court held that the Upper
    Tribunal attached insufficient weight to the fact that the appellant had
    been lawfully in the United Kingdom for his whole life. At para. [39] of
    his judgment Sir Ernest Ryder set out the correct approach as to a
    flexible consideration of the public interest:

         '39. ... The correct approach to be taken to the 'public interest'
            in the balance to be undertaken by a tribunal is to recognise
            that the public interest in the deportation of foreign
            criminals has a movable rather than fixed quality. It is
            necessary to approach the public interest flexibly, recognising
            that there will be cases where the person's circumstances in
            the individual case reduce the legitimate and strong public
            interest in removal. The number of these cases will necessarily
            be very few i.e. they will be exceptional having regard to the
            legislation and the Rules ...'

98. At para. [40], he observed:

         '40.  In support of that general proposition, it is necessary to go
            back to the facts of this case and the court's reasoning in the
            first appeal. First, one has to be careful to identify as a
            relevant fact that the appellant was in the UK lawfully for the
            whole of his life. It was a feature of the first appeal to this
            court that the UT had wrongly factored into the balance that
            his residence was unlawful or at least that it had the
            character of 'the absence of any lawful leave' (see Akinyemi at
            [30] and [31]). The conclusion of this court was unequivocal:
            subject to the deportation provisions of the 1971 Act, the
            appellant was 'irremovable' because 'he was in breach of no
            legal obligation by being here' (see Underhill LJ at [35]).

99. At paras. [50] and [51]:

         '50. In my judgment there can be no doubt, consistent with the
            Strasbourg jurisprudence, that the Supreme Court has clearly
            identified that the strength of the public interest will be
            affected by factors in the individual case, i.e. it is a
            flexible or moveable interest not a fixed interest. Lord Reed
            provides the example at [26] of a person who was born in this
            country as a relevant factor. Applying this approach to the
            weight to be given to the public interest in deportation on the
            facts of this case could lead to a lower weight being attached
            to the public interest.


         51.   I am strengthened in my view by the conclusion of the ECtHR
            in Maslow v Austria (supra), one of the cases relied upon by
            the Supreme Court in Hesham Ali. In that case, the court said
            at [74]:


                "Although Article 8 provides no absolute protection against
                expulsion for any category of aliens (see Uner cited above,
                #55), including those who were born in the host country or
                moved there in early childhood, the Court has already found
                that regard is to be had to the special situation of aliens
                who have spent most, if not all, of their childhood in the
                host country, were brought up there and received their
                education there (see Uner, #58 in fine ).'

100. We observe that on several occasions during his submissions Mr. Muquit
    referred to the appellant as being 'super-Akinyemi' consequent to his
    having enjoyed British citizenship from birth to the renunciation of his
    citizenship in 2011, a period of a little over 32 years. In Akinyemi
    (No. 2) the appellant was born in this country but had not acquired
    British nationality automatically due to legislative changes that
    occurred just before his birth. Despite for many years being entitled to
    British citizenship, he had never taken steps to acquire it and so
    remained a Nigerian national by virtue of his birth. Mr. Muquit's
    submissions were based upon the previous enjoyment of British
    citizenship being of significant weight in the proportionality
    assessment, though he correctly did not seek to go so far as to say that
    it was determinative of the issue.

101. We remind ourselves that the appellant advances this challenge on a
    rationality basis. As required the Judge was careful to identify as a
    relevant factor that the appellant was born British and has lived in the
    United Kingdom for most of his life as a British citizen. The Judge
    expressly referred to the appellant being a British citizen at birth
    when she was considering a private life claim at para. [17] of her
    decision and at para. [27] she expressly stated that his having been
    formerly a British citizen carried substantial weight in her
    proportionality assessment. We are satisfied that she lawfully adopted
    the approach endorsed by the Court of Appeal in CI (Nigeria) as to the
    weight to be given to his long enjoyment of British citizenship, and her
    assessment was in accordance with that subsequently confirmed in
    Akinyemi (No. 2) which post-dates her decision.

102. The substance of the complaint advanced, both in the appellant's
    skeleton argument and orally before us, is that the Judge erred in not
    treating the appellant's personal history of British citizenship as a
    stronger, special situation beyond that enjoyed by the appellants in CI
    (Nigeria) and Akinyemi (No. 2). The Judge's purported failure was to
    fail to allocate a 'special' weight to the depth of the appellant's
    social and cultural integration, secured through his enjoyment of
    British citizenship, relative to the public interest. We are satisfied
    that the Judge did consider such integration when placing as a positive
    fact for the appellant in the balance sheet approach that he had only
    ever lived in this country. She did not underestimate the importance of
    the appellant having enjoyed British citizenship for many years,
    including his formative ones. There is no requirement to forensically
    detail each individual inherent factor flowing from the long-term
    enjoyment of British citizenship in the balance sheet when they are
    reasonably identified by reference to the appellant having enjoyed such
    citizenship.

103. The assessment of an article 8 claim such as this is inevitably fact
    sensitive, as noted by Leggatt LJ when considering the personal
    circumstances arising in CI (Nigeria), at [117]:

         '117. The first is the severity of the difficulties and suffering
             that CI would potentially face if sent to Nigeria. There was a
             material difference between returning an immigrant to a
             country with which he retains some social and cultural ties
             and deporting him to a country to which he has none and which,
             in the words of CI's sister in this case, 'is as foreign to us
             as China'. The harshness of such deportation is magnified in
             the present case to the extent that it could be cruel by the
             evidence of the devastating impact that it would have upon
             CI's mental health.'

104. In this matter, the Judge acknowledged that though the appellant has
    spent very little time in Pakistan, it is not a country that is entirely
    unfamiliar to him. She found that the appellant was desirous of being
    transferred to a prison in Pakistan to enjoy greater contact with his
    father and this motivated his decision to renounce his citizenship.
    Unlike the appellants in CI (Nigeria) and Akinyemi (No. 2), the
    appellant has sought over time to relocate to Pakistan.

105. In our judgment the Judge undoubtedly considered all relevant matters
    in the round. The public interest in the deportation of a foreign
    criminal is not set in stone and must be approached flexibly. The Judge
    had proper regard, inter alia, to the appellant's length of residence in
    the United Kingdom, the ties that he retains with his family in this
    country, his immigration and offending history, and his family
    circumstances. In adopting the balance sheet approach, at paras [32] and
    [33], the Judge carefully considered the matters that weighed in favour
    of, and against, the appellant. In addition to his only having ever
    lived in this country she noted that the appellant is remorseful, has
    accepted responsibility for his previous convictions and that there is
    extensive evidence in the appeal bundle as to rehabilitation. The Judge
    gave substantial weight to the personal ties the appellant enjoys in
    this country through his long enjoyment of British citizenship. She also
    gave appropriate weight to the appellant's ability to establish his life
    in Pakistan and to integrate into the community. The appellant does not
    challenge the weight the Judge gave to the murder conviction.

The risk of re-offending

106. In a paragraph subjected to considerable analysis by the parties
    before us, the Judge detailed, at [28]:

         '28.  I do note that the appellant has committed, using the
             terminology in the skeleton argument, a 'historic' offence. I
             appreciate that he has been recommended for parole which
             suggests that he is a very low risk of reoffending in the
             future. I accept there is no evidence of any pro-criminal
             attitudes or that the appellant associates with people
             involved in criminal activities. I also take note of the
             extensive evidence of rehabilitation in the appellant's
             bundle.'

107. Mr. Muquit informed us that he had not sought to downplay the
    seriousness of the offence when referring to it as a 'historic' offence
    in his skeleton argument. It was simply a term used to identify that the
    conviction had occurred several years before and was not meant to imply
    that such fact alone diminished the public interest in deportation. We
    understand that the Judge used the term as meant by Mr. Muquit and
    nothing more is to be read into it.

108. Mr. Muquit contended before us that the Judge had accepted, at para.
    [28], that the appellant is a very low risk of re-offending in the
    future and sought to place reliance upon it as evidencing a difficulty
    in reconciling such finding of fact with her conclusion that the
    appellant's deportation is proportionate to the legitimate end sought to
    be achieved, namely the prevention of crime.

109. We reject this submission. Upon a natural reading of the paragraph,
    the Judge is careful to identify when she is making observations as to
    the evidence before her - 'note' and 'appreciate' - and when she is
    making a finding of fact - 'accept'. Our conclusion is reinforced by the
    Judge not placing a finding that the appellant is a very low risk of
    reoffending into her structured balance sheet at paras. [32] to [33].
    The appellant erroneously seeks to elevate a simple observation made
    upon the evidence into a finding of fact. We are satisfied that the
    Judge accepted that there is no evidence of any criminal attitudes or
    that the appellant associates with people involved in criminal
    activities.

110. During his oral submissions, in which he relied upon the Judge having
    made a finding of fact as to the appellant being a 'very low risk' of
    future reoffending, Mr. Muquit asserted in the alternative that if the
    Judge had not made such finding, she had erred in not doing so because
    it was a weighty matter in favour of the appellant. Whilst permission to
    appeal had not been granted on this ground, we heard submissions from
    Mr. Muquit and Mr. Lindsay on the issue.

111. We firstly observe that the risk of reoffending is one facet of the
    public interest but, in the case of very serious crimes, it is not the
    most important facet: OH (Serbia) v. Secretary of State for the Home
    Department [2008] EWCA Civ 694, [2009] I.N.L.R. 109, at [15(a)].

112. Before the Judge were several documents prepared by the Ministry of
    Justice concerned with the appellant's sentence management, including a
    parole assessment report, National Offender Management Service (NOMS)
    report and OASys, all dated October 2016. The appellant further relied
    upon a psychologist's report dated June 2008, a psychological risk
    assessment dated 2012, a summary of a sentence planning and review
    meeting held in 2016 and a considerable number of documents attesting to
    the completion of offender behaviour work, educational study and good
    behaviour in prison. Evidence was also filed as to the appellant working
    in the community on day release from prison. We note the Judge's
    observation that there was extensive evidence of rehabilitation before
    her.

113. We observe that nowhere in the documentation before us was the
    appellant identified as being a 'very low risk' of future offending. The
    Offender Manager's report identified the risk of reoffending as low,
    which was consistent with that identified at the time of the sentence,
    and the risk of serious harm if the appellant reoffended as medium,
    which also was consistent with the situation at the time of sentence.
    Such risk assessment was consistent with OASys. Both the Offender
    Manager's report and the OASys are dated 2016.

114. The Judge was entitled to observe that there was evidence before her
    that was suggestive as to risk, but to implicitly conclude that there
    was insufficient evidence upon which she could make a finding of fact.
    Such approach was lawful in circumstances where the evidence as to risk
    relied upon by the appellant dated from between 2008 and 2016 and when
    the Parole Board had not yet considered this evidence as well as the
    evidence prepared for its expert assessment in 2020. We note the
    observation of Underhill LJ in HA (Iraq) v. Secretary of State for the
    Home Department [2020] EWCA Civ 1176, at [141] that '... tribunals will
    properly be cautious about their ability to make findings on the risk of
    re-offending, and will usually be unable to do so with any confidence
    based on no more than the undertaking of prison courses or mere
    assertions of reform by the offender ...'

115. Further, we are satisfied that by placing the extensive evidence of
    rehabilitation in the 'pro' column in the structured balance sheet, at
    para. [33(3)] the Judge was mindful as to a body of evidence before her
    concerned with the appellant's risk. By its nature, rehabilitation, or
    desisting from crime and behaviour leading to crime, is indicative of a
    reduced risk of re-offending and so such evidence could properly
    considered as relevant to rehabilitation, rather than requiring an
    express finding of fact to be made as to 'risk' in the community, or
    future risk, and for such finding to be placed in the balance sheet
    exercise. To that end, we are satisfied that the Judge adopted the
    approach confirmed by the Court of Appeal in Danso v. Secretary of State
    for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 596, at [20].

116. We are fortified in our decision by the recent consideration of
    rehabilitation in deportation matters by Underhill LJ in HA (Iraq), at
    [134] to [142] and agree that the Judge adopted the approach identified
    by the Court of Appeal. She identified that the appellant has shown
    positive evidence of rehabilitation, and thus a reduced risk of re-
    offending, and included it as a positive factor within the overall
    proportionality exercise. However, she was not required to give it great
    weight because the public interest in the deportation or criminals is
    not based only on the need to protect the public from further offending
    by the foreign criminal but also on wider policy considerations of
    deterrence and public concern, which in this matter are rooted in the
    index offence of murder.

117. Though the Judge erred in the weight that she gave to the public
    interest, such error was in the appellant's favour and he was
    unsuccessful. The challenge to the Judge's consideration of the article
    8 appeal on rationality grounds cannot succeed. We are satisfied that in
    the circumstances arising in this appeal the appellant could not succeed
    under section 117C(6) of the 2002 Act or para. 398 of the Rules as no
    very compelling circumstances arise to lessen the public interest in his
    deportation.

 I. Conclusion

118. It is in our judgment clear from her assessment of the appellant's
    article 8 claim that the Judge considered the matter very carefully and
    had regard to all relevant matters. Having done so, she concluded at
    para. [34] that the decision to deport the appellant on conducive
    grounds struck a fair balance against the appellant's rights and
    interests and those of his wife when weighed against the wider interests
    of society. She found that deportation was proportionate to the
    legitimate end sought to be achieved, namely the prevention of crime,
    and therefore the appellant's removal in pursuance of a deportation
    order did not constitute a disproportionate interference with his right
    to respect for his family and private life. We find that it is clear
    such decision was properly open to the Judge on the evidence before her
    and was made following a careful assessment of the appellant's article 8
    claim.

119. As the Court of Appeal said in Herrera v. Secretary of State for the
    Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ 412; [2018] Imm. A.R. 1033, at [18], it
    is necessary to guard against the temptation to characterise as errors
    of law what are in truth no more than disagreements about the weight to
    be given to different factors. The assessment of such a claim is always
    a highly fact-sensitive task. The Judge was required to consider the
    evidence as a whole and she plainly did so, giving adequate reasons for
    her decision. The findings and conclusions reached were neither
    irrational, as asserted by the appellant, or unreasonable in the
    Wednesbury sense and it follows that our judgment is that there is no
    material error of law identifiable in the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal and the appeal is dismissed.





J.     Notice of decision

120. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of
    a material error on a point of law.

121. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal, dated 13 November 2019, is
    upheld and the appeal is dismissed.


Signed: D O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Date: 11 September 2020



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal has been dismissed and so there is no fee award.

Signed: D O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Date: 11 September 2020

                           -----------------------
[1] Question for Ministry of Justice UIN 159578, tabled on 2 July 2018

