



                                    [pic]


|Upper Tribunal                       |                                     |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)     |                                     |
|                  |                      |                |                  |
|SHL (Tracing obligation/Trafficking) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 00312 (IAC)    |
|                                                                            |
|the immigration Acts                                                        |
|                  |                      |               |                   |
|Heard at:|Field House               |        |Determination Sent:          |
|         |                          |        |Re Promulgated:              |
|On :     |1st May 2013              |                   |                   |
|         |                          |                   |                   |
|Before                                                                      |
|The Honourable Mr. Justice McCloskey                                        |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein                                              |
|                                                                            |
|Between                                                                     |
|           |SHL                                                |           |
|           |                                                   |Appellant  |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|           |                                                   |           |
|           |Secretary of State for the Home Department         |Respondent |
|           |                                                   |           |


Representation

For the Appellant:           Mr O'Ceallaigh, instructed by  Hammersmith  and
                       Fulham Community Law Centre
For  the  Respondent:                Mr  Jarvis,  Home   Office   Presenting
                 Officer.



  [1]   Regulation  6(1)  of  the  Asylum  Seekers  (Reception   Conditions)
Regulations 2005 imposes on the Secretary of State a duty  to  endeavour  to
trace the members of a minor asylum applicant's family as soon  as  possible
following submission of the asylum claim. A failure to discharge  this  duty
may, depending on the facts found, give rise to a breach  of  the  Secretary
of  State's  duty  under  section  55  of  the  Borders,   Citizenship   and
Immigration Act 2009, as it may render the decision maker unable  to  assess
the best interests of the child claimant. Where a Tribunal  finds  a  breach
of a  duty  owed  under  Regulation  6,  it  is  necessary  to  address  the
consequences thereof. Such a breach does not  per  se  vitiate  the  ensuing
asylum decision. Rather, it is incumbent on the  Tribunal  to  evaluate  its
effect and consequences in the fact sensitive context  under  consideration.
The onus remains on the Appellant to establish a proper foundation  for  the
grant of relief.

[2]   In the instant case, the Secretary of State failed  to  discharge  its
duty under Regulation 6. However the lack of evidence from the Secretary  of
State concerning the availability of otherwise of familial  support  to  the
Appellant in the event  of  returning  to  his  country  of  origin  neither
established nor reinforced any of the grounds upon which the  Appellant  put
forward his case for protection.

[3]   There is no right  of  appeal  to  the  Tribunal  under  the  European
Convention on Action Against Trafficking In Human Beings.  This  Convention,
as  an  unincorporated  international  treaty,  cannot  be  invoked   as   a
freestanding  source  of  rights,  obligations   and   legal   effects   and
consequences in domestic law.

[4]   In any event, in so far as the Secretary of State  was  subject  to  a
public duty to take the Convention into account, this was  clearly  done  in
the present case in making the separate trafficking decision.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



Introduction


[1]   This appeal has its origins in the Respondent's decision of 5th  April
      2011 rejecting the Appellant's application for  asylum.  By  the  same
      decision the Respondent determined that the Appellant did not  qualify
      for any form of relief by virtue of Articles 2, 3 or 8 ECHR or for the
      grant of humanitarian protection pursuant to  paragraph  339C  of  the
      Immigration Rules.

[2]   The Appellant challenged this decision and the history of the  ensuing
      proceedings may be charted thus:

      (a)   On 6th July 2011, the First-tier Tribunal dismissed his appeal.


      (b)    On  3rd  January  2012,  the  Upper  Tribunal  set  aside   the
           aforementioned decision and determined to re-make it.


        c) On 1st April 2012, a hearing scheduled to proceed in  the  Upper
           Tribunal was adjourned, to await the decision of  the  Court  of
           Appeal in KA (Afghanistan) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
           Department [2012] EWCA Civ 1014.


        d) On 18th July 2012, there was another  adjournment  of  the  same
           species.

        e) On 25th July 2012, the decision in KA was promulgated.

        f) On 18th October 2012, the appeal was rescheduled for hearing  in
           the  Upper  Tribunal.   On   this   occasion,   an   adjournment
           materialised as a result of the Respondent belatedly introducing
           certain fresh evidence.  This consisted of information emanating
           from Kent County Council Social Services Department, a "Eurodoc"
           fingerprint record originating  in  Greece  and  a  Home  Office
           record of interview of the Appellant.   This  new  evidence  was
           admitted  by  the  Tribunal  under  rule  15  of  the  Tribunals
           Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008.   The  adjournment  was
           designed to enable the Appellant to consider the fresh  evidence
           and take any further steps deemed appropriate.

        g) Initially, it was proposed that  the  appeal  hearing  would  be
           rescheduled on 10th December  2012.   In  the  event,  this  was
           revised to 28th January 2013.  On this occasion,  the  Appellant
           did not appear. The Tribunal granted an adjournment  and  a  new
           hearing date of 1st May 2013 was allocated.

      In deciding, on 3rd January 2012, to set aside  the  decision  of  the
      First-Tier Tribunal, this Tribunal (constituted only by Upper Tribunal
      Judge Goldstein) concluded that this decision was vitiated  by  errors
      of law in relation to the Secretary of State's duty under Regulation 6
      under the Asylum Seekers (Reception of  Conditions)  Regulations  2005
      and the duty owed under section 55 of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
      Immigration Act 2009, a further error of law on the issue of burden of
      proof and the making of  certain  findings  which  had  no  evidential
      foundation.


Appeal Hearing

[3]   Prior to 28th January  2013,  the  Appellant  had  attended  all  four
      previous listings of his case in the Upper Tribunal.  His  first  non-
      appearance occurred on 28th January 2013.  At the  rescheduled  appeal
      hearing on 1st May 2013  he  failed  to  appear  again.   His  counsel
      informed  the  Tribunal  that  there  had  been  contact  between  the
      Appellant and his solicitors some days before the adjourned hearing in
      January and again by telephone in advance of the most recent  hearing.
      Counsel  further  represented   to   the   Tribunal   that,   in   the
      circumstances, he and his instructing solicitors considered themselves
      to be without instructions from their client,  with  the  result  that
      they would no longer be representing  him.  In  essence,  this  was  a
      declaration that they were coming off the record on  behalf  of  their
      client.


[4]   As a result, a conventional hearing  was  not  conducted  on  1st  May
      2013.  In its ruling, the Tribunal stated  that,  notwithstanding  his
      non-attendance, the Appellant was entitled to a determination  of  his
      appeal and that this would be undertaken  as  a  paper  exercise.  The
      Tribunal noted  that  personal  attendance  is  not  required  of  any
      Appellant and that by non-attendance an Appellant does not forfeit his
      right to  have  the  appeal  determined.   There  is  nothing  in  the
      legislation  suggesting  otherwise.  Nor  does  non-attendance  by  an
      Appellant automatically qualify for an inference adverse to  him.  The
      Tribunal further  ruled  that  as  this  was  the  Appellant's  second
      successive failure to appear, there would be  no  further  adjournment
      and no fresh hearing date would be allocated.

[5]    This  determination  is  prepared  in  the   circumstances   outlined
      immediately above.  It has  two  particular  features,  each  of  them
      regrettable.   The  first  is  that  the  Tribunal  has  not  had  the
      opportunity to hear the Appellant's evidence at first hand. The second
      is that the Tribunal has been deprived of  adversarial  argument  from
      the parties' respective representatives.

The evidence: the main features


[6]   The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 30th  August  2009,  an
      unaccompanied teenager, aged almost 15 years.  Having claimed  asylum,
      he was registered by Kent County Council as  an  unaccompanied  asylum
      seeking child and was treated accordingly.  It was  recorded  that  he
      went missing on 9th October 2009 and remained so until  26th  November
      2010.

[7]   On 7th March 2011 [then aged 16 years - [10],  infra],  the  Appellant
      was interviewed by the Respondent in the presence of his solicitor,  a
      social  worker  acting  as  responsible  adult  and  an   interpreter.
      Afghanistan was noted as his country of origin. His village,  district
      and province were recorded.   He  asserted  that  the  only  remaining
      members of his family in Afghanistan were his sister,  maternal  uncle
      and grandfather.  He had maintained contact with his  family  and  had
      spoken  by  telephone  with  his  sister  just  three  or  four  weeks
      previously. As regards his most recent history,  he  claimed  to  have
      been kidnapped by "the agent" who escorted him  to  Birmingham,  where
      the Appellant worked for him in building operations.  There he resided
      with the agent and other male Afghanis. The Appellant  was  forced  to
      repay an alleged debt to his captor and when this was achieved he  was
      released.  He suffered no ill treatment during his captivity.

[8]    With  regard  to  his  alleged  vulnerability   to   persecution   if
      repatriated in Afghanistan, he claimed that he would be killed by  the
      Taliban, who were active in his area.  He believed that -

           "..... they would give me explosive material or bomb  to  be  on
           myself .... I would be  killed  ....  They  wanted  me  as  well
           because they took my maternal uncle's son and wanted to use  him
           as suicide bomber.  He did not come  home.   My  maternal  uncle
           told me I would be taken also so he sent me here."

      His cousin, he claimed, had been taken away  by  Taliban  members  two
      days before the Appellant's departure from Afghanistan.  They told his
      uncle that they wanted him also.  The Appellant was elsewhere at  this
      time.  Upon returning home, this was recounted to him by his  maternal
      uncle, who also told him that he would send the Appellant to  a  place
      where he would be safe.  The Appellant  left  the  following  morning.
      His uncle told him that his cousin was  exposed  to  deployment  as  a
      suicide bomber. The Appellant detailed the route and duration  of  his
      journey from Afghanistan to  the  United  Kingdom.  The  countries  in
      transit included Greece, where he spent about one month.   He  claimed
      that his father had been killed by the Taliban in  an  explosion  when
      working with the police,  when  the  Appellant  was  very  young.   He
      alleged that his mother  had  died  from  illness  shortly  after  his
      departure from Afghanistan. He had been living with his maternal uncle
      previously.  The Taliban had visited this house on two occasions.  His
      cousin's removal had been reported by his uncle  to  the  police.  The
      Appellant had had no direct contact with Taliban members.


[9]   Chronologically, the next material development  was  the  Respondent's
      decision on whether the Appellant was a victim  of  trafficking  under
      the Council of Europe Trafficking Convention  This  decision  had  two
      basic elements.   The  first  consisted  of  a  recognition  that  the
      Appellant may have been a victim of trafficking viz that he "..... may
      have been trafficked from  Afghanistan  for  the  purposes  of  labour
      exploitation". The second element of the decision is expressed in  the
      following passage:


           "...... It is not considered that there is any evidence that you
           were under the influence of traffickers at the  point  that  you
           came to the attention of the UK authorities.   You  have  stated
           that the man whose control you were under released you after you
           had worked off the debt you owed him for your journey to the  UK
           and you have had no contact with him since .....


           It is not considered  that  you  are  at  present  a  victim  of
           trafficking ....."



      Notably, this decision contains the following statement:

           "No evidence has been gathered or submitted that would  lead  to
           your account being inconsistent or incredible".

[10]  On the same date, 5th  April  2011,  the  Respondent  promulgated  its
      decision rejecting the Appellant's claim for  asylum.   This  decision
      had the following breakdown:


      (a)   The Appellant's asserted date of birth of 1st January  1995  and
           his asserted Afghan nationality were accepted.


      (b)    His  claim  regarding  his  father's  death  was  rejected   as
           incredible.


      (c)   His claim regarding Taliban  recruitment  of  his  cousin  as  a
           suicide  bomber  was   considered   speculative   and   rejected
           accordingly.


        d) Ditto the Appellant's claim that  he  was  at  risk  of  similar
           recruitment.


        e) His assertion that his mother had died following  his  departure
           from Afghanistan was doubted.


        f) His account of captivity in the United  Kingdom  was  apparently
           believed.


        g) While there was a possibility  of  Taliban  recruitment  of  the
           Appellant  if  returned  to  Pakistan,  the  evidence  did   not
           demonstrate a real risk.


        h) The Appellant did not belong to the particular social  group  of
           Afghan orphans and had not established that he would be at  risk
           of any harm upon returning to his country of origin.


        i)  There  would  in  any  event  be  sufficient  State  protection
           available to the Appellant.


        j) The Appellant is a person with no particular profile,  political
           or otherwise and  any  possible  Taliban  recruitment  would  be
           merely random.


        k) Internal relocation for the Appellant in  Afghanistan  would  be
           possible in any event. Moreover, he would have  the  support  of
           his living family members.

      The Appellant having failed  to  establish  a  well  founded  fear  of
      persecution, his claims for asylum and  humanitarian  protection  were
      dismissed accordingly. The decision letter further  recited  that  the
      Appellant's return to Afghanistan would not infringe his rights  under
      Article 8 ECHR.  Finally, the letter made brief reference  to  section
      55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act  2009  ("the  2009
      Act").  In accordance with the extant policy concerning  unaccompanied
      children seeking asylum, the Appellant was granted discretionary leave
      to remain in the United Kingdom until 1st July 2012, when he would  be
      aged 17 � years.

[11]  In sequence, the next material item of evidence is a  report  compiled
      by the NSPCC, dated 21st June 2011.  Having regard to the  chronology,
      it seems likely that this was commissioned on behalf of the  Appellant
      in the wake of the Respondent's decision two months  previously  that,
      at that time, he could not be considered a victim of trafficking under
      the Council of Europe Convention (supra).  The three main  sources  of
      information available to the author of the report were  the  documents
      provided to him, his interview of the Appellant (with an  interpreter)
      and the Appellant's social worker.  The Tribunal has  considered  this
      report in full and we highlight but  some  of  its  salient  features.
      While repeating his claim that his cousin  had  been  removed  by  the
      Taliban, he asserted that "he had witnessed some boys in  his  village
      being taken by the Taliban  never  to  be  seen  again".   He  further
      described that on one specific occasion -


           ".......  The Taliban visited the house [where] he  was  staying
           with his family in the afternoon while he had gone swimming with
           other boys in a local pond. The Taliban told his uncle that they
           wanted SHL to work for them ..........  [and] ......  that  they
           would return the next day or at some point in the near future to
           collect him."

      He asserted a fear of recruitment for deployment as a suicide  bomber.
      In its essence this account  harmonises  with  that  provided  by  the
      Appellant during his earlier asylum interview. The author's assessment
      was that the Appellant had been trafficked to the United  Kingdom.  He
      opined:


           ".......  children, such as SHL, who have  experienced  multiple
           traumatic events and have  become  victims  of  trafficking  and
           exploitation as a result, are at high risk of  being  vulnerable
           to re-trafficking and exploitation on  return.   This  risk  can
           continue into adulthood unless the young person has  appropriate
           support systems in place ..............


           In my professional opinion, SHL will need greater  psycho-social
           support to enable him to recover from the impact of his physical
           and emotional abuse and loss."

     It is evident that this report was designed to be deployed at the First-
     Tier Tribunal hearing scheduled for the following month.

[12]   Sequentially, the next material item of evidence is the first of  the
      Appellant's two written witness statements, dated 28th June 2011.   In
      this he describes a significant Taliban presence and influence in  his
      village and surrounding area.  The key passage in  this  statement  is
      the following:


           "I was forced to flee from Afghanistan as I was  forcibly  being
           recruited by the Taliban who came to our house on two occasions.
            My uncle then arranged for me to leave the country."

      In this statement, he also responded to the refusal letter.   Notably,
      in doing so, he made no mention of  his  mother  when  describing  his
      family circle and circumstances in Afghanistan. While confirming post-
      departure communication with his sister, he claimed that he  had  lost
      the relevant telephone number, adding that he had requested his social
      worker to arrange an appointment to enlist the tracing services of the
      British Red Cross.  The Appellant's second witness statement was  made
      on 30th November 2012 (cf. the chronology in paragraph [2] above).  In
      this he recounts receipt of a letter from  the  Red  Cross  disclosing
      their inability to locate his uncle.  He reconfirmed a single occasion
      of communication with  his  uncle  after  departing  Afghanistan.   He
      expressed his fear in the following terms:


           "I am still in fear of being returned to Afghanistan.  I believe
           I would be killed by the Taliban if I was returned."


           [Emphasis added.]

     Annexed to this statement is a British Red Cross letter confirming  the
     Appellant's tracing assertion.  While this letter clearly  contemplated
     further tracing efforts, to be followed by  further  contact  with  the
     Appellant, there is no evidence of these matters.




Findings and Conclusions

[13]  Notwithstanding the factors to which attention is drawn in [5]  above,
      the Tribunal has had the benefit of the carefully constructed skeleton
      argument of Mr O'Ceallaigh (of counsel)  and  has  derived  assistance
      from this.

[14]  To begin with, we shall address one discrete issue.  It was  submitted
      that the Tribunal should attribute no  weight  to  the  notes  of  the
      Appellant's  first  encounter  with  immigration  officials  upon  his
      arrival in the United Kingdom, relying on the decision of the Court of
      Appeal in AM and FA v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
      [2012] EWCA Civ 136. It is  clear  that  this  particular  record  was
      generated on the date when the Appellant entered the  United  Kingdom.
      We consider the present case to be  a  clear  instance  of  one  where
      evidence of this kind should attract  no  weight.   We  thus  consider
      because the Appellant was aged only 14 years at the material time;  he
      had just undergone a gruelling journey of  some  months  duration;  he
      found himself in an alien environment; and  no  responsible  adult  or
      legal or other representative was present.  This  situation  contrasts
      sharply with that which prevailed  at  the  time  of  the  Appellant's
      asylum interview (supra).  We disregard this evidence accordingly.


[15]  While the Appellant claimed to have been born  on  1st  January  1995,
      the assessment of Kent County Council is that his date of birth is 1st
      September 1994.  We shall proceed on  the  latter  basis.  We  do  not
      consider that this discrete factor  per  se  weakens  the  Appellant's
      credibility. It follows that he was aged 16 � years  when  his  asylum
      interview took place. We are mindful of the care to be  exercised  and
      latitude to be afforded in our evaluation of the Appellant's responses
      to the questions posed, given his age.  Other relevant factors in this
      exercise include his intervening period of captivity, the duration  of
      his period under the care of Kent County Council  pre-interview  (some
      three  months),  the  way  in  which  the  interview   was   conducted
      (formulation of questions, breaks, duration et alia) and the  presence
      of an interpreter, a  responsible  adult  and  the  Appellant's  legal
      representative.

[16]  Based on the Appellant's  asylum  interview,  we  make  the  following
      specific findings:


      (a)   An agent was engaged by his family to bring him  to  the  United
           Kingdom and this duly occurred.


        b) The journey from Afghanistan to the United Kingdom was basically
           as described by the Appellant.


        c) En route to the United Kingdom the Appellant  was  in  temporary
           police detention in Greece when his fingerprints were taken.


        d) Following his departure from Afghanistan, the Appellant had some
           initial contact by telephone with his family, both directly  and
           via the agent, but not subsequently.
        e) The Appellant was the victim of captivity and forced  labour  in
           the United Kingdom, perpetrated by the agent, from October  2009
           to November 2010.  This was for the purpose of paying the  agent
           for his services.

[17]  In its Notice of Decision,  the  Respondent  stated  that  the  meagre
       detail of his  father's  alleged  death  provided  by  the  Appellant
       damaged his credibility.  Secondly, the Appellant's  claim  that  the
       Taliban had an interest in recruiting him was rejected and  this  was
       considered  to  weaken  his  credibility   further.    Thirdly,   the
       Appellant's  assertions  about  his  mother's  death  were  rejected.
       Having regard to all the  circumstances  of  the  Appellant's  asylum
       interview,  including  in  particular  the  factors  highlighted   in
       paragraph [15] above, we would have expected the  Appellant  to  have
       provided  rather  greater  detail  about  various   family   matters.
       Moreover, he volunteered very little indeed about his upbringing and,
       strikingly, said nothing about his mother  -  notably  when  asked  a
       series of questions  about  his  family  (at  the  beginning  of  the
       interview) and when describing alleged events  before  his  departure
       from Afghanistan.  On his account, his mother played no role and  did
       not feature at all in the crucial decision to send him to the  United
       Kingdom. If true, one would have expected the Appellant to state this
       and  to  explain  it  even  briefly.  In  addition,  he  provided  no
       substantial information about his sister's home circumstances or  her
       upbringing.  In addition, bearing in mind  the  date  of  the  asylum
       interview and our finding of contact with family  members,  we  would
       have expected the Appellant to have said something about  the  actual
       or suspected fate or whereabouts of his cousin or, as  the  case  may
       be, the absence of any knowledge thereof.

 [18]       As the analysis immediately above, juxtaposed with  the  summary
       of the Appellant's various accounts (paragraph [7] - [8] and  [11]  -
       [12]  above)  demonstrates,  there  are  certain  imperfections   and
       inconsistencies in the story provided by the Appellant from  time  to
       time.  However, we must balance these with the factors  of  his  age,
       the rigours of his difficult and protracted  journey  to  the  United
       Kingdom and the ordeal of his lengthy captivity in this country.   We
       note further that, in its trafficking decision (paragraph [9] supra),
       the Respondent expressly acknowledged that  the  Appellant's  account
       was neither inconsistent nor incredible.  Furthermore, in its  asylum
       refusal decision  on  the  same  date  (paragraph  [10]  supra),  the
       Respondent, presumably advisedly, criticised certain aspects  of  the
       Appellant's  account  as  "speculative"  rather  than  mendacious  or
       exaggerated.  Following a critical,  but  fair,  review  of  all  the
       evidence, we find that the essential core of the Appellant's story is
       worthy  of  belief.  Thus  we  accept  his  explanation  for  leaving
       Afghanistan.

[19]  In  our  view,  the  critical  issue  is  whether  the  Appellant  has
       demonstrated a well founded fear  of  persecution  for  a  Convention
       reason in the event of  being  returned  to  Afghanistan.  We  remind
       ourselves that he bears the onus of proving a  well-founded  fear  of
       persecution for a Refugee Convention reason and that the standard  of
       proof is a reasonable degree of likelihood  (per  R  v  Secretary  of
       State for the Home Department, ex parte Sivakumaran [1998]  AC  958.)
         Reduced to its essentials, the  key  elements  in  the  Appellant's
       story are the alleged visits  by  Taliban  members  to  his  maternal
       uncle's home on two occasions, the alleged forced recruitment of  his
       cousin as a suicide bomber and his uncle's belief,  now  espoused  by
       the Appellant, that he was, and remains, at risk of a  similar  fate.
        The written submission formulated by counsel was that the  Appellant
       seeks asylum on the basis of his fear of persecution because  of  his
       imputed political opinion. It was further contended that he would  be
       at risk of forced recruitment by the Taliban. While  the  Appellant's
       second witness statement asserted a  risk  of  being  killed  by  the
       Taliban (paragraph  [12],  supra),  we  shall  interpret  this  as  a
       fear/risk of death  by  suicide  bombing  (or  something  comparable)
       following forced recruitment.

[20]  Acting on the findings  rehearsed  above,  we  turn  to  consider  the
       question of whether the Appellant, if returned to Afghanistan,  would
       have a profile exposing him to any particular risk of recruitment  by
       the Taliban.  On his own account,  he  at  no  time  had  any  direct
       approach from  or  contact  or  connection  with  this  organisation.
       However, based on our findings above,  we  accept  that,  indirectly,
       some interest had been expressed in him  by  the  Taliban.   In  this
       context, we refer to  the  decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  AK
       (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2012]
       UKUT 00163 (IAC). This decision embodies the current country guidance
       on the applicability of Article 15(c) of  the  Refugee  Qualification
       Directive to Afghanistan.  It does not speak directly to the specific
       risk canvassed by the Appellant in  the  present  case  viz  that  of
       forced recruitment by  the  Taliban  and,  consequentially,  possible
       death by suicide bombing.  However, we consider  that  this  discrete
       risk falls within the scope of the armed conflict and  indiscriminate
       violence generally identified by the Upper Tribunal in AK.   This  is
       confirmed by the detailed description of the  present  conditions  in
       Afghanistan in paragraph [1]  of  the  Determination.   The  Tribunal
       held, inter alia


           "[249]      .........


           (ii)  Despite a risk  in  the  number  of  civilian  deaths  and
                 casualties and (particularly in the 2010 - 2011 period)  an
                 expansion of the geographical scope of the  armed  conflict
                 in Afghanistan, the level  of  indiscriminate  violence  in
                 that country taken as a whole is not at such a  high  level
                 as to mean that, within the meaning of Article 15(c) of the
                 Qualification  Directive,  a  civilian,  solely  by   being
                 present in the country, faces a real risk  which  threatens
                 his life or person ...............


           (iii) Nor is the level of indiscriminate violence, even  in  the
                 provinces worst affected by the violence  ...........    at
                 such a level."


       Both this decision and that in AA (Unattended  Children)  Afghanistan
       [2012] UKUT 00016 featured in the recent  decision  of  the  European
       Court of Human Rights in H  and  B  v  United  Kingdom  [Applications
       numbers 70073/10 and  44539/11  -  9th  April  2013].   The  domestic
       decisions were endorsed by the Strasbourg Court: see paragraphs  [92]
       - [93].  The Court held that in the  event  of  the  removal  of  the
       Applicants to Afghanistan there would be  no  infringement  of  their
       rights under Article 3 ECHR.


[21]  We consider, in light of our findings above,  that  in  the  event  of
       being removed to Afghanistan the Appellant would be  of  no  specific
       interest to the Taliban.  If he were to attract such  interest,  this
       would be simply on account of his general profile constituted by  his
       age (now 18) and his male gender.  He would be under no compulsion to
       live where he did previously, having  regard  to  the  considerations
       that he has no living parents, his only sibling (his sister)  is  now
       married and he has lost contact with his maternal uncle. We  consider
       that, as a matter of probability, the Appellant will choose to settle
       elsewhere, away from this area of high  level  Taliban  activity  and
       influence. It will be open to the Respondent to return him  to  Kabul
       (as in AK and H and B).  In this respect, we  note  also  the  recent
       judgment of the Court of Appeal in  EU  (Afghanistan)  and  Others  v
       Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  32,
       paragraph [34] especially.

[22]  We consider that the risk upon removal to Afghanistan asserted by  the
       Appellant has no special or specific features personal to him.  It is
       no different from the risk theoretically faced by the  large  numbers
       of  other  broadly  comparable  members  of  the  Afghan  population.
       Furthermore, the Appellant has failed  to  establish  that  he  is  a
       member  of  any  discernible  group.  We  specifically   reject   the
       suggestion that he is a member of a group  whose  common  identifying
       characteristic is some unspecified political opinion. His  claim  for
       asylum must fail accordingly.  Secondly, applying the decision in AK,
       he  does  not  qualify  for  humanitarian  protection.  A  real  risk
       threatening his life or person has not  been  demonstrated.  Thirdly,
       giving effect to the decision in H and B v United Kingdom, his  claim
       under Articles 2 and 3 ECHR must fail.  The findings of fact which we
       have made in this Determination are probably about as  favourable  to
       the Appellant as they could possibly be. However,  we  conclude  that
       they fall well short of providing a basis  for  concluding  that  his
       removal from the United Kingdom to Afghanistan would  contravene  any
       of the governing legal standards.


The Tracing Issue


[23]  Counsel's skeleton argument canvassed two further  issues.  The  first
       concerns the tracing duty imposed on  the  Respondent  by  Regulation
       6(1) of the Asylum Seekers (Reception Conditions)  Regulations  2005.
       This is an issue which seems to be arising with increasing frequency.

[24]  The issue of tracing originates  in  a  measure  of  EU  law,  Council
      Directive 2003/9/EC (27th January 2003), the subject matter whereof is
      the prescription of certain minimum standards  for  the  reception  of
      asylum  seekers.  Article  19  addresses   the   discrete   topic   of
      unaccompanied  minors.  They  must  be  afforded  certain  levels   of
      protection and representation.  Article 19.3 provides:

           "Member  States,  protecting  the  unaccompanied  minor's   best
           interests, shall endeavour to trace the members of  his  or  her
           family as soon as possible.  In  cases  where  there  may  be  a
           threat to the life or integrity of the minor or his or her close
           relatives, particularly if they have remained in the country  of
           origin, care must  be  taken  to  ensure  that  the  collection,
           processing  and  circulation  of  information  concerning  those
           persons is undertaken on a confidential basis, so  as  to  avoid
           jeopardising their safety."

      The domestic transposing measure  is  the  Asylum  Seekers  (Reception
      Conditions) Regulations 2005, Regulation 6(1) whereof provides:

           "So as to protect an unaccompanied minor's best  interests,  the
           Secretary of State shall endeavour to trace the members  of  the
           minor's family as soon as possible after  the  minor  makes  his
           claim for asylum."

      In paragraph 68 of the UNCHR Guidelines on International Protection, a
      nexus is forged between tracing and "family reunification with parents
      or other family  members".   This  theme,  and  its  interaction  with
      reception arrangements in the country of destination, is reiterated in
      paragraph 8A of the UNCHR  Aide-Memoire  concerning  special  measures
      applicable to the return of unaccompanied and  separated  children  to
      Afghanistan.  This theme is also clearly apparent in the  Respondent's
      publication "Processing  an  Asylum  Application  from  a  Child",  in
      particular the passage in Chapter 15 which  states  that  any  tracing
      exercise must consider the duty  under  section  55  of  the  Borders,
      Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 -


           ".... to have regard to the need to  safeguard  or  promote  the
           welfare of  children  in  the  UK  and  whether  it  is  in  the
           childrens' best interests to return  them  to  their  family  or
           extended family, if reunification is  possible  .....  [the  aim
           being] ..... to obtain information relevant to an assessment  of
           whether there is a prospect of reuniting the child  safely  with
           their family in the event of return."




      It is convenient here to interpose section 55 of the 2009  Act  which,
      insofar as material, provides:


           "(i)  The Secretary of State must make arrangements for ensuring
           that -


                 (a)    the  functions  mentioned  in  subsection  (ii)  are
                       discharged having regard to the need to safeguard and
                       promote the welfare of children who are in the United
                       Kingdom ...


             ii) The functions referred to in (i) are -


                 (a)   any function of the Secretary of State in relation to
                       immigration, asylum or nationality.... "




      It is also pertinent to highlight paragraph 80 of  the  commentary  on
      the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child  promulgated  by  the  UN
      Committee on the Rights of the Child (September 2005):

           "Tracing is an essential component of any search for  a  durable
           solution and should be  prioritised  except  where  the  act  of
           tracing, or the way in which  tracing  is  conducted,  would  be
           contrary to the  best  interests  of  the  child  or  jeopardise
           fundamental rights of those being traced."


[25]        In the jurisprudence  which  has  developed,  it  has  not  been
       disputed that Regulation 6(1) imposes on the  Secretary  of  State  a
       duty to endeavour to trace the members of a minor asylum  applicant's
       family as soon as possible following submission of  the  claim.  This
       was described by Pill LJ in DS (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for
       the Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ 305 as "a plain duty": [44].  His
       Lordship's conclusion was that the case should  be  remitted  to  the
       Tribunal, to enable further evidence  to  be  considered,  apparently
       with specific reference  to  the  issue  of  reception  services  and
       facilities available in the proposed country of destination.  It  was
       common case that the Secretary  of  State  had  made  no  attempt  to
       discharge the tracing obligation. In the  second  of  the  two  major
       judgments delivered by the Court of Appeal, Lloyd  LJ  observed  that
       the duty was an enduring one "..... and steps ought now to  be  taken
       to comply with that obligation": see [68].   His  Lordship  did  not,
       however, link this  failure  to  the  grant  of  any  relief  to  the
       Appellant.  Rather, his clearly pronounced reason for concluding that
       the Tribunal's determination was wrong in law was that it had  failed
       to give consideration to that to  which  regard  must  be  had  under
       section 55 of the 2009 Act, namely the need to safeguard and  promote
       the welfare of the Appellant as a child in the  United  Kingdom.   On
       this basis, he concurred with the proposed order, namely remittal  of
       the case to the Tribunal: see paragraphs [80] - [83]. Rimer  LJ,  the
       third member of the Court, concurred with  Lloyd  LJ:  see  paragraph
       [88].  We consider the ratio of DS to be that the Appellant succeeded
       and a consequential order  of  remittal  to  the  Tribunal  was  made
       because there had been a failure to  conduct  an  assessment  of  the
       Appellant's best interests, contrary to section 55.


[26]  The Secretary of State's duty to endeavour to trace  was  the  subject
      of further consideration by the Court of Appeal in HK (Afghanistan)  v
      Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  315.
      Delivering the judgment of the Court, Elias  LJ  considered  that  the
      Regulation 6 duty is an integral aspect of the  determination  of  the
      asylum application: [39].  It also fell within the ambit of the  broad
      duty under section 55 of the 2009  Act:  paragraph  [40].   Concurring
      with the approach of Lloyd LJ in DS, Elias LJ continued:

           "[46] .... In my view, he was thereby recognising that there may
                 be cases where the Secretary of State or a  Tribunal  could
                 make  a  determination  on   an   asylum   application   in
                 circumstances where Regulation  6  had  not  been  complied
                 with, but that would not necessarily compel the  conclusion
                 that asylum should be granted ....


            The significance of an unjustified failure to trace is not  that
                 Regulation 6 has not been complied with,  but  rather  that
                 the decision maker is not in a position to assess the  best
                 interests of the child."

      This illustrates one potential consequence of a failure  to  discharge
      the Regulation 6 duty, namely a breach of the duty imposed by  section
      55. It also draws attention to the need to address the consequences of
      any breach of this duty in every case. The outcome of the  appeal  was
      the same as in DS viz  an  order  remitting  the  case  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal to facilitate  the  consideration  of  further  evidence,  to
      include such information (if any) "...  which the Secretary  of  State
      is obliged to try to obtain pursuant to her Regulation 6 obligations":
      paragraph [52].  Notably, the  appeal  was  allowed  "on  the  grounds
      conceded by  the  Secretary  of  State":  [52].   This  is  clearly  a
      reference to the concession that, in alignment with  the  decision  in
      DS, the case should be remitted to the Upper Tribunal:  see  [32]  and
      [33]. One tenable construction of this concession is that it  included
      an acknowledgement  by  the  Secretary  of  State  that  the  duty  to
      endeavour to trace would be performed (belatedly) post-remittal and in
      advance of the reconvened Upper Tribunal  hearing.  Alternatively,  it
      may have been a subtly framed mandatory order.  Irrespective,  it  was
      clearly envisaged that further material evidence would be adduced  and
      duly considered by the Tribunal. Notably, this decision casts no doubt
      on the earlier decision of the Upper Tribunal in  AA  v  Secretary  of
      State  for  the  Home  Department  [2012]  UKUT  00016  (IAC)  and  in
      particular the following passage in paragraph [133]:


            "We note .....  that the Respondent has  not  made  any  tracing
      enquiries ......


           But as the Court of Appeal observed in DS .....  the appellant's
           claim has to be determined on its merits,  whether  or  not  any
           steps have been taken by the Respondent  in  discharge  of  that
           obligation."

      We are also mindful that in the same passage the Upper Tribunal stated
      further:


           "But the centrality of the question of  whether  a  child  would
           have the protection of his or her family  on  return  serves  to
           demonstrate the importance of the discharge by the Respondent of
           her duty to make tracing enquiries".

[27]  The jurisprudence in this field was extended by the  decision  of  the
      Court of Appeal in KA (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for the  Home
      Department [2012] EWCA Civ 1014. In that case, it was agreed that  the
      only step taken by the Secretary of State in  purported  discharge  of
      this duty had been to inform the Appellant of the availability of  the
      Red Cross services. The Court was trenchant  in  its  conclusion  that
      this did not discharge the  duty:  see  paragraph  [14].   While  this
      breach of  the  duty  was  clearly  considered  to  be  egregious,  or
      "systemic", its consequences were duly addressed by the  court.  These
      were formulated in cautious terms:

      "Having accepted that there was a systemic breach of the duty to
     endeavour to trace .... [it is] not simply a matter of the systemic
    breach entitling these appellants, without more ado, to the allowing
    of their appeals with remittal to the Secretary of State to consider
       grants of leave to remain, which is the primary relief sought."

      Notably, this chimes with the statement of Lloyd LJ in  DS  that  this
      failure ".... is not, by itself, relevant to the determination of  the
      appellant's asylum application": paragraph [68].  In KA, Morris Kay LJ
      fashioned three principles, in paragraph [24]:


           "(1)  The duty to endeavour to trace is not discharged by merely
                 informing a child of the facilities of the Red Cross.


              2) A failure to discharge the duty may be relevant to judicial
                 consideration  of  an  asylum  or  humanitarian  protection
                 claim.


              3) Such a failure may also be relevant to a  consideration  of
                 the section 55 duty."

      His Lordship emphasised that the application of  these  principles  to
      individual cases would, inevitably, be fact sensitive: paragraph [25].
       He added in paragraph [26]:


           "Whether one is considering asylum, humanitarian  protection  or
           corrective relief, there is a burden of proof  on  an  applicant
           not just to establish the  failure  to  discharge  the  duty  to
           endeavour to trace but also that he is entitled to  what  he  is
           seeking .....


           Even in the context of a clear breach of the duty  to  endeavour
           to trace,  a  Tribunal  will  retain  a  certain  robustness  in
           assessing the evidence of a young person who has demonstrated  a
           deep-rooted resistance to  being  returned  to  his  country  of
           origin".


           [Emphasis added]


       We consider the import of this statement clear  -  a  breach  of  the
       tracing duty does not, without more, betoken an error of law  by  the
       Secretary of State  giving  rise  to  consequential  relief  for  the
       claimant.

[28]  In summary, we consider it clear that a failure by  the  Secretary  of
       State  to  discharge  the  duty  to  endeavour  to  trace  an  asylum
       applicant's family  members  does  not  per  se  either  vitiate  the
       Secretary of State's determination of the asylum claim or any ensuing
       decision of the First-Tier Tribunal or the Upper  Tribunal  affirming
       such determination. Neither the relevant measure of EU  law  nor  its
       domestic transposing  measure  prescribes  any  sanction,  remedy  or
       consequence for such a failure. We consider that in cases where  this
       discrete failure is canvassed and established, it is incumbent on the
       Tribunal concerned to undertake  an  evaluation  of  its  effect  and
       consequences, in the fact sensitive context under consideration.   In
       performing this task, some guidance can be derived from the  decision
       in KA:

           "[25] Although we are not yet in a position  to  deal  with  the
                 cases of these individual appellants (save for SA),  it  is
                 important to emphasise that, when the principles to which I
                 have referred come to be applied to individual cases,  much
                 will turn on their specific facts. There is a  hypothetical
                 spectrum. At one end is an applicant who gives  a  credible
                 and cooperative account of having no  surviving  family  in
                 Afghanistan or of having lost touch with  surviving  family
                 members  and  having  failed,  notwithstanding   his   best
                 endeavours, to re-establish contact. It seems to  me  that,
                 even if he has reached the age of 18 by the time his appeal
                 is considered by the tribunal, he  may,  depending  on  the
                 totality of the established facts,  have  the  basis  of  a
                 successful appeal  by  availing  himself  of  the  Rashid/S
                 principle and/or section 55 by reference to the failure  of
                 the Secretary of State to discharge the duty  to  endeavour
                 to trace. In such a  case  Ravichandran  would  not  be  an
                 insurmountable obstacle. At the other end of  the  spectrum
                 is an applicant whose claim to have no surviving family  in
                 Afghanistan is disbelieved and in respect  of  whom  it  is
                 found that he has been uncooperative so as to frustrate any
                 attempt  to  trace  his  family.  In  such  a  case,  again
                 depending on the totality of established facts, he may have
                 put  himself  beyond  the  bite  of  the   protective   and
                 corrective principle. This would not  be  because  the  law
                 seeks to punish him for his mendacity but  because  he  has
                 failed to prove the risk on return and because there  would
                 be no causative  link  between  the  Secretary  of  State's
                 breach of duty and his claim to protection. Whereas, in the
                 first case, the applicant may have lost the opportunity  of
                 corroborating his evidence about the absence of support  in
                 Afghanistan by reference to  a  negative  result  from  the
                 properly discharged duty to  endeavour  to  trace,  in  the
                 second case he can establish no such disadvantage. At  this
                 stage, when we have not heard oral submissions on the facts
                 of their cases, it is inappropriate to  say  where  on  the
                 spectrum each of these Appellants lies."

       It is further noteworthy that there is nothing in  the  jurisprudence
       of the Court of Appeal to suggest that the determination  of  appeals
       should be delayed by Tribunals to afford the Secretary of  State  the
       opportunity of belatedly  discharging  the  obligation  enshrined  in
       regulation 6. This is unsurprising,  given  the  apparent  prevailing
       government policy.  Nor,  to  our  knowledge,  have  there  been  any
       applications for judicial review culminating in  an  order  requiring
       the Secretary of State to discharge this duty in any particular case.
        Furthermore, there does not appear to have  been  any  consideration
       yet of the impact, if any, of Article 4/3 TEU viz the  duty  to  take
       appropriate measures to "...ensure fulfilment of the  obligations..."
       imposed by EU law which, of course, applies  to  courts  as  well  as
       organs of the State.  There may,  therefore,  be  scope  for  further
       development of the jurisprudence in this sphere.

[29]  We also draw attention to the most recent  authoritative  decision  in
      this field, namely EU and Others (Afghanistan) v  Secretary  of  State
      for the Home  Department  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  32.   Arguably  the  most
      important feature of this decision is that  it  appears  to  give  its
      quietus to the decision of a differently constituted Court  of  Appeal
      in Rashid v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ
      744  and  [2005]  INLR  550,  which  gave  birth  to   the   so-called
      "corrective" or "protective"  principle.   Signs  of  a  retreat  from
      Rashid had already been evident in KA (supra).  The judgment in EU re-
      emphasises the need for the claimant to establish a proper  foundation
      for the grant of one of the available forms of protection:


           "[6]  ........ In cases  that  are  concerned  with  claims  for
                 asylum, the purpose of the grant of leave to remain  is  to
                 grant protection to someone who would be at risk, or  whose
                 Convention rights would be infringed,  if  he  or  she  was
                 returned  to  the  country  of  nationality.   Of   course,
                 breaches  of  the  duty  of  the  Secretary  of  State   in
                 addressing a claim may lead to an independent justification
                 for leave to remain, of which the paradigm is the Article 8
                 claim  of  an  asylum  seeker  whose  claim  has  not  been
                 expeditiously determined, with the result that he has  been
                 in this country so long as to have established private  and
                 family life here.  But to grant leave to remain to  someone
                 who has no risk on return, whose Convention rights will not
                 be infringed by his return and who has no other independent
                 claim to remain here (such as  a  claim  to  be  a  skilled
                 migrant) is to use the power to grant leave to remain for a
                 purpose  other  than  that  for  which  it   is   conferred
                 ................


                 I do not think that the Court should require  or  encourage
                 the Secretary of State to grant leave in such circumstances
                 either in order to mark  the  Court's  displeasure  at  her
                 conduct, or as a sanction for her misconduct."


            [Emphasis added.]

      Notably, the Court concurred with judgment of Lightman J in  R  (S)  v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2007]  EWCA  Civ  546  and
      [2007] INLR 450. Also notable is the Court's suggestion that  where  a
      breach of the Secretary of State's  duty  to  trace  is  demonstrated,
      this:

           "........may be relevant to her  or  the  Tribunal's  decisions.
           Her failure may be relevant to the assessment of risk on return.
            The lack of evidence from the Secretary  of  State  as  to  the
           availability or otherwise of familial support  should  be  taken
           into account......

           Similarly, the failure to endeavour to trace  may  result  in  a
           failed asylum seeker, who may in consequence lose  contact  with
           his family, putting down roots here  and  establishing  a  valid
           Article 8 claim." See [7].


      Finally, it is clear from this  decision  that  Tribunals  should,  in
      appropriate cases, take into  account  that  the  Afghan  families  of
      unaccompanied minor children who have travelled to the United  Kingdom
      may be unwilling to co-operate with an agent of the Secretary of State
      engaged in tracing enquiries.


 [30]  We find that in the present case, the Respondent failed to  discharge
      the duty to employ reasonable  endeavours  to  trace  the  Appellant's
      family in Afghanistan. It is settled that this duty is not  discharged
      by simply steering the  person  concerned  towards  the  services  and
      facilities offered by the International Red Cross.  However,  we  must
      take  into  account  our  findings  above,  which  indicate  that  the
      Appellant has no subsisting settled family unit in Afghanistan.  Since
      his departure from that country, his mother has died, his  sister  has
      married and his maternal uncle  has  left  the  village  in  question.
      Furthermore, we have found that the Appellant and his agent were  able
      to make contact with the  sister  and  uncle  previously  and  we  are
      sceptical about the claim that this is no longer  feasible.   Finally,
      our clear expectation is that the Appellant  will  seek  to  relocate,
      settling elsewhere than in the village where he  was  reared,  distant
      from the malign Taliban influence  there.   Accordingly,  we  consider
      that the Secretary of State's breach of the tracing duty in this  case
      is of no moment.  The lack of evidence from  the  Secretary  of  State
      concerning the availability or otherwise of familial  support  to  the
      Appellant in the event of returning to Afghanistan neither establishes
      nor reinforces any of the grounds upon which he puts forward his  case
      for protection.

The Trafficking Issue


[31]   The  second  discrete  issue  canvassed  concerned  the  Respondent's
      negative trafficking decision enshrined in the second of  its  letters
      dated 5th April 2011. This  focuses  attention  on  an  instrument  of
      international  law,  the  European  Convention   on   Action   Against
      Trafficking in Human Beings ("the Trafficking Convention").   This  is
      a Council of Europe measure, signed by the United  Kingdom  Government
      in 2007 and ratified in 2008. It entered into force  on  1st  February
      2008, having received the necessary  10  ratifications.  It  has  been
      ratified by the vast majority of the Council of Europe Member  States.
      Article 10 provides:

         "Each party shall provide its competent  authorities  with  persons
         who  are  trained  and  qualified  in  preventing   and   combating
         trafficking in human beings, in identifying  and  helping  victims,
         including children and shall ensure that the different  authorities
         collaborate with each  other  as  well  as  with  relevant  support
         organisations, so that victims can be  identified  in  a  procedure
         ....."

      Where the relevant authority has identified a victim  of  trafficking,
      the person concerned may qualify for a residence permit under  Article
      14.  The Convention is a comprehensive measure, focusing  particularly
      on the protection of victims of trafficking and  the  safeguarding  of
      their rights. It is also designed to prevent and deter trafficking and
      to prosecute the perpetrators  thereof.   It  embraces  all  kinds  of
      exploitation, sexual exploitation, forced labour and  kindred  abuses,
      whether national or transnational and irrespective of whether  related
      to  organised  crime.   It  establishes  an   independent   monitoring
      mechanism for the purpose of securing compliance with  its  provisions
      by the Parties.

[32]  In the United Kingdom, the Respondent is the competent  authority  for
      the purposes of the Convention.  By its decision of 27th August  2010,
      the Respondent determined that there were no  reasonable  grounds  for
      believing that the Appellant is a victim of trafficking. The  decision
      was made by the Criminal Case Work Directorate (Liverpool) of  the  UK
      Border Agency.  This decision was entirely independent of the impugned
      deportation decision.  It was based on an assessment of  (inter  alia)
      the circumstances of the Appellant's journey to  and  entry  into  the
      United Kingdom, including the factors of age and sponsor.  It is clear
      that an important ingredient of this decision was the rejection of the
      Appellant's assertions of slavery on the ground  that  they  were  not
      considered credible.

[33]  Our evaluation of this argument is as follows.  In  the  first  place,
      there is no right of appeal to this Tribunal against the  Respondent's
      trafficking decision: see Part V of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
      Asylum Act 2002.   Secondly,  the  Trafficking  Convention  cannot  be
      invoked as a freestanding source  of  rights,  obligations  and  legal
      effects and consequences in domestic law, as it is  an  unincorporated
      international  treaty.  Thus  the  long  established  principle   that
      treaties  are  not  self-executing  in  municipal  law  applies.  This
      principle was expressed unambiguously by Lord Phillips in Ahmed  v  HM
      Treasury [2010] 2 AC 534, at [109], in the following terms:

           "Treaties entered into by the United Kingdom do not take  direct
           effect.  Treaties are entered into by the Government  under  the
           Royal Prerogative, but unless and until Parliament  incorporates
           them into domestic law, they confer no powers upon the executive
           nor rights or duties upon the individual citizen"

      This is frequently described as the  principle  in  the  International
      Tin Council case
          ([1990] 2 AC 418).  A corollary  of  this  principle  is  that  a
      failure by a public authority to take into account the  provisions  of
      an unincorporated international treaty is not of itself a  ground  for
      impugning the exercise of a discretionary power: R v the  Ministry  of
      Defence, ex parte Smith [1996]  QB  517,  page  558  (Per  Sir  Thomas
      Bingham MR).   It  is,  of  course,  established  that  unincorporated
      international instruments have a role in certain contexts, a  paradigm
      example being the presumption  that  Parliament  does  not  intend  to
      legislate contrary to the United Kingdom's international  obligations:
      see most recently Assange v Swedish Prosecution Authority [2012]  UKSC
      22, [122] (Per Lord Dyson).  Furthermore, a decision may  be  impugned
      where  a  public  authority  purports  to  apply   an   unincorporated
      international treaty provision but errs in doing so: R v Secretary  of
      State for the Home Department, ex parte Launder [1997] 1 WLR 839, page
      867 (per Lord Hope).  However, none of  these  principles  avails  the
      Appellant in the instant case.  Moreover, in the present context,  the
      measure of international law in question was more  than  simply  taken
      into account: it was the subject of  a  specific  application  by  the
      Appellant and ensuing decision by the designated organ of  the  State.
      In passing, we observe that the Trafficking Convention is one of  over
      200 treaties adopted by the Council of Europe since its  inception  in
      1949, the vast majority whereof belong exclusively to  the  domain  of
      international law (the ECHR and some of its Protocols being  the  most
      notable exceptions in the United Kingdom).

[34]  Finally, we consider that it would have been open to the Appellant  to
      challenge the Respondent's trafficking decision by an application  for
      judicial review. The Tribunal was informed that such  challenges  have
      occurred. However, he did not  pursue  this  remedy.  We  are  of  the
      opinion that backdoor challenges to trafficking decisions made by  the
      Respondent under the Trafficking Convention  are  not  permissible  in
      appeals of the present kind. They lie outwith the  competence  of  the
      First-tier and Upper Tribunals.


[35]   It might be helpful to reiterate two of our findings  of  fact  above
      viz the Appellant travelled voluntarily to the United Kingdom pursuant
      to an arrangement made by his family and, some time following  arrival
      here, was in captivity for a period of approximately one year  at  the
      hands of  his  agent.  Thereafter,  there  is  no  suggestion  of  any
      persisting trafficking of the Appellant, albeit there is a  dearth  of
      recent evidence concerning him. It will in any event be open to him to
      make his case afresh to the designated authority if he wishes.


[36]  For the reasons  elaborated  in  paragraphs  [31]  -  [35]  above,  we
      consider the Appellant's argument on this discrete issue misconceived.




Decision


[37]  The appeal is dismissed on all  grounds  for  the  reasons  elaborated
      above.






Nathan Goldstein
Upper Tribunal Judge
pp
SIGNED: _Bernard McCloskey

The Honourable Mr Justice McCloskey
High Court of Justice of Northern Ireland

Dated:   22 May 2013
Amended para [2] (in bold) and re-promulgated pursuant to  Rule  42  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Dated 25 June 2013
