
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

       TA and Others (Kareem explained) Ghana [2014] UKUT 00316 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 10 June 2014                                 |                           |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    MS TA
                                  MASTER KA
                                  MISS ANAG
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Kandola, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Akohene, Solicitor - Afrifa and Partners



Following the decision in Kareem (proxy marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT  24,
the determination of  whether  there  is  a  marital  relationship  for  the
purposes of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 must always  be  examined
in accordance with the laws  of  the  Member  State  from  which  the  Union
citizen obtains nationality.






                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant in these appeals is the Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department.  For the sake of convenience I shall refer herein to Ms TA,
    Master KA and Miss ANAG as 'the claimants'.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity direction and  neither  party
    has requested that I discharge that direction.  Therefore,  unless  and
    until a Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, the claimants are  granted
    anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly
    identify them or any members of their family.  Failure to  comply  with
    this direction could lead to a contempt of court.

 3. The claimants are citizens of Ghana. The first claimant is  the  mother
    of the second and third claimants, who are minors. On 14 September 2012
    the claimants each applied for an EEA residence card as confirmation of
    their right to reside in the United Kingdom as non-EEA national  family
    members of  EKT,  a  Dutch  national.   The  two  minors  are  not  the
    biological children of the EEA sponsor (EKT).  The Secretary  of  State
    refused these applications in a single decision of 2 May 2013.

 4. The claimants appealed the Secretary of State's decision to the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Chowdhury heard  the  appeals
    on 3 March 2014 and allowed them "under  the  2006  Regulations"  [this
    being  a  reference  to  the  Immigration  (European   Economic   Area)
    Regulations 2006 (SI 2006/1003)] in a determination promulgated  on  22
    April 2014.

 5.  Having  considered  the  reported  decision  of  the  Tribunal  in  NA
    (Customary marriage and divorce evidence) Ghana [2009] UKAIT 00009  the
    judge concluded that the first claimant and EKT had undertaken a  valid
    marriage for the purposes of regulation 7 of 2006 Regulations.

Error of Law

 6. The Secretary of State sought, and obtained, permission  to  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal, it being said  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    erred in law in failing to take  into  account  and  apply  the  recent
    reported decision of the Upper Tribunal of Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU
    law) [2014] UKUT 24; this being  relevant  because  neither  the  first
    claimant, nor EKT, had been present in Ghana at the time their marriage
    was contracted.

 7. It is not in dispute that the First-tier Tribunal ought  to  have,  but
    failed to, consider the decision in Kareem, although the judge was  not
    helped in this regard by the  failure  of  both  parties  to  draw  her
    attention to it. Mr Akohene submits that this error was not material to
    the First-tier Tribunal's determination.  Mr  Kandola  submits  to  the
    contrary.

 8. It is prudent at this juncture to set out the terms of paragraph 68  of
    the decision in Kareem, upon  which  Mr  Akohene  seeks  to  found  his
    submissions:

       "We make the following general observations:



        i)    A person who is the spouse  of  an  EEA  national  who  is  a
           qualified person in the United Kingdom can derive rights of free
           movement and residence if proof of the marital  relationship  is
           provided.

       ii)     The  production  of  a  marriage  certificate  issued  by  a
           competent  authority  (that  is,   issued   according   to   the
           registration laws of the country where the marriage took  place)
           will usually be sufficient.  If not  in  English  (or  Welsh  in
           relation to proceedings in Wales), a  certified  translation  of
           the marriage certificate will be required.

      iii)    A document which calls itself a marriage certificate will not
           raise a presumption of the marriage it purports to record unless
           it has been issued by an authority with legal power to create or
           confirm the facts it attests.

       iv)    In appeals where there is no  such  marriage  certificate  or
           where there is doubt that a marriage certificate has been issued
           by a competent authority, then the marital relationship  may  be
           proved by other evidence.  This will  require  the  Tribunal  to
           determine whether a marriage was contracted.

        v)    In such an appeal, the  starting  point  will  be  to  decide
           whether a marriage was contracted between the appellant and  the
           qualified person according  to  the  national  law  of  the  EEA
           country of the qualified person's nationality.

       vi)    In all such situations,  when  resolving  issues  that  arise
           because of conflicts of law, proper respect must be given to the
           qualified person's rights as provided by the European  Treaties,
           including the right to marry and the rights of free movement and
           residence.

      vii)    It should be assumed that, without independent  and  reliable
           evidence about the recognition of the marriage under the laws of
           the EEA country and/or  the  country  where  the  marriage  took
           place, the  Tribunal  is  likely  to  be  unable  to  find  that
           sufficient evidence has been provided to discharge the burden of
           proof.  Mere production of legal materials from the EEA  country
           or country where the marriage took place  will  be  insufficient
           evidence  because  they  will  rarely  show  how  such  law   is
           understood or applied in those countries.  Mere assertions as to
           the effect of such laws will,  for  similar  reasons,  carry  no
           weight.

     viii)    These remarks apply solely  to  the  question  of  whether  a
           person is a spouse for the purposes of  EU  law.   It  does  not
           relate to other relationships that might be regarded as  similar
           to   marriage,   such   as   civil   partnerships   or   durable
           relationships."


 9. Mr Akohene submits that it is clear that there is a  two-stage  process
    in the determination of whether a marriage  can  be  considered  to  be
    valid for the purposes  of  the  2006  Regulations.  Where  a  marriage
    certificate has been  issued  by  a  competent  authority,  this  would
    usually be enough to demonstrate the validity of the marriage under the
    2006 Regulations [paragraph 68(b) of Kareem]. In the instant case it is
    accepted that the competent authority  in  Ghana  issued  the  marriage
    certificate and, consequently, the first claimant has demonstrated that
    she is married for the purposes of the 2006 EEA Regulations. It is  not
    necessary to move on to the second stage of the consideration, which is
    relevant only where there is doubt about whether a  marriage  has  been
    lawfully contracted [paragraph 68(d) of Kareem]. Where there  is  doubt
    as to whether a marriage has  been  lawfully  contracted,  for  example
    because there is doubt about whether the marriage certificate has  been
    issued by a competent  authority,  the  starting  point  is  to  decide
    whether the  marriage  has  been  contracted  in  accordance  with  the
    national  law  of  the  EEA  country  of  the   sponsor's   nationality
    [paragraphs 68(d) and 68(e) of Kareem, when read together].

10. This submission, it is said, is supported by  the  terms  of  paragraph
    68(g) of Kareem, which contains the conjunctive "and/or".  Accordingly,
    it is said, if there is clear evidence from the country  in  which  the
    marriage took place that  the  marriage  was  lawfully  contracted,  an
    applicant need demonstrate no more.

11. In response Mr Kandola submits that the determination in  Kareem  makes
    clear that a consideration of whether  a  person's  marriage  is  valid
    always has to be undertaken in the context of the national  legislation
    of  the  EEA  sponsor's  country  of  nationality;  in  this  case  the
    Netherlands.

12. I have no hesitation in agreeing with Mr Kandola's submission.

13. Mr Akohene relies upon the terms of paragraph 68  of  the  decision  in
    Kareem, but it is important to read the determination  as  a  whole  in
    order to properly understand what is being said in paragraph 68.

14. At paragraph 17 of Kareem the Tribunal concludes:-

         "...that,  in  a  situation  where  the  marital  relationship   is
         disputed, the question of whether there is a  marital  relationship
         is to be examined in accordance with the laws of the  member  state
         from which the union citizens obtains nationality  and  from  which
         therefore that citizen derives free movement rights."

15. When this passage is read in isolation, it would appear to provide some
    support for Mr Akohene's submissions; however, when it is read  in  the
    context of the surrounding paragraphs a different picture emerges.

16. In paragraph 11 of its determination the Tribunal in  Kareem  recognise
    that the question of whether a person is married is a  matter  governed
    by the national laws of the individual Member States.

17. It continues in paragraph 13 as follows:

         "From this we infer that usually a marriage certificate issued by a
         competent authority will be sufficient evidence that a marriage has
         been contracted.  Of course, a document which merely calls itself a
         marriage certificate does not have any legal status.  A certificate
         will only have legal status if it is issued by  an  authority  with
         legal power to create or confirm the facts it attests, that is,  by
         an authority that has such competence.  Where a  marriage  document
         has no legal status or where such status is unclear, other evidence
         may be used to establish  that  a  marriage  has  been  contracted.
         However, once again we find that these principles do not help us to
         determine whether a person is a spouse because it would  depend  on
         identifying the authority with legal power  to  create  or  confirm
         that a marriage has been contracted."

18. Moving forward to paragraph 16, the Tribunal once again observe that :

         "...where there are issues of EU law that involve  the  nationality
         laws of Member States, then the law that applies will be the law of
         the Member State  of  the  nationality  and  not  the  host  Member
         State..."

19. The reasoning continues in paragraph 18:

         "Within EU law, it is essential that Member States  facilitate  the
         free movement and residence rights  of  Union  citizens  and  their
         spouses.  This would not be achieved if it  were  left  to  a  host
         Member State to decide whether a Union  citizen  has  contracted  a
         marriage.  Different Member States would be able to reach different
         conclusions about that Union citizen's marital status.  This  would
         leave Union citizens unclear as to whether their spouses could move
         freely with them; and might mean that the Union citizen could  move
         with greater freedom to one Member State (where the marriage  would
         be recognised) than to another  (where  it  might  not  be).   Such
         difficulties  would  be  contrary  to  the   fundamental   EU   law
         principles.   Therefore,  we  perceive  EU  law  as  requiring  the
         identification of the legal system of which a marriage is  said  to
         have been contracted in such a way as  to  ensure  that  the  Union
         citizen's marital status  is  not  at  risk  of  being  differently
         determined by different Member States.  Given  the  intrinsic  link
         between nationality of a Member State and free movement rights,  we
         conclude that the legal system of  the  nationality  of  the  Union
         citizen must itself govern whether a marriage has been contracted."

20. Given that which I set out above, it is difficult to see how the  Upper
    Tribunal in Kareem could have been any clearer in its  conclusion  that
    when  consideration  is  being  given  to  whether  an  applicant   has
    undertaken a valid marriage for the purposes of the  2006  Regulations,
    such consideration has to be assessed by reference to the laws  of  the
    legal system of the nationality  of  the  relevant  Union  citizen.  Mr
    Akohene's submissions to the contrary are entirely misconceived and are
    born out of a failure to read the determination in Kareem as a whole.

21. Turning back to the instant case, the Union citizen  sponsor  (EKT)  is
    national of the Netherlands. The First-tier Tribunal failed  to  engage
    in any consideration  of  the  applicable  legal  provisions  in  EKT's
    homeland and, consequently,  in  my  conclusion  its  determination  is
    flawed by an error on a point of law that requires me to set it aside.

Re-making of decision under appeal

22. As to the re-making of the decision under appeal, I  have  no  evidence
    before me that Dutch law recognises the first claimant's marriage as  a
    valid marriage, and the burden of proving the fact that it is  a  valid
    marriage is on the claimant.   It  is  relevant  to  observe  that  the
    Tribunal in Kareem itself gave  consideration  to  the  relevant  legal
    provisions of the Dutch Civil  Code  and  concluded,  on  the  evidence
    before it, that it was not satisfied that the Netherlands  was  one  of
    the countries that recognised the validity of proxy marriages. Thus,  I
    find that the first claimant and EKT are not to  be  treated  as  being
    married for the purposes of the 2006 Regulations and,  therefore,  that
    the first claimant cannot establish that she is a family member for the
    purposes of regulation 7 of those Regulations.

23. That, though, is not the end of the matter.  Regulation 8 of  the  2006
    Regulations regulates  those  persons  who  can  be  considered  to  be
    'extended family members' of EEA  nationals.   Pursuant  to  regulation
    8(5):

         "A person satisfies the conditions in this paragraph if the  person
         is the partner of an EEA national and can  prove  to  the  decision
         maker that he is in a durable relationship with the EEA national."

24. "Durable relationship" is not defined in the Regulations, and whether a
    person is in a durable relationship is a matter to be determined  on  a
    case-by-case basis.  In the instant case Mr Kandola  submits  that  the
    first claimant and EKT are not in a durable  relationship.  Mr  Akohene
    submits to the contrary. On this occasion I accept that Mr  Akohene  is
    correct.

25. The First-tier Tribunal concluded that  the  relationship  between  the
    first claimant and EKT was genuine and subsisting and  that  they  have
    undertaken a marriage ceremony - albeit it is now clear that it is  not
    recognised as a valid  marriage  in  the  Netherlands.  These  findings
    remain unchallenged and, when taken together with the evidence  I  have
    before me, lead me to conclude that the first claimant and EKT are in a
    durable relationship for the purposes of regulation 8(5)  of  the  2006
    Regulations. The first  claimant  is,  therefore,  an  extended  family
    member for the purposes of the 2006 Regulations.

26. Regulation 17(4) of 2006 EEA Regulations  provides  discretion  to  the
    Secretary of State to issue a residence card  to  an  'extended  family
    member'.  In the first claimant's case the Secretary of State  has  not
    yet considered the exercise of such discretion.  It is not open  to  me
    to consider the exercise of discretion for myself, absent the Secretary
    of State first doing so: see FD (EEA  discretion  -  basis  of  appeal)
    Algeria [2007] UKAIT 49.[1]  In such circumstances I am constrained  to
    allow the first claimant's appeal on the basis  that  the  respondent's
    decision was not in accordance with the law.

27. As to the second and third claimants' appeals, it is not submitted that
    these can succeed independently of their mother's appeal. They are  not
    the children of the EEA national sponsor (EKT) and must rely upon their
    mother obtaining an EEA residence  card  in  order  to  found  a  claim
    themselves under the 2006 Regulations. Consequently, the  Secretary  of
    State's failings in relation to the first claimant's  case  infect  her
    decisions made in relation to the second and third claimants.

Decision

The First-tier Tribunal's determination contains an error on a point of  law
and is set aside.

The decision I substitute is to allow the claimants' appeals to  the  extent
that  each  of  their  applications  for  an  EEA  residence  card   remains
outstanding before the Secretary of State.

Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Date: 14 June 2014
-----------------------
[1] Ihemedu (OFMs - meaning) [2011] UKUT 00340 (IAC)

