
[pic]


                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

R (on the application of AA) v The London Borough of Ealing IJR [2014]  UKUT
00317(IAC)

                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR

                                                  8, 9, 10 & 13 January 2014

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE perkins
                         upper Tribunal judge dawson

                                   Between

                       The Queen on the application of
                                     a a

                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

                        THE LONDON BOROUGH OF EALING

                                                                  Respondent

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                            Interested Party
                               - - - - - - - -
Mr A Suterwalla, Counsel, instructed by Steel & Shamash Solicitors appeared
on behalf of the Applicant.

Mr A Harrap-Griffiths, instructed by the Chief Executive of the London
Borough of Ealing

The Interested Party did not appear and was not represented


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -


                                  JUDGMENT

                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -




 JUDGE perkins:   This action began by the applicant seeking  permission  to
     bring proceedings for judicial review of a decision of the  respondent
     dated  15  February  2013.  There  the  respondent  decided  that  the
     applicant was born on 2 May 1993 and therefore achieved  his  majority
     on 2 May 2011 whereas the applicant says that he was  born  on  2  May
     1995 and therefore achieved his majority on 2 May 2013.  The applicant
     sought a declaration that he is the age  that  he  claimed,  that  the
     respondent's determination of his age was wrong and that therefore the
     respondent's decision to treat him as an adult was unlawful.

  2. On 10 April 2013 the interested party  served  an  Acknowledgement  of
     Service indicating that she  did  not  intend  to  take  part  in  the
     proceedings and asserted her right to seek  to  be  discharged  as  an
     interested party at a later date although, as far as we are aware,  no
     such application has been made.  Additionally,  the  interested  party
     confirmed in the Acknowledgement of Service that the applicant's  then
     solicitors had provided a birth certificate to the UK Border Agency on
     11 June 2012 and that the interested party had confirmed in writing to
     the applicant that she did not accept that he was the age  he  claimed
     to be.

  3. On 6 August 2013 Cranston J. gave permission to pursue the application
     for judicial review and transferred the claim to  the  Upper  Tribunal
     for a substantive hearing.

  4. The approach that we are obliged to take to this case is, we  find,  a
     matter of settled law and was not disputed by the  parties.   We  must
     decide the applicant's age as a matter of fact.  The standard of proof
     is the balance of probabilities but this is not a case where there  is
     a burden of proof. The Tribunal must act in an inquisitorial role  but
     we must bear in mind that a person who claims to be  escaping  from  a
     country as a refugee may well have good  reason  not  to  be  able  to
     produce the kind of identity and  similar  supporting  documents  that
     would be available to a person leaving in calmer  circumstances.   For
     the avoidance of doubt, it is this  applicant's  case  that  he  is  a
     refugee but that is not  something  we  have  to  determine  in  these
     proceedings.

  5. Although for the reasons explained below we were  not  impressed  with
     the applicant's evidence we do not want to risk influencing his  claim
     for asylum by drawing attention to his identity. Pursuant to  Rule  14
     of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 we  order  that,
     unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  applicant
     is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings  shall  directly
     or indirectly identify him or any member of his  family.   Failure  to
     comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to   contempt   of   court
     proceedings.

  6. We have been provided with an appropriately prepared bundle as well as
     some  additional  documents  provided  during  the  hearing.  We  have
     considered all the material before us before making  any  findings  on
     controversial matters.

  7. We heard evidence from the  applicant  and  his  tutor  Ms  I  B,  his
     community worker Mr M W, his uncle Mr H A, the social workers Victoria
     Aderinola and Dennis Dean, and a dentist Dr Philip Marsden.

  8. The bundle included an Age Assessment Form prepared by the  respondent
     and dated 15 February 2013. It is an overview of the respondent's case
     but we found it a convenient way  to  start  our  examination  of  the
     evidence because it identifies key issues. We consider it below.

     Age Assessment Form

  9. It begins by identifying the appellant as a citizen of Afghanistan who
     was then living at a branch of the YMCA.

 10.  The  applicant  had  a  Home  Office   Young   Person's   Application
     Registration Card asserting that his date of birth had  been  assessed
     as 1 May 1993.

 11. He said that his birthday had been celebrated every year on 2 May when
     he received gifts for his immediate family and  that  his  mother  had
     informed him of his age and date of birth.

 12. He supported the application with a Tazkira, which he described as his
     birth certificate, and which he said had  been  sent  to  him  by  his
     friend S in November 2011.

 13. The applicant said that he had given the original  to  the  UKBA  case
     owner during his asylum interview in December 2011 but,  according  to
     the note, UKBA had informed the respondent that they were not aware of
     any such documentation.  The position was clarified by his  solicitors
     who said that the original had not been handed to the Home Office  but
     a copy sent by facsimile on 11 June 2012.  The summary indicated  that
     the photograph on the "birth certificate" "is no resemblance of Al  as
     the person in the picture who is dressed in a suit, has a  round  face
     and fully grown moustache" even though the document asserted that  the
     applicant was 13 years old when the picture was taken.

 14. A total of seven family members are listed.   The  applicant's  mother
     died when she was aged 42 years and his father died in the year  2000.
     It was the applicant's case that he was one of six  siblings  but  all
     save his younger brother were dead.  The siblings were  identified  as
     follows:

     Family member three, brother H;

     Family member four a sister M;

     Family member five a brother N;

     Family member six a sister N;

     Family member seven a brother Aa.

 15. Aa was said to be 14 years old.  The others  were  described  as  "age
     unknown."

 16. One uncle was identified as "Contact in the United  Kingdom".   He  is
     known as Mr A A and he was described as a paternal uncle who had lived
     in West Drayton but who had now relocated to Pakistan.

 17. The report began by acknowledging an interview  on  6  February  2013.
     Present at that interview were  one  Andy  Carhill  described  as  the
     responsible adult and  two  social  workers,  Victoria  Aderinola  and
     Dennis Dean.

 18. The report noted that the appellant appeared to be a person "well over
     the age of 18".  This was based on his physique and bearing  including
     his deep and assertive voice and his facial hair growing through rough
     skin that appeared to have been shaved for  some  time.   Considerable
     weight was also given  to  the  applicant's  apparent  confidence  and
     particularly the way he was  said  to  have  asserted  his  rights  to
     certain benefits and  his  confidence  to  say  sarcastically  that  a
     medical age assessment would be frustrated because his molars had been
     extracted due to decay in Afghanistan.

 19. The applicant explained that in summary his father  had  died  in  the
     year 2000.  His father had been working as a truck driver.  About four
     months before the applicant arrived in the United Kingdom  his  mother
     and brothers (except Aa) and sisters had been killed  by  the  Taliban
     while he and his  brother  Aa  were  safe  in  a  separate  room.   He
     explained that Aa resides in Pakistan with an Afghani man who  owns  a
     shop and accommodates him in consideration for work done.

 20. The applicant claimed that his former school friend, S,  arranged  for
     him to enter the United Kingdom and that he sold the family  home  and
     possessions to S in exchange for US$7-8,000 to finance the trip.

 21. The applicant had planned for Aa to travel  with  him  to  the  United
     Kingdom but they did not raise sufficient funds for Aa to travel too.

 22.  The  report  commented  on  the  lack  of  any   emotional   distress
     demonstrated during this part of the account.

 23. The applicant had told social services in Hillingdon in 2011  that  he
     had a brother in Pakistan aged 14.

 24. Four adverse points are noted at the end of the section of the  report
     labelled "Physical Appearance and Demeanour".

 25. Firstly, if the applicant had told Hillingdon Social Services in  2011
     that he had a younger brother then aged 14, that brother would  be  at
     least 16 years old by February 2013 and if there was  another  sibling
     between the applicant and Aa, Aa could not be less than 18 years old.

 26. Secondly, it was said that it was incongruous  for  the  applicant  to
     have negotiated the sale of the family possessions  for  �7-8,000  (it
     was accepted that this was an error and the sign  for  dollars  should
     have been used rather than the sign for pounds) if in fact he was only
     15 years old and his family had been killed some  two  or  three  days
     before.

 27. Thirdly, the applicant's friend, S, was said to be aged 20 years  when
     the applicant sold his family home and so would be aged 22 years  when
     the applicant was interviewed. It was  thought  incongruous  that  the
     appellant would have had a good friend some five years his senior.

 28. Fourthly, it was also said that the applicant had not  challenged  the
     Home Office's age decision and  did  not  show  Hillingdon  his  birth
     certificate in 2011.

 29. Clearly there are criticisms that can be made  of  these  observations
     but we record them here because we are outlining the report.

 30. When giving his social history and details of his family  composition,
     the applicant said that he was born in Balkh  Village  in  Afghanistan
     and had a happy family life with his parents and  five  siblings.   He
     claimed not to know the ages of the siblings except  for  Aa  who  was
     aged 14 and was the only surviving member of the family.   He  claimed
     to have done well at  school  and  to  have  been  "promoted"  on  two
     occasions and so advanced by two year groups.

 31. He claimed that he had studied for only  eight  years  in  Afghanistan
     rather than the normal ten because of his accelerated progress through
     the school system.

 32. He claimed to have started school between the age of 5  and  7  years.
     He claimed that he had obtained his "birth  certificate"  in  2009  to
     enable him to attend a computer class  in  an  "Academic  School".  He
     attended with his friend S but he could not remember the name  of  the
     school.  His main school was in Maqsadallah Ershmid  in  the  City  of
     Mazar some 40 minutes by car away from his home.

 33. It was noted that the applicant was  dressed  appropriately  in  clean
     clothes and wanted to cook his own food which he claimed to be able to
     do.  He said that he could cook, clean and take care  of  himself  and
     travel independently.  He claimed to be able to manage his money.

 34. The report also noted under the heading  "Information  From  Documents
     and Other Sources" that the applicant's age was in doubt and that  the
     social workers present during the  (allegedly)  Merton  compliant  age
     assessment were of the opinion that the applicant was over  18  years.
     There was a note that a staff member at  the  Ealing  Churches  Winter
     Night Centre said that he "presents physically to be over the  age  of
     25" but expressed herself to be "unsure" if he was a minor.   The  key
     social worker at the YMCA found it "a bit tricky" to  decide  his  age
     and he was taken for dental examination.

 35. The report gives twelve reasons for the conclusion that the  applicant
     is over 18 years of age.  These are numbered 1 through to  11  but  Mr
     Suterwalla contended, we find correctly, that the first point  was  in
     fact an amalgam of two separate points and suggested that it should be
     numbered as "0" in order to preserve the other numbers.  We  summarise
     them below:

    0.   The applicant had shown no sign of  missing  his  family  and  his
         conduct had been evasive, confident and sarcastic.

    1.   If he was as young as he claimed it was unlikely that his uncle, A
         A, would have abandoned him to fend for himself.

    2.   He had not challenged the Home Office decision that he  was  older
         than claimed and did not show Hillingdon Social Services his  birth
         certificate in 2011.

    3.   He did tell Hillingdon Social Services  in  2011  that  he  had  a
         younger brother who would have been at least 16 years old in  2013.
         He had also said that he had a sister younger than  him  and  older
         than Aa and if those things were right the  applicant  was  not  18
         years old.

    4.   It was unbelievable that  he  would  have  had  the  maturity  and
         sophistication  to  have  sold  the  family  possessions  and  left
         Afghanistan two or three days after the death of his family  if  he
         was only 15 years old.

    5.   He claimed that he had a close  school  friend  named  S  who  had
         assisted him but that S was 20 at the  material  time  and  now  22
         years old.  It was inherently improbable that he would be  so  much
         younger than his school friend.

    6.   He claimed wrongly that he had given UKBA his birth certificate in
         December 2011 when in fact it was sent by fax on 10 June 2012.

    7.   The photograph on the "birth certificate"  did  not  resemble  the
         applicant.  He was supposed to have been 13 years  of  age  at  the
         material time but he had a round face and a fully  grown  moustache
         and was dressed in a suit.

    8.   The translation of the birth certificate showed that he  was  born
         in 1996 when he claimed to have been born in 1995.

    9.    His  demeanour,  stance,  bearing,   personal   confidence   with
         authorities was not consistent with his claimed age.

    10.  He  had  the  confidence  to  express  his  feelings  and  claimed
         sarcastically that there was  no  need  for  a  medical  assessment
         because his molars had been extracted.  This was thought to be  too
         sophisticated for his claimed age.

    11.  Dental evidence said that he was almost certainly over 18 years of
         age.

 36. The applicant was invited to comment, particularly on and  the  points
     put to him and his answers were recorded.

 37. He could not remember when the picture was taken but he insisted  that
     the photograph was a photograph of  him.  He  denied  that  the  birth
     certificate had been sent by fax in June  and  insisted  it  had  been
     produced at the interview in December 2011. He denied not  challenging
     the Home Office age decision. He denied that if he had told Hillingdon
     Social Services in 2011 that his younger brother, Aa, was aged 14  and
     that there was a sibling between him and Aa he could not be aged  less
     than 18 years of age.  However, exactly which part of  the  allegation
     he denied is not shown. He made no comment on the suggestion  that  he
     did not have the maturity to arrange his departure. He denied  that  S
     being 22 years old proved that the applicant was well over the age  of
     18. He denied not disputing the Home Office  age  assessment  and  not
     handing over the birth certificate during the  interview  in  December
     2011. He denied the birth certificate showing that he was born in 1996
     presented any difficulty. He denied appearing older than  his  claimed
     age.

 38. The interview was supported by manuscript notes which we have examined
     when necessary to consider submissions.

 39. There was also a document comprising a manuscript note apparently made
     of the assessment on 4 February 2013.  It  is  particularly  important
     because having recorded the applicant's claims that  he  was  born  in
     Balkh and that his mother died  and  his  brothers  and  sisters  were
     killed and that his father died in the year 2000, he  is  recorded  as
     having three brothers and two sisters.  He is shown to be  the  fourth
     child to be born.

 40. Given the slightly  unusual  nature  of  age  assessment  proceedings,
     although the applicant gave evidence first,  we  have  found  it  more
     helpful to set out the respondent's  evidence  in  this  part  of  the
     determination.  As indicated above, this is not a  case  where  either
     party bears a burden of proof.

     Victoria Aderinola

 41. Victoria Aderinola made a statement dated 7  January  2013  (she  must
     mean 2014) although it is the same as  her  unsigned  draft  statement
     provided much earlier.

 42. She identified herself as a social worker employed by  the  respondent
     in its Children Housing Support Team and Unoccupied Minors Team.   She
     graduated from Brunel University in 2007 with a BA Honours  degree  in
     Social Work and since  then  has  been  practising  social  work  with
     teenagers  in  "a  variety  of  settings,  mostly  with  unaccompanied
     minors".

 43. Her statement dealt with criticisms with the administration of the age
     assessment which we have noted.  In answer to additional questions she
     identified her handwritten notes, the age assessment report  and  also
     notes kept by the appropriate adult, Mr Andy Carhill.

 44. She was cross-examined.

 45. She said she had done a number of age assessments during the course of
     her work and this one was  not  procedurally  significantly  different
     from any other as far as she was  aware.   She  had  worked  with  her
     colleague, Dennis Dean.

 46. She was directed to the notes of the first assessment dated 4 February
     2013.  She said that she was not then conducting  an  age  assessment.
     It was an observation to help her decide  if  an  age  assessment  was
     needed.  She had asked some questions to try to learn more  about  the
     applicant, to "get to know him".  She accepted that she had read  back
     things to the applicant but was not quite sure what she had read back.

 47. She was asked to consider each of the twelve points she had identified
     as reasons for doubting his claimed age.

 48. Mr Suterwalla suggested that there was no obvious mechanism  by  which
     the applicant could challenge the Home Office's assessment of his  age
     or any particular reason why  he  should  want  to  challenge  such  a
     decision.  The Home Office had made no decision on  his  asylum  claim
     and his concern was that he  was  getting  the  support  that  he  was
     entitled to get from the respondent.  Ms Aderinola  was  reluctant  to
     admit an error but it was plain she understood that it was not  really
     a good point to complain that he had not challenged  the  Home  Office
     decision.

 49. It was also suggested that the applicant was in no  position  to  show
     documents  to  Hillingdon  soon  after  his  arrival  because  he  had
     travelled without identity documents and it was not fair to  criticise
     him for not producing things that were not then in his possession.

 50. She had said that it was the appellant's solicitors who had  suggested
     his uncle had abandoned him in a letter at F3 in the bundle  dated  16
     January 2013.  She had thought that letting him live for a time on the
     streets was something described appropriately as being abandoned.

 51. She was shown a letter from the appellant's uncle sent by email on  24
     December 2012 from the  uncle  explaining  why  he  was  not  able  to
     continue to accommodate the applicant.  There was neither room for him
     nor finances to support him.  She did accept that there was nothing in
     the interview with  the  applicant  to  suggest  that  his  uncle  had
     abandoned him.  It followed that this was a point  taken  against  the
     applicant without it being put to him.

 52. She was asked about the notes of 4 February and particularly the  ages
     and order of siblings that are recorded there.  She accepted that  she
     had not checked the note with the  applicant  but  believed  that  her
     recollection was correct when she made her notes.

 53. She was asked about her view that the applicant was not old enough  at
     his claimed age to have arranged his departure and sale of the  family
     possessions so quickly.  She accepted that the reference  to  �7-8,000
     was an error and that the description  "dollars"  was  used  correctly
     earlier in the report.  She had not asked  the  applicant  if  he  had
     actually taken possession of the cash but her impression was not  that
     his friend S had paid for his  departure  to  the  United  Kingdom  in
     consideration of being  given  assets  in  Afghanistan  but  that  the
     applicant had taken the money and  made  his  own  arrangements.   She
     accepted that there was nothing in the notes  the  directly  supported
     this impression.  She maintained it was still  a  mature  decision  to
     make in a short space of time.  She accepted that  the  applicant  had
     limited options if he was telling the truth  about  his  circumstances
     but she still felt that the sale of the family assets was a lot for  a
     15 year old to take on and she did not believe he was that young.

 54. Unsurprisingly, she accepted that it was possible that the applicant's
     friend S was a few years older than the applicant and she  had  formed
     the impression that S was the  applicant's  class  mate  she  had  not
     actually asked the applicant if that was so.

 55. Under cross-examination, the  witness  repeated  her  claim  that  the
     photograph on the Tazkira was not the applicant.  It was  put  to  the
     witness that the point raised under number 8 that the Tazkira did  not
     support his case was based on a mistranslation.  It  is  accepted  now
     that this was a mistranslation and that the translator had  identified
     the wrong year but, concerningly, Ms Aderinola found it  difficult  to
     accept that this undervalued the point.

 56. Points 9 and 10 were taken together.  They are about  the  applicant's
     general demeanour, assertiveness and confidence.  She  had  to  accept
     that other people had gained a different impression.

 57. She was not able to refer to any note that  supported  any  suggestion
     that the applicant was sufficiently well versed in procedures  to  ask
     for an age assessment.

 58. Ms Aderinola was then asked to  consider  e-mail  correspondence  with
     Oluseun Babajide who had worked with him during his stay in a  hostel.
     Mr Babajide estimated his age at "17/18" years and based this  on  his
     friendships with other young people and his general behaviour and  his
     having a girlfriend aged about 18.  She had not made further enquiries
     of the applicant's key worker at the YMCA.  She was then  referred  to
     notes  dated  3  May  2013  concerning  the  conversation   with   the
     applicant's uncle.  This records his being born  in  1995  and  having
     only one living brother then aged 15 years.

 59. In re-examination she said she had a clear memory of  the  applicant's
     sarcasm when he said he wanted a medical  assessment.   She  confirmed
     that the reference to the applicant's sarcastic manner was  raised  in
     the request for the applicant's comments because it was something that
     was in her mind.

 60. She did not think that Mr Oluseun Babajide would have  direct  contact
     with the applicant more than about once a month.

     Dennis Dean

 61. Mr Dennis Dean gave evidence.  He adopted the statement signed  on  23
     December 2013.

 62. He explained that he is a social  worker  in  the  employment  of  the
     respondent in the Children's Housing Support  Team  and  Unaccompanied
     Minors Team.

 63. He was awarded a Diploma in Social Work at North London University  in
     2001 but his experience in social work of various kinds  extended  for
     twenty years.  He had been  involved  with  unaccompanied  minors  for
     seven years and believed he had been suitably  trained  and  supported
     for that work.

 64. Responding to points specifically taken in the pleadings, he  said  it
     was his belief that the Afghan college certificate  was  not  produced
     during the age assessment but was  mentioned  in  a  letter  from  the
     applicant's  solicitors  dated  16  January  2013.    He   echoed   Ms
     Aderinola's evidence dealing with procedural points and,  contrary  to
     the impression created by his statement,  he  was  not  present  at  a
     meeting between the applicant and Ms Aderinola on 22 January 2013.

 65. Mr Dean was cross-examined.

 66.  He  was  asked  to  explain  his  understanding  of  the   safeguards
     appropriate for an age assessment case.  He suggested that the  report
     should be prepared  by  two  appropriately  qualified  social  workers
     working together and detailed notes taken of interviews.  He said that
     he was not present at the initial child and family assessment  because
     although part of the  whole  picture  it  was  not  part  of  the  age
     assessment interview.

 67. He was then taken to the summary of the reasons containing the  twelve
     points that were put to Ms Aderinola.   Unlike  Ms  Aderinola  he  was
     willing to engage in the hypothetical exercise required  by  Counsel's
     questions and also accepted readily that, for  example,  factoring  in
     wrong  information  about  a  date  on  a  document   because   of   a
     mistranslation meant a point had been relied upon that  could  not  be
     sustained.

 68. He accepted criticisms of the decision and believed that it was  still
     right to assert the applicant is over his claimed age.

     Documents

 69. The documents include a Statement of Evidence  Form  marked  as  being
     appropriate for use in the case of children prepared by the UK  Border
     Agency in connection with an interview of the applicant on 14 December
     2011.  At standard question 5 the applicant was asked if he  has  "any
     documents or other evidence  that  you  wish  to  submit  today?"   He
     replied, "My birth certificate and Afghan national ID card".  This  is
     equivocal.  It could mean two different documents or  it  could  be  a
     description of the Tazkira.  It is reasonably clear from the following
     questions, particularly question 7, that one  document  was  produced.
     It was said to have been forwarded by the applicant's friend, S.   The
     document was issued "three years ago" when the applicant was aged 13.

 70. There is a note from Alison Wood, the Project  Coordinator  at  Ealing
     Churches Winter Night Shelter dated 3 January  2013.   This  expresses
     concern about admitting the applicant because he identified himself as
     a minor but other than noting the consistency of  his  claim  to  have
     been born on 2 May 1995 this is not particularly illuminating.  It  is
     not evidence of the applicant's age, only of what he claimed  his  age
     to be.

 71. There is an email addressed to Victoria Aderinola dated  20  September
     2013 from Alison Wood.  This makes it plain that although it was noted
     that the applicant said he was a minor he looked like  a  young  adult
     and "I might have guessed about 25".

 72. In Alison Wood's email of 20 September 2013 there is  a  reference  to
     "Ad's younger brother, Aa aged 10" having escaped to Pakistan.

 73. The "person case notes" concerning the applicant in  the  form  of  an
     email to Victoria Aderinola received from Hillingdon  Social  Services
     on 22 January 2013 refers to the claimant saying that he had a 14 year
     old brother, Aa Ahmadi, still living in Pakistan.

     Dr Philip Marsden

 74. The age assessment was assisted by reports from Philip Hayley  Marsden
     who holds the qualifications of Bachelor of Dental Surgery awarded  by
     the University of London, Licentiate in Dental Surgery from the  Royal
     College of Surgeons of England, a  Postgraduate  Diploma  in  Forensic
     Odontology  and  a  Master  of  Science  with  Distinction  from   the
     University of Hertfordshire.   He  also  has  a  Diploma  in  Forensic
     Medical Sciences and Diploma in Forensic Human Identification from the
     Society of Apothecaries. In deference to modern custom we  will  refer
     to the witness as "Dr Marsden".

 75. He examined the applicant on 20 February 2013.   An  Afghanistan  Dari
     interpreter was present.

 76. There was one tooth with  an  amalgam  filling  but  examination  also
     showed that the rear teeth in the upper jaw on both sides of the mouth
     had been removed as had the lower right teeth numbered 4, 5, 6, 7  and
     8 and the lower left teeth numbered 6, 7 and 8.

 77. As well as the missing and filled teeth, Dr  Marsden  noted  that  the
     upper left outstanding  molar  tooth  is  slightly  over-erupted.   He
     explained this means the tooth had grown down into the space  made  by
     the absence of a tooth beneath it.  He said that  there  is  extensive
     resorption of the bone of the lower jaw and  complete  remodelling  of
     the area where the teeth used to be with no sign of the outline of the
     roots of the extracted teeth.  He  said  that  clinically  the  ridges
     where the teeth used to be were narrow showing extensive  remodelling.
     There was also extensive wear on the edges of the  front  teeth  where
     they had been rubbed together over  time.   He  opined  that  this  is
     likely to have been increased because there were no opposing teeth for
     many years.

 78. Dr Marsden drew on his clinical experience of over 30 years  and  said
     that the applicant "is almost certainly over 18 years of age".

 79. He based this on a variety of factors which can be summarised  as  the
     wear in the mouth.  Dr Marsden said that he had asked the applicant if
     he had seen a dentist in the United Kingdom and been told that he  had
     not.  He asked specifically if x-rays had been taken  because  he  did
     not want to take a second x-ray  unnecessarily.   Dr  Marsden's  notes
     showed that the applicant had denied seeing a dentist  in  the  United
     Kingdom when first asked but changed his account and said he had  seen
     a dentist but no x-rays had been taken.  However  he  had  seen  x-ray
     images that were plainly of the applicant's mouth.  There was  nothing
     in the further information that caused him to change  his  mind  about
     age.

 80. Dr Marsden expressed his surprise at the additional  medical  evidence
     not including the date of birth.  He did not know how that came  about
     but it was a surprising omission  because  his  date  of  birth  helps
     ensure that medical records are not misplaced or confused.

 81. Dr Marsden gave evidence before us.

 82. He had explained in his second statement (19 December  2013)  that  he
     was uncertain which molars were actually missing.   As  there  was  no
     evidence that would resolve the matter, he decided it would be  fairer
     to the applicant to assume that the third molars were missing as  this
     assumption would favour the applicant's case.

 83. He explained in his oral evidence why he thought that  this  applicant
     was aged over 18 years.

 84. He began by commenting  on  the  wear  on  the  remaining  teeth.   He
     explained, uncontroversially, that the rate  of  wear  varies  between
     individuals and is dependent  on  several  factors,  particularly  the
     hardness of the teeth and the pressure of the natural bite. Where  all
     the teeth are present the pressure is distributed evenly but if  there
     are no back teeth wear is increased on the front teeth.

 85. He did not feel able to  say  very  much  about  the  applicant's  age
     because of the wear of  the  front  teeth  alone  but  that  wear  was
     consistent with deductions he had made  concerning  the  rest  of  the
     state of the mouth.

 86. He did say that the degree of wear at the front of the  mouth  is  the
     kind that would be found in a 50 year old person if the back teeth had
     been present to spread wear but that was not what had happened here.

 87. He then explained how the jaw responds to  the  removal  of  a  tooth.
     Firstly bleeding stops and skin grows over the area of  the  wound  to
     prevent further  infection.   This  is  a  relatively  quick  process.
     Secondly, the hole created by the extraction fills with bone tissue in
     a way  analogous  to  a  broken  limb  mending.   This  takes  longer.
     However, the third response, which is described as resorption,  occurs
     as the jaw remodels to adapt to the absence of  the  tooth.   When  no
     tooth has to be supported and accommodated, the top of the jaw at  the
     back of the mouth becomes thinner and its shape changes.   This  is  a
     process that takes years rather than  weeks.   He  said  that  in  the
     applicant there had been "considerable remodelling".

 88. He said that he had been involved in forensic dentistry  for  over  25
     years  and  for  twenty  of  those  years  he  had  been  particularly
     interested in ageing.

 89. He also explained  that  adult  teeth  erupt  at  different  times  in
     different people but the emergence of the tooth tends to be  within  a
     two year bracket and that typically the second molar  emerges  when  a
     person is aged about 12 years and will be established by the time  the
     person is about 14 years.  He said that the absence of rear teeth  was
     more significant and helpful in establishing age than was the  absence
     of front teeth.  Front teeth can be lost by mechanical damage but rear
     teeth that are missing have generally been removed because  they  have
     decayed.  Additionally, teeth do not decay until  they  have  erupted.
     He explained that the decay typically occurs in  the  fissure  between
     the peaks in the top of the tooth.  Teeth do not decay within the  gum
     and peaks do not decay at all.  It followed that for  a  tooth  to  be
     removed because of  decay  it  would  firstly  have  to  have  erupted
     sufficiently far for the decay to begin and then for the decay to have
     taken place so that the tooth became so rotten that  it  was  removed.
     Eruption followed by decay to such a  degree  would  be  in  the  time
     bracket of three to four years, and a minimum of  three  years,  given
     the time taken for that and the likely time for  resorption  to  reach
     the observed level he thought that he was looking at the  mouth  of  a
     person aged 25 years although he was very quick to  emphasis  that  it
     was not his evidence  that  the  applicant  was  aged  25  years.  The
     applicant could be older or younger.  Dr  Marsden  clearly  found  the
     applicant to be aged over 18 years.

 90. He was cross-examined.  He accepted that his report was not  supported
     by any scientific data.  He was not aware of any  studies  of  Afghani
     males to see if they differed from other population groups.   Although
     he had conducted more than 100 age assessments, he did  not  know  how
     his evidence had been received by the  courts.   His  experience  with
     courts was mainly in the criminal courts.

 91. He said that his he had published peer reviewed papers in the  British
     Dental Journal  but  we  did  not  understand  him  to  say  that  his
     explanation of the relevance of resorption had  been  the  subject  of
     peer review. Although there was "a wealth" of studies  done  on  tooth
     development his opinion in this case was not based on development.  He
     emphasised that he was basing his assessment  not  on  the  degree  of
     development but on the degree of resorption.

 92. He opined that it would be difficult to conduct a  study  to  assemble
     data to test his thesis.  In particular, it would not  be  ethical  to
     leave people with painful decaying teeth to see how long they  lasted.
     He said that  age  assessment  based  on  resorption  was  a  standard
     question on a form produced by Interpol  to  be  used  when  examining
     bodies.

 93. He explained again that he concentrated on the assumed eruption of the
     third molar because that was the assumption  most  favourable  to  the
     applicant.

 94. It was put to him that teeth could have been expected to have  erupted
     between the ages of 11  and  13  years.   He  suggested  that  was  an
     unnecessarily tight bracket and 10� to 14 years would be  better.   He
     accepted that it was possible that the  tooth  in  the  applicant  had
     developed earlier and rotted quicker and that wear was quicker than he
     suggested.  He could see no  clinical  justification  for  removing  a
     tooth that was healthy and so he considered it likely that  the  tooth
     had erupted and decayed before it was removed.

 95. He accepted that the rate of decay can be affected by diet  and  mouth
     hygiene.  This was something very hard to test because  patients  were
     not always reliable witnesses about the care they gave to their teeth.

 96. He accepted it was possible to construct a scenario which  would  have
     produced the results seen in the mouth of a  younger  person  than  he
     thought the applicant to be.  He was not dealing  with  certainty  but
     probabilities and the most probable explanation for the state  of  the
     applicant's mouth is that he was older than he claims to be.

     The Applicant, A A

 97. The applicant gave evidence before us, adopting a statement made on 17
     December 2013.

 98. He said that he grew up in a small village in Balkh  province  in  the
     north of Afghanistan.  He lived in the family home with his mother,  a
     brother H, a sister M, a brother N, a sister N, and a brother Aa.   He
     claimed not to be able to remember living  with  his  father  whom  he
     thought was killed by the Taliban in 2000.

 99. He said he was unsure about the ages of his  siblings  but  he  listed
     them as indicated above starting with the oldest.  He said that it was
     not the custom in Afghanistan  to  celebrate  birthdays  or  dwell  on
     people's ages.  He believed his mother married when she was  14  years
     old and she started to have children when she was 15.

100. He said his early years in Afghanistan had been happy.  His mother was
     the main carer.  They kept chickens and so had eggs to eat.  He stayed
     at home until he was aged about 6 when he started school  in  Mazar-i-
     Sharif being the nearest city to his village.

101. His father worked as a driver and was killed by the  Taliban  when  he
     was aged 5 or 6 years.  After  the  father's  death,  the  applicant's
     older brother, Habib, worked as  a  driver  and  interpreter  for  the
     German and American armies.  He  recalled  travelling  to  school  and
     having  his  grandfather  sometimes  take  him  to  school.   He   was
     successful at school and "jumped two years ahead" of  his  age  group.
     He was ambitious and wanted to go to university to become an engineer.

102. He said how in June or July of 2011 the  Taliban  came  to  the  home,
     killed his mother and all of his family except Aa and himself.   Their
     brother Habib had been working with foreign armies and  did  not  heed
     the threat to stop.  The applicant and Aa  were  in  the  neighbouring
     room when the family were attacked and were able to hide.

103. He said that after the shooting a neighbour told him it was  not  safe
     for him to remain in the village and he went to a  house  in  Mazar-i-
     Sharif with his brother as this was a safe  place.   A  school  friend
     called S accommodated  them  and  S's  father  spoke  to  friends  and
     arranged their escape to Pakistan.  The applicant said he left the key
     to the family home with S's father and told him to  take  whatever  he
     needed to pay for the escape.  This was done and he fled.

104. They went to Pakistan and then  later  an  agent  came  and  took  the
     applicant to the United Kingdom.  He was told that S's father had only
     paid for one.

105. He travelled for about four months.

106. He described his journey to the United Kingdom.  There were  seven  of
     them travelling in a refrigerated van carrying meat and he was  afraid
     he would die of cold.  He entered the United Kingdom  at  the  seventh
     attempt.  He had memorised the  telephone  number  of  his  uncle  and
     stopped pedestrians until someone was  inclined  to  let  him  make  a
     telephone call and his uncle came to collect him.

107. He said his Tazkira was obtained in Afghanistan.  It is  the  official
     document that  identifies  him.   The  photograph  he  used  had  been
     adjusted to show him wearing a suit and tie although he had never  had
     such a thing.  It was the custom for people to present themselves in a
     smart way on an official form.

108. He recalled two interviews with the Home Office.  One was a  few  days
     on arrival on 10 November 2011 and that  was  when  his  birthday  was
     recorded as 2 May 1993.  He said that was an error.  He told  them  it
     was 1995.  He said he challenged the assessment and told them  he  did
     not agree with it and was told that would not  be  a  problem  but  he
     should get  his  birth  certificate  so  they  could  change  the  age
     assessment.

109. The full interview was on 14  December  2011  when  he  presented  his
     Tazkira and an identity card.  He had asked  S  to  get  hold  of  the
     documents on his behalf.  He said the suggestion that his  immigration
     solicitor had suggested obtaining the Tazkira later  was  wrong.   The
     solicitor was confused between the date of the Tazkira being  obtained
     and the college certificate sent to the Home  Office.   He  said  that
     when he was interviewed by the social workers he was nervous.  He  was
     questioned and the questions were not empathetic.  He thought  he  was
     regarded as a liar or at least someone being  deliberately  misleading
     and he became stressed.  He had signed a copy  of  the  notes  of  the
     interview but he had not read the notes.  He could not understand what
     was written.  He never agreed that he  was  the  age  alleged  by  the
     respondent.  He particularly denied being sarcastic or referring to  a
     molar being missing.  He did not understand the word  "molar"  and  he
     did not understand the word "sarcastic".

110. He was so upset after  being  interviewed  that  he  hurt  himself  by
     cutting his hand and punching the  wall.   He  had  been  referred  to
     mental health assessments.  He was now on medication.  He struggled to
     sleep and had "horrible flashbacks".

111. The applicant gave evidence before us and adopted his  statement.   He
     said that although birthdays were not celebrated in  Afghanistan,  his
     mother would tell him when it was his birthday  and  sometimes  buy  a
     small present such as a book or a pen.  He did not know  the  ages  of
     his brothers and sisters.  He thought that Aa was now  16  years  old.
     When asked to indicate family relationships, he said that Aa  was  his
     younger brother, that the applicant was the next youngest,  and  after
     that came N who was the younger of their sisters.  He said that he had
     said his mother was 42 years old.  He thought she was 42  because  she
     was like a teacher who taught him daily college whose age he asked.

112. He claimed to have had lots of friends and S was one of them.

113. He recalled arriving in the United Kingdom and contacting  the  London
     Borough of Hillingdon.  His English was then not  very  good  but  his
     uncle helped him.  He remembered the contact with Ealing and the first
     meeting with Victoria Aderinola.  He knew that she took notes  of  the
     meeting but they were not checked over with him.

114. He had never said that N was younger than him.

115. He remembered an interview on 6 February with Dennis Dean and Victoria
     Aderinola.  He did not recall being asked then about the ages  of  his
     sister and his position in the family.  He did not say that he  wanted
     a dental or a medical assessment.  That was something they suggested.

116. He had had about four teeth removed in Afghanistan.  He did  not  know
     exactly how many.  They were taken out because they were decayed.   He
     was clear in his mind that his teeth had decayed.  He said  they  were
     "black" and he had no money to do  anything  about  it  so  they  were
     removed.

117. He remembered meeting Dr Marsden although did not remember  his  name.
     He had seen another dentist in the United Kingdom.  He was  not  asked
     about his diet in Afghanistan when he  first  had  problems  with  his
     teeth.

118. He was cross-examined.

119. He was asked about his interview on 4  February  2013.   He  confirmed
     that he could not read English precisely but he  could  sometimes  get
     the gist and on this occasion there was an  interpreter  present.   He
     had some difficulty with the interpreter because he  speaks  Dari  and
     the interpreter spoke Farsi but he did not mention this difficulty  at
     the interview.  He confirmed  that  the  notes  did  record  correctly
     several things he remembered from the  conversation.   These  included
     his saying that his mother was aged 42 and that she  died  because  of
     the Taliban four months before he came to the United Kingdom  and  his
     father had been dead since 2000 but he insisted that she had  recorded
     wrongly what he had said about the age of  his  family  members.   The
     suggestion that his mother was aged 14 when she married  and  15  when
     she had her first child was just a guess.  It was pointed out that  if
     his mother was 42 when she died and 15 when she had her  first  child,
     her first child would now be aged about 27 years.  He claimed  not  to
     know.

120. He claimed it was not unusual for his sister to be  unmarried  at  her
     late age.  He said that the family was in  reduced  circumstances  and
     that was a partial explanation for his sister being single.

121. He did not know what age he went to school.  He only knew it was usual
     to start at school between 5 and 7 years of age.  He was not  prepared
     to accept that it would be ordinarily the case to  leave  school  aged
     about 14 years but he left school when he was 16 years old.

122. He described S as a very close friend.  He had  no  relatives  on  his
     mother's side and only Uncle Habib lived  near  him  on  his  father's
     side.  Although he remembered being given some token  present  on  his
     birthday he could not remember his age at any particular birthday.  He
     was  asked  about  having  his  teeth  removed  in  Afghanistan.    He
     remembered going to a dentist in a  village  that  was  not  his  home
     village.  He could not recall if he had been on one or  two  occasions
     or in what year his teeth were removed.  He thought it was about  four
     or five years before coming to the United Kingdom.   They  were  taken
     out because they were black and painful.  He could  not  remember  how
     long his teeth had been hurting before they were removed.

123. The Afghan diet was typically rice with some meat and bread, fruit and
     vegetables but he did eat sweet cakes and loved chocolate.

124. He was asked about his Tazkira.  He said it was his photograph on  the
     Tazkira  taken  when  he  was  in  Afghanistan.   He  had  had   other
     photographs taken.  This one was taken by a professional photographer.
      He applied for it because he wanted to go  to  computer  college  and
     needed an identification document.  He went to the computer college in
     2008.  He did not know the month when he started or  even  the  season
     when he started.  When pressed he decided it was not too cold and  not
     too hot.

125. He was asked for how long he was at college and he replied "A year  or
     two maybe".  As well as maths on the computer he had to study  English
     for three or four months  and  also  study  the  Koran.   He  did  not
     complete the maths course but said he could not recall how much of  it
     he had completed.  He had to study the Koran before he could go on the
     computer  course.   It  was  suggested  the  certificate  appeared  to
     indicate that he had been on a course for ten months  from  August  to
     June but he said he had been on the course for three months and he was
     asked if he could explain.  He said that the dates were approximate.

126. He remembered having a student card with  his  photograph  on  it  but
     could not remember his student number.  The date of birth was  not  on
     it.  He said that S was contacted by his uncle who he had asked to get
     the certificate.  The uncle  had  gone  to  Pakistan,  Afghanistan  or
     possibly Dubai in 2012.  His uncle set up the call.  He did not  speak
     directly to S.  He did not ask for particular documents  but  for  all
     relevant documents.  He did not have a conversation where he  told  S,
     for example, to look in the bedroom.

127. He could remember the name of one other  person  on  the  course.   He
     could not remember the name of the instructor or tutor.

128. He did recall the name of one tutor who was an engineer.

129. He said the $7-8,000 needed to pay for the trip to the United  Kingdom
     came from S's father.  He said that he was like a son to S's father.

130. He explained how he travelled to the United Kingdom  and  how  he  was
     helped at different stages by agents.

131. He was asked why he had not indicated in interview that  the  document
     was needed for the college rather than just to establish identity.  He
     denied being asked for an appropriate question.

132. He denied that he had been sent a fake document by S.

133. He said when he was in a container he could not make  contact  on  his
     way to the United Kingdom.

134. He denied saying he did not know where his uncle was  born.   He  said
     that was a mistake.

135. He admitted that when he claimed asylum he said that he was older than
     was truly the case.

136. He remembered speaking with  Dr  Marsden  the  dentist.   He  admitted
     saying wrongly that he had not seen another dentist and had not had an
     x-ray.  He thought that the question was about the dentist that he was
     seeing.

137. He admitted saying he wanted his own flat and that it was noisy in the
     YMCA.  He was asked why he thought he was entitled  to  his  own  flat
     which is what he had admitted asserting (page 39 notes).

138. He denied discussing what would happen on arrival as he  travelled  to
     the United Kingdom.  He claimed not to know people could make findings
     about age by looking at teeth.

139. He said his girlfriend was not from Somalia and she was aged 19.

140. His best friend, S was now 21.  He denied that he was  older  than  he
     claimed to be.

141. He was re-examined.

142. He insisted he had a penchant for sugary food.

143. He offered no sensible explanation for saying that he had not been  x-
     rayed when he had been x-rayed.

144. He insisted he had not heard of dental age assessments  before  coming
     to the United Kingdom.

145. The applicant was recalled.  He was shown a document being a slip from
     a neighbour relating to a packet sent from Afghanistan.  He said  that
     it was dated 30 June 2013 but he could not recall when he had received
     the envelope.  He had had  a  T-shirt  as  well  as  a  document  from
     Afghanistan.

146. He confirmed that at his screening interview his  date  of  birth  was
     written down as 1 May 1994 and then crossed out to show 1995.  He said
     that he had simply been misheard.

147. He was not further re-examined.

     M W

148. Mr M W gave evidence before us  for  the  applicant.   He  signed  his
     statement before us.

149. He introduced himself in the statement  as  the  claimant's  community
     worker.  He was employed by St Mary's Church  Acton  to  serve  people
     such as the appellant.

150. He helped the appellant engage with social worker  organisations,  his
     solicitors and the respondent.

151. He explained that Ealing Churches Winter Night Shelter was not able to
     help everyone who wanted its help.

152. Typically it provided an  evening  meal,  a  bed  for  the  night  and
     breakfast, usually in a church hall.

153. Mr W took the applicant to visit the Refugee Council seeking help  and
     took him to his solicitors.  He said,

     "I have now spent a considerable period of time with the claimant  and
     because I have been involved in  his  case  I  agree  to  act  as  his
     litigation friend."

154. He then listed occasions when he had escorted the applicant on various
     visits.

155. He commented particularly on the age assessment report.

156. He had never experienced the appellant being in any way sarcastic  but
     regarded him as a "very polite and respectful boy".

157. The suggestion that he showed no emotional  distress  or  signs  about
     missing his family surprised Mr W who had observed  directly  opposite
     behaviour although he noted that the applicant  did  not  become  open
     with him until he gained his confidence.

158. The applicant had given a consistent account to Mr W about his  family
     and paperwork.

159.  He  was  surprised  the  age  assessment  recorded  nothing  of   his
     involvement with the applicant.  He knew that the ECWMS member, Alison
     Wood, had little involvement with the applicant.

160. Mr W said he had had considerable experience of teenage boys.  He  had
     two sons of his own but more significantly in this context he had been
     a football and cricket coach for many years in the United Kingdom  and
     in  Australia  and  had  experience  of  the  Lebanese   and   Turkish
     communities.

161. There was nothing about the applicant's  appearance  or  conduct  that
     made him believe he was older than the 17 years that he claimed to be.

162. He gave examples of the appellant behaving in a way that  he  regarded
     as typical of a 17 year old  youth.   He  commented  on  his  shyness,
     hesitancy about making  eye  contact  and  disinclination  to  express
     himself orally, and also how  he  "showed  an  interest  bordering  on
     wonderment in things like tall buildings and trains".

163. He said that the applicant had an  idealistic  and  immature  view  of
     life.

164. He found it significant how on one occasion the applicant spent all of
     his clothing allowance on fashionable shoes rather than warm  clothes.
     He regarded this as the behaviour of a teenage boy rather than a man.

165. In answer to oral questions he expressed his respect for  Alison  Wood
     but confirmed his disagreement with her assessment of his age.  Indeed
     he recalled a conversation with Ms Wood where they  expressed  concern
     that the appellant was an underage boy sleeping in a night shelter for
     men.

166. He was cross-examined.

167. He said he had worked at different times in the financial  sector  and
     as a litigation lawyer but he now worked as a volunteer for the winter
     project.  He  said  that  he  went  shopping  with  the  applicant  on
     occasions.

168. He confirmed that he had never known the applicant to be sarcastic but
     that he accepted that it is possible that the applicant reacted  badly
     if he was challenged.

169. Although he repeated his evidence about his experience of working with
     teenage boys, he said that  he  had  no  direct  experience  of  young
     adults.  He then qualified that to explain that he had some experience
     of young men aged 19  to  21  and  he  found  they  generally  had  an
     assertive quality that was not something he saw in the applicant.

     I B

170. Ms I B gave evidence before us, adopting a statement made in  December
     2013.  She explained that she is a tutor  at  the  college  where  the
     applicant studied and had been since 2005  where  her  main  work  was
     teaching English as a second language.   She  had  dealings  with  the
     applicant since 2 September 2013 and would  see  him  for  about  nine
     hours in the working week.  She had had several "one to one" tutorials
     with him because he needed a lot of support.

171. She said she had over nine years' experience of teaching young  people
     in the 14 to 19 year old age bracket and it was her strong  view  that
     the applicant is genuine and honest and had  "no  reason  to  set  him
     apart from his peers in terms of  age  which  ranges  from  17  to  19
     years".  In  some  ways  he  appeared  rather  less  mature  than  his
     contemporaries.  He could appear awkward and gauche in class.

172. She adopted her witness statement.

173. She said her tutor group was of mixed ethnicity.  She said that people
     such as the applicant tended to treat her as  a  maternal  figure  and
     wanted her attention in a way that people in their 20s did  not.   She
     was particularly concerned when the applicant went with a group to see
     a play at the Royal Court Theatre which concerned a person seeking the
     help of an  agent  to  leave  his  own  country.   The  applicant  was
     disturbed by the scene and she found his  conduct  childlike  at  that
     time.

174. She also recalled an occasion when her work as a tutor touched on  the
     topic of sexual reproduction and she had to draw swimming sperm.   The
     applicant, with the rest of the class, giggled  in  a  way  she  found
     immature.   She   suggested   that   spontaneous   giggling   out   of
     embarrassment could not be easily feigned.  She was not  competent  to
     decide if he had mental health problems but she was worried after  his
     distress at the theatre.

     H A

175. Mr H A gave evidence before us.  He adopted a statement that he signed
     on 17 December 2013 and endorsed to say it had been read in a language
     he understood.

176. There he identified himself as  the  applicant's  uncle.   He  claimed
     asylum and was later granted indefinite leave  to  remain.   He  lived
     with  his  wife  and  four  daughters  but  was  presently  unemployed
     following a fracture to his hip.

177. He said that the applicant as the son of his older brother.   He  said
     that his brother had lived with his wife and family in Balkh  city  in
     the north of Afghanistan at an address one or two miles from  his  own
     home.  He used to see the family often, usually each day.

178. He particularly remembered the day of the applicant's birth because he
     took the applicant's mother to hospital when she went into labour  and
     he remembered the applicant being born between 10 and  11  o'clock  in
     the morning.

179. He said that the applicant  was  given  a  birth  certificate  at  the
     hospital but this was not like  a  birth  certificate  in  the  United
     Kingdom  for  the  purposes  of  registration  but  was  more  like  a
     prescription because it listed the medicines that had to  be  obtained
     for the mother.  He remembered signing the certificate.  He remembered
     it being a date that translated as 2 May 1995.  He remembered going to
     the pharmacist to collect medicines.

180. He said it is the tradition in  Afghanistan  to  have  a  party  after
     babies are born and that different families celebrate it at  different
     times.  In his family it was the custom to have a party six days after
     the birth.

181. He said it was not common for children  in  Afghanistan  to  celebrate
     their birthdays.

182. In 2000 the applicant's father was killed.  Mr Ahmadi was shot by  the
     Taliban whilst serving in the Afghan  army  in  2001  and  escaped  to
     Pakistan.

183. He remembered the applicant arriving in the United  Kingdom  in  March
     2007 and going to live with his (the witnesses) younger  brother,  the
     applicant's uncle, named A A until October 2012 when A A had to  leave
     the country and the applicant stayed with a friend.  By then, Mr  H  A
     was in hospital because of his broken hip and the  applicant  came  to
     see him in hospital to see if he could help him with accommodation but
     he could not.  He had four daughters  aged  between  15  years  and  9
     months and the house was simply too small to accommodate a  young  man
     whose presence would be questionable on moral or cultural  grounds  in
     any event.

184. He was quite clear that there was no sister between the applicant  and
     his younger brother, Aa.  Aa is  about  two  years  younger  than  the
     applicant.

185. He said in terms that he confirmed the applicant's date of birth is  2
     May 1995.  In answer to additional questions he confirmed that it  was
     common in Afghanistan for young children to receive some attention  on
     their birthdays.  It was put to him that in Victoria's evidence he had
     said he remembered the applicant being born  in  1995  but  could  not
     remember  the  day  and  the  month.   He  said  he   had   difficulty
     understanding   Ms   Aderinola's   accent   and   there    was    some
     misunderstanding between them.  For example  it  had  never  been  his
     intention to convey the impression that the applicant's  parents  were
     killed two or three years before the meeting.  It was the  applicant's
     father who died in 2000.

186. He was cross-examined.

187. He confirmed that he is the younger brother of the applicant's father.
      He then gave very detailed and not always  easy  to  follow  evidence
     about where he lived in Afghanistan, where it was in relation  to  the
     applicant's home.  It is at least possible that this difficulty  arose
     because of the inconsistent descriptions about the location and it  is
     not necessarily sinister or indicative of dishonesty.

188. He confirmed the evidence in his statement that he remembered the date
     of birth because he had to take the prescription  from  the  hospital.
     He insisted that he could not understand Victoria  Aderinola's  accent
     but he did accept that he knew that she had asked about  the  date  of
     birth and he said that he had said 1995.

189. He explained how he had been an army driver.  He knew the  applicant's
     birthday and did not need to read a prescription to be reminded of it.
      He then explained that the date was fixed in his mind because he  had
     borrowed money on the same  day  as  the  birthday  and  the  document
     containing  the  prescription  and  birthday   was   an   aide-memoire
     concerning the debt.  He borrowed 30 lakhs from a friend.   He  listed
     the order of the children.

190. He was not re-examined.

     Analysis

191. We were given skeleton arguments from both sides to which we have  had
     proper  regard  as  well  as  full  oral  submissions  which  we  have
     considered.

192. For the avoidance of doubt, we make it plain that we have  reached  no
     findings without considering the evidence as a whole and if the layout
     of our determination causes anyone to suspect that we have decided the
     case incrementally then that suspicion is wrong.

193. We have to begin  somewhere  and  we  begin  by  considering  the  age
     assessment form.  This document has been correctly criticised.  We are
     satisfied that it  was  not  read  over  to  the  applicant  properly.
     Certain things were clearly read over to him.  That has never been  in
     dispute.  The points of contention or points that  were  going  to  be
     held against him were not referred to him in a way that enabled him to
     comment at an early opportunity if the evidence had been misunderstood
     or otherwise misconceived.

194. Nevertheless, we are satisfied that the applicant did  on  an  earlier
     occasion give his year of birth as 1993 and we are satisfied  that  he
     did indicate that he had a younger sister between him and the  younger
     brother.  We recognise that sometimes people say things they  just  do
     not mean.  We all have experience of a "slip of the tongue" or a "slip
     of the pen".  Nevertheless, in any case involving  a  young  man  from
     Afghanistan it was likely that his claimed age could become  important
     which we would expect to be recorded accurately. If the applicant  was
     "off his guard" he may have said something that he did not mean to say
     but we find  it  inherently  unlikely  that  the  answer  to  such  an
     important question would be recorded inaccurately.

195. Neither do we see any good explanation for Victoria  Aderinola  saying
     that the applicant had identified a younger sister or saying  that  he
     had had his molars removed  or  saying  that  he  was  entitled  to  a
     residential flat unless the applicant had made  these  claims.  It  is
     conceivable but, we find, inherently unlikely that she  would  make  a
     mistake concerning the applicant's account  of  his  position  in  the
     family. We can think of no sensible explanation at all for her  noting
     comments by the applicant about the evidential difficulties caused  by
     his not having any back teeth or his wanting a flat  except  that  the
     applicant did say the things attributed to him.

196. We note here but will consider it more below that we do not accept the
     severe criticisms of  the  photographs  made.   Many  cameras  distort
     images to some extent and it is not obvious to us from looking at  the
     photograph that it is not a photograph of the applicant.   Whether  it
     is a photograph of the applicant taken when  he  was  aged  13  as  he
     claims is a different point.

197. Ms Aderinola was not an entirely satisfactory witness.  Her reluctance
     to accept  that  certain  points  taken  against  the  appellant  were
     misconceived even when they plainly were, as evidenced by her  refusal
     to accept the point taken on a mistranslated document, made  her  seem
     rather stubborn and inflexible even when it was plain that  a  mistake
     had been made.  We have  allowed  for  this  but  can  still  find  no
     sensible explanation for her getting wrong the things indicated above.
       It  would  have  required  either  mischief  on  her  part   or   an
     extraordinary lapse in concentration on matters about  which  she  was
     required as an employee doing her job to be particularly  astute.   We
     do not think she is wrong.  We think she recorded accurately something
     the applicant now wishes he had not said.

198. These things aside there is  nothing  in  the  evidence  and  the  age
     assessment  which  is  particularly   compelling.    The   applicant's
     approximate age is not the issue.  We do however find  some  merit  in
     the suggestion that his uncle would not  have  left  him  to  his  own
     devices if he had been as young as alleged.

199. Mr Dean was  a  more  experienced  witness  than  Ms  Aderinola.   His
     willingness to abandon misconceived points put him in a better  light.
     We accept he gave a truthful account of things and we gave some weight
     to his opinion.

200. The applicant was an unsatisfactory witness.  He was not able to  deal
     with the points taken against him. Where there is a  conflict  between
     his recollection of events and Ms Aderinola's recollection we have, as
     we have indicated above, preferred hers.

201. We find the Tazkira a very unhelpful document.  It was the applicant's
     own case that he supported his college application with the photograph
     that had been doctored to give a false  impression.   It  is  possible
     that he had developed facial hair at the age  of  13.   Certainly  the
     photograph suggests a growing rather than mature moustache but we find
     it unlikely that his moustache would be as developed at  13  years  of
     age as it is I the photograph.  We do not go so  far  as  to  say  the
     photographs were not of the same person.  It is common knowledge  that
     appearances can alter significantly with  the  sophistication  of  the
     camera used and the focal length of the lenses.  We are not  satisfied
     at all that the picture shown is of a man as young as 13 years of age.
      His inability to give a clear chronology did not assist.  He did  not
     impress as a straightforward witness.

202. His uncle's evidence supported the applicant and had the potential  to
     assist him considerably. However the suggestion that the date of birth
     was fixed in his mind because of  a  prescription  used  as  an  aide-
     memoire of a debt appeared contrived.  The applicant's  uncle  has  an
     incentive to help him for family reasons and, when we set his evidence
     in the context of the case as a whole,  we  found  him  an  unreliable
     witness.

203. The school teacher, Ms B, has given us food for thought.  We recognise
     that school teachers are in a good position to  assist  the  Tribunal.
     She had known the applicant over some months  in  circumstances  where
     she would have seen him  with  his  guard  down  and  she  would  have
     considerable experience of young  people  of  about  the  age  of  the
     applicant.  Nevertheless, her evidence was very impressionistic.   She
     could only say he did not exhibit the kind of maturity she would  have
     expected.  Although she has known the applicant long enough to have  a
     valid opinion, she has not known him for an extended period  of  time.
     She has also developed some wholly appropriate professional  affection
     for him because it is the nature of teachers to care for young  people
     in their charge. We find that she has gone along with his story but is
     not really in a position to know his age. The examples of his  alleged
     immaturity could be the result of  personal  qualities  that  are  not
     indicative of his youthfulness. For example he may have no  experience
     of discussing sexual matters in mixed company and we find that a group
     of people can join in embarrassed laughter at almost  any  age.  There
     could be many reasons for his being upset  by  play  about  an  asylum
     seeker that are not age dependant.

204. Similarly Mr W was an honest witness with  some  experience  of  young
     people. He too has formed a personal bond with the applicant as he has
     tried to help him. He has not caught  the  applicant  telling  obvious
     lies and, again like Ms B, has gone along with what the applicant  has
     said.  Unlike  Ms  Aderinola,  Mr  W  has  not  seen  the  applicant's
     assertiveness. If he had then,  we  find,  he  may  have  changed  his
     opinion.

205. We are not impressed with the references to "Ms Wood",  at  the  night
     centre, assessing the applicant's age at 25 years of age.  She was not
     called as  a  witness  and  we  accept  that  her  comment  about  the
     applicant's age was a rather throwaway remark without much to back  it
     up.  We accept the answer as accurately recorded and no doubt said  in
     good faith when it was said but it is not an  informed  or  considered
     remark and was not subjected to scrutiny before us.

206. It is Dr Marsden's  evidence  we  found  most  helpful.   As  we  have
     indicated above, when he set  out  his  evidence  in  detail,  he  was
     careful not to give it too much weight and we must  not  either.   His
     evidence is not like DNA evidence which can say with  confidence  that
     something did not happen or more typically can say with  a  very  high
     degree of probability that something did  happen.   His  evidence  was
     based on an impression formed by many years  of  relevant  experience.
     It is an impression that was very carefully explained  before  us  and
     the more his opinion was tested before us the more sense  it  made  to
     us.

207. We were particularly impressed with  his  observation  that  he  could
     construct a scenario that would allow the applicant to be younger than
     he thought him to be but that would apply only if a  lot  of  unlikely
     things had happened. Dr Marsden was,  we  find,  an  entirely  neutral
     witness whose only concern was to assist with a considered,  objective
     and informed opinion.

208. By definition the things that probably happened are the likely things.
      We agree that it is very unlikely that the applicant's teeth  erupted
     early enough and rotted quickly enough to be removed in time  for  the
     jaw bone to remodel in the way indicated and for the  applicant  still
     to be of the age claimed.

209. Dr Marsden did not claim that his evidence  was  particularly  precise
     but it suggested that the applicant was  considerably  older  than  he
     claimed to be. There was an appreciable margin of error given  in  the
     applicant's favour.  Dr Marsden thought he was looking at the mouth of
     a 25 year old but accepted that that figure had to be put  with  other
     strands of evidence.

210. There was no evidence before us  to  suggest,  for  example  that  the
     resorption noted by Dr Marsden could probably be explained by untested
     variables such as the distinctive individual characteristics  of  this
     applicant's diet, mouth hygiene or ethnicity.

211. In the absence of any  conflicting  scientific  opinion  we  found  Dr
     Marsden's evidence to be very persuasive.

212. We find that the applicant is older than he now wants  to  admit.   We
     find he did research his case before coming to the United Kingdom  and
     did know about third molars being  relevant.   He  did  think  he  was
     entitled to more state assistance than he was getting.  He did say  he
     had a younger sister and  recognised  that  this  caused  problems  in
     constructing a plausible chronology and he had to invent a  reason  to
     discredit that slip on his part.

213. He is clearly a young man who  has  had  difficulties.   Whatever  his
     reasons for leaving Afghanistan we  accept  that  his  travel  to  the
     United Kingdom was protracted and distressing.  We are  not  surprised
     that he showed some kind of emotional collapse at a theatre production
     that touched a raw nerve with him.

214. Doing the best we can, we find that the applicant was born  on  2  May
     1993.~~~~0~~~~

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 8 May 2014                     |








