
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Omenma (Conditional discharge - not a conviction of an offence) [2014] UKUT
00314 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 14 May 2014                                |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                              MR JUSTICE GREEN
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

                           MRS IJEOMA GLORY OMENMA

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Revill instructed by Peer and Co
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


The effect of section 14(1) of the Powers of  Criminal  Courts  (Sentencing)
Act 2000 is that a  person  who  has  received  a  conditional  or  absolute
discharge does not make a false representation if the answer  is  "no"  when
asked if he has ever been "convicted" of an offence.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


Introduction

1.   The issue in this appeal is whether  a  failure  to  disclose  that  an
    appellant has pleaded guilty to shoplifting and was given a conditional
    discharge for two years constitutes a  failure  under  the  Immigration
    Rules, paragraph 322(1A) which has  the  effect  of  disqualifying  the
    appellant from an entitlement to leave to remain. Permission to  appeal
    has been given in this case because it gives rise to  a  point  of  law
    which  is  to  be  thought  worth  clarifying,  namely  the  status  of
    conditional and unconditional discharges in this context.  In this case
    the SSHD has withdrawn the  impugned  decision  and  accepts  that  the
    appellant had not  been  dishonest.  However,  the  appellant  has  not
    withdrawn the appeal.  The Tribunal is not deprived of jurisdiction and
    its task pursuant to section 12 Tribunals, Courts and  Enforcement  Act
    2007 remains to determine whether the FtT decision involved the  making
    of an error on a point of law: See SM (Withdrawal  of  appeal  decision
    effect) Pakistan [2014] UKUT 64 (IAC) paragraphs 27,  70  and  73.   We
    consider that notwithstanding the withdrawal of the decision, not  only
    does it remain our function to bring this  appeal  to  an  end  but  we
    consider that there is a point of law of some potential materiality  on
    which  there  is  no  extant  authority.  We  consider  that  (although
    obliquely) the point has been a live one throughout these  proceedings,
    but for the avoidance of any doubt we grant permission to the appellant
    to raise the point should that be needed.

Facts

2.   The appellant, Mrs Omenma, first arrived in the United Kingdom  in  May
    2009.  On 8 November 2011 the appellant was convicted of four counts of
    shoplifting at Woolwich Magistrates' Court.  She pleaded guilty and was
    given, by the magistrates, a two year  conditional  discharge  on  each
    count.  The sentence is spent under the Rehabilitation of Offenders Act
    1974 (ROA 1974) on 29 October 2013.

3.   On 5 August 2012 the appellant made an application for leave to  remain
    in the United Kingdom upon the basis that she was a partner of a Tier 1
    Migrant under the  Points  Based  System  (PBS)  and  for  a  biometric
    Residence Permit (BRP).

4.   Section F of  the  relevant  application  form  is  entitled  "Personal
    History" (criminal convictions, war crimes, etc)."  The first  part  of
    Section F is in the following terms:

         "It is mandatory to complete Section F.  If it is not complete  the
         application will be invalid and will be returned to you.


         This section asks you about any criminal convictions you have,  any
         civil judgments or civil penalties made against you and details  of
         any involvement you  may  have  in  war  crimes,  genocide,  crimes
         against humanity or terrorism.  If you fail to answer all of  these
         questions as fully and accurately as possible, your application may
         be refused.


         Please answer every question in this section.   It  is  an  offence
         under Section 26(1)(c) of  the  Immigration  Act  1971  to  make  a
         statement or representation which is known to be false  or  is  not
         believed to be true.  Information given will be  checked  by  other
         agencies."


5.   There followed, as  question  "F1",,  the  following:  "Have  you  been
    convicted of any criminal offence in the United Kingdom  or  any  other
    country?  As to this the appellant ticked the box which stated "No".

6.   Had the appellant ticked the "Yes" box she would have been required  to
    give details of each criminal conviction.  Section F refers, at the end
    of the section, to the position of offences pursuant to the  ROA  1974.
    The note attached to Section 5 states:

         "The  Rehabilitation  of  Offenders  Act  1974   enables   criminal
         convictions to become 'spent' or ignored  after  a  'rehabilitation
         period'.  The length of the rehabilitation period  depends  on  the
         sentence  given.    For   a   custodial   (prison)   sentence   the
         rehabilitation period is decided by the original sentence, not  the
         time served.  Prison sentences of more than two and  a  half  years
         can never  become  spent  and  should  always  be  disclosed.   For
         information on rehabilitation  periods  can  be  found  at  Nacro's
         Resettlement Plus Helpline 020 7840 6464 or  by  obtaining  a  free
         copy of their leaflet on 020 7840 6427."

7.   The application form was duly submitted by  the  appellant  to  the  UK
    Border Agency.  On 18 March 2013 the application was refused.  Although
    not relevant to the matter before us, her partner was  successful  with
    his application. For present purposes the  following  is  the  relevant
    part of the decision:

         "In your application, you answered  'no'  to  question  F1  on  the
         application form, therefore stating  that  you  have  not  had  any
         criminal convictions in the UK, or  any  other  country  (including
         traffic offences) or civil judgments made against you.


         I am satisfied that this  statement  was  false,  because  extended
         checks carried out by the UK Border Agency have revealed that on 08
         November  2011,  you  were  given  a  conditional   discharge   for
         shoplifting which is spent on 29 October 2013.


         I am satisfied that these facts were material  to  the  application
         because it is, as stated in the declaration which you  have  signed
         upon submitting your application, an offence under the  Immigration
         Act 1971, as amended by the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 and the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, to make  a  statement
         or representation which you know to be false or to seek  to  obtain
         leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  by  means  which  include
         deception.


         As false representations have been made and material facts were not
         disclosed in relation to your  application,  it  is  refused  under
         paragraph 322(1A) of the Immigration Rules.


         For the above reasons, I am  also  satisfied  that  you  have  used
         deception in this application."

8.   Paragraph 322(1A) of the  Immigration  Rules  identifies  grounds  upon
    which leave to remain and variation of leave to enter or remain in  the
    United Kingdom "are to be refused".  This is to be distinguished  from,
    inter alia, Immigration Rule  paragraph  322(2)-(12)  which  identifies
    grounds upon which leave to remain and variation of leave to  enter  or
    remain in the United Kingdom "should normally be refused".

9.   Sub-paragraph (1A) states that leave to remain is to be refused:

         "....where false representations have been made or false  documents
         or information... had been submitted (whether or  not  material  to
         the application, and whether or not to the applicant's  knowledge),
         or material facts have not  been  disclosed,  in  relation  to  the
         application..., or in order to obtain documents from the  Secretary
         of State or a third party required in support of the application."

10.  The appellant appealed the decision of the  SSHD  to  the  FtT.   In  a
    determination  promulgated  on  13  September  2013  the   appeal   was
    dismissed.  In paragraph 5 the Judge addressed  the  relevant  standard
    and burden of proof.  This has been made the subject  of  a  ground  of
    appeal.  Paragraph 5 is in the following terms:

         "In Immigration Appeals, the burden of proof is upon the  Appellant
         and  the  standard  of  proof  required  is  upon  a   balance   of
         probabilities.   In  Non-Entry  Clearance  cases,  i.e.   In-County
         Appeals, I can also take account of evidence right up to  the  date
         of the hearing as per the case of LS (Gambia) [2005] UKIAT 00085 if
         it relates to the application  which  led  to  the  decision  under
         appeal.  In Human Rights Appeals, it is for the Appellant  to  show
         that there has been an interference with his or her  human  rights.
         If that is established, and the relevant  Article  permits,  it  is
         then for the Respondent to  establish  that  the  interference  was
         justified.  The appropriate standard of proof is the  normal  civil
         standard of the balance of probabilities as per  the  case  of  Box
         [2002] UKIAT 02212."

11.  The Judge recorded that the appellant had given oral  evidence  and  he
    had received oral and written  submissions  from  representatives  from
    both parties.  In relation to the shoplifting the Judge  recorded  that
    the appellant gave a variety of reasons (not always consistent) for her
    failure to record the fact of those  proceedings  in  Section  F.   The
    reasons were: that she  had  not  taken  legal  advice;  that  she  had
    successfully completed such forms  in  the  past;  that  a  conditional
    discharge was not a conviction and was not a criminal offence; that the
    judge had said to her that if she did it again she would go to  prison;
    that this was not a criminal conviction  because  she  did  not  go  to
    prison; and, that she had forgotten all about it.

12.  The Judge in the FtT was unimpressed.  He applied the  dishonesty  test
    set out in the judgment of AA v SSHD [2010]  EWCA  Civ  773.   In  that
    case, the essential question before the court was  whether  "false"  in
    either paragraph 320(7A) or paragraph 322(1A) is used in the meaning of
    "incorrect" or in the meaning of "dishonest".  As  to  this  the  court
    preferred the meaning of "dishonest" for a number of reasons set out in
    paragraphs 67-75.  Lord Justice Rix, giving the leading judgment of the
    court, identified eight grounds justifying his conclusion.  The  second
    ground was that a false representation  stated  in  all  innocence  may
    simply be a matter of mistake, or an error  short  of  dishonesty.   He
    stated that: "In such a case there is little reason for  a  requirement
    of  mandatory  refusal,  although  a  power,  even  a  presumption,  of
    discretionary refusal would be  understandable.  "   Judge  Hawden-Beal
    stated that she had to decide whether, in the light of that  case  law,
    the appellant's answer to Section F1, that she had not  been  convicted
    of any criminal offence in the UK or any other country, was honest  and
    whether by answering "no" to that question she  failed  to  disclose  a
    material fact.  With regard to this the Judge stated as follows:

         "16. I am satisfied that her answer was not honest  and  it  was  a
             material fact relevant  to  her  application.   The  appellant
             before me cannot be considered to be an honest  woman  because
             she has physically appeared in front of a court of law in  the
             UK and pleaded guilty to stealing items which she knew did not
             belong to her.  She has lost her good character as the  phrase
             is.  She knew full well that she had been in a court  and  had
             been told by  the  Judge  that  if  she  committed  any  other
             offences in the two years from  that  date  she  would  go  to
             prison.  Any member of the public, who has pleaded guilty in a
             court to an offence, knows very well that  they  will  in  all
             cases be given a punishment, whether it be at the lower end of
             the scale such as the  appellant's  conditional  discharge  or
             whether it  is  imprisonment.   Theft  cannot  be  equated  to
             speeding for example, whereby you may be given a fixed penalty
             ticket for that offence, pay the  fine  and  never  appear  in
             court.  In those circumstances a member of the public  may  be
             forgiven for thinking that because they did not go  to  court,
             it does not count as a conviction.  This is not the  case  for
             this appellant.

         17.  She claims to  have  forgotten  all  about  it,  yet  she  was
             sentenced in November 2011 and by August  2012  had  completed
             this form.  The form must have jogged her memory.   Section  F
             is quite clear when  it  asks  for  details  of  any  criminal
             offence and what sentence you received.  The appellant  cannot
             say that she did not think that a conditional discharge was  a
             sentence because question F2 asks clearly  what  sentence  you
             received and IF it was imprisonment how long was it for.   The
             'IF' gives  it  away  that  another  sentence  may  have  been
             imposed.  Theft is a crime whichever country you come from and
             I am satisfied that the appellant knew that, had not forgotten
             about  it  and  did  not  make  an  innocent  mistake  by  not
             disclosing  it  on  her  form.   The  appellant   deliberately
             concealed her convictions for shoplifting  in  an  attempt  to
             obtain further leave to remain in the UK with her husband  and
             has been found out.

         18.  I am therefore satisfied that the appellant did make  a  false
             representation by signing her form  to  the  effect  that  the
             information therein was true to the best of her knowledge  and
             belief and did fail to disclose a material fact in relation to
             her  application  and  has  thus  attempted  to  deceive   the
             respondent into granting  her  further  leave  to  remain.   I
             therefore find the decision of the Respondent appealed against
             is in accordance with the law and the  applicable  Immigration
             Rules."

13.  The determination has been subject to criticism in two principal  ways.
     First, it is submitted that the judge erred by failing  to  apply  the
    correct burden and standard of proof to cases of dishonesty.  Secondly,
    the  judge  erred  in  concluding  that  the  appellant's  conduct  was
    dishonest. In granting permission to appeal the UT  has  identified  an
    issue of public interest arising out  of  this  case.   Permission  was
    granted for the following reasons:

         "The judge should have  avoided  giving  the  impression  that  her
         general, correct statement of the burden of proof applied  also  to
         the deception issue.  I should not have given  permission  on  this
         point alone, since, as the permission judge said, she clearly found
         that the appellant had deliberately concealed the fact that she had
         been found guilty of four offences of shop-lifting.   However,  she
         had been conditionally discharged on these, which for a  number  of
         purposes does not amount to a conviction in law.   The  explanatory
         notes to the visa application form do not seem to explain that  any
         finding of guilt must be disclosed,  and  in  my  view  the  public
         interest requires that the question of whether  the  form  required
         the disclosure of a conditional  discharge  to  be  authoritatively
         settled."


14.  On 15th April 2014 the SSHD, accepting the legal error inherent in  her
    decision, withdrew the decision, notwithstanding the  determination  in
    her favour.  The SSHD does not therefore oppose discontinuance  of  the
    appeal upon this basis.

Analysis

15.  We consider that the starting point is  the  approach  that  the  Judge
    adopted towards the analysis of conditional discharges.

16.  In particular we  need  to  address  whether  a  conditional  discharge
    constitutes a criminal conviction such that the appellant  should  have
    answered "yes" to the question whether she had been  convicted  of  any
    criminal offence in the United Kingdom or in any other country.

17.  In this regard it is necessary to consider  the  terms  and  effect  of
    sections 12-14 of the Powers of Criminal Courts (Sentencing) Act  2000.
    Section 12(1), under the heading "absolute and  conditional  discharge"
    states, so far as is relevant:

         "(1) where a court by or before which a person is convicted  of  an
             offence...  is  of  the  opinion,   having   regard   to   the
             circumstances including the nature  of  the  offence  and  the
             character of the offender, that it is inexpedient  to  inflict
             punishment, the court may make an order either -


             (a)  discharging him absolutely; or


             (b)  if the court thinks fit, discharging him subject  to  the
                  condition that he commits no offence during  such  period,
                  not exceeding three years from the date of the  order,  as
                  may be specified in the order."


18.  Pursuant to section  12(4)  before  making  an  order  for  conditional
    discharge any court is required to explain to the offender in  ordinary
    language that if he commits another offence during the  period  of  the
    conditional discharge he  will  be  liable  to  be  sentenced  for  the
    original offence.  Pursuant to section 12(7) the making of an  absolute
    or conditional discharge does not prevent a court from imposing a costs
    order, an order of disqualification, or a compensation, deprivation  or
    restitution order.

19.  Section 14(1) of the Act, entitled "effect of discharge" provides:

         "(1) Subject to subsection (2) below, a conviction  of  an  offence
             for which an order is made under section 12 above  discharging
             the offender absolutely or conditionally shall be  deemed  not
             to be a conviction for any purpose other than the purposes  of
             the proceedings  in  which  the  order  is  made  and  of  any
             subsequent proceedings which may be taken against the offender
             under section 13 above."


20.  The effect of section 14(1) the Powers of Criminal Courts  (Sentencing)
    Act 2000 is that a person who has received a  conditional  or  absolute
    discharge does not make a false representation if the  answer  is  "no"
    when asked if he has ever been "convicted" of an offence.  This was  so
    held in R v Patel (Rupal) [2007] 1Cr. App. R12 (CA).  In that case  the
    defendant applied for a job on the civilian staff of  the  Metropolitan
    Police and on the  application  form  ticked  "No"  in  answer  to  the
    question "whether she had ever been convicted  of  an  offence".   Nine
    years earlier she had appeared in the Magistrates Court and  the  Court
    had made an order for her conditional discharge.  She had been indicted
    for an offence of obtaining a pecuniary  advantage  by  deception.  The
    trial judge had accepted a half-time submission that in  the  light  of
    section 14(1) there  was  no  case  to  answer.  The  Court  of  Appeal
    dismissed the appeal by the prosecution.  Lord Justice Hughes gave  the
    judgment of  the  Court.   He  observed  that  the  position  would  be
    different if a person were  asked  whether  he  had  ever  been  "found
    guilty" of an offence. The Court considered that to say  "no"  to  this
    would "undoubtedly" have been false  (ibid  paragraph  13).  The  Court
    stated that the solution to all of this lay in "asking properly  framed
    questions" (ibid paragraph 17).


21.  We observe that the authors of  Archbold  (2014)  page  623  view  this
    latter point as obiter and  they  make  the  following  observation  in
    relation to this statement:

         "This however, must  remain  open  to  argument;  a  conclusion  so
         completely at odds with the purpose and  intent  of  the  provision
         could hardly be justified on the basis of semantics."


22.  In the present case the  appellant  was  asked  whether  she  had  been
    "convicted of any criminal offence in the United Kingdom".  Pursuant to
    section 14(1) of the Act she was entitled to answer "no", as indeed she
    did.  Accordingly it follows from an analysis of the Powers of Criminal
    Courts (Sentencing) Act 2000 that she answered question  F1  correctly.
    In these circumstances she plainly did not answer it dishonestly.


23.  It is notable that she was not asked, on Section  F,  whether  she  had
    ever been "found guilty".  On the basis of the obiter observation in  R
    v Patel (Rupal) (ibid) the position, had this alternative question been
    posed, might have been more nuanced, especially  given  the  (critical)
    observations of the authors of Archbold. The basis in law under the Act
    for the imposition of a discharge (conditional or otherwise) is that it
    is "inexpedient to inflict punishment"; if this is so then it might  be
    considered that the view of Parliament is that  the  commission  of  an
    offence for which the sentence turns out to be a discharge is  not  one
    which should warrant potentially very severe  adverse  consequences  in
    other areas, such as immigration control. Whether that  is  correct  is
    however for another day.

24.  The statutory position does not appear to have been cited to the  Judge
    at first instance.  Had it been cited we have no  doubt  but  that  the
    Judge would have decided otherwise.  However the statutory position  is
    in our view clear and as such the Judge erred.  In the circumstances it
    is not necessary to consider the second question namely  whether  if  a
    conditional discharge amounted to a criminal conviction  the  appellant
    was dishonest, in all the circumstances, in failing to record that fact
    in Section F of the application form.

25.  There is one other matter we wish to refer to.  This is the meaning  of
    the phrase "dishonesty". It is clear that for the SSHD to conclude that
    the inaccurate completion of an application form  amounts  to  a  false
    statement there must be an element of dishonesty.  However there is  no
    definition of that term in the Immigration Rules or in statute which is
    not surprising given that it  has  been  injected  into  the  Rules  by
    subsequent judicial interpretation and  intervention.   It  is  a  well
    known concept in the realm  of  criminal  law  where  it  involves  the
    classic "Ghosh"[1] two part (objective and subjective)  test.  In  such
    cases it must be proven to the criminal  standard  of  proof.   In  the
    present context the burden of proof is the civil standard  (balance  of
    probabilities). We would simply  point  out  that  at  some  stage  the
    Tribunal will have to address this issue and in particular whether  the
    criminal law test is the correct formulation of the test, and  if  not,
    what the proper test is. The Judge in the present case did not  grapple
    with this.  We  have  not  heard  argument  on  the  point,  given  the
    withdrawal of the decision, and we hence do no more than flag it as  an
    issue of some importance for future consideration.

    Decision


   It follows then from the above that the decision of the FtT is set  aside
   for error of law. We re-make the decision and allow the appeal. The  sole
   reason why the respondent refused the application  was  unlawful  and  we
   therefore direct that the appellant be granted the leave sought.



Signed                                                Date 21 May 2014


Mr Justice Green
-----------------------
[1] R v Ghosh [1982] EWCA Crim 2

