
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

            Reyes (EEA Regs: dependency) [2013] UKUT 00314 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 24 September 2012, 25 April 2013           |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                        TOMMY BUSTAMANTE DELOS REYES

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms R Akhtar  instructed  by  Equalisers  Limited  (24
                  September 2012 only)
For the Respondent:    Ms F Saunders, (24 September 2012), Mr P  Deller  (25
                  April 2013) Home Office Presenting Officers



   1. The mere fact that a person is in the United  Kingdom  without  lawful
      permission to work does not mean that he or she is to be considered as
      meeting  the  test  of  dependency  under  the  Immigration  (European
      Economic Area) Regulations 2006.


   2. Whether a person qualifies as a dependent under the Regulations is  to
      be determined at the  date  of  decision  on  the  basis  of  evidence
      produced to the respondent or, on appeal, the date of hearing  on  the
      basis of evidence produced to the tribunal.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. This case concerns a person seeking to rely on regulation 7(1)(c) of  the
Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (hereafter  "the  2006
Regulations") as a dependent  direct  relative.  It  raises  two  issues  in
particular: (1) whether such a person's dependency can be deduced  from  the
fact that he is (or was  for  a  relevant  period)  in  the  United  Kingdom
unlawfully; (2) whether if such a person is able to show dependency  at  the
date of application, he is entitled  to  qualify  under  regulation  7(1)(c)
even though he is no longer dependent by the time of the  decision  made  on
his application.

2. The appellant is a citizen of the Philippines.  He came to the  UK  as  a
visitor in January 2006. Despite refusal later that year of applications  by
him to stay as a dependent relative of a British citizen, Mr S (the  husband
of his  daughter  Josephine),  he  remained  in  the  UK  unlawfully.  On  6
September 2011 he applied for a residence card as the dependent relative  of
Mr Mathieu, a French national said to be exercising European  Economic  Area
(EEA) rights in the UK. His other daughter, Janet, had married this  man  in
March 2011 which was just over two years after she had arrived in the UK  as
a student. On 1 November 2011 the respondent made a decision  to  refuse  to
issue a residence card as confirmation of a right of residence under EU  law
as the father-in-law daughter's husband.   The  respondent  refused  on  two
counts: that the appellant had not shown she was  dependent  on  either  his
daughter or her husband since he arrived in the  UK  in  January  2006;  and
that she had not produced sufficient evidence to show that the  EEA  son-in-
law was a qualified person.  The respondent's refusal identified as the  two
bases for refusal: regulation  8  and  4  of  the  2006  Regulations.  These
Regulations we should mention were amended most recently by the  Immigration
(European Economic Area)  (Amendment)  Regulations  2012/1547  on  July  16,
2012, but none of the amendments affect the  provisions  at  issue  in  this
case.


3. One other matter we should mention at this point is that not  long  after
the applicant applied for a  residence  card   the  respondent  sent  him  a
letter dated 20 September 2011 headed "Certificate of  Application",  noting
his  application,  confirming  that  "we  will  make  a  decision   on   the
application as soon as we can" and stating that: "Your client  is  permitted
to accept offers of  employment  in  the  United  Kingdom,  or  to  continue
employment  in  the  United  Kingdom,  whilst  the  application   is   under
consideration". The document included a "Note for employers" confirming  the
fact that the appellant was authorised to accept offers  of  employment.  As
will be explained below, the Tribunal did not know  the  precise  date  this
letter was sent until late in the day, but it makes the  chronology  clearer
if we mention it at this stge.

4. The appellant's appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Hussain  on
16 December 2011. He  heard  evidence  from  the  appellant,  his  daughter,
Janet,  and  his  son  in-law.   The   judge  correctly  observed  that  the
respondent had been wrong to base her refusal on regulation 8  of  the  2006
Regulations, which relates to  extended  family  members   or  (to  use  the
terminology  of  Article  3  of  Directive   2004/38/ECJ   or   "Citizenship
Directive") "Other Family members" or "OFMs".  By virtue of being  a  family
member in the ascending  line  of   the  spouse  of  an  EEA  national,  the
appellant should have been considered under regulation 7(1)(c) which  covers
"dependent direct relatives in his ascending line or that of his  spouse  or
his civil partner".

5. The judge also considered that on the basis of further evidence  provided
by the appellant he had shown that his son-in-law was  a  qualified  person,
and that he was a family member of such a person.   The  judge  nevertheless
dismissed the appeal because, like the  respondent,  he  was  not  satisfied
that the appellant had shown he  had  ever  been  dependent  on  either  his
daughter or son-in-law.

6. At [26]-[29] the judge stated:

         "26. My attention has been drawn to the Home Office's  approach  to
             the use of dependency for the purpose of the EEA  Regulations.
             This is to be found at 5.1.2  of  the  relevant  part  of  the
             Immigration Service Directorate's Instructions.  This provides
             that:


                 . Financial dependency should  be  interpreted  as  meaning
                   that the person needs  financial  support  from  the  EEA
                   national and his/her spouse/civil  partner  in  order  to
                   meet his/her essential needs - not in  order  to  have  a
                   certain level of income.


                 . Provided a person would  not  be  able  to  meet  his/her
                   essential needs without the financial support of the  EEA
                   national, she/he should be considered dependent  on  that
                   national. In those circumstances, it does not matter that
                   the  applicant   may   additionally   receive   financial
                   support/income from other sources."


         27.      It is the appellant's and that  of  his  daughter  Janet's
             evidence that since about December 2009  he  has  been  living
             with her and her husband  at  their  address  in  Southsea  in
             Portsmouth. No evidence was given as to  when  Janet  and  her
             husband been cohabiting although I note  that  their  marriage
             took place only on 26 March 2011 following which she was given
             a Residence Document on  6  July  2011.  The  appellant's  own
             evidence suggested that he did some occasional  work  such  as
             cleaning if the opportunity arose. However it  is  regrettable
             that no evidence  of  that  marriage  was  placed  before  the
             Tribunal.  Significantly, no  objective  evidence  was  placed
             before the Tribunal that since December 2009 the appellant has
             resided with his daughter Janet or  her  husband.   Given  the
             uncertainty over the appellant's  own  income  and  given  the
             absence of documentary proof that  he  actually  resided  with
             Janet and her  husband,  I  have  considerable  doubts  as  to
             whether they were the main source  of  his  income.  The  Home
             Office approach appears to suggest that what  is  required  to
             establish is whether the EEA  national  or  his  partner  have
             provided the appellant's essential needs. In this case, it was
             claimed that Janet and her husband provided the appellant with
             accommodation as well as food. Whilst I appreciate  that  they
             may not be able to provide objective evidence that  they  have
             paid for his food I am surprised that no documentary  evidence
             was adduced to show that in fact  they  lived  together  as  a
             member of his household.

         28.  My  doubts  as  to  whether  the  appellant  has  indeed  been
             dependent in the sense described above on his daughter and her
             husband also rose from the speed  which  he  appears  to  have
             taken up paid employment since being issued with a  letter  by
             the Home Office authorising him to work.


         29.  In any event, it seems to me  that  as  at  the  date  of  the
             hearing the appellant was no longer financially  dependent  on
             his daughter and her husband.  Their  evidence  was  that  the
             appellant has had to move out to an address so that he can  be
             nearer to his place of employment. For the appellant  to  rent
             his own accommodation near his place of work suggests that  he
             must be earning sufficiently to make it financially viable for
             him to live away from home. Whilst no evidence of  his  actual
             earnings was provided, the inference I  draw  is  that  he  is
             earning  sufficient  to  provide   for   himself.   In   those
             circumstances I am not satisfied that the appellant's daughter
             and her husband have been or are responsible for providing his
             essential needs."

7. We should straightaway observe that the judge was incorrect to  cite  the
relevant  Home  Office  instructions  as  "Immigration  Service  Directorate
instructions"; they are in fact, the "European Casework Instructions".

Submissions on error of law


8. At the hearing in September we heard submissions from the parties  as  to
whether the First-tier Tribunal judge had erred in law.

9. The grounds raised several points.   The  first  challenged  the  judge's
findings of fact. It was said that the respondent was  not  represented  and
the  evidence  of  the  appellant  and  his  daughter  and  son-in-law   was
unchallenged; that at the hearing the judge  had  not  raised  any  concerns
about the credibility and truth of the witnesses; and that  the  judge  made
no findings that the witnesses were not credible. In amplifying  this  point
Ms Akhtar argued that the judge's assessment of whether  the  appellant  had
been living with Janet and her EEA national husband in the past was  flawed.
The judge said there was  "no  objective  evidence  ...  placed  before  the
Tribunal" which wrongly implied, she submitted, that  the  evidence  of  the
three witnesses was not in itself  capable  of  establishing  the  objective
truth.  At the very least,  she  said,  the  judge's  findings  of  fact  on
material matters were insufficiently clear.

10. The second main  point  of  challenge  was  that  in  finding  that  the
appellant was not dependent the judge had applied the wrong legal  test.  He
had applied the equivalent of a "wholly or mainly dependent"  test  familiar
from the Immigration Rules, but incorrect under  EU  law  as  enunciated  in
leading cases.

11. A third point of challenge was that the judge wrongly failed  to  deduce
the fact of the appellant's dependency from his immigration  status  in  the
UK (prior to 20 September 2011 when he was given permission  to  work).   As
set out in [7] of the grounds the argument was that:

         "The appellant is an overstayer. He had no right to work in the UK.
         It therefore follows that he must have been dependent upon  someone
         for his 'essential needs'. The unchallenged evidence  is  that  the
         appellant lived with his daughter  and  son-in-law  since  December
         2009.  He relied  upon  them  for  accommodation,  food  and  other
         essential items."

12. A fourth point focused on the implications of the judge's  finding  that
the appellant stood to fail in any event (even if it were  accepted  he  had
previously been dependent on his daughter and her husband)  because,  as  we
have already noted,  on 20 September 2011, i.e. a date in between  the  date
he had applied for a residence card and  the  date  of  hearing  before  the
judge (December 2011),  (1) he had been given permission to work in  the  UK
whilst his application was pending; and  (2)  he  had  commenced  very  soon
after working in a self-employed capacity cleaning  in  a  care  home  which
specialises in rehabilitation (certainly by December  2011).   Because  this
job was in Hildenborough in Kent, it was stated that he  had  taken  a  room
nearby although his main address was still that of his daughter and  son-in-
law in Portsmouth.  The judge had found  (at  [29])  that  at  the  date  of
hearing, by virtue of this employment, the appellant was not (or no  longer)
financially dependent on his daughter and son-in-law.

13. By way of challenge to  this  finding  [9]  of  the  grounds  argued  as
follows:

         "If the dismissal of the appeal is upheld then the  appellant  will
         immediately  become  totally  dependent  upon  his  son-in-law  and
         daughter and will be in a position to make a new application for  a
         residence card. He would then be given permission to  work  and  it
         would be  a  farcical  situation  if  he  then  falls  outside  the
         Directive because he is supporting himself  as  a  result  of  such
         work. There would be a constant yo-yo of application  and  refusal.
         It must be that the relevant date for dependency  is  the  date  of
         application."

14. It was also argued in the same context that the judge was  wrong  anyway
to draw an inference that the appellant was "earning sufficient  to  provide
for himself" despite stating that "no evidence of his  actual  earnings  was
provided". It was further contended that the  evidence  that  the  appellant
was still using his daughter and son-in-law's home as his main  address  was
evidence of continuing reliance on them for living essentials.

15. On behalf of the respondent Ms Saunders submitted that  we  should  find
the judge's findings of fact sustainable and the other  grounds  lacking  in
cogency. Although she accepted that the judge may have  erred  in  seemingly
applying a "wholly or mainly dependent" test of  dependency  familiar  under
the Immigration Rules, she contended that  this  had  not  resulted  in  any
material error.


Relevant Law

16. Before proceeding to set out why we proceeded to find  that  the  First-
tier Tribunal judge had erred  in  law,  it  will  assist  to  set  out  the
relevant law.  Article  2  of  the  Directive  2004/EC/38,  the  Citizenship
Directive, specifies that:

         "For the purposes of this Directive:
         1) "Union citizen" means any person having the nationality of a
         Member State;
         2) "Family member" means:
         (a) the spouse;
         (b) the partner with whom the Union citizen has contracted a
         registered partnership...
         (c) the direct descendants who are under the age of 21 or are
         dependents and those of the spouse or partner as defined in point
         (b);
         (d) the dependent direct relatives in the ascending line and those
         of the spouse or partner as defined in point (b)".
17. The corresponding parts of regulation 7 provide that:

         "(1) Subject to paragraph (2), for the purposes of thee Regulations
             the following persons shall be treated as the family member of
             another person -
         ...
         (c) dependent direct relatives in his ascending line or that of his
             spouse or civil partner;..."

18. As regards the meaning of dependency within Article 2 of  the  Directive
and regulation 7 of the 2006 Regulations, the Upper  Tribunal  has  set  out
the relevant criteria in Moneke (EEA  -  OFMs)  Nigeria  [2011]  UKUT  00341
(IAC), drawing on Court of Justice cases such as Lebon C-316/85  [1987]  ECR
2811 and Jia v Migrationsverket Case C-1/05; and Court of Appeal cases  such
as Pedro [2004] EWCA Civ 1358 and  SM  (India)  v  Entry  Clearance  Officer
(Mumbai) [2009] EWCA  Civ  1426.  In  Moneke  at  [41]  it  was  noted  that
"dependency is not the same as mere receipt  of  some  financial  assistance
from the sponsor. As the  Court  of  Appeal  made  plain  in  SM  (India)...
dependency means dependency in the sense used by the  Court  of  Justice  in
the case of Lebon..." There is also  now the Court of Justice ruling in  the
case of Secretary of State for the Home Department v  Islam  &  Anor  [2012]
EUECJ C-83/11 (made in response to the  order  of  reference  by  the  Upper
Tribunal in the case  of   MR  and  Others  (EEA  extended  family  members)
Bangladesh [2010] UKUT 449 (IAC)) which, although being concerned  not  with
regulation 7/Article 2.2 family members  (such  as  we  are  concerned  with
here) but "Other Family  Members  (OFMs)  under  regulation  8/Article  3.2,
sheds further light on the Court's approach to the  meaning  of  dependency.
The Court made clear that dependency had to be genuine,  not  contrived  and
that  its  interpretation  had  to  be  informed   by   the   principle   of
effectiveness. In Jia v Migrationsverket C-1/05 [2007] QB 545  at  [35]-[37]
the Court  of  Justice  summarised  its  understanding  of  the  meaning  of
dependency as follows:

         "35. According to the case law of the Court of Justice, the  status
         of "dependent" family member is the result of a  factual  situation
         characterised by the fact that material  support  for  that  family
         member is provided by the Community national who has exercised  his
         right of free movement or his spouse: see...Lebon...and...Chen...
         36. The court has also held that the  status  of  dependent  family
         member does not presuppose the existence of a right of maintenance,
         otherwise that status would depend on national  legislation,  which
         varies from one case to another: Lebon's case...there is no need to
         determine the reasons for recourse to that support or to raise  the
         question whether the person concerned is able to support himself by
         taking up paid  employment.  That  interpretation  is  dictated  in
         particular by the  principle  according  to  which  the  provisions
         establishing the free movement of workers, which constitute one  of
         the foundations  of  the  Community,  must  be  construed  broadly:
         Lebon's case...
         37. In order to determine whether the relatives  in  the  ascending
         line of the spouse of a Community national  are  dependent  on  the
         latter, the host Member State must assess whether, having regard to
         their financial and social conditions, they are not in  a  position
         to support themselves..."
19. From the above, we glean four key things. First, the test of  dependency
is a purely factual test. Second, the  Court  envisages  that  questions  of
dependency  must  not  be  reduced  to  a  bare  calculation  of   financial
dependency  but  should  be  construed  broadly  to   involve   a   holistic
examination of a  number  of  factors,  including  financial,  physical  and
social conditions, so as to establish whether there is  dependence  that  is
genuine.  The essential focus has to be on the nature  of  the  relationship
concerned and  on  whether  it  is  one  characterised  by  a  situation  of
dependence based  on  an  examination  of  all  the  factual  circumstances,
bearing in mind the underlying objective of maintaining  the  unity  of  the
family. It seems to us  that  the  need  for  a  wide-ranging  fact-specific
approach is indeed enjoined by the Court of Appeal in  SM  (India):  see  in
particular Sullivan LJ's observations at [27]-[28]. Third, it is clear  from
the wording of both Article 2.2 and regulation 7(1) that the test is one  of
present, not past dependency.  Both  provisions  employ  the  present  tense
(Article 2.2(b) and (c) refer to family members who "are dependants" or  who
are   "dependent";   regulation   7(c)   refers   to    "dependent    direct
relatives..."). Fourth (and this may have relevance to  what  is  understood
by present dependency), interpretation of the meaning of the  term  must  be
such as not to deprive that provision of its effectiveness.

Our decision on error of law

20. On 28 February 2013 we sent to the parties  our  decision  finding  that
there was an error of law on the  part  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge
necessitating that we set aside his decision. Our reasons  were  essentially
as set out below.

Significance of lacking lawful permission to work

21. We dealt first with the third ground of challenge, which contended  that
the judge should have deduced the fact of  the  appellant's  dependency  (at
least up until 20 September 2011, when he was granted  permission  to  work)
from his immigration status in the UK and the fact that  until  latterly  he
had no permission to work.  We saw no  merit  in  this  ground.  As  already
highlighted, in EU law the test of dependency is a purely factual  test.  It
is not dependent on a person's status under  national  legislation.   Whilst
the fact that a person is  an  overstayer  without  permission  to  work  is
clearly  a  very  relevant  matter  when  considering  a   person's   actual
circumstances, it does not of itself establish that he is in a situation  of
dependence.  As  already  noted,  assessment  of  dependency  also  involves
looking at a person's circumstances as a whole and what is known  about  how
their essential needs are met. Here there may be a wide range of factors  to
consider. The matter of whether a person is physically and mentally able  to
work may be relevant. So may be the matter of whether a  person  has  worked
even if it is unlawful for them to have done so: the phenomenon  of  persons
working in breach  of  conditions  is  regrettably  still  all  too  common.
Another factor, emphasised by the Court  of  Justice  in  Islam  and  Others
(albeit in the  different  context  of  OFMs  under  Article  3.2)  concerns
whether the need for the dependency is genuine.  It  can  happen  that  such
persons have assets of their own sufficient to  cover  all  their  essential
needs. On the other hand, even if a person works in breach of conditions  he
or she may not earn enough from employment to cover their essential needs.

Findings of fact regarding dependency

22. We then reverted to the first two grounds of challenge, which  concerned
the integrity of the judge's findings of fact.  We found these grounds  made
out for several reasons. First, the judge heard evidence from the  appellant
and his daughter and son-in-law and made no adverse  comment  regarding  it.
The  judge's  only  adverse  comment  concerned  the  lack  of   independent
documentary evidence. So far as it went,  the  evidence  of  all  three  was
consistent and plausible. The judge did not suggest that the  appellant  had
a source of income of his own. Although far from  being  determinative  (see
above) the fact that he  had  no  lawful  permission  to  work  was  another
consideration. There was nothing to suggest  he  had  accommodation  of  his
own.  Whilst it is for  an  appellant  to  discharge  the  burden  of  proof
resting  on  him  to  show  dependency,  and  this  will  normally   require
production of relevant documentary evidence, oral evidence  can  suffice  if
not found wanting. Second,  the  judge  proceeded  on  the  basis  that  the
appellant had as a matter of law to show dependency going back to  the  time
he began living with Janet and her partner, i.e.  December  2009.  That  was
incorrect. Although his circumstances  going  back  to  December  2009  were
relevant to the assessment of dependency, the appellant was not entitled  as
a matter of law to rely on any dependency prior to the date on  which  Janet
had married her partner, i.e. prior  to  26  March  2011;  before  then  the
appellant did not  come  within  the  terms  of  either  Article  2.2(c)  or
regulation  7(1)(c).  Third,  at  one   point,   contrary   to   established
principles, the judge appeared to treat dependency as  merely  a  matter  of
financial dependency. Fourth, the judge  himself  appeared  only  to  reject
that Janet and her husband were the main source of the  appellant's  income,
not that they were a partial source  ("I  have  considerable  doubts  as  to
whether  they  [Janet  and  her  husband]  were  the  main  source  of  [the
appellant's] income"). This links  to  the  second  ground  of  appeal.  The
statement  just  quoted  from  [29]  of  the   determination   betrays   the
application of incorrect legal criteria. As the case  law  makes  clear,  in
the context of EU law on family  members  the  test  of  dependency  is  not
whether a person is wholly or mainly dependent, but whether  he  or  she  is
reliant on others for essential living needs.

23. Having stated that the above errors  meant  that  the  judge  materially
erred in  law  necessitating  that  his  decision  be  set  aside,  we  then
considered whether we were in a position to  re-make  the  decision  without
further ado. It seemed to us that we were significantly hampered by lack  of
evidence from the appellant as the nature of the work  he  has  begun  in  a
care home in Kent. Whilst he and his daughter and  son-in-law  had  referred
during the hearing before the judge to him still using their address as  his
main address and still living with them when he was not working, we did  not
know enough about the full  circumstances  to  ascertain  whether  that  was
credible. Also, up to this point in time we did not know  the  precise  date
on which the appellant was granted permission to work and we  considered  we
needed the respondent to supply  that  information.  Accordingly  we  issued
directions relating to such further evidence and adjourned the  hearing  for
a date to be fixed in the near future so as to hear from the  appellant  and
his daughter Janet and his son-in-law. So far  as  concerns  the  directions
addressed to the appellant, these required - to be produced within  14  days
of the date fixed for further hearing: (i) details of the appellant's  self-
employment in a care home in Kent including  when  it  commenced,  how  many
hours he has worked there per week, how he has been  paid;  what  have  been
his earnings; and what has been  his  tax  position;  (ii)  details  of  his
accommodation in Kent (including tenancy agreement) and  how  much  he  paid
for it and its size; (iii) and details of the  appellant's  visits  back  to
his daughter Janet and his son-in-law's home since  he  began  work  in  the
care home in Kent.

Our re-making of the decision

24. The date for a hearing at which the Tribunal would re-make its  decision
was fixed for 25 April 2013. At the hearing there  was  no  appearance  from
the appellant or anyone on his behalf, nor  had  any  explanation  for  such
absence  being  sent  to   the   Upper   Tribunal.   Efforts   by   Tribunal
administration  to  contact  the  appellant  and  his  representatives  were
unsuccessful. Nor had there being any compliance with the above  directions.
For the respondent Mr Deller appeared and apologised  for  the  respondent's
failure to produce evidence of the date when the respondent  had  given  the
appellant permission to work.

25. Having considered the matter, we decided to exercise our  discretion  to
proceed with the further hearing in the absence of one of the  parties.  The
importance so far as the Upper Tribunal was concerned of  receiving  further
documentary evidence from the appellant and having a further opportunity  to
hear from the appellant and his witnesses could not have been made  clearer.


26. We then heard submissions from Mr Deller which were to the  effect  that
(i) as regards his past and present  position  as  a  claimed  dependent  he
would understand why the Tribunal might choose  to  regard  the  appellant's
past dependency up  until  the  time  he  got  a  job  in  Kent  as  already
established;  (ii)  so  far  as  concerns  his  situation  since  then,  the
appellant had simply failed to avail himself of the opportunity afforded  to
furnish material evidence and  this  failure  to  provide  evidence  made  a
significant difference. Mr Deller did not seek  to  disagree  with  anything
said by the Tribunal in its error of law decision  but  expressed  his  hope
that the Tribunal would seek to clarify the issue of  whether  the  relevant
date for deciding dependency was the date of decision or, upon  appeal,  the
date of hearing.

27. Having heard from Mr Deller we pointed out that we  still  required  the
respondent to reply to our earlier direction that she  furnish  evidence  of
the date when the appellant was granted permission to work. We also  pointed
out that it was not clear to us whether the decision of  the  respondent  to
grant the appellant permission to work in  advance  of  any  decision  being
made on his application for a residence card reflected  Home  Office  policy
or was specific to this case. We gave an oral direction  relating  to  these
two matters and Mr Deller undertook to respond within  a  fixed  period.  In
the event due to an injury Mr Deller was not able to respond until early  in
June. We have already noted that his response confirmed that  the  appellant
was granted permission to work on 20 September 2011 and he  produced  to  us
the  actual  letter  sent  to  the   appellant,   headed   "Certificate   of
Application". As regards the policy dimension, Mr Deller's response  was  as
follows:

    "I have approval to say that:


         "Nothing in the Directive  or  the  Regulations  specifies  that  a
         certificate of application must contain confirmation of  the  right
         to work, pending processing of their  application  for  a  document
         confirming their EEA right of residence. It is current practice  in
         the  Home  Office,  however,  to  afford  this  opportunity  in   a
         certificate of application so as to facilitate a person's access to
         employment  whilst  their  application  is  being  processed.   The
         possibility for abuse is one of which  we  are  aware  and  we  are
         considering what can be done about this issue".


 28. It will be apparent from the terms of our error lf  law  decision  that
we considered the First-tier judge erred in the reasons he gave for  finding
the appellant and his  witnesses  lacking  in  credibility  as  regards  the
appellant's past and present  situation  as  a  dependent.  However,  it  is
equally apparent that so far as concerned our own assessment  of  the  facts
we required further evidence concerning his situation once he had got a  job
in Kent and we fixed another hearing in order to afford an  opportunity  for
that evidence to be further explored.

29. In light of the failure of the appellant to comply with  directions  and
the failure of him and his witnesses to attend the further hearing, we  have
some doubts about their claims regarding his situation of  dependency  prior
to getting a job in Kent, but given that we confined our further  directions
at the end of the first hearing to production of further  evidence  relating
to his situation once he had got a job and flat in Kent,  we  consider  that
in  fairness  we  should  proceed  on  the  basis  that  the  appellant  has
established past dependency from the date of his daughter  Janet's  marriage
up until the date he got his job in Kent. (We do not know the  precise  date
when he began this job but on 14 December 2011 his  solicitors  submitted  a
statement from him which refers to it and we also  know  he  began  it  soon
after he got permission to work in September 2011.)

30. However, our directions made very clear that we had concerns  about  the
situation from that  date  onwards  and  we  must  now  take  stock  of  the
appellant's non-compliance with them. The evidence of the appellant and  his
witnesses at the hearing and in written form was that after he secured  this
job he continued to live with them at weekends and to regard their house  as
his principal residence and they continued to meet his essential needs.  Yet
despite the Tribunal making  very  clear  its  concern  to  see  documentary
evidence relating to the  appellant's  work  and  flat,  he  has  failed  to
produce any. Second, despite being informed that the Tribunal  had  directed
a further hearing, the appellant and his witnesses failed to  attend.Thereby
he has denied himself the opportunity afforded to substantiate his claim  to
have continued to be a dependent. In light of these considerations  we  find
that the appellant has failed to discharge the  burden  on  him  of  showing
that he continued to be dependent on his son-in-law after he got  a  job  in
Kent circa December 2011.

The relevance of dependency at the date of application

31. Given our preparedness to deal with the appellant's case  on  the  basis
that he was a dependent on his son-in-law until he got a job in Kent, it  is
necessary for us to address the submissions made about this matter  by  Miss
Akhtar at the first hearing which were in  effect  that  the  appellant  was
entitled to succeed on the basis that he had shown he  was  a  dependent  at
the date of application: see [13] above.

32. We are unable to accept that a  person  is  entitled  to  succeed  under
regulation 7 if able to show dependency at the date of application  but  not
at the date of decision.

33. As already noted, the test of dependency as found in regulation  7  (and
also in regulation 8) is expressed in the present tense: see [19] above.  As
a result the appellant would only have  been  entitled  to  succeed  in  his
application to the respondent if he had been able to show on  the  basis  of
evidence produced to the respondent that he was dependent as at the date  of
decision.

34. How is the position affected once a  person  has  been  refused  by  the
respondent and lodges  an  appeal?  In  our  view,  the  relevant  date  for
deciding whether he met the  requirements  must  then  become  the  date  of
hearing. As a result of our finding that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge's
decision was set aside and our  giving  directions  making  clear  that  the
appellant was required to produce further evidence of his situation once  he
had got  a  job  in  Kent,  the  relevant  date  for  deciding  whether  the
requirements of regulation 7 are met becomes the date of hearing before  us.
The 2006 Regulations expressly  apply  to  EEA  appeals  the  provisions  of
s.85(4) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002: see   paragraph
1 of Schedule 1.

35. Hence, even accepting that the appellant was a dependent at the date  of
application, the evidence,  as  at  the  date  of  hearing  before  us,  was
insufficient to satisfy us that  the  appellant  had  remained  a  dependent
after he got a job in Kent circa December 2013.

36. We have considered  whether  our  decision  on  this  appeal  should  be
altered by the  fact  that  following  the  appellant's  application  for  a
residence card the  respondent  granted  him  permission  to  work.  In  our
judgement this fact cannot make a  material  difference.  The  20  September
2011 letter sent to him make  abundantly  clear  that  such  permission  was
distinct from and did not amount to a decision  on  his  application  for  a
residence card: it stated that "we will make a decision on  the  application
as soon as we  can"  and  that  the  permission  was  given  "whilst  [your]
application is under consideration".

37. For the above reasons:

The First-tier Tribunal judge erred in law and his  decision  has  been  set
aside.

The decision we re-make is to dismiss the appellant's appeal.




Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Storey



