
IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL (IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER)


R (on the application  of  Badalge)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department IJR [2015] UKUT 00325 (IAC)

                                                                 Field House
                                                                      London

                                       Hearing date: Wednesday, 8 April 2015
                                  Judgment handed down: Monday 11th May 2015

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

   THE QUEEN (ON THE APPLICATION OF KALUM KRISHANTHA KANDA ADDARA BADALGE)

                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
                               - - - - - - - -

Mr M Biggs of Counsel, instructed by SEB Solicitors appeared on behalf of
the Applicant.

Mr M Gullick of Counsel, instructed by the Government Legal Department
appeared on behalf of the Respondent.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                       APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                                  JUDGMENT

                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    JUDGE warr:
1.   The applicant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on  15  August  1979.   He
    arrived in this country as a student in 2010.  On 24 February  2014  he
    made an application for further leave to remain as a student.  This was
    an in-time application as his leave expired on 28 February  2014.   The
    applicant's leave was extended pursuant  to  Section  3C  of  the  1971
    Immigration Act.

2.   The application for judicial review relates  to  decisions  reached  by
    the respondent on 15 July 2014.  On that date the respondent decided to
    remove the applicant from the United Kingdom under Section  10  of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.  She also reached a  decision  on  the
    outstanding application for leave to remain.  The respondent noted that
    the applicant had submitted a certificate from the Educational  Testing
    Service  (ETS)  in  relation  to  his  application  and  it   was   the
    respondent's contention that ETS had  found  "significant  evidence  to
    conclude that your certificate was fraudulently obtained."  Accordingly
    the respondent found that the applicant had used deception and  refused
    the application under paragraph 322(1A) of the Immigration  Rules.   In
    the refusal letter under the heading "Section C: right of  appeal"  the
    respondent wrote as follows:

         "This decision is not an immigration  decision  under  Section  82.
         Section 82(2) (d) concerns a 'refusal to vary the person's leave to
         enter or remain in the United Kingdom if the result of the  refusal
         is that the person has no leave to enter or remain'.
         This is not the situation in this case, as the effect of the  prior
         Section 10 decision means that  any  existing  leave  to  enter  or
         remain in the United Kingdom was invalidated under Section 10(8) so
         you have no leave to enter or remain at the time  the  decision  to
         refuse to vary leave to remain was notified."


3.   In contrast the removal decision informed the  applicant  that  he  was
    entitled to appeal under Section 82(1) of the Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 but only after he had left the United Kingdom.

4.   In a nutshell the applicant contends that he has  an  in-country  right
    of appeal.  Permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Coker on  29
    September 2014.

5.   The short point in this case is that since the applicant submitted  his
    application for further leave to remain as a Tier 4  (General)  Student
    on 24 February 2014 before the  expiry  of  his  leave  to  remain  the
    refusal decision should generate an in-country right of appeal.

6.   The argument was considered by the Administrative Court in Shahbaz  Ali
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWHC  3967  (Admin)
    (Helen Mountfield QC sitting as a Deputy High Court Judge).

7.   In that decision the judge decided that  the  decision  to  remove  the
    applicant preceded the decision to refuse the  application.   Mr  Biggs
    submits that the decision was wrongly decided and refers  to  paragraph
    25 where the judge stated:

         "However, as a matter of law, I  find  that  the  removal  decision
         preceded the refusal decision. It is clear from the caselaw that  a
         decision takes effect at the moment  when  it  is  given,  not  the
         moment when it is drafted (see SSHD v Ahmadi [2013] EWCA  Civ  512,
         [2014] 1 WLR 401 at [20-25]). Thus, accepting  as  I  do  that  the
         removal decision was served first, at 6.19 am on  11  August  2014,
         and the refusal decision second, at 6.21am,  it  follows  that  the
         refusal decision was second in time."

     Counsel argues that in fact the case of  Ahmadi  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  512
    decided the opposite.   He  submitted  that  at  paragraph  22  of  the
    judgment Sullivan LJ  had  decided  that  an  immigration  decision  as
    defined by Section 82 of the 2002 Act takes place  when  that  decision
    was taken and not when the notice of such a decision was given.

8.   Counsel submitted that the applicant's appeal right vested  before  the
    1999 Act invalidated the applicant's leave to remain.  The decision had
    to be taken before notice of it was given it was submitted and  Section
    3C only took effect on notice of the decision being given.  There was a
    clear distinction between an immigration decision  and  notice  of  the
    decision as was apparent from the cases of E (Russia)  v  Secretary  of
    State [2012] EWCA Civ 357 and JN (Cameroon) v Secretary  of  State  for
    the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 307.  It was submitted  that  under
    Section 82(2)(d) of the 2002 Act the right  of  appeal  vested  when  a
    decision within the terms of the Section was taken. Reference was  made
    to SA (Section 82(2) (d): interpretation and  effect)  Pakistan  [2007]
    UKAIT 00083.  By way of contrast, Section 10(8) of the  1999  Act  only
    had effect in invalidating the appeal rights  which  must  have  vested
    before the applicant's leave to remain as extended by  Section  3C  was
    invalidated.

9.   Paragraph 322(1A) of the Immigration Rules required the decision  maker
    to refuse an application on being satisfied  that  deception  had  been
    used which contrasted with the discretionary regime under the 1999 Act.
     Accordingly  the  decision  under  the  Immigration  Rules  must  have
    preceded the Section 10 decision.  While  Section  10  invalidated  any
    leave to enter or remain previously given, it did not divest a right of
    appeal.  An in-country right of appeal would not be an  empty  one  and
    the Secretary of State would be bound to  acknowledge  the  declaratory
    effect of a determination to the effect that the decision under Section
    10 was unlawful.

10.  Mr Gullick submitted that what was said by Sullivan LJ in  Ahmadi  made
    the position quite clear in paragraphs 22 to 25 of the judgment:

         "22. I readily accept Mr. Blundell's submission that the 2002  Act,
         in sections 82 and 105  draws  a  distinction  between  making,  or
         taking an immigration decision, and giving written notice  of  that
         decision to the person concerned. I do not  accept  his  submission
         that the same approach is to be found in the 1971  Act.  Section  3
         confers the power to give and to vary leave to  remain.  The  first
         part of section 4(1) provides that this power shall be exercised by
         the Secretary of State. The second part of  section  4(1)  provides
         that the power "shall be exercised by notice in  writing  given  to
         the person concerned." The notice in writing is  not  a  subsequent
         step following the exercise of the power; it is the  way  in  which
         the power is to be exercised. Mr. Blundell's submission invites  us
         to read section 4(1) as though it  said:  "and  notice  in  writing
         shall be given to the person  concerned  of  the  exercise  of  the
         power."


         23.  The authorities relied upon by Mr. Blundell, Rafiq [[1998] Imm
         IR 193] and Hashmi [[2002]  EWCA  Civ  728],  do  not  support  his
         submission. Hashmi turned on its own facts and established no point
         of principle, while Rafiq tends to support Mr. Malik's  submission:
         that the decision-making process prescribed by  section  4(1)  (and
         section 3C (6) and rule 2 of  the  2006  Regulations)  is  not  the
         making of a decision followed by the notification of that  decision
         to the person concerned, but the making of  a  decision  by  giving
         notification of it to the person concerned. Although the Court, for
         understandable  reasons  given  the  very   different   legislative
         context, did not consider that the Yeovil case  was  of  particular
         significance, it did consider that the proposition that  there  was
         no  planning  permission  unless  and  until  notice  of   planning
         permission had been given to the applicant was consistent with  the
         Secretary of State's case on section 4(1), which it accepted.


         24.  Section 3C (6) and the 2006 Regulations  are  consistent  with
         section 4(1). The 2006 Regulations do not determine when notice  is
         to be given of a decision on an application for variation of leave;
         they determine when an application is decided for the  purposes  of
         section 3C: it is not decided until notice has been given. I do not
         accept Mr. Blundell's submission that the  2006  Regulations  apply
         only  for  the  purpose  of  determining  when  an  application  is
         "decided"  in  paragraphs  3C(1)(c)  and  (2)(a),   and   have   no
         application to paragraph 3C(2)(b). The 2006  Regulations  determine
         when an application for variation  of  leave  is  decided  for  the
         purposes of section 3C as a whole. There has  to  be  a  consistent
         approach to this question throughout the section. Paragraph 3C  (2)
         (b) extends leave during any period when an appeal could be brought
         under section 82(1) of the 2002 Act against  the  decision  on  the
         application for variation. Before an appeal can  be  brought  under
         section 82 there has to  be  a  decision  on  the  application  for
         variation against which the person can appeal.  Subsection  3C  (6)
         and the 2006 Regulations make it clear that there is no decision on
         the application for variation for the purpose of paragraph  3C  (2)
         (b) until notice of the decision has been given.


         25.  Mr.  Blundell  accepted  that  on  the  Secretary  of  State's
         approach to section 3C there was an overlap between  the  extension
         of leave under paragraph (a) of subsection 3C(2) - until notice  of
         the decision was given - and leave beginning to be  extended  under
         paragraph (b) - when the decision was "made" prior to notice of the
         decision being given. In my judgment, subsection 3C (6) requires  a
         consistent answer to the question - when is an application  decided
         for the purpose of section 3C - and the answer to that question for
         the purpose of paragraph (b) is that there is no  decision  against
         which an appeal can be brought under section 82(1) until notice  of
         the decision has been given. Mr. Blundell submitted that this would
         result in an inconsistency between paragraphs 3C (2) (b) and 3D (2)
         (a) because subsection 3C (6) applies only to the former,  and  not
         the latter. This submission is based on the  Secretary  of  State's
         erroneous approach to  section  4(1)  (see  paragraphs  22  and  23
         above): the power to vary leave under section 3(3) (a) is exercised
         by notice in writing given  to  the  person  affected.  Giving  the
         notice does not follow the exercise of the power; it is the  manner
         in which the power is exercised. For these reasons I  would  reject
         ground 1 of the Secretary of State's appeal."

     Mr Gullick submitted that there was no decision until notice was  given
    and any refusal of the application to vary leave to  remain  could  not
    have had legal effect unless and  until  it  was  communicated  to  the
    applicant.  Quite apart from the case of Ahmadi, Mr  Gullick  submitted
    that the applicant's argument was inconsistent with R  v  Secretary  of
    State ex parte Anufrijeva [2003] UKHL 36 where Lord Steyn at  paragraph
    26 had stated that:

         "Notice of a decision is required before it can have the  character
         of  a  determination  with  legal  effect  because  the  individual
         concerned must be in a position to challenge the  decision  in  the
         courts if he or she wishes to do so.  This is not a technical rule.
         It is simply an application of the right of access to justice."

11.  Mr Gullick submitted that the decision in Shahbaz Ali  was  correct  as
    was the refusal of permission to apply for judicial review in R  (Shah)
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWHC  3301  (Admin)
    (Lewis J). Having referred to s 10(8) of the 1999 Act Lewis J stated at
    paragraphs 15 and 16 as follows:

         "15.     That is  what  happened  here.  Because  of  the  alleged
         deception the Secretary of State did decide to remove him. That had
         the consequence when notification was  given  of  invalidating  the
         leave to remain. Thereafter, no matter how the Secretary  of  State
         expressed herself, what she was doing was saying because your leave
         has been invalidated you do not have leave to remain and we  cannot
         therefore vary it by extending the time. Therefore that, no  matter
         how expressed, did not amount to an immigration decision within the
         meaning of section 82(2) (d) of the 1999 Act and therefore there is
         no in country right of appeal.


         16. Standing back from the matter, therefore, I am satisfied  that
         the contrary position is unarguable. The  Secretary  of  State  has
         made a decision here under 10(1) (b). That carries with it a  right
         of appeal but only from outside the United Kingdom.  That  decision
         invalidates any previous leave given and therefore there  would  be
         no need, and no  legal  provision,  for  a  decision  refusing  the
         application to vary leave, as there is no leave.  Consequently  the
         claim to challenge the decision to refuse leave and  the  claim  to
         challenge the removal decision  under  section  10  should  not  be
         granted permission because there is an alternative  remedy,  namely
         appeal out of country in relation to the only true decision,  which
         is the removal decision."

 12. Mr Gullick argued that the refusal decision was effectively a  nullity.
     The decisions in E (Russia) and JN (Cameroon) dealt with the  question
    of the effect of non-compliance with the Notices Regulations  and  were
    not relevant to the issues in this case.  The case of  Ahmadi  made  it
    clear that a decision on an application  to  vary  leave  to  enter  or
    remain was not made until written notice of the decision had been given
    in accordance with the Notices  Regulations  and  that  until  after  a
    variation decision had been made there could be no appeal or  extension
    of leave under Section 3C.  In the case of SA (Pakistan)  the  decision
    was the result of  an  application  -  see  paragraph  4.   The  powers
    referred to in the decision in Ahmadi applied.  These were  the  powers
    in Section 3 and 4 of the 1971 Act.  The decision in Ahmadi  could  not
    be distinguished as was apparent from what was set out in ground  1  at
    paragraphs 20(ff).

13.  The effect of the decision to remove the applicant was  by  statute  to
    invalidate the earlier application.  The  operative  decision  was  the
    removal decision and not the refusal decision.

14.  Mr Biggs in reply submitted  that  the  circumstances  in  Ahmadi  were
    distinguishable  and  a  key  issue  was  the   Immigration   (Notices)
    Regulations 2003.  It was apparent that the regulations  operated  only
    if a decision had been taken in advance and  accordingly  there  was  a
    need for two decisions.  The right of appeal vested in advance  of  any
    notice. Mr Biggs  submitted  that  Anufrijeva  was  authority  for  the
    opposite proposition - the applicant was being deprived of the right to
    access to justice by the removal of his right  of  appeal  against  the
    refusal decision and ambiguous language should not be used to frustrate
    that right.

15.  At the conclusion of the submissions I  reserved  my  decision.   I  am
    very grateful to Counsel for setting out the arguments so concisely and
    clearly.

16.  In Shahbaz Ali Helen Mountfield QC  found  that  the  removal  decision
    preceded the refusal decision and that it was clear that  the  decision
    took effect at the moment when it was given and not at the moment  when
    it was drafted.  It is submitted that the learned  judge  misunderstood
    what was said in Ahmadi.  However I find with respect  that  it  was  a
    misunderstanding on the part of the applicant's representative of  what
    was said in Ahmadi.  What is said in Ahmadi  at  paragraphs  22  to  25
    which I have set out above do not support the  applicant's  contention,
    they clearly  support  the  respondent's  position.   The  decision  in
    Shahbaz  Ali  was  consistent  with  the  authorities  and  was  in  my
    respectful view entirely correct.  What is  said  in  paragraph  26  of
    Anufrijeva makes the position quite clear.  Notice of the  decision  is
    required before it can have the character of a determination with legal
    effect.

17.  In relation to the point based on paragraph 322(1A) of the Rules as  Mr
    Gullick submitted in  a  footnote  to  paragraph  22  of  his  skeleton
    argument the submission presupposes that the respondent was required to
    take the decision  on  the  application  to  vary  leave  before  doing
    anything else at all.

18.  As Mr Gullick further points out, even if the applicant  had  a  vested
    right of appeal - as Mr Biggs argues - any leave to  remain  previously
    given is invalidated by Section 10(8) of the 1999 Act and there was  no
    leave capable of being varied, his leave to remain being invalidated by
    the removal decision.  A right of  appeal  is  provided  by  Parliament
    against the decision to remove.  This right of  appeal  is  exercisable
    out of country.  As Lewis J  said  in  Shah  at  paragraph  16  "...the
    contrary position is unarguable." This application is an attempt to get
    round what Parliament has clearly provided.

19.  For the reasons I have given, I  do  not  find  that  the  decision  of
    Shahbaz Ali was wrong, on the contrary it appears fully  and  correctly
    to analyse the statutory provisions.  The circumstances  in  this  case
    and that case are similar.  I see no reason to distinguish the case  or
    to depart from it.  Accordingly, this application fails.  ~~~~0~~~~
