
                                                                     [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


         SK (Article 1F(a) - exclusion) Zimbabwe [2010] UKUT 327 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at  Field House                   |Date Sent                |
|On 11 May 2010                          |                         |
|                                        |                         |


                                   Before

                             Mr Justice Ouseley
                       Senior Immigration Judge Eshun

                                   Between

                                     SK
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms Pickup, instructed by Howe & Co
For the Respondent:  Mr Ouseley, Home Office Presenting Officer

1. Article 7.1 of the Statute of  the  International  Criminal  Courts,  the
Rome Statute, is usually regarded as providing the best  working  definition
of a crime against humanity  for  the  purposes  of  Article  1F(a)  of  the
Refugee Convention.

2. Where the act or crime does not involve the specifically listed forms  of
acts or crimes, in order to consider  that  a  crime  against  humanity  had
occurred, the Tribunal must consider if the  acts  participated  in  by  the
appellant were of a  "similar  character"  to  those  specified  in  Article
7.1(a) to (j) of the Rome Statute. In so doing, the Tribunal  must  consider
the specific purpose of the crime, its intent and effect, the  participation
of an appellant in the crime and if needs be whether the  appellant  made  a
substantial contribution to the crime.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.    The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe,  born  in  1971,  widowed  and
      with three children in Zimbabwe.  She arrived in the UK  in  2002  but
      did not apply for asylum until  7  May  2008.   This  was  refused  in
      September 2008 and she was then  to  be  removed  to  Zimbabwe  as  an
      illegal entrant.  She appealed against that decision of  the  SSHD  on
      the grounds that her removal would infringe the Refugee Convention and
      her ECHR rights under Articles 2 and 3.

2.    Her appeal was allowed  on  the  grounds  that  removal  would  breach
      Article 3.  Her asylum appeal was dismissed on the ground that she was
      excluded from the protection of the Refugee Convention  under  Article
      1F,  and  from  humanitarian  protection.  This  was  because  of  her
      participation in crimes against humanity through  her  involvement  in
      the violent invasion of land  owned  by  two  white  farmers  and  the
      violent expulsion of their black farm workers from  their  houses  and
      jobs on those farms.

3.    Immigration Judge Buchanan, in a carefully  considered  determination,
      rejected her  claim  that  she  had  participated  through  duress  or
      obedience to superior orders.

4.    Reconsideration was ordered by Mitting J in June 2009.   He  concluded
      that the Immigration Judge's  decision  on  the  appellant's  personal
      participation in the activity of  the  group,  and  on  coercion  were
      unimpeachable.  He also thought it  beyond  doubt  that  the  Zimbabwe
      regime's attacks on white farmers and  their  workers  constituted  an
      attack directed against any civilian population within Article 7.1  of
      the Statute of the International Criminal  Court,  the  Rome  Statute,
      which is usually regarded as providing the best working definition  of
      a crime against humanity for the  purpose  of  Article  1F(a)  of  the
      Refugee Convention.  Such attacks must also involve one or more of the
      listed forms of violence  for  the  attacks  to  be  a  crime  against
      humanity.  Mitting J thought that the  specifically  listed  forms  of
      violence were not involved and the IJ could only conclude that a crime
      against humanity had occurred if  the  acts  in  which  the  appellant
      participated were "of a similar character" to those acts specified  in
      Article 7.1(a)-(j) of the Rome Statute.  Mitting J thought it arguable
      that the IJ had failed to ask himself whether the acts  in  which  the
      appellant participated were of such  a  nature.   The  reconsideration
      ordered by Mitting J was confined to that issue.

The nature of the reconsideration

5.    The AIT decided that there was indeed an error of law,  as  Mitting  J
      had said was arguable.  The IJ had not considered a relevant question.
       The AIT added that the Tribunal might need to hear  further  evidence
      about what she did during the farm invasions,  although  the  existing
      determination was full and thorough.  The appellant accordingly was to
      attend to deal, if required, with the acts she participated in  during
      the farm invasions.  The remainder of the IJ's findings were to stand.

6.    The IJ had  considered  evidence  in  the  appellant's  first  witness
      statement of 21 May 2008 and in her asylum interview which  contained,
      or at least appeared strongly to contain, admissions that  during  her
      participation in two farm invasions, she had actually  killed  people.
      He concluded however, having heard her evidence  about  what  she  had
      done and why she had said what she had said, that she had not actually
      killed anyone.  He found the rest of what she  said  had  happened  in
      Zimbabwe to be "comprehensive, detailed and  truthful".   He  did  not
      accept her as an entirely truthful witness however because of what she
      said about how she had obtained a  passport  illegally  from  a  white
      person working in the Zimbabwe Embassy.

7.     We  decided  that  we  needed  to  hear  further  evidence  from  the
      appellant.  In the light of the determination and of  her  statements,
      we concluded that further detail was required as to what she had done,
      how serious the harm she had inflicted had been and with  what  intent
      she had inflicted it.  The evidence already given  was  insufficiently
      detailed and focussed on those issues.  We heard such evidence bearing
      in mind, as we emphasised to the  parties,  that  we  were  not  going
      behind the finding that she had killed no one.  This did not  preclude
      us hearing questions of her as to why she had said or had appeared  to
      say, on two occasions, that she had in fact killed  people,  for  what
      light that might cast on her credibility on the detail.

8.    We had to make up our own minds as to  the  detail  of  what  she  had
      done.  The previous findings did not require us  to  accept  that  the
      detail of what she might say to us was inevitably  true  or  reliable.
      We should not however overturn or go behind what the IJ had  found  on
      the evidence he had heard.

Crimes against humanity

9.    Article 1F(a) of the Refugee Convention excludes from  recognition  as
      a refugee someone in respect of whom "there are  serious  reasons  for
      considering that (a) he has committed a crime  against  peace,  a  war
      crime, or a crime against humanity, as defined  in  the  international
      instruments drawn up to make provision in  respect  of  such  crimes".
      Article 12(2)(a) of the Qualification Directive (2004/83/EC) is to the
      same effect.  This became part of domestic law through the Refugee  or
      Persons  in   Need   of   International   Protection   (Qualification)
      Regulations 2006 (SI 2006/2525).

10.    The  starting  point  for  considering  who  is  excluded  by   those
      provisions is the Rome Statue of the International Criminal Court; see
      R (JS (Sri Lanka)) v SSHD [2010] UKSC 15. This  case  concerns  crimes
      against humanity. Article 7 of the ICC Statute provides:

           "1.   For the purpose of this Statute "crime  against  humanity"
           means any of the following acts when  committed  as  part  of  a
           widespread  systematic  attack  directed  against  any  civilian
           population, with knowledge of the attack:
              a) Murder;
              b) Extermination;
              c) Enslavement;
              d) Deportation or forcible transfer of population;
              e)  Imprisonment  or  other  severe  deprivation  of  physical
                 liberty in violation of fundamental rules of  international
                 law;
              f) Torture;
              g)  Rape,  sexual  slavery,  enforced   prostitution,   forced
                 pregnancy, enforced sterilization, or  any  other  form  of
                 sexual violence of comparable gravity;
              h) Persecution against any identifiable group or  collectivity
                 on  political,   radical,   national,   ethnic,   cultural,
                 religious,  gender,  other  grounds  that  are  universally
                 recognized as impermissible  under  international  law,  in
                 connection with any act referred to in  this  paragraph  or
                 any crime within the jurisdiction of the Court;
              i) Enforced disappearance of persons;
              j) The crime of apartheid;
              k) Other inhumane acts of a  similar  character  intentionally
                 causing great suffering, or serious injury to  body  or  to
                 mental or physical health.

11.   The terms of the order for reconsideration required  the  Tribunal  to
      focus exclusively on subparagraph (k), "as the only arguably  relevant
      subparagraph", as Mitting J put it. Mitting J said  that  it  was  not
      self-evident that the acts in which  the  appellant  had  participated
      were  of  that  character.  We  have  confined   ourselves   to   that
      subparagraph, although not necessarily agreeing that none of the other
      subparagraphs was arguably applicable to the forced removal  of  black
      workers from white  owned  farms  for  imputed  political  motives  of
      support for the opposition to Mugabe.  Of  course,  the  reference  to
      "other inhumane acts of a similar character" means that there may be a
      strong kinship between, say, persecutory acts on racial  or  political
      grounds or forcible transfer of population, and acts which fall within
      (k); and acts are not excluded from consideration  under  (k)  because
      they might fit into one or more of the  other  subparagraphs.  It  was
      agreed that the proper interpretation  of  subparagraph  (k)  did  not
      require some artificial compartmentalisation of the acts, followed  by
      a narrow view of them.

12.   Ms Pickup for the appellant did not take issue with the general  point
      made by Mitting J that "the Zimbabwe regime's attacks on white farmers
      and their workers fall  within  the  definition  of  "attack  directed
      against any civilian population".  She contended  that  the  two  farm
      invasions  in  which  the  appellant  took  part   were   not   within
      subparagraph (k) on the evidence  here.  Her  principal  argument  was
      however directed to what the appellant herself had intended  and  done
      during those attacks;  and  those  she  contended  fell  outside  that
      subparagraph.

13.   JS (Sri Lanka) also dealt with what had to be  shown  in  relation  to
      individual  participation  in  crimes  against   humanity   for   that
      individual to be excluded  from  the  Refugee  Convention.   We  start
      however with the  ICC  Statute,  Article  25  of  which  provides  for
      individual criminal responsibility where a person:

           "(a)   Commits  [a  crime  against  humanity]  whether   as   an
                 individual, jointly with another or through another person,
                 regardless of  whether  that  other  person  is  criminally
                 responsible;
              b) Orders, solicits or induces the commission of such a  crime
                 which in fact occurs or is attempted:
              c) For the purpose of facilitating the commission  of  such  a
                 crime, aids, abets or otherwise assists in  its  commission
                 or its attempted commission, including providing the  means
                 for its commission;
              d) In any other way contributes to the commission or attempted
                 commission of such a crime by a  group  of  persons  acting
                 with  a  common  purpose.   Such  contribution   shall   be
                 intentional and shall either:
                 i) Be made with the aim of furthering the criminal activity
                    or criminal purpose of the group, where such activity or
                    purpose involves the commission of a  crime  within  the
                    jurisdiction of the Court; or
                ii) Be made in the knowledge of the intention of  the  group
                    to commit the crime;



14.   Article 30 deals with the mental element of the crime. Guilt  requires
      both intent and knowledge which are elaborated as follows:

            "2.   For the purposes of this  article,  a  person  has  intent
      where:
                    a) In relation to conduct, that person means  to  engage
                       in the conduct;
                    b) In relation to a consequence, that  person  means  to
                       cause that consequence or is aware that it will occur
                       in the ordinary course of events.
             3.   For  the  purpose  of  this  article,  "knowledge"  means
           awareness   that a circumstance exists  or  a  consequence  will
           occur  in  the      ordinary  course  of  events.   "Know"   and
           "knowingly" shall be   construed accordingly."

15.   Ms Pickup submitted that an individual could not be  held  responsible
      for a crime unless he had made a  "substantial  contribution"  to  it,
      even if that person had been a participant in a  joint  enterprise  to
      commit it.  Mr Ouseley for  the  SSHD  submitted  that  if  there  was
      participation in a joint enterprise as understood in UK domestic  law,
      there was no requirement for the degree of participation in it  to  be
      "substantial". The concept of responsibility for a crime on the  basis
      of "substantial contribution" was not  a  limit  on  joint  enterprise
      responsibility,   but   was   relevant   because   responsibility   in
      international law was wider than domestic joint enterprise  liability;
      international responsibility extended  not  just  to  those  who  were
      liable as participants in a joint enterprise, but also  to  those  who
      had knowingly made a "substantial contribution" to the crime.

16.   Paragraph 18 of the UNHCR Guidelines, which deals with this  exclusion
      provision, reads:

           "...In general individual responsibility flows from  the  person
           having committed, or made  a  substantial  contribution  to  the
           commission of the criminal act, in the knowledge that his or her
           act or omission would  facilitate  the  criminal  conduct.   The
           individual need not physically have committed the  criminal  act
           in question.  Instigating, aiding and abetting and participating
           in a joint criminal enterprise can suffice."

 17.  Lord Brown approved that approach in JS,  in  paragraphs  35  and  38,
saying:

           "Put simply, I would hold an accused disqualified under  article
           1F if there are serious reasons for considering him  voluntarily
           to have contributed in a significant way to  the  organisation's
           ability to pursue its purpose of committing  war  crimes,  aware
           that his assistance will in fact further that purpose."

18.   Lord Hope adopted what Lord Brown had said above, but showed that  the
      reference  to  "significant  contribution"  as  used  by  the   German
      Administrative Court contrasted those  who  had  committed  the  crime
      personally and those who were  still  personally  responsible  because
      they had "made a substantial contribution  to  its  commission."  Lord
      Kerr, in paragraphs 57-58, cites the use of the phrase in the  context
      of someone  who  "lends  a  significant  contribution  to  the  crimes
      involved [in the joint enterprise]" which might or might  not  suggest
      that  a  significant  contribution  was  required   from   an   actual
      participant in the joint enterprise. But he emphasised that  the  real
      point was that what was required was more than mere passivity or  mere
      continued involvement in an organisation after acquiring knowledge  of
      its crimes against humanity.

19.   The distinction drawn by Mr Ouseley is supported by  paragraph  18  of
      the UNHCR Guidelines, and the structure of Article  25  itself,  where
      contribution in a way other than those specified,  which  cover  joint
      enterprise, leads to criminal responsibility.  There is no requirement
      for a particular degree of participation in domestic law  before  that
      participation is a criminal act.  But the requirement in domestic  law
      for a shared guilty intention, taking the issue  at  a  simple  level,
      would act as an indirect control on the degree of participation  which
      would actually lead to criminal responsibility in a joint  enterprise.
      JS decided that criminal  responsibility  in  international  law  went
      beyond domestic joint  enterprise.  Much  of  what  it  discussed  and
      decided about "substantial contribution" relates to the basis for that
      wider criminal responsibility, rather than to  what  is  required  for
      international responsibility on a joint enterprise basis.  That phrase
      is used largely in the context of joint enterprise being too narrow  a
      definition of that liability.

20.   The debate, so far as this case is  concerned,  is  not  advanced  by
      consideration  of  what  is  required  beyond  mere  membership  of  a
      terrorist organisation, or the role of the military foot soldier in an
      organisation which has both military and terrorist  purposes,  or  the
      person who raises money for an organisation, which at some later stage
      carries out a crime against humanity.

21.   We think that the answer is this: personal  responsibility  can  arise
      through  personal  participation  in   the   crime,   which   includes
      participation on a joint enterprise basis. But personal responsibility
      is not limited  to  that  and  also  covers  those  who  have  made  a
      "substantial contribution" to the commission of the  crime,  with  the
      requisite knowledge and intent. There is no requirement as  such  that
      the individual's participation on  a  joint  enterprise  be  itself  a
      "substantial contribution" to the crime, although the  combination  of
      participation  and  intent  will  usually  demonstrate  that  such   a
      contribution was made. The need to keep a strict eye on the  operation
      of  the  exclusion  clause  may  mean  that  there  are   some   whose
      participation might suffice in  law  for  responsibility  on  a  joint
      enterprise basis, but which could properly be described as trivial  or
      insubstantial. It may well be that such a person  would  fall  outside
      the scope of the exclusion clause, rather in  the  way  that  a  judge
      might ask whether it really was in the public  interest  to  prosecute
      such a person.  Of course mere passivity would not suffice  for  joint
      responsibility anyway. That apart, there is in our judgment no further
      requirement in international law that  those  who  participated  in  a
      joint enterprise crime against humanity  should  also  have  played  a
      substantial part in it.  It is also clear that at least a  purpose  of
      that requirement for  a  "substantial  contribution",  which  is  very
      relevant to liability through  acts  where  the  involvement  is  more
      indirectly linked to the violence or force which underpins  all  these
      crimes, is to prevent mere passivity or membership of an  organisation
      with knowledge constituting such crimes. That gives a clear pointer to
      the  conclusion  that  it  is  not  intended  to  exclude  all  lesser
      participants from the scope of international  criminal  responsibility
      leaving only the more serious criminals to face trial and punishment.

22.   This case is concerned with the responsibility of someone who, on  her
      own evidence, used violence herself on black farm workers to  help  to
      drive them from their homes during  two  farm  invasions,  which  were
      intended to remove those workers as well as the white farmer, so  that
      his land could be taken by others,  usually  regime  acolytes  or  its
      marauding supporters. She was not a ring leader, nor one of  the  hard
      core of the Zanu-PF youth militia, but she was one of the large  group
      of militia members, one of the mob, who were taken  to  the  farms  to
      drive out the workers, burn their homes and ensure that they were  too
      intimidated  ever to return. Of course, we accept that it is necessary
      to look at what she personally actually did, and with what intent. But
      we reject what seemed to be Ms Pickup's suggestion that  her  personal
      acts and intent are the end of the matter, as if there were no context
      to what she did, as if she were not doing what she did as part  of  an
      invading mob which had a clear and violent purpose.  This  has  to  be
      examined to judge whether she was part of this joint enterprise.

23.   We also reject Ms Pickup's submission that the question of the  intent
      with which the appellant committed the  acts  of  violence  is  to  be
      answered by reference to her  motivation  in  committing  those  acts,
      namely out of fear and to seem to be a participant in order to protect
      herself, when in reality she did not want to see these workers  driven
      from their homes. We reject this not just because her plea  of  duress
      was rejected by the Immigration Judge, but because  the  Rome  Statute
      deals with intent  not  motivation,  as  is  the  commonplace  in  the
      criminal law.  Ms Pickup's reference to what the ITFY Appeals  Chamber
      said at paragraph 117 in Kordic, is a misreading of it; the  reference
      to "motivated by intent" is more to emphasise the need for intent than
      to introduce the need for a separate examination of motivation, as  we
      think the rest of that judgment on intent puts beyond doubt.

The evidence

24.   The most convenient starting place is with the  evidence  as  recorded
      by the Immigration Judge. The appellant had explained  how  her  uncle
      had taken her into his family after her parents had died;  he  was  an
      ardent Zanu-PF supporter. In 2001, he had made her  join  the  Zanu-PF
      youth brigade or militia in 2001.  She described the sexual  abuse  to
      which she was subjected, and other activities of the militia to  which
      she objected. This included forcing villagers to attend rallies. Those
      are not the basis of the SSHD's case that she should be excluded  from
      the Refugee Convention.  His case is based on the two farm invasions.

25.   Her evidence about the first one was this:

           "16.  In April and October 2002 appellant was  involved  in  two
           farm invasions which she  had  explained  in  detail  and  which
           involved her being part of a large group of  Zanu  PF  activists
           who attacked two white owned farms.  The first attack took place
           at a place called Manzou Farm where  a  white  farmer  had  been
           given an eviction order which he had disregarded.  The appellant
           was with a mob of perhaps one hundred twenty  people,  including
           members from different  areas  and  trained  youth  members  and
           senior leaders.


           17.   The group was split into two and the senior members  which
           included the appellant's uncle went to the  farmer's  house  and
           beat him up.  The appellant in the other group was  involved  in
           going to the farm workers' houses, beating them up  and  burning
           their houses down.  The appellant admitted that she was  one  of
           those carrying a stick or "chamu", but she was not  involved  in
           burning any of the houses.  She found the situation  very  scary
           and although she did hit people she did not use excessive force.


           18.   The appellant disliked what she had to do, but was  afraid
           of the repercussions if she left  the  youth  militia.   Rumours
           abounded about how another girl had tried to  escape,  had  been
           caught and severely punished."


26.   Her evidence about the second was this:

           "20.  In early October 2002 she  and  others  were  involved  in
           another farm invasion at a place called Bellrock Farm where  the
           white farmer had been given orders to leave  the  farm  and  had
           ignored it.  Again she went with a large mob  which  might  have
           included over one hundred youth members.  Her uncle was  amongst
           the senior members of the group.  When they got to the farm  her
           group was ordered to beat the farm workers  in  the  fields  and
           everyone joined in, including the appellant.   They  chased  the
           farm workers and if they caught up with  any  worker  they  beat
           them until they left the farm.  The  appellant  remembered  that
           she had beaten one woman in particular and she felt very  guilty
           about this.  She felt horrible as to  what  had  happened.   She
           stopped hitting the woman when she saw  what  distress  she  had
           caused and the woman scrambled away.  Farm Workers' houses  were
           set on fire but the appellant was not involved in that.  But she
           did witness the Zanu PF leaders  questioning  the  white  farmer
           when she saw him being  beaten  badly  and  his  property  being
           destroyed."


      Her witness statement said that she started beating the woman when she
      stumbled while the appellant was chasing her, she felt she had to beat
      her to avoid being a target herself, and punished; and she had stopped
      beating the woman when she realised that she was  not  being  watched,
      and that enabled the woman to escape. She was also part of  the  group
      who watched as the farmer was badly beaten, and she was one  of  those
      who looted his maize.


27.   The Immigration Judge accepted this  evidence,  finding  at  paragraph
84:

           "84   I further  find  that  she  had  participated  in  actions
           against civilians which had resulted in innocent civilians, both
           MDC supporters and  farm  workers  on  two  farms,  being  badly
           harmed, and that she had used force with a stick to  beat  these
           innocent people.  I do accept that she was only one of a  number
           of people on the two farm invasions, that she had not personally
           been involved in setting fire to people's houses,  or  that  she
           was a prominent member of these groups.  But there is no denying
           the serious nature of these attacks on innocent  civilians,  and
           that the appellant participated in them.


           85.   The onus is on the respondent to show that  the  appellant
           falls within the categories identified in Article 1F of the 1951
           Convention.  I am entirely satisfied that the actions  taken  by
           the  group  in  which  the  appellant  participated  were   acts
           involving  crimes   against   humanity.    The   appellant   had
           voluntarily joined the Zanu  PF  militia,  even  though  at  the
           instigation  of  her  uncle;  she  had   participated   in   its
           activities, she was aware of the actions taken against civilians
           and she had failed to disassociate herself from these activities
           at the earliest safe opportunity.   I  accept  the  respondent's
           suggestion that it was not so much due to remorse that  she  had
           decided to desert from the militia, but  on  account  of  having
           been raped by another member of the militia  that  prompted  her
           eventually to leave."


28.   The Appellant's account of how  she  was  forced  to  join  the  youth
      brigade, the sexual abuse she suffered, the activities of the  militia
      in which she participated, including helping to force  villagers  come
      to Zanu-PF meetings with  threats  and  violence,   and  the  terrible
      consequence for those in the youth brigade who appeared  unsympathetic
      to its aims and methods, were all of a piece with how her  expert,  Dr
      Kibble, described the militia behaving in 2002/3, and  with  what  the
      Solidarity Peace  Trust  and  other  reports  told  of  their  wanton,
      sadistic, and extreme brutality against those whom they  perceived  as
      Mugabe's enemies.  This did not start in  2008,  though  it  may  have
      become yet more widespread and severe against those who had not  voted
      for him in the elections.

29.   Dr Kibble was asked to comment on how  her  account  fitted  with  his
      knowledge of what was happening in Zimbabwe at the time, with what the
      youth  militia  were  doing,  and  the   risks   she   faced   through
      disobedience. This was in connection with her   argument about duress.
       It was from the start of 2002 that allegations  emerged  against  the
      youth militia of murder, rape, torture, and property destruction. This
      is when they began to be used to occupy farms and to force people from
      their homes, the farm invasions. He described the impunity with  which
      the militias operated, and harsh treatment meted out to those who were
      suspected of supporting opposition parties and indeed those  who  were
      not sufficiently sympathetic supporters.

30.   He does not suggest that  the  appellant's  description  of  them  was
      atypical.  Rather he says that her account captured the way  in  which
      indoctrinated youth were worked up into  a  state  of  mass  hysteria,
      often fuelled by drugs and alcohol, to unleash violence  on  opponents
      and farm workers.

31.   The violent occupation of farms and  forcing  people,  including  farm
      workers from their houses, was part of the State violence, formal  and
      informal, used to crush opposition  and  those  who  were  not  regime
      supporters.

The Appellant's evidence to the Upper Tier

32.   On the first farm invasion, she said that she had beaten no more  than
      ten people, inflicting enough pain to get them to run away.  She  beat
      them as hard  as  she  could  on  their  clothed  backs  and  bottoms,
      carefully avoiding hitting them on their heads.  She  could  not  see,
      through their clothes, if she had injured them. She was  beating  them
      as their homes were burning. She did not see how severely others  were
      hurt. It was the Youth Brigades who were beating  people  so  severely
      that she thought they would die.

33.   She only hit one person severely on the second farm invasion. She  was
      shocked that she had beaten her so severely. It was the way  she  beat
      her which made her think that the woman would die; but she  only  beat
      her back and bottom. She saw other people being beaten and  had  never
      seen people being beaten like that before. She beat  other  people  on
      the second farm invasion as severely as she had beaten people  on  the
      first farm invasion; in re-examination she said that this was the only
      person she had beaten on the second farm invasion.  She did not intend
      to hurt the woman but only to beat her so that she could run away.

34.   She had said that she had beaten  people  to  death  because  she  had
      beaten someone so hard that she thought she was dead but she  did  not
      in fact die. Although she thought  that  others  would  die  from  the
      beatings they received, in fact none of them died. She mentioned death
      because the beatings were so severe. She only beat one lady that  way,
      so that the Youth Brigades could see her sympathy to their cause.  She
      never intended to kill anyone.  But she had hit other people  on  both
      farm invasions. She had referred to beating many because she  went  on
      two farm invasions.

Were the farm invasions crimes against humanity?

35.   This was the issue  upon  which  Mitting  J  ordered  reconsideration,
      rather than what the argument before us focussed on, which was whether
      the role of the Appellant in the farm invasions might  mean  that  she
      was not guilty of participation in crimes against humanity, if that is
      what the farm invasions were. We first deal with the issue  identified
      by Mitting J, taking as our starting point his  barely  contested  and
      obviously correct point  that  the  farm  invasions  were  part  of  a
      systematic attack  directed  against  civilian  population,  and  that
      applies to the two farm invasions here.

36.    We  are  satisfied  that  these  two  farm  invasions  were  part  of
      widespread systematic  attacks  against  the  civilian  population  of
      farmers and farm workers, carried out not just with the full knowledge
      of the regime but as a deliberate  act  of  policy  by  it,  with  the
      intention of advancing its grip on power, suppressing opposition,  and
      helping its supporters.

37.   We  are  satisfied  that  the  intention  behind  these  invasions  in
      general, and it applies as well to the  two  in  which  the  Appellant
      participated, was to cause great suffering or inflict serious physical
      or mental injury.  The aim was to drive people from  their  homes  and
      their work, and to do so in such a way that they would be so cowed  by
      their experience that they would neither return  to  their  homes  nor
      foment opposition outside.  It would also deter  resistance  on  other
      farms or in other potential areas of opposition.  The aim was achieved
      by the mob  violence  of  beatings  administered  to  men  and  women,
      burnings  and  lootings  in  a  deliberately  brutal  and   terrifying
      experience.

38.   These acts were obviously inhumane, and were, in our  judgment,  of  a
      similar character to those in sub-paragraph (h) of Article  7.   These
      acts were clearly persecutory  acts  against  an  identifiable  group,
      farmers and farm workers.  They were undertaken for political reasons,
      the  suppression  of  perceived  opposition  and  for  the   financial
      advancement of the regime members and supporters.  There was  a  clear
      racial element in the attacks on the farms, and the farm  workers  who
      were a necessary part of the white farmers' ability  to  benefit  from
      the farm.

39.   Accordingly, on the issue on which Mitting J ordered  reconsideration,
      we are satisfied that the  two  farm  invasions  were  crimes  against
      humanity.  No doubt, these  actions  could  have  been  charged  in  a
      variety of ways, including causing grievous bodily harm  with  intent,
      affray, violent disorder, and  arson.   But  such  an  exercise  would
      distract from the true question: did these two  farm  invasions,  with
      their specific aim, intent and  effect  fall  within  Article  7  sub-
      paragraph (k).  In our view, they did.

Participation

40.   We now turn to whether the Appellant's  participation  in  them  makes
      her criminally  responsible.   The  Appellant  was  a  participant  in
      serious  mob  violence.   The  intention  of   the   instigators   and
      participants, including her, was that the farmer and farm  workers  be
      driven from their homes, by violent beatings and  burnings,  never  to
      return and to deter them from opposition to the regime.  The intention
      was that the farms would then be available for regime supporters.

41.   We accept the generality of her evidence,  and  specifically  that  no
      one was murdered.  We accept she was a lesser  participant,  and  that
      others, below the ringleaders, were more active and  brutal.   But  we
      also felt that, in her evidence to us,  she  falsely  underplayed  her
      role at the second farm invasion.  She clearly beat a number of people
      on it.  She beat one woman very severely to demonstrate  her  loyalty,
      not just to make the woman run away.  We note her  evidence  that  she
      was shocked at how hard she had beaten the woman and thought  she  had
      beaten her so severely she would die.

42.   The Appellant was not merely present.  She  was  on  each  occasion  a
      voluntary,  even  if  reluctant,  actual  and  active  participant  in
      beatings; even taking her evidence at face value, beating many  people
      hard as part of the aim of driving them away. She  specifically  tried
      to demonstrate her loyalty to Zanu-PF in her actions.

43.   She is plainly criminally liable on a joint  enterprise  domestic  law
basis.

44.   If there is an additional requirement that,  in  these  circumstances,
      there be a substantial contribution to the crime, we consider that she
      provided it. That expression  is  not  intended  to  exclude  all  but
      ringleaders  and  major  participants.  Each  of   those   who   guard
      extermination camps, for example, make a substantial  contribution  to
      genocide.

45.   Active participation in mob violence which itself  falls  within  sub-
      paragraph (k) makes a substantial contribution to that  crime  against
      humanity, and is a sufficient basis for exclusion from refugee  status
      of those who actively and intentionally participated in the  violence,
      seeking to achieve its purpose.

46.   This appeal is dismissed.


                            Signed                                       Dat
                       e










                                   Mr Justice Ouseley
                                   sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal






