
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

R (on the application of FBL) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
IJR [2015] UKUT 00328 (IAC)

             IN the matter of an application for judicial review


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre        |                              |
|On 10 April 2015                             |                              |
|                                             |..............................|
|                                             |.........                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                    THE QUEEN (ON THE APPLICATION OF FBL)
                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Applicant:     Mr C Jowett instructed by Albany Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms M Bayoumi instructed by Government Legal
Department

                               ANONYMITY ORDER

I was invited by both parties to make an  anonymity  order  to  protect  the
identity of the applicant's children.   Pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal
Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/269 as  amended)  I  make  an
anonymity order.  Unless the Upper Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  no
report of these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the
applicant, his partner or children.  For the avoidance of doubt, this  order
also applies to both the applicant and to  the  respondent.   A  failure  to
comply with this order could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
                                  JUDGMENT
                     (HANDED DOWN ON FRIDAY 29 MAY 2015)

Judge Grubb:

Introduction

 1. The applicant, who was born on 11 January 1983, is a  national  of  the
    People's Republic of China (China).  He arrived in the  United  Kingdom
    on 6 January 2007 and claimed asylum.  That application was refused  by
    the Secretary of State on 16  February  2007.   There  was  no  appeal.
    Thereafter, the applicant ceased contact with the Home Office until  20
    June 2012.

 2. Sometime in December 2008 the applicant began  a  relationship  with  a
    Chinese national, "QC".  The applicant and QC  have  two  children  who
    were born respectively on 20 January 2010 ("AXL")  and  10  April  2011
    ("AYL") in the United Kingdom.

 3. The applicant's partner, QC, came to the UK on  11  May  2009  using  a
    false passport.  On 13 November  2009,  she  claimed  asylum  and  that
    application was refused by the Secretary of State on 21 December  2009.
    Thereafter, QC appealed and her appeal was dismissed by an  Immigration
    Judge on 16 February 2010.  She did not appeal that  decision.   On  24
    November 2011, further submissions were lodged on her behalf and on  17
    January 2013 those submissions were rejected.  However, on  22  January
    2013, a decision was made  by  the  Secretary  of  State  applying  the
    "exceptional circumstances" criteria in para 353B  of  the  Immigration
    Rules to grant QC and her two  children,  AXL  and  AYL,  discretionary
    leave until 22 July 2015.

 4. The applicant made contact with the Home Office on 20 June 2012 and  on
    10 April 2013 he made further submissions  to  the  respondent  relying
    upon his private and family life in the  UK,  namely  his  relationship
    with his partner and two children.

 5. On 18 February  2014  the  applicant's  legal  representatives  sent  a
    'chasing'  letter  to  the  respondent.   On  25  February  2014,   the
    respondent replied indicating they would review  the  applicant's  case
    within 12 months.  On 26 February 2014, the applicant's MP wrote to the
    respondent who responded on 28 February 2014 indicating  that  the  aim
    was to review the applicant's case by December 2014.

 6. On 7 July 2014, the respondent refused the applicant's claim for  leave
    under the Immigration Rules (Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules,
    HC 395 as amended) and under Art 8  of  the  ECHR.   In  addition,  the
    Secretary of State concluded that the applicant's claim  to  remain  in
    the UK did not amount  to  a  'fresh  claim'  under  para  353.    (The
    detailed reasons are dated 8 July 2014 but I will throughout  refer  to
    the decision as the "7 July 2014" decision.)

 7. On 31 July 2014, the applicant's solicitor sent a  pre-action  protocol
    letter (PAP) to the respondent.  On 16 August 2014,  the  Secretary  of
    State responded to the PAP letter maintaining her  decision  to  refuse
    leave to the applicant and that his claim was not a 'fresh claim'.

 8. On 30 September 2014, the applicant filed these proceedings challenging
    the respondent's decisions of 7 July  2014  and  16  August  2014.   In
    summary, two Grounds were relied upon:

         (1) the respondent's decision to  refuse  leave  under  Art  8  was
         unlawful as the respondent had applied a test of  'exceptionality';
         had failed to have regard to the 'best interests' of  the  children
         and had failed properly to consider all the circumstances; and

         (2) the decision that the submissions did not amount  to  a  'fresh
         claim' was irrational  and  the  respondent  had  failed  to  apply
         'anxious scrutiny' in reaching her conclusion.

 9. On 8 December 2014, HHJ Lambert  (sitting  as  a  Judge  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal) granted permission to bring these proceedings.

The Applicant's Further Submissions

10. In their letter of 10 April 2013, the applicant's legal representatives
    set out further submissions which  formed  the  basis  upon  which  the
    applicant should be granted leave under Art 8 of  the  ECHR.   In  that
    letter, reliance is placed upon the relationship between the  applicant
    and QC and also that they have two children, AXL and AYL who were  born
    in the UK.  The applicant relies on  the  fact  that  QC  and  the  two
    children have discretionary leave which is valid until  July  2015  and
    that the applicant plays an "active role" in the children's day to  day
    lives.   Accompanying  the  application  were  the  passports  of   the
    applicant's partner and children; the birth  certificates  of  the  two
    children,  and  a  number  of  other  supporting  documents   such   as
    photographs of the applicant with his partner and children.

11. The representative's letter puts the applicant's claim as follows:

         "We respectfully advise you as  to  a  significant  change  to  our
         client's circumstances in  the  UK.   Our  client  has  been  in  a
         serious, and long standing relationship with  [QC]  since  December
         2008 and they have two children together, [AXL]  and  [AYL].   [QC]
         and their children currently hold Limited Leave to  Remain  for  30
         months.  Our client, partner and children are currently  unable  to
         legally live together permanently  due  to  our  client's  lack  of
         immigration status but hope to do so in the future.  Despite  this,
         he is able to reside with his partner and children at times and has
         been formally included in their pending housing application.

         Our client plays an active role in the  day  to  day  life  of  his
         children and is central in the upbringing of  both  children.   Our
         client and  [QC]  share  responsibility  for  all  decision  making
         concerning the future of the child".

    Then, the letter set out some points and relevant case law relating  to
    the existence of "family life".




12. The letter continues:

         "Furthermore, with reference to s55 we believe that it would be  in
         the children's best interests to  remain  in  the  UK  where  their
         mother is based.  If our client is forced to  leave  the  UK,  then
         this will lead to the separation of  the  family  unit,  as  [QC's]
         current status does not allow her  to  pursue  an  Entry  Clearance
         application for our client to lawfully return  to  the  UK  on  the
         basis of his family and exercise his family life".

13. The letter then concludes as follows:

         "It is considered that the  above  representations  and  supporting
         evidence clearly demonstrate our client maintains a strong  private
         and family life in the UK and that the removal of our  client  from
         the UK in light of the  above  would  lead  to  a  disproportionate
         breach of his Article 8 ECHR right to family life.  We submit  that
         a grant of Limited Leave to Remain in  line  with  [QC]  and  their
         children would be appropriate in respect of the above.

         We wish to remind you of the very low burden of proof required when
         considering what amounts to a "realistic prospect  of  success"  as
         this does  not  mean  will  succeed,  but  may  succeed  before  an
         Immigration Judge".

14. On 7 July 2014, the respondent made the decision which  is  principally
    challenged in these proceedings.

The Challenged Decisions

15. The Secretary of State considered the applicant's claim  to  remain  in
    the UK based upon his family and private  life  under  the  Immigration
    Rules and Art 8 of the ECHR in her decision  letter  of  7  July  2014.
    Although they have been subject to some subsequent amendment, I set out
    below the Rules as they were in force at the date of decision.

16. Having noted that the applicant relied upon the  fact  that  he  had  a
    partner in the UK and two children aged 3  and  4,  all  of  whom  were
    Chinese  nationals,  the  Secretary  of  State  first  considered   the
    applicant's claim under the "partner" Rule, namely R-LTRP  of  Appendix
    FM.  In order to succeed under R-LTRP, R-LTRP1.1(c)(ii) required that:

         "(ii)    the applicant meets all the  requirements  of  Section  E-
             LTRP: Eligibility for leave to remain as a partner; ...".

17. Alternatively, by virtue of R-LTRP1.1(d)(ii) and (iii):

         "(ii)    the applicant must meet the requirements of  paragraph  E-
             LTRP1.2-1.12 and E-LTRP2.1; and

         (iii)    paragraph EX.1 applies".

18. EX.1 provided, so far  as  relevant  to  the  applicant's  claim  as  a
    "partner" that:

         "This paragraph applies if ...

         (b)  the applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with a
             partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen, settled  in
             the UK or  in  the  UK  with  refugee  leave  or  humanitarian
             protection, and there are insurmountable obstacles  to  family
             life with that partner continuing outside the UK".

19. One of the "eligibility" requirements in E-LTRP1.2 stated as follows:

         "the applicant's partner must be -

         (a)  a British Citizen in the UK;

         (b)  present and settled in the UK; or

         (c)  in the UK with refugee leave or as a person with  humanitarian
             protection".

20. In her decision, the Secretary of State concluded  that  the  applicant
    could not meet  the  "eligibility"  requirement  in  E-LTRP1.2  as  his
    partner was not a British citizen, was not settled in the  UK  and  was
    not in the UK with leave as a refugee or on the basis  of  humanitarian
    protection.  The applicant's partner only had limited leave to  remain.



21. In addition, the respondent concluded that the applicant could not meet
    the requirements of EX.1 for the same reason and also because:

         "You  have  not  demonstrated  any  reasons  why  there  would   be
         insurmountable obstacles to your relationship  continuing  in  your
         country of origin.  It is considered that all four members of  your
         family unit are Chinese nationals and would face no  difficulty  in
         continuing your present family life  in  your  country  of  origin.
         Your partner has been granted discretionary leave to expire in July
         2015.  As such your partner is free to return to China with you  at
         any time".

22. The respondent then considered the  applicant's  claim  as  a  "parent"
    under the Rules.  As regards that claim, R-LTRPT1.1(c)(ii) required the
    applicant to meet all the "eligibility" requirements for  leave  in  E-
    LTRPT.  Alternatively, R-LTRPT1.1(d)(ii) and (iii) stated that:

         "(ii)    the applicant meets  the  requirements  of  paragraphs  E-
             LTRPT2.2-2.4 and E-LTRPT3.1; and

         (iii)    paragraph EX.1 applies".

23. E-LTRPT2.2 required, in addition to the child being under the age of 18
    at the date of application and having not formed an independent  family
    unit or leading an independent life and to be living in  the  UK,  that
    the child should be:

         "(c) a British Citizen or settled in the UK; or

         (d)  has lived in the UK continuously  for  at  least  seven  years
             immediately preceding the date of  application  and  paragraph
             EX.1 applies".

24. So far as relevant to a claim as a "parent", EX.1 provided that:

         "This paragraph applies if

         (a)  (i) the  applicant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                  relationship with a child who -

                  (aa)     is under the age of 18 years ...;

                  (bb)     is in the UK;

                  (cc)     is a British Citizen  or  has  lived  in  the  UK
                      continuously for at least the seven years immediately
                      preceding the date of application; and

             (ii)     it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
             leave the UK; ...".

25. In her decision, the respondent focused upon EX.1  and  concluded  that
    the applicant  could  not  meet  its  requirements  for  the  following
    reasons:

         "Regard has been given to EX.1 of Appendix FM  of  the  Immigration
         Rules.

         You state that your children were born in  the  United  Kingdom  in
         2010 and 2011 respectively, both of whom are  nationals  of  China.
         Your children have not spent 7 years in the United Kingdom and  you
         have not presented any exceptional circumstances  as  to  why  they
         would be unable to return with you to your country of origin.

         You therefore fail to fulfil EX.1 (a) (aa) and (cc) of Appendix  FM
         of the Immigration Rules.

         As you have not demonstrated any reasons as to  why  your  children
         cannot return with you to enjoy your family life in China, you have
         failed to fulfil EX.1 (a) (ii) of Appendix FM and it is  considered
         that it would be in the best interests of your children  to  return
         with you to your country of origin where you can enjoy family  life
         as a family unit".

26. In relation to the applicant's private life, the respondent  considered
    paragraph 276ADE of the Rules which, so far as  relevant,  provided  as
    follows:

         "The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to remain  on
         the grounds of private life in the UK  are  that  at  the  date  of
         application, the applicant:

         ...

         (iii)    has lived continuously in the UK for at least twenty years
             (discounting any period of imprisonment); or

         ...

         (vi) is aged 18 years or above, has lived continuously  in  the  UK
             for  less  than  twenty  years  (discounting  any  period   of
             imprisonment) but has no ties (including social,  cultural  or
             family), with the country to which he  would  have  to  go  if
             required to leave the UK".

27. In her decision, the respondent concluded that the applicant could  not
    meet either the requirement in para 276ADE(iii) or in para 276ADE  (vi)
    for the following reasons:

         "You claim to have entered the United Kingdom in January 2007.  You
         have failed to demonstrate that you have accrued 20 years residence
         in the United Kingdom as required by Rule 276 ADE (iii).  You  have
         spent the majority of your life in China and have raised no reasons
         as to why you would not be able to continue to live in China as you
         have done so before.

         You have failed to demonstrate that you have no social, cultural or
         family ties in your country of origin for the reasons  given  above
         and therefore fail to fulfil Rule 276 ADE (vi)".

28. Consequently, the respondent concluded that the applicant had no  claim
    under the Rules.

29. The respondent then turned in her decision letter to  consider  whether
    the applicant could succeed outside the Rules under Art 8.  In doing so
    she also  considered  the  "best  interests"  of  the  applicant's  two
    children.  The decision letter is in the following terms:

         "I have also considered whether the  particular  circumstances  set
         out in your application constitute exceptional circumstances which,
         consistent with the right to respect for private  and  family  life
         contained in Article 8 of the European Convention on Human  Rights,
         might warrant consideration by the Secretary of State of a grant of
         leave to remain in the United Kingdom outside the  requirements  of
         the Immigration Rules.  I have decided that  they  do  not,  having
         first considered the best interests of your two children.

         Article 3 of the UNCRC requires that  the  best  interests  of  the
         child are a primary consideration in  all  actions  concerning  the
         child.  Section 55 of  the  statutory  guidance  in  the  2009  Act
         creates a duty to safeguard and promote the welfare of children.

         In weighing up the factors in favour and against a grant  of  leave
         it is pertinent to look at the judgement given on 01 February  2011
         in the case of ZH (Tanzania) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department.

         At paragraph 33 Lady Hale said:

             "... . The best interests of  the  child  must  be  a  primary
             consideration.  This means that they must be considered first.
              They can, of course, be outweighed by the  cumulative  effect
             of other considerations.  In  this  case,  the  countervailing
             considerations  were  the  need  to  maintain  firm  and  fair
             immigration  control,  coupled  with  the  mother's  appalling
             immigration history and the  precariousness  of  her  position
             when family life was created".

         While it is accepted that you are father to dependent children born
         in the United Kingdom and that you maintain an active role in their
         upbringing, it  is  not  considered  that  this  alone  amounts  to
         circumstances which may be considered exceptional so as to  warrant
         a grant of leave.  It is  not  considered  that  remaining  in  the
         United Kingdom is necessarily in the best interests of the children
         or that  you  would  face  any  difficulty  in  returning  and  re-
         integrating into your country of origin alongside your partner  and
         children.

         Your application for leave to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  is
         therefore refused.

         Consideration of SSHD v Razgar

         Your claim has been considered using the five stage  test  outlined
         in the case of SSHD v Razgar [2004] UKHL 27:

         (1)  Below is a  consideration  of  whether  you  have  established
             family and/or private life in the United Kingdom:

             You have submitted certified copies of birth certificates  for
             your two dependent children, born in the United  Kingdom.   It
             is accepted that you have established a  family  life  in  the
             United Kingdom with your children and partner, all of whom are
             Chinese nationals.   You  additionally  cite  your  length  of
             residence in the United Kingdom in excess of six years.  It is
             accepted that you may  have  established  connections  to  the
             county over this time amounting to a private life in the UK.

         (2)   If  (or  assuming  that)  family  or  private  life   exists,
             consideration is given below to  whether  refusal  or  removal
             will interfere with that family and/or private life:

             It is considered that your removal would  interfere  with  any
             family or private life you have developed in the country.

         (3)  If there is any interference it must be in accordance with the
             law.  Interference with family life, that is, the decision  to
             refuse/remove, will be in accordance with the law where:

                . It is in accordance  with  domestic  law  as  set  out  in
                  primary and secondary legislation, the Immigration  Rules,
                  or published policies and procedures; and

                . The relevant law is accessible (published) and precise.

             It is considered that any interference with your  family  life
             would be in accordance with the law.

         (4)  Below is a consideration of why any interference is in pursuit
             of a permissible aim as set out in Article 8(2);

             It is considered that any interference would be in pursuit  of
             the  permissible  aim  of  maintaining  effective  immigration
             control.

         (5)   Below  is  a  consideration  of  why  any   interference   is
             proportionate to the permissible aim;

             You have accumulated  7  years  of  residence  in  the  United
             Kingdom  however   you   have   absconded   from   immigration
             authorities for the majority of this residence.  You claim  to
             have been in a relationship with your partner since  2008  but
             made the decision  not  to  present  yourself  to  immigration
             authorities  until  2012  and  not  to  make  any  attempt  to
             regularize your stay until 2013 following your partner's grant
             of discretionary leave.  While you have established  a  family
             life in the United Kingdom, it is considered that  you  are  a
             fit and healthy male and have spent the majority of your  life
             in your country of origin.  Your partner and children are  all
             Chinese nationals.  You  have  presented  no  reason  why  you
             cannot return to China as  a  family.   You  established  said
             family  life  in  full  knowledge  of  the  fact   that   your
             immigration  status  was  especially  precarious  given   your
             decision to abscond.

             Your children are aged three and four and cannot be claimed to
             have established exceptionally significant  cultural  ties  to
             the United Kingdom in this time.

             In light of the above it is considered that your removal would
             be entirely proportional to the pursuit of the permissible aim
             of maintaining effective immigration controls.

             For the reasons considered above it  is  concluded  that  your
             rights under Article 8 of the ECHR would not be breached  upon
             your removal from the United Kingdom".

30. Then, having referred to  the  applicant's  previous  submissions,  the
    respondent concluded that his claim did not amount to a  'fresh  claim'
    under para 353 of the Immigration Rules in the following terms:

         "Further more it has been decided  that  your  submissions  do  not
         amount to a fresh claim.  The new submissions taken  together  with
         the previous considered material do not create a realistic prospect
         of success, namely  that  an  immigration  judge  applying  anxious
         scrutiny would decide that the claimant ought to be granted asylum,
         Humanitarian Protection or  Discretionary  Leave  for  the  reasons
         above and in light of WM(DRC) v SSHD and SSHD  v  AR  (Afghanistan)
         [2006] EWCA Civ 1495".

31. Finally, the respondent considered para 353B of the  Immigration  Rules
    and concluded that it did not apply  so  as  to  make  the  applicant's
    removal inappropriate.  Para 353B provides as follows:

         "Where further submissions have been made and  the  decision  maker
         has established whether or not they amount to a fresh  claim  under
         para 353 of these Rules, or in cases with  no  outstanding  further
         submissions whose appeal rights have been exhausted and  which  are
         subject to a review, the decision maker will also  have  regard  to
         the migrant's:

         (i)  character, conduct and  associations  including  any  criminal
             record and the nature of any  offence  of  which  the  migrant
             concerned has been convicted;

         (ii) compliance with any conditions attached to any previous  grant
             of leave to enter or remain and compliance with any conditions
             of temporary admission or immigration bail where applicable;

         (iii)    length of time spent  in  the  United  Kingdom  spent  for
             reasons beyond the migrant's control after the human rights or
             asylum claim has been submitted or refused;

         in deciding whether there are exceptional circumstances which  mean
         that removal from the United Kingdom is no longer appropriate".

32. The respondent considered the relevant factors and concluded  that  the
    applicant's circumstances were  not  "exceptional"  for  the  following
    reasons:

         "Character, conduct and associations

         Security checks have returned no evidence of  criminality  on  your
         part, however the  absence  of  criminality  is  not  considered  a
         suitable justification for a grant of leave.   There  are  concerns
         with regards to your character arising from your failure to  comply
         with immigration authorities upon arrival, discussed below.

         Compliance

         The majority of your residence  in  the  United  Kingdom  has  been
         accrued with no basis of stay.  You have absconded from immigration
         authorities for some five years having failed  entirely  to  comply
         with the  asylum  process  upon  arrival.   You  failed  to  attend
         interview and to submit your statement of evidence.  You  claim  to
         have remained in the United  Kingdom  and  to  have  established  a
         relationship with your partner since  2008,  but  have  offered  no
         explanation as  to  why  you  chose  not  to  present  yourself  to
         authorities until  2012.   Taken  in  the  round,  your  compliance
         history is considered to weigh heavily against you.




         Length of time in the UK

         You have resided in the United Kingdom for more than  seven  years,
         however as noted above the majority of this time was accrued due to
         your decision to abscond from the Home Office.  Your stay has  been
         further prolonged by an additional year  awaiting  the  outcome  of
         your further submissions, however when considered in  balance  with
         your total length of residence, it is concluded that your  previous
         non-compliance outweighs any  consideration  which  may  have  been
         given to delay on the part of the Home Office beyond your  control.
         Your length of time in the UK  accordingly  carries  little  weight
         when considered in the round.

         Conclusion

         All of the above factors considered in the round  fail  to  present
         any justification for a grant of leave  to  remain  in  the  United
         Kingdom.  You have raised no circumstances  exceptional  enough  to
         overrule the fact that you have accrued the majority of  your  time
         in the United Kingdom illegally".

33. Following the applicant's PAP letter, the  respondent  replied  in  her
    letter of 16 August 2014 as follows:

         "You claim that SSHD has fettered her discretion by failing to give
         adequate consideration to your client's circumstances.   You  claim
         SSHD completely fails to consider  the  application  in  accordance
         with Article 8 ECHR and  established  jurisprudence.   You  further
         claim this error of law makes the decision unlawful and submit that
         it cannot stand.

         You request a review of the decision or alternatively  you  request
         that your client is given a right of appeal.

         It is  considered  that  your  client's  further  submissions  were
         considered in accordance with the law, guidance and  policies  that
         were in place at the time of the decision.  In your client's  case,
         the caseworker has weighed up factors to indicate  whether  removal
         is  appropriate,  incorporating  all  present  policies  and  legal
         requirements  or  conversely,  whether  a   grant   of   leave   is
         appropriate.

         The SSHD submits that the approach outlined by the  Master  of  the
         Rolls in MF (Nigeria) and Sales J in Nagre is consistent  with  the
         approach of considering whether a case meets  the  requirements  of
         the Rules and then  considering  whether  the  case  discloses  any
         exceptional circumstances such as to mean that refusal would result
         in unjustifiably harsh consequences for  the  individual  or  their
         family  such  that  refusal  of  the  application  would   not   be
         proportionate under Article 8.  Article 8 is not an absolute right.
          When considering the impact  of  removal  SSHD  must  balance  the
         Applicant's rights to a private  and  family  life  in  the  United
         Kingdom, against the maintenance of effective immigration  control.
         The case law has established that:

             "[t]he existence or  non-existence  of  family  life  for  the
             purposes of Article  8  is  essentially  a  question  of  fact
             depending on the real existence in practice of close  personal
             ties".

         If the existence of an Article 8 right is established, the case law
         states that contracting states are permitted to interfere with  the
         enjoyment of  that  right  provided  that  certain  conditions  are
         satisfied.  Any assessment of an Article 8 claim must therefore  be
         viewed in light of the United Kingdom's right to control the  entry
         of foreign nationals into its territory and the necessity  of  fair
         and consistent immigration control.

         The result of the consideration and the reason for the  refusal  of
         your client's case were explained in detail in the decision letter.
          It  is  submitted  that  the  decision  gives  complete  and  full
         consideration of your client's circumstances, including that of his
         partner and children.

         It is considered there is no evidence that the appropriate policies
         and guidance in place at the time  of  the  consideration  of  your
         client's  case  were  not  applied  correctly.   Consequently,  the
         decision  to  refuse   your   client's   further   submissions   is
         maintained".

The Grounds

34. The applicant's challenge is focused primarily  upon  the  respondent's
    decision letter of 7 July 2014.   The  detailed  grounds  and  skeleton
    argument prepared by Mr Jowett raise two grounds.

35. Ground 1 concerns the respondent's decision under Art 8.  First, it  is
    argued that the respondent unlawfully applied an "exceptionality" test.
     Secondly, it is argued that the respondent failed properly to consider
    the "best interests" of the applicant's two  children  as  required  by
    s.55 of the Borders, Citizenship and  Immigration  Act  2009  "BCI  Act
    2009").  Thirdly, it is argued that the respondent failed  properly  to
    take into account all relevant  factors  in  assessing  proportionality
    including  the  immigration  status  of  the  applicant's  partner  and
    children, the best interests of the children and the delay in  reaching
    a decision on the applicant's claim.  In addition, it  is  argued  that
    the respondent had failed  to  properly  consider  whether  there  were
    "exceptional circumstances" under para 353B, in particular  by  failing
    to have regard to the best interests of the children.

36. Ground 2 challenges the  respondent's  decision  that  the  applicant's
    claim does not amount  to  a  'fresh  claim'  under  para  353  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  It is argued that  the  respondent's  decision  was
    irrational in concluding that the applicant's claim  had  no  realistic
    prospect of success before a  judge  hearing  an  appeal  and  that  in
    reaching that  conclusion  the  respondent  has  failed  to  apply  the
    required "anxious scrutiny".

Discussion

37. It is well recognised that Statement in Changes in Immigration Rules HC
    194 introduced new provisions into the Immigration  Rules  with  effect
    from 9 July 2012, in para 398, 399 and 399A  in  relation  to  criminal
    deportation cases and in paras 276ADE and Appendix FM  in  other  cases
    that deal with claims under Art 8 based upon an individual's private or
    family life in the UK.  Those Rules provide a more focused analysis  of
    factors considered to be relevant in applying Article 8.  In R  (Nagre)
    v SSHD [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin), Sales J (as he then was) stated at [29]
    that:

         "... the new Rules do  provide  better  explicit  coverage  of  the
         factors identified in case-law as relevant to  analysis  of  claims
         under Article 8 than was formerly the position, so  in  many  cases
         the main points for consideration in relation to Article 8 will  be
         addressed by decision-makers applying the new Rules. It is only if,
         after doing that, there remains an arguable case that there may  be
         good grounds for granting leave to  remain  outside  the  Rules  by
         reference to Article 8 that it will  be  necessary  for  Article  8
         purposes  to  go  on  to  consider  whether  there  are  compelling
         circumstances not sufficiently recognised under the  new  Rules  to
         require the grant of such leave".

    (See also Haleemudeen v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 558 at [40] per Beatson LJ
    - "the Secretary of State's policy...is more particularised in the  new
    Rules than it had previously been".)

38. The decision-maker should adopt a two-stage process.   First,  can  the
    individual succeed under the Rules?  Secondly, if not, can  he  or  she
    succeed outside the Rules under Art 8?  The two-stage approach has been
    approved by the Court of Appeal in  a  number  of  cases  including  MF
    (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 (in the  context  of  deportation
    where the Rules are a "complete code") and  Singh  and  Khalid  v  SSHD
    [2015] EWCA Civ 72 (in the non-deportation context).

39.  There  is  no  "threshold  requirement"  or  "intermediary  test"   of
    arguability before a decision maker must  consider  the  second  stage,
    namely whether the individual, despite not meeting the requirements  of
    the Rules, has a good claim under Art 8 (see MM (Lebanon) v SSHD [2014]
    EWCA Civ 985).  However, the extent of any  consideration  outside  the
    Rules will depend upon whether all  the  issues  have  been  adequately
    addressed under the Rules.  As Underhill  LJ  (with  whom  Lewison  and
    Arden LJJ agreed on this point) noted in the Court of Appeal  in  Singh
    and Khalid (at [64]):

         "there is no need to conduct a full separate examination of  Art  8
         outside the Rules where, in the circumstances of a particular case,
         all the issues have been addressed in the consideration  under  the
         Rules."

40. In Nagre, Sales J said at [30]:

         "... if, after the process of applying the new  Rules  and  finding
         that the claim for leave to remain under them falls,  the  relevant
         official  or  Tribunal  judge  considers  it  is  clear  that   the
         consideration under the Rules has fully addressed any  family  life
         or private life  issues  arising  under  Article  8,  it  would  be
         sufficient simply to say that; they would not have  to  go  on,  in
         addition, to consider the case separately under the Rules".

41. The approach in Nagre has most recently been approved by the  Court  of
    Appeal in SSHD v SS (Congo) and  Others  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387  and  R
    (Agyarko and Others) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 440.

42.  As  Sales  J  noted  (above)  a  claim  outside  the  Rules   required
    consideration of whether there are "compelling circumstances" so as  to
    outweigh the public interest reflected in the fact that  the  applicant
    could not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.  That  latter
    public interest is now, so far as a court  or  tribunal  is  concerned,
    statutorily enshrined in s.117B(1) of the Nationality, Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002.

43. In Huang v SSHD [2010] UKHL 11 the House of Lords recognised that, as a
    general proposition, a claim for leave outside  the  Immigration  Rules
    under Art 8 should not only be granted in "exceptional  cases".   There
    is no "test of exceptionality" in assessing proportionality  under  Art
    8.  Nevertheless the case law acknowledges that  in  carrying  out  the
    balancing exercise under Art 8, where an  individual  cannot  meet  the
    requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules,  the  public  interest  will,
    generally, only be outweighed by the individual circumstances if  there
    are "exceptional" or "compelling" circumstances.  That approach has, in
    a number of cases, been 'glossed' so as to  require  an  individual  to
    establish that the immigration decision would have unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences in order for the public interest to  be  outweighed  (see,
    e.g. Nagre at [42] and  Gulshan  (Article  8  -  new  Rules  -  correct
    approach) [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC)).

44. In SSHD v SS (Congo) and Others, decided  after  the  hearing  in  this
    case, the Court of Appeal  adopted  a  more  nuanced  approach  to  the
    consideration of Art 8 outside the Rules.  The court considered that  a
    test of "exceptionality" ("the most exceptional") or  "very  compelling
    reasons" was applicable in  two  special  contexts,  namely  where  the
    individual family relationship had been established in circumstances of
    known "precariousness" and the deportation of  foreign  criminals.   In
    other cases, involving entry clearance or a claim for leave to  remain,
    an applicant must show that "compelling circumstances" exist.  At [40]-
    [42] Richards LJ, delivering  the  judgment  of  the  Court  (Richards,
    Underhill and Sales LJJ), stated:

         "40  .... In our view, the appropriate general  formulation  [in  a
             claim outside the Rules] is that such cases will  arise  where
             an applicant for LTE [leave to enter] can show that compelling
             circumstances exist (which  are  not  sufficiently  recognised
             under the new Rules) to require the grant of such leave.

         41.  This formulation is aligned to that proposed in Nagre at  [29]
             in relation to the general position  in  respect  of  the  new
             Rules for LTR [leave to remain], which  was  adopted  by  this
             court in Haleemudeen at [44].  It is a fairly demanding  test,
             reflecting  the  reasonable  relationship  between  the  Rules
             themselves and  the  proper  outcome  of  the  application  of
             Article 8 in the usual run of cases.   But,  contrary  to  the
             submission of  Mr  Payne,  it  is  not  as  demanding  as  the
             exceptionality  or  "very  exceptional   circumstances"   test
             applicable in the special contexts explained in  MF  (Nigeria)
             (precariousness of  family  relationship  and  deportation  of
             foreigners convicted of serious crimes).

         42.  In our view, it is a formulation  which  has  the  benefit  of
             simplicity. It avoids  the  need  for  any  excessively  fine-
             grained approach at the level of decision-making by  officials
             and tribunals.  It should thus help to  avoid  confusion  when
             cases arise, as they sometimes do, where  an  application  for
             LTE is made in parallel with an application for LTR ...".

45. I, of course, did not have the benefit of submissions in relation to SS
    (Congo) and Others as the decision  was  reported  after  the  hearing.
    Given that the relationship between  the  applicant  and  QC  began  in
    December 2008 when neither had leave to remain in the UK, there  is  an
    argument that their situation falls within the "precarious" family life
    situation recognised by the Court of Appeal in SS (Congo) and Others as
    requiring the application of a strict "exceptionality" test in order to
    outweigh the public interest.  It may be, however, that  that  approach
    is restricted to  cases  where,  unlike  this  case,  no  children  are
    involved (see [29]).  For that reason, and out of deference to the fact
    that I had not heard submissions on SS  (Congo)  and  Others,  together
    with my conclusion that the applicant cannot succeed on the  basis  put
    by Mr Jowett in his  submissions,  it  is  not  necessary  to  consider
    further the application of the distinction made by the Court of  Appeal
    to the facts of this case.  If the  applicant  cannot  succeed  on  the
    basis of Mr Jowett's submissions, a fortiori he could  not  succeed  on
    the more onerous test ("exceptionality")  and  approach  identified  in
    SS(Congo) and Others.

    Ground 1: "exceptionality" test

46. With that in mind, I turn to the first issue raised  by  Mr  Jowett  in
    Ground 1,  namely  that  the  respondent  wrongly  applied  a  test  of
    exceptionality in refusing the applicant leave outside the Rules  under
    Art 8.

47. In support of his submissions Mr Jowett did not criticise the Secretary
    of State's use of the phrase "exceptional circumstances".  However,  he
    submitted that  she  had  unlawfully  applied  a  substantive  test  of
    "exceptionality" when she had stated that the children's  circumstances
    were not "considered exceptional so as to warrant a  grant  of  leave".
    Likewise, he relied upon the respondent's statement that the  children,
    aged 3 and 4, could not be  said  to  have  established  "exceptionally
    significant cultural ties" to the UK.  Mr  Jowett  submitted  that  the
    respondent  had,  contrary  to  Huang,  wrongly  applied  a   test   of
    "exceptionality" both in assessing the children's best interests and in
    determining the proportionality issue under Art 8.  He  submitted  that
    at no point had the Secretary of State properly considered whether  the
    consequences to the applicant and his family were "unjustifiably harsh"
    such that the refusal would not be proportionate.

48. I do not accept Mr Jowett's submissions on this point.  In my judgment,
    the respondent did not unlawfully apply an exceptionality test.

49. First, and I will return to this point as a recurring theme in relation
    to the points raised by Mr Jowett in his submissions, the  respondent's
    decision letter must be fairly read as a whole.   Whilst  the  decision
    letter may not be a model of structural clarity, it is clear  that  the
    respondent when first considering the  applicant's  claim  outside  the
    Rules considered whether  there  were  "exceptional  circumstances"  to
    justify the grant of leave.  As I understood Mr Jowett's submissions he
    did not take issue with that formulation.   He  was,  in  my  judgment,
    right not to do so.  It is a formulation  accepted  by  the  courts  as
    consistent with the respondent's lawful consideration  of  whether  the
    public interest is outweighed by  an  individual's  circumstances  when
    they are unable to meet the requirements of the Rules (see, e.g., Nagre
    at [14]).  In my judgment, reading the respondent's decision letter  as
    a whole there is no reason to think that the respondent's reference  to
    "exceptional" or "exceptionally" in the  instances  highlighted  by  Mr
    Jowett were other than a shorthand for considering whether  there  were
    "exceptional circumstances" as properly understood as being required to
    outweigh the public interest.

50. Secondly, it is clear that the respondent applied the well-known  five-
    stage test in R (Razgar) v SSHD [2004]  UKHL  27  and,  in  particular,
    considered the issue of  proportionality  when  stating:  "below  is  a
    consideration  of  why  any  interference  is  proportionate   to   the
    permissible  aim".   Likewise,  the  respondent's  reference   to   the
    applicant's removal being "entirely proportional"  is  also  clearly  a
    reference to the central issue under Art 8.2 of proportionality.

51. Thirdly, Mr Jowett's reliance upon the absence of a  self-direction  by
    the respondent in terms of whether the consequences  to  the  applicant
    and his family would be "unjustifiably harsh" does not  establish  that
    the decision was unlawful.  Reading the decision letter as a whole,  it
    is plain that the Secretary of State looked to factors relevant to  the
    applicant and his family to weigh against the public interest.  Leaving
    aside Mr Jowett's submission, to which I will return  below,  that  the
    respondent did not carry out that assessment lawfully, there can be  no
    doubt that she did actually carry  out  an  assessment.   There  is  no
    reason to conclude that the respondent failed to do so.

52. In any event, in her letter of 16 August 2014, which is also challenged
    in these proceedings,  the  respondent  specifically  stated  that  the
    applicant's case did not disclose:

         "any exceptional circumstances such as to mean that  refusal  would
         result in unjustifiably harsh consequences for  the  individual  or
         their family such that refusal of  the  application  would  not  be
         proportionate under Article 8".

53. Although that letter  post-dated  the  first  decision,  it  is  itself
    challenged in these proceedings, and plainly identifies in my  judgment
    that  the  respondent  was  well  aware  of  the  need  to  assess  the
    applicant's circumstances against an appropriate yard-stick  sufficient
    to outweigh the public interest.

54. The respondent's letter also goes on to state that the decision was  in
    accordance with the "appropriate policies and guidance" relevant to the
    applicant's claim.  In some detail, Mr Jowett placed some reliance upon
    the respondent applying  an  irrelevant  part  of  her  guidance  (IDI,
    "Family Members under the Immigration Rules", Section FM  1.0,  Partner
    and ECHR Article 8 Guidance" (October 2013)  by  reference  to  section
    3.2.7c rather than 3.2.8.  The former, he submitted,  was  relevant  to
    whether  there  were   "insurmountable   obstacles"   relevant   to   a
    consideration under the Rules whilst the latter was directly  concerned
    with "exceptional circumstances" outside the Rules under Art 8.  Whilst
    Mr Jowett's submission is correct to the extent that section 3.2.7c  is
    not the relevant part of the guidance concerned with Art 8,  the  point
    takes Mr Jowett nowhere.  The Secretary of State made no  reference  to
    section 3.2.7c in either of her decision letters.  The reference to  it
    is found in the "detailed grounds of defence" (at para 45)  drafted  by
    Ms Bayoumi.  As  I  understood  Ms  Bayoumi  in  her  submissions,  she
    accepted that she  had  wrongly  referred  to  section  3.2.7c  in  the
    respondent's  grounds.   Nothing  in  either  decision  letter,  in  my
    judgment,  demonstrates  that  the  respondent  unlawfully  applied  an
    irrelevant part of her policy or that she did  not  have  in  mind  the
    relevant "exceptional circumstances" guidance in  section  3.2.8  which
    the Administrative Court in Nagre (at [14]) acknowledged  lawfully  set
    out the approach to "exceptional circumstances" to justify a  grant  of
    leave  outside  of  the  Rules  on  the  basis  that  there  would   be
    "unjustifiably harsh consequences".  As the Court  of  Appeal  recently
    accepted  in  SS  (Congo)  and  Others  (at  [49]),  the   "exceptional
    circumstances" guidance in the respondent's IDIs is given:

         "a wide meaning in the context of the  instructions,  covering  any
         case in which on proper analysis under  Article  8  at  the  second
         stage it would be disproportionate to refuse leave".

55. In rejecting Mr Jowett's submissions, I  note  that  similar  arguments
    were put to, and rejected by, the Upper Tribunal in  R  (Chen)  v  SSHD
    [2015] UKUT 00189 (IAC).  At [30], UTJ Gill rejected a submission  made
    in  that  case  that  the  respondent   had   unlawfully   applied   an
    "exceptionality test".  The judge said this:

         "30. ....

             i)   The mere fact that the word "exceptional"  is  used  does
                  not mean that the test of exceptionality is being  applied
                  contrary to the guidance of the House of Lords in Huang  v
                  Secretary of State for the Home Department [2007] UKHL 11.
                   In MF (Nigeria), the Court of Appeal accepted  (at  paras
                  40 and 41)  the  submission  advanced  on  behalf  of  the
                  Secretary of State that the phrase "it  will  only  be  in
                  exceptional circumstances  that  the  public  interest  in
                  deportation will be outweighed by other factors"  in  para
                  398,  which  applies  in  deportation  cases,  served  the
                  purpose of emphasising that, in  the  balancing  exercise,
                  great weight should be given to  the  public  interest  in
                  deporting foreign criminals who do not satisfy  paras  398
                  and 399 or 399A.  At para 42 of MF (Nigeria),  the  Master
                  of the Rolls said, in effect, that the use of  the  phrase
                  "exceptional circumstances" does not necessarily mean that
                  a  test  of  exceptionality   is   being   applied.    The
                  explanation given at  para  42  of  MF  (Nigeria)  was  as
                  follows:

                      "...it  is  only  in  "exceptional"  or   "the   most
                      exceptional circumstances" that removal of  the  non-
                      national family member will constitute a violation of
                      article 8.  In our view, that is not to  say  that  a
                      test of exceptionality is being applied.   Rather  it
                      is that,  in  approaching  the  question  of  whether
                      removal  is  a  proportionate  interference  with  an
                      individual's article 8 rights, the scales are heavily
                      weighted in favour of deportation and something  very
                      compelling (which will be "exceptional") is  required
                      to outweigh the public interest in removal.   In  our
                      view,  it  is  no   coincidence   that   the   phrase
                      "exceptional circumstances" is used in the new  rules
                      in the context of weighing the competing factors  for
                      and against deportation of foreign criminals".

             ii)  Although MF (Nigeria) was a deportation case, there is no
                  reason to think that the use of the word "exceptional"  or
                  the phrase "exceptional circumstances" outside the IRs  in
                  non-deportation   cases   means   that   the    test    of
                  exceptionality  is  being  applied  contrary   to   Huang,
                  especially given that:

                  a)   Strasbourg case-law indicates that, where family life
                      is established when the  immigration  status  of  the
                      claimant   is    precarious,    removal    will    be
                      disproportionate only in "exceptional  cases"  (Nagre
                      at (41)); and

                  b)   the guidance applied by the case-workers in assessing
                      Article   8   claims   outside   the   IRs    defines
                      "exceptional" as follows (Nagre at para 14):

                           ""Exceptional"  does  not   mean   "unusual"   or
                           "unique".  Whilst all cases are  to  some  extent
                           unique, those unique  factors  do  not  generally
                           render them exceptional.  For example, a case  is
                           not exceptional just because the criteria set out
                           in EX.1 of Appendix FM  have  been  missed  by  a
                           small  margin.   Instead,   "exceptional"   means
                           circumstances in which refusal  would  result  in
                           unjustifiably   harsh   consequences   for    the
                           individual such that refusal of  the  application
                           would not be proportionate.  That is likely to be
                           the case only very rarely".

             At para 14 of Nagre, Sales J accepted that the  definition  of
             "exceptional circumstances" which is  given  in  the  guidance
             equates such  circumstances  with  there  being  unjustifiable
             hardship  involved  in  removal  such   that   it   would   be
             disproportionate - i.e. would involve a breach of Article 8.

         31.  Yet, I regularly encounter objections by applicants to the use
             of  the  word  "exceptional"  or   the   phrase   "exceptional
             circumstances"  by  decision-makers  in  assessing  Article  8
             claims outside the IRs on the ground that it  shows  that  the
             respondent has unlawfully applied the test  of  exceptionality
             contrary to Huang.  The mere  use  of  these  phrases  is  not
             enough to show that the test of exceptionality is  being  used
             contrary to Huang.  An applicant must  point  to  a  defective
             process  of  reasoning   that   shows   that   the   test   of
             exceptionality was in fact applied.

         32.  In the instant case, the decision-maker plainly considered the
             question of proportionality.  This is evident  not  only  from
             the fact that the words "proportionate" and "disproportionate"
             were used a total of three times in the second decision letter
             in the assessment of the Article 8 claim outside the  IRs  and
             once in the "Summary" at the end but also from  the  reasoning
             (see the words in bold in the quote at my para 8 above)  which
             shows that the decision-maker  looked  for  factors  to  weigh
             against the state's interests".

    I entirely agree with that reasoning which  is  in  line  with  my  own
    expressed above.   The  respondent  plainly  considered  the  issue  of
    proportionality  and,  subject  to  Mr   Jowett's   submission   below,
    considered the individual circumstances of the members of  the  family.
    For these reasons, I reject Mr Jowett's submission that the  respondent
    unlawfully applied a test of "exceptionality".

     Ground 1: the children's 'best interests'

56.  Mr  Jowett  submitted  that  the  respondent's  consideration  of  the
    children's best interests was unlawful.  He put this point in two ways.



57. First, looking at the decision letter, Mr  Jowett  submitted  that  the
    respondent had failed to reach a conclusion on whether removal  was  in
    their best interests.  He relied upon the  respondent's  words  in  the
    decision letter when dealing with s.55 of the 2009 Act that:

         "it is not considered that  remaining  in  the  United  Kingdom  is
         necessarily in the best interests of the children ...".

58. Mr Jowett submitted that the respondent's failure to reach a finding on
    the children's "best interests" remained  equivocal  even  though  when
    considering the applicant's claim as  a  parent  under  the  Rules  the
    respondent had stated that:

         "it would be in the best interests of your children to return  with
         you to your country of origin where you can enjoy family life as  a
         unit".

    He submitted that that passage did not form part  of  the  respondent's
    reasoning when she subsequently considered Art 8.

59. In my judgment, Mr Jowett's approach  demands  that  one  part  of  the
    respondent's decision letter should be read in isolation from  another,
    rather than reading the letter as a whole.  That, in my judgment, is  a
    wholly impermissible approach.  Whilst, as I  have  already  commented,
    the letter may not be the model of structural clarity, it is plain that
    the respondent was well aware of her obligation under s.55 of the  2009
    Act (to which she makes specific reference)  to  "first  consider  [the
    best interests of  your  two  children]".   The  respondent  also  made
    reference to,  and  cited  from  the  judgment  of  Lady  Hale  in,  ZH
    (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4.  That is  done  under  the  rubric  of
    "exceptional circumstances" and a consideration of Art 8, albeit  prior
    to the section applying the five-stage Razgar test.  It is  clear  from
    the respondent's statement, albeit when considering the "parent" Rules,
    that she concluded it:

         "would be in the best interests of your children to return with you
         to your country of origin where you can  enjoy  family  life  as  a
         family unit".

60. The part relied upon by Mr Jowett must be read in the  context  of  the
    letter as a whole.  Read in that way, despite the apparently  equivocal
    nature of the subsequent wording ("not considered that remaining in the
    UK is necessarily in  the  best  interests  of  the  children"),  I  am
    satisfied that the respondent approached the applicant's claim  on  the
    basis that it would be in the children's best interests  to  return  to
    China with the applicant and their mother.  Consequently, I reject that
    aspect of Ground 1 relied upon by Mr Jowett.

61. Secondly, Mr Jowett submitted that the respondent had  failed  to  take
    into account all relevant matters  in  assessing  the  children's  best
    interests.  He relied on a number of matters.

62. He drew attention to the fact that the children had never  lived  other
    than in the UK and that both they and their  mother  had  discretionary
    leave until July 2015, which they would be entitled to apply to extend.
     It is simply untenable to suggest that the  respondent  did  not  take
    into account that the applicant's children had lived in  the  UK  since
    they were born.  Again, the decision letter must fairly be  read  as  a
    whole and in considering the  applicant's  claim  as  a  "parent",  the
    respondent notes that: "your children were born in the  United  Kingdom
    in 2010 and 2011".  There has never been any suggestion that they  have
    left the UK.  Equally, the  respondent  made  reference  to  the  fact,
    albeit when considering the applicant's claim under the "partner" Rule,
    to the fact that his partner: "has been granted discretionary leave  to
    expire in July 2015". It simply defies common sense  to  conclude  that
    the respondent was also not fully aware that the applicant's  children,
    aged 4 and 3, had leave in line with their mother.   In  addition,  the
    respondent was no doubt factually aware, as it  was  patently  obvious,
    that both the applicant's partner  and  his  children  could  apply  to
    extend their discretionary leave in the future.

63. Mr Jowett submitted that the  respondent's  decision  was,  in  effect,
    contrary to the one taken by the Secretary of  State  in  granting  the
    applicant's partner and children discretionary leave  in  2013.   There
    was no inconsistency necessarily in the  respondent's  conclusion  that
    the children's "best interests" lay with their mother and father if the
    applicant returned to China and the  decision  taken  in  2013,  having
    regard to their interests, that they and their mother should be granted
    discretionary leave.  The record of that grant is at pages 45-47 of the
    trial bundle.  It is clear that the decision was taken under para  353B
    of the Immigration Rules on the basis of  "exceptional  circumstances".
    Amongst the factors  considered  was  the  fact  that  the  applicant's
    partner had been living in the UK for at least three years and that the
    children had lived  their  entire  lives  in  the  UK.   But,  somewhat
    curiously, it is also noted:

         "it is not believed the family have any extended family in the  UK,
         although the children's father/father's status is not known".

64. That would appear to record that, in making her application for  leave,
    the applicant's partner did not identify the applicant as their  father
    or indicate his status.  The grant of  leave  was,  therefore,  on  the
    basis that the applicant's partner was a single woman looking after two
    young children in the UK.  At the hearing, I asked Mr Jowett whether he
    could assist me in relation to this matter but he indicated that he had
    no instructions.  The applicant's claim has always been that he and  QC
    formed their relationship in 2008 and it has been continuous thereafter
    including at the time that  QC  made  her  successful  application  for
    discretionary leave.  Given the  premise  upon  which  that  leave  was
    granted to both the applicant's partner and children, there is  nothing
    necessarily inconsistent in the respondent, now being aware of the full
    facts, concluding that the  children's  best  interests  lie  with  the
    family unit of the applicant and his partner if he returns to China.

65. Mr Jowett submitted that the respondent had been  wrong  to  take  into
    account the issue of whether the children's parents  could  reintegrate
    into China which was irrelevant to their best interests,  and  also  in
    taking into  account  that  they  had  not  established  "exceptionally
    significant cultural ties" to the UK.  I do not accept that submission.
     It was relevant to consider whether their  parents  could  reintegrate
    into life  in  China.   The  circumstances  of  the  parents  in  China
    potentially impacted upon the children and their interests.  Apart from
    the time that both parents had been in the UK, there  was  no  evidence
    concerning any difficulty they might have in reintegrating.  Also,  the
    children  were  4  and  3  years  old  respectively,  it  was  entirely
    reasonable for the respondent to conclude that their focus  was  likely
    to be, in effect, on their family (parents) rather than  externally  as
    they developed social ties with others  through,  for  example,  school
    (see, e.g., E-A (Article 8 - best interests of  child)  Nigeria  [2011]
    UKUT 00315 (IAC)). Whether looking for "exceptional" or any  ties  with
    the UK, the evidence was simply not there to suggest they existed.

66. Ms Bayoumi drew my attention to the Upper Tribunal's decision in JO and
    Others (Section 55 duty) Nigeria [2014]  UKUT  00517  (IAC)  which  she
    submitted  demonstrates   that  a  decision  maker  applying  s.55  was
    entitled  to  reach  a  conclusion  on  a  child's  best  interests  by
    considering the material in the application  for  leave  or  submission
    made to the Secretary of State.   Whilst  the  Tribunal  was  primarily
    concerned with the "tools available to  the  court  or  Tribunal",  the
    point made by Ms Bayoumi is, in my judgment, as a  generality,  equally
    true of the Secretary of State.  There may be  circumstances,  however,
    where the  Secretary  of  State's  duty  under  s.55  requires  further
    enquiry.  Mr Jowett did not submit that the respondent was required  to
    make further enquiry so as to consider material  not  contained  within
    the application or submissions.  Ms Bayoumi submitted  that  the  plain
    fact in this case  was  that  there  was  little  material  before  the
    respondent relevant to the children's best interests.   In  particular,
    the applicant had not provided the Secretary of State with any material
    concerning the impact upon the children of leaving the UK and returning
    to China with their parents.  That, in my view,  is  entirely  correct.
    All that the  Secretary  of  State  knew  was,  in  essence,  that  the
    applicant and his partner had two children who had been born and  lived
    in the UK and were aged 4 and 3.  They were Chinese nationals  and  had
    been brought up by a couple  who  were  themselves  Chinese  nationals.
    This was not a case where the children had lived, e.g., at least  seven
    years in the UK and had established social ties through education, etc.
       It was entirely reasonable for the Secretary of  State  to  consider
    the children's position on return to China despite the fact  that  they
    and their mother had discretionary leave to remain in the UK.  That did
    not mean that they could not return to China.   Neither  the  applicant
    nor the applicant's partner were entitled to international  protection.
    Whilst the applicant's partner and children could remain in the UK,  if
    they did so despite the  applicant  being  removed,  that  would  be  a
    personal choice of the applicant and the  applicant's  partner.   There
    were no obstacles, let alone "insurmountable" obstacles, to the  family
    as a unit returning to China.  Given the ages of the two  children  and
    the total absence of any evidence of any deleterious impact  upon  them
    of returning to China with their parents, in my judgment, the Secretary
    of State was properly entitled to conclude rationally that  it  was  in
    their "best interests" to do so.

    Ground 1: 'proportionality'

67. I turn now to Mr Jowett's submissions which challenge the  respondent's
    assessment of "proportionality" under Art 8.

68. Mr Jowett submitted that the  respondent  had  failed  to  give  proper
    consideration  to  the   children's   best   interests   in   assessing
    proportionality.  That submission, in my judgment, added nothing to the
    points raised by Mr Jowett and with which I have  already  dealt.   The
    respondent properly directed herself in accordance  with  s.55  and  ZH
    (Tanzania) and was  entitled  as  a  matter  of  law  to  come  to  the
    conclusion that the children's best interests lay with their parents in
    China if the applicant was removed.  It was, as I have already  pointed
    out, entirely reasonable for the respondent to conclude  that,  despite
    the applicant's partner and children having  discretionary  leave,  for
    them to accompany the applicant to China where, given  the  paucity  of
    evidence, it had not been established that the family as a whole  would
    be unable to reintegrate into China.

69. Secondly, Mr Jowett submitted that the respondent's decision was wholly
    inconsistent with that of the grant  of  discretionary  leave  for  the
    applicant's partner and their children and failed to take into  account
    that they were entitled to apply for further leave in the future.  As I
    have already pointed out, the  grant  of  discretionary  leave  to  the
    applicant's partner and children was based upon her being a lone mother
    with two children.  Here, the respondent was considering a family  unit
    including two parents whom it was reasonable to expect could return  as
    a whole to China if the applicant was  removed.   Those  are  different
    circumstances from those considered by the respondent when granting the
    applicant's partner and children leave in 2013.  However, of course, in
    assessing the applicant's claim, his immigration history was unique  to
    him including that he had absconded between 2007  and  2012  which  the
    respondent  was  entitled   to   take   into   account   in   assessing
    proportionality.

70. Further, the respondent's decision was not unbalanced.  In my judgment,
    the respondent did not unlawfully focus on factors militating against a
    grant of leave to the applicant.  The respondent took into account  the
    positive factors in favour of the  applicant  which  in  large  measure
    amounted to little more than a period of residence of  seven  years  in
    the UK and the fact that he had a partner and two young children in the
    UK, the latter being his dependants and in respect of  whom  he  played
    "an active role in  their  upbringing"  on  a  day-to-day  basis.   The
    respondent clearly took into account the applicant's parental role.

71. Thirdly, Mr Jowett submitted that the respondent  had  failed  to  take
    into account  that  the  respondent  had  delayed  in  considering  the
    applicant's further submissions sent on 10  April  2013  until  7  July
    2014.  Mr Jowett submitted that this delay of over a year  was  a  very
    substantial proportion of the children's lives and the  respondent  had
    failed to take that into account.

72. Ms Bayoumi accepted that the respondent's decision  had  taken  over  a
    year but she submitted that this was not the type of delay envisaged by
    the House of Lords in EB (Kosovo) v SSHD [2008]  UKHL  41  which  would
    weigh in favour of a grant of leave.  I accept that  submission.   Lord
    Bingham of Cornhill dealt with the relevance of delay at  [13]-[16]  of
    EB (Kosovo).  He considered that delay might be relevant in three ways.
     First, it might assist to demonstrate that an applicant had during the
    period of delay developed closer  personal  and  social  ties  and  had
    established  deeper  roots  in  the  community.   To  that  extent,  an
    applicant's claim  under  Art  8  would  necessarily  be  strengthened.
    Secondly, delay might be relevant if it was  of  sufficient  length  to
    remove  or  displace  an  individual's  "precarious  situation"  if  an
    expectation arose that the authorities did not  intend  to  remove  the
    applicant.  Thirdly, delay could be relevant in reducing the weight  to
    otherwise be accorded to the requirements of firm and fair  immigration
    control if the delay was shown to result from  a  dysfunctional  system
    which yielded "unpredictable, inconsistent and unfair outcomes".

73. Mr Jowett submitted that any sense of impermanence in  the  applicant's
    relationship with his partner and  with  his  children  faded  and  the
    expectation grew that the respondent  did  not  intend  to  reject  the
    application.    Mr   Jowett   pointed   out   that   the    applicant's
    representatives had sent a chasing letter on 18 February 2014 and there
    had  been  contact  between  the  applicant's  MP  and  the  respondent
    resulting in a response by the respondent on 28 March 2014.  Mr  Jowett
    quite rightly did not rely upon the third basis upon which delay  could
    be relevant set out in Lord Bingham's judgment that it  demonstrated  a
    "dysfunctional system".  There is no evidence in this case which  could
    conceivably engage that aspect of Lord Bingham's reasoning.

74. As regards the other two aspects of delay identified by  Lord  Bingham,
    the respondent plainly had in mind that over the course of  the  period
    April 2013 to July 2014 that the applicant's children had  become  that
    much older.  They remained, however,  young  children  aged  4  and  3.
    There was no evidence that they had developed any particular social  or
    cultural ties in the UK outside of their family  unit.   Likewise,  the
    delay of just over a year could not, in my judgment, amount to  such  a
    significant factor, in all the circumstances of the  applicant's  case,
    so as to create an "expectation" that he was to  be  granted  leave  to
    remain.  The applicant had been in the UK since 2007 and had never  had
    leave to remain.  He had absconded between  2008  and  2012  and  I  am
    wholly unpersuaded that the "delay" in determining his application  for
    leave was, or is, a significant factor in assessing the proportionality
    of the respondent's decision.

75. Despite the detailed forensic dissection undertaken by Mr Jowett in his
    written and oral submissions of the respondent's decision, I am  wholly
    unpersuaded that the decision to refuse leave under Art 8  read  fairly
    and as a whole was unlawful.   The  reality  is  that  the  applicant's
    circumstances in large measure, if not as  a  whole,  fell  within  the
    rubric of, and were dealt with by, the  Immigration  Rules  themselves.
    It is not suggested that the applicant met the requirements of  any  of
    the Rules.  The applicant's claim under Art  8  was,  in  my  judgment,
    weak.  In my judgment the respondent properly reached her  decision  to
    refuse the applicant leave outside the Rules  under  Art  8.   For  the
    reasons I have given, that decision was  not  irrational  or  otherwise
    unlawful.

    Ground 1: paragraph 353B

76. The final point raised by  Mr  Jowett  under  Ground  1  concerned  the
    respondent's decision in her letter of  7  July  2014  that  para  353B
    dealing with "exceptional circumstances" did not lead to the conclusion
    that the applicant's removal was no longer appropriate.

77. In his oral submissions, Mr Jowett was content to rely upon paras 37-39
    of his skeleton  argument.   Those  brief  paragraphs  argue  that  the
    respondent failed properly, or at all, to consider the children's "best
    interests" and reliance is placed upon the points raised in relation to
    Art 8 of the ECHR.

78. I have set out above the respondent's  decision  in  relation  to  para
    353B.  The respondent considered the  applicant's  circumstances  under
    the headings "Character, conduct and  associations",  "Compliance"  and
    "Length of time in the UK".  The respondent then concluded  that  there
    are "no exceptional circumstances" sufficient to overrule the fact that
    the applicant has spent the majority of his time in the UK illegally.

79. Para 353B was considered by the Court of Appeal in Qongwane and  Others
    v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 957.   In  his  leading  judgment,  Sir  Stanley
    Burnton noted at [24] that:

         "the discretion is a safety valve, pursuant to which the  Secretary
         of State may refrain from removing but only in such  circumstances,
         which will necessarily be rare".

80. Then at [32] Sir Stanley Burnton observed that:

         "In any event the factors referred to in that paragraph are  likely
         to have been considered in the rejection of the  Article  8  claim.
         It will be unnecessary for the decision maker  to  refer  to  those
         factors  again,  other  than  the  statement  that  there  are   no
         exceptional circumstances justifying a decision that removal is not
         appropriate".

81. The truncated course approved by Sir Stanley Burnton was  not  followed
    by the Secretary  of  State  in  her  decision  letter.   Instead,  the
    Secretary of State considered in  full  the  applicant's  circumstances
    under the rubric set out in para 353B(i)-(iii).  In  truth,  there  was
    nothing raised by the applicant relevant to para 353B which had already
    not been considered by the Secretary of State  in  considering  whether
    there were "exceptional circumstances" to justify the  grant  of  leave
    outside the Rules under Art 8.  There  was,  in  my  judgment,  nothing
    which could invoke the "safety valve" of  para  353B.   Certainly,  the
    children's best interests could not - even if the  respondent  had  not
    taken those into account, and I simply do not accept that  reading  the
    letter  as  a  whole  that  was  the  case  -  amount  to  "exceptional
    circumstances" given the respondent's entirely  justifiable  conclusion
    that their best interests were served as remaining  as  a  family  unit
    with their parents if the applicant was removed.  It may well  be  that
    the brevity of Mr  Jowett's  submissions  on  this  point  reflect  the
    reality that any challenge to the respondent's decision  restricted  to
    para 353B is without hope of success.

    Ground 2

82. That leaves Ground 2 which challenges the respondent's conclusion  that
    the applicant's claim was not a 'fresh claim' under  para  353  of  the
    Rules.  Para 353 provides as follows:

         "When a human rights or asylum claim has been refused or  withdrawn
         or treated as withdrawn under paragraph 333C of these Rules and any
         appeal relating to that claim is no longer  pending,  the  decision
         maker will consider any further submissions and, if rejected,  will
         then  determine  whether  they  amount  to  a  fresh  claim.    The
         submissions will amount to a fresh claim if they are  significantly
         different from the material that has  previously  been  considered.
         The  submissions  will  only  be  significantly  different  if  the
         content:

         (i)  had not already been considered; and

         (ii)  taken  together  with  the  previously  considered  material,
             created a realistic prospect of success,  notwithstanding  its
             rejection.

         This paragraph does not apply to claims made overseas".

83. The relevant law was not a matter of dispute before me.  It is set  out
    in a number of decisions of the Court of Appeal, in particular WM (DRC)
    v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1495 and R (YH) v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 116.

84. Further submissions will amount to a 'fresh claim' if:

        a. their content has not yet been considered; and

        b. taken together with the  previously  considered  material,  they
           create a realistic prospect of  success  before  an  Immigration
           Judge on appeal.

85. A decision is challengeable only on public  law  grounds.   First,  the
    Secretary of State  must  ask  herself  the  correct  question,  namely
    whether the claim had a "realistic  prospect  of  success"  on  appeal.
    That test is a "modest" one  requiring  only  more  than  a  'fanciful'
    prospect of success.  Secondly, in reaching a decision the Secretary of
    State must  apply  "anxious  scrutiny"  taking  into  account  all  the
    relevant material and demonstrating that she has done so.  Thirdly, the
    court's role is one of "review" and the legality  of  the  decision  is
    based upon public law principles, in particular whether  the  Secretary
    of State could rationally come to the conclusion that she did.

86. In this  case,  there  is  no  dispute  that  the  applicant's  further
    submissions had not previously been considered.  The challenge here  is
    to the respondent's decision at the second stage, namely that the claim
    had no realistic prospect of success before an Immigration Judge.

87. Mr Jowett, in his written and oral submissions, did not argue that  the
    respondent had failed to  apply  the  correct  "realistic  prospect  of
    success" test.  At the  hearing,  I  raised  in  argument  whether  the
    respondent had, in fact, done so by asking the question  whether  there
    was "a realistic prospect of success" that  a  judge  applying  anxious
    scrutiny "would decide" in the applicant's favour.  On reflection, I am
    satisfied that the phrase "would decide" in the applicant's favour does
    not demonstrate that the respondent applied too high a  standard.   The
    crucial phrase, identifying the correct test, used by  the  respondent,
    was whether there was a "realistic prospect of success".   The  use  of
    the phrase "would decide"  is  no  more  than  a  reflection  that  the
    respondent was considering a hypothetical future judge and his  or  her
    decision.   The  phrase  "realistic  prospect  of  success"   correctly
    identified that the Secretary of  State  need  only  conclude  that  an
    appeal "might" succeed.  That is  the  "modest"  test  which  para  353
    requires the Secretary of State to address.

88. Mr Jowett submitted that the brief reasons given by the  respondent  in
    her decision letter demonstrated that  she  had  not  applied  "anxious
    scrutiny" in reaching her decision and further this  was  not  a  claim
    where the Secretary of State was entitled to conclude  that  there  was
    "only one right answer to a  proportionality  assessment".   Mr  Jowett
    also relied upon each of his submissions challenging  the  respondent's
    decision to refuse leave outside the Rules.  I will  not  repeat  those
    submissions here other than to state that I have  rejected  them  above
    and for those reasons  they  cannot  establish  that  the  respondent's
    decision under para 353 was unlawful.

89. Although the respondent's reasoning is brief in respect of para 353, it
    is in my judgment adequate in law.  It has to be read in the context of
    the decision letter as a whole  which  rejects  the  applicant's  claim
    under Art 8.  In reaching her conclusion under para  353,  just  as  Mr
    Jowett sought to import his challenge to the substantive decision under
    Art 8 in his submission about para  353,  so  the  Secretary  of  State
    should properly be considered to have had  in  mind  her  reasoning  in
    relation to the  substantive  decision  under  Art  8.   That  decision
    entails a proper consideration of  all  the  factors  relevant  to  the
    applicant's Art 8 claim.  As I have already indicated, that  claim  was
    weak.  In my judgment, given  the  paucity  of  evidence  and  all  the
    circumstances of the  applicant  and  his  family,  his  claim  had  no
    realistic prospect of success before an Immigration  Judge  on  appeal.
    More  importantly,  I  am  wholly  unpersuaded  that  the  respondent's
    decision that the claim  had  no  realistic  prospect  of  success  was
    irrational or otherwise unlawful on public law principles.   The  brief
    reasons must be taken in the context of the decision's detailed reasons
    as a whole and, read as a whole, I am satisfied that the respondent did
    give "anxious scrutiny" by considering  all  the  relevant  factors  in
    reaching her decision under para 353.

90. For these reasons, I reject Ground 2 relied upon by the applicant.

Decision

91. For all the above reasons, the respondent's decisions of  7  July  2014
    and 12 August 2014 affirming the earlier  decision  were  lawful.   The
    claim is, accordingly, dismissed.



                                                                      Signed

                                                                       [pic]

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal


