
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Badewa (ss 117A-D and EEA Regulations) [2015] UKUT 00329 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 February 2015                           |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                    THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE THIRLWALL
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY

                                   Between

                         Mr Adedamola Daniel Badewa
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Mak, Solicitor, MKM Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer

The correct approach to  be  applied  by  tribunal  judges  in  relation  to
ss.117A-D of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum 2002  (as  amended)  in
the context of EEA removal decisions is:

     i)  first  to  decide  if  a  person  satisfies  requirements  of  the
        Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006.  In  this
        context ss.117A-D has no application;
    ii) second where a person has raised Article 8 as a ground  of  appeal,
        ss.117A-D applies.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellant, born in November 1995,  is  a  national  of  Nigeria.   He
brings an appeal  against  a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (FtT)
comprising Judge Gillespie and NLM Winstanley.  On 10 December 2014 the  FtT
dismissed the appellant's appeal against  a  decision  dated  24  June  2014
expressed  as  a  deportation  order  against  him  pursuant  to  regulation
19(3)(b) of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006
(hereafter "the 2006 EEA Regulations").

2. The appellant came to the UK in May 2009 in the company  of  his  younger
brother on an EEA family permit to join their mother and stepfather.   Their
stepfather was a Portuguese national.  On 1 December 2011 the appellant  was
issued with a residence card as the family member of an EEA  national  valid
until 1 December 2016.  The appellant's criminal history began  in  November
2012 when he was arrested for  robbery.   For  this  he  was  convicted  and
placed on a twelve month referral order.  On 6 July 2013  he  was  convicted
of two counts of robbery and one of  possession  of  a  knife  in  a  public
place.  For these offences he was sentenced to 24 months'  detention  and  a
training  order.   Whilst  in  detention  he  has  received  a   number   of
adjudications for violence.

3. The FtT heard  evidence  from  the  appellant,  his  mother  and  younger
brother.  The  FtT  found  that  all  three  were  unreliable  witnesses  in
relation to his family circumstances in  Nigeria  which  adversely  affected
their credibility generally.  The FtT did not  accept  that  his  father  in
Nigeria had abandoned him.  It considered  that  the  appellant's  equivocal
attitude to his past offending cast doubt on the extent of  his  willingness
to accept responsibility for his wrongdoing.   It  found  that  he  had  not
settled into  home  life  in  the  UK  and  had  fallen  into  a  delinquent
lifestyle.   The  FtT  highlighted  that  despite  being  given  significant
opportunities to overcome difficulties at home,  in  the  form  of  separate
accommodation, an allowance, school  and  college  placements,  he  had  re-
offended  and  continued  his  resort  to  violence  in  a  Young  Offenders
Institute.

4. The  FtT  stated  that  it  was  required  to  decide  the  appeal  under
regulation 19(3) of the 2006 EEA  Regulations  in  respect  of  whether  his
deportation was on grounds of public policy or  public  security.   It  then
recited the principles set out in regulations 21(2),  21(5)  and  21(6).  It
will assist if before proceeding  further  we  set  out  the  provisions  of
regulation 19(3)-(5) and regulation 21(1)-(6) respectively:

      "19. ...

        (3) Subject to paragraphs (4) and (5),  an  EEA  national  who  has
      entered the United Kingdom or the family member of  such  a  national
      who has entered the United Kingdom may be removed if

      (a) that person does not have or ceases to have a right to reside
      under these Regulations;

      (b )the Secretary of State has decided that the person's removal is
      justified on grounds of public policy, public security or public
      health in accordance with regulation 21; or

      (c) the Secretary of State has decided that the person's removal is
      justified on grounds of abuse of rights in accordance with regulation
      21B(2).

        (4) A person must  not  be  removed  under  paragraph  (3)  as  the
      automatic consequence of having recourse  to  the  social  assistance
      system of the United Kingdom.

        (5) A person must not be removed under paragraph (3) if  he  has  a
      right to remain in the United Kingdom  by  virtue  of  leave  granted
      under the 1971 Act unless his removal is justified on the grounds  of
      public policy, public security or public health  in  accordance  with
      regulation 21.

      ...


      Decisions taken on public policy, public security and  public  health
      grounds

        21. (1) In this regulation  a  "relevant  decision"  means  an  EEA
      decision taken on the grounds of public policy,  public  security  or
      public health.

        (2) A relevant decision may not be taken to serve economic ends.

        (3) A relevant decision may not be taken in  respect  of  a  person
      with a permanent right of residence under  regulation  15  except  on
      serious grounds of public policy or public security.

        (4) A relevant decision may  not  be  taken  except  on  imperative
      grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who-

      (a)has resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of at
      least ten years prior to the relevant decision; or

      (b)is under the age of 18, unless the relevant decision is necessary
      in his best interests, as provided for in the Convention on the
      Rights of the Child adopted by the General Assembly of the United
      Nations on 20th November 1989(11).

        (5) Where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of public  policy
      or public security it  shall,  in  addition  to  complying  with  the
      preceding paragraphs of this regulation, be taken in accordance  with
      the following principles-

      (a)the decision must comply with the principle of proportionality;

      (b)the decision must be based exclusively on the personal conduct of
      the person concerned;

      (c)the personal conduct of the person concerned must represent a
      genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the
      fundamental interests of society;

      (d)matters isolated from the particulars of the case or which relate
      to considerations of general prevention do not justify the decision;

      (e)a person's previous criminal convictions do not in themselves
      justify the decision.

        (6) Before taking a relevant decision  on  the  grounds  of  public
      policy or public security in relation to a person who is resident  in
      the  United  Kingdom  the  decision  maker  must  take   account   of
      considerations such as the age, state of health, family and  economic
      situation of the person, the person's  length  of  residence  in  the
      United Kingdom, the person's social and cultural integration into the
      United Kingdom and the extent of the person's links with his  country
      of origin.

              ..."

5. The FtT considered that the appellant  represented  a  "genuine,  present
and sufficiently serious threat" to the public interest as was evident  from
the fact that  there  existed  a  "present  medium  level  and  sufficiently
serious risk to public security and safety, particularly given  our  finding
as to the equivocal nature of the appellant's acceptance  of  responsibility
for his offending ..."

6.  The  FtT  concluded  by  considering   whether   the   deportation   was
proportionate.   It  said  his  deportation  would  impact  upon  the   best
interests of his brother (born in October 1997) and to a much lesser  extent
his half-siblings in the UK.  It said  it  accepted  his  deportation  would
deprive him of advantages of life in the UK he would  otherwise  enjoy.   At
[25] it stated:

    "There is a clear public interest in his removal, however,  as  appears
    both from the foregoing assessment of risk and  from  consideration  of
    the public interest question as enacted in sections 117A to 117D of the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  He has not been  present
    in the United Kingdom for a lengthy period of time.  He has  not  shown
    himself to be integrated into the United Kingdom society, indeed he  is
    not integrated into the family of his mother.  He does not fall  within
    any provisions of section 117C or  117D  that  might  exempt  him  from
    removal.  His personal circumstances are evocative of sympathy, both on
    his account and on account of his younger brother, who will no doubt be
    affected by separation from his brother and  by  contemplation  of  his
    brother's  misfortune.   There  is,  however,  no   truthful   evidence
    presented to us as to the likely  circumstances  of  the  appellant  in
    Nigeria.  It is thus not possible  to  reach  any  finding  that  those
    circumstances would be so adverse as to outweigh the public interest in
    removal.  The family as a whole has, we conclude, attempted to  conceal
    or obfuscate, rather than satisfactorily to  evince  the  personal  and
    family circumstances of the appellant in Nigeria.  It would be vain  to
    speculate as to  whether,  had  a  satisfactory  account  be  given  of
    circumstances in Nigeria, a different decision on proportionality could
    be reached.  The fact is that  no  such  satisfactory  explanation  was
    given."

7. It concluded at [26] that "[t]hese reasons so  analysed  show  both  that
the appellant may be deported in accordance with the Immigration  Rules  and
that this removal would not be disproportionate for the purposes of  general
article 8 protection."

Grounds of appeal

8. The grounds as amplified by Mr Mak were  threefold.   Ground  1  directed
its fire at  the FtT's statement in [25] that "[t]here  is  a  clear  public
interest in [the appellant's] removal ... as appears  ...from  consideration
of the public interest question as enacted in Sections 117A  to  D  [of  the
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, as amended]..."

9. This statement  was  said  to  evince  two  errors:  making  the  "public
interest" a relevant consideration  when  it  was  not  part  of  regulation
21(5); and  applying  sections  117A  -  D  considerations  which  were  not
relevant considerations for the purposes of an appeal  under  the  2006  EEA
Regulations.

10. It was also alleged under the rubric of "Ground  1"  that  the  FtT  had
failed to take the appellant's age at the date of the offences into  account
when considering regulation 21(5), and had also failed to make any  findings
in relation to its overall assessment of the regulation 21(5) factors.

11. "Ground 2" contended that the FtT had wrongly  found  the  appellant  to
pose a higher level of risk than was established by the evidence.   The  FtT
had made reference to the appellant having been assessed as posing a  medium
risk and as falling within MAPPA level 1.  It  was  submitted  that  thereby
the FtT clearly failed to appreciate that MAPPA level 1 was  the  lowest  of
the three risk categories.  To conclude as the FtT did  that  the  appellant
was  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat,   his   MAPPA
assessment would have needed to be a level 3.  If  the  FtT  was  minded  to
depart from the Probation Service's risk  assessment,  it  was  required  to
give reasons justifying that departure.

Our assessment

12. Dealing first with Ground 2, we are quite satisfied  that  the  FtT  did
not depart from the Probation Service's risk assessment which was  that  the
appellant posed a medium risk; the FtT expressly  noted  that  he  had  been
assessed as a medium risk more than once: see e.g. [22] and [23].

13. Ground 2 appears to assume that the FtT arrived at its  conclusion  that
the appellant was  a  "present,  genuine  and  sufficiently  serious  threat
affecting one of the fundamental interests of society" solely on  his  being
assessed as a medium risk under MAPPA 1, but that  is  plainly  not  how  it
proceeded.  The FtT made clear that that conclusion was based  on  a  number
of considerations including the following: that he  had  re-offended  within
weeks of being made the subject of a referral order for his  first  offence;
that that  re-offending  had  involved  violence  (brandishing  a  knife  in
robbing two young people); that his resort to violence had continued in  the
Young Offenders Institute;  that  he  had  not  shown  he  clearly  accepted
responsibility  for  his  offending;  and  that  he  had  "squandered"   the
opportunities he had been given to rehabilitate him and get him into  school
and college.

14. We would also observe  that  in  any  event  the  MAPPA  levels  do  not
identify a hierarchy of  risk,  but  are  essentially  concerned  with  risk
management arrangements and resources.  Although level 3  does  identify  as
an example of the small number of people who  may  require  extra  resources
"[those] who pose a serious risk of harm", neither level 1 nor level  2  are
defined by reference to the degrees of risk, and it is clear  that  level  1
can encompass those who are a medium (as opposed to a low) risk.

Role of sections 117A-D considerations in EEA appeals

15. We do not consider it can be correct to regard ss.117A-D  considerations
as inapplicable to an EEA appeal, although we would accept  this  is  not  a
straightforward matter.

In favour of the view that  ss.117A-D  considerations  are  inapplicable  it
could be said that s.117A(1) provides that  "[t]his  Part  applies  where  a
court or tribunal is required to  determine  whether  a  decision  was  made
under the Immigration Acts" and that an appeal against an  EEA  decision  is
not  an  appeal  under  the  Immigration  Acts,  but  under  the  2006   EEA
Regulations which aim to implement  Directive  2004/38/EC.  In  this  regard
reference could be made to  the  Explanatory  Memorandum  to  the  2006  EEA
Regulations stating that:


    "These Regulations implement in domestic law  Directive  2004/38/EC  of
    the European Parliament and the Council of 29 April 2004 on  the  right
    of citizens of the Union and their family members to  move  and  reside
    freely within the territory of the Member States ("the Directive"). The
    Directive governs movement rights between Member States".


(See also s.7 Immigration Act 1988.)

 16. Regulation 2 defines "EEA decision"  and  regulation  26  provides  the
right of appeal "under these regulations against an EEA decision". It  could
also be observed that although the 2006 EEA Regulations  make  reference  to
deportation provisions under s.3(5) of the 1971  Act,  what  it  applies  to
them is the doctrine of novation: e.g. note the words "as if" in  regulation
24(3) ("Where a decision is under regulation 19(3)(b), the person is  to  be
treated as if he  were  a  person  to  whom  section  3(5)(a)  of  the  1971
Act...applied and section 5 of that Act...are to apply accordingly. ...").

17. On the other hand, it can  be  argued  that  decisions  made  under  the
Immigration Acts must include EEA decisions because it is s.109 of the  2002
Act that makes provision for an appeal under  (the  2006)  EEA  Regulations.
Further for a decision to be made "under" the Immigration  Acts  it  is  not
the case that it must wholly be so. The EEA Regulations are, in  fact,  made
partly under the European Communities Act 1972 and  partly  under  s.109  of
the 2002 Act which is one of the Immigration Acts. The  view  that  the  EEA
Regulations mean only to depend  on  decisions  under  the  Immigration  Act
novationally was not accepted by Jay J in R (on the  application  of  Byczek
and Oliviera) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWHC  4298
(Admin).

18. In any event, so far as concerns the context of  EEA  appeals  the  2006
EEA Regulations themselves  provide expressly at Schedule 1 that:

    "The following provisions of, or made under, the 2002 Act  have  effect
    in relation to an appeal under these  Regulations  to  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration Tribunal as if it were an  appeal  against  an  immigration
    decision under section 82(1) of that Act:


    Section 84(1), except paragraphs (a) and (f)..."

19. As a result, human rights grounds under paragraphs (c) and  (g)  can  be
brought even against EEA decisions. Human  rights  grounds  are  defined  in
s.84(c) and (g) in terms of whether a decision is unlawful under s.6 of  the
Human Rights Act as  being  incompatible  with  the  appellant's  Convention
rights. Section 117A(1) states  that  Part  5A  applies  where  a  court  or
tribunal is  required  to  determine  whether  a  decision  made  under  the
Immigration Acts "- (a) breaches a person's right  to  respect  for  private
and family life under Article 8, and (b)  as  a  result  would  be  unlawful
under section 8 of the Human Rights  Act  1998."   Demonstrably,  therefore,
Part 5A considerations must be relevant to any human rights  grounds  raised
in an EEA appeal.

20. However, it does not follow that ss.117A-D considerations -  or  broader
"Convention rights" (i.e. ECHR  rights)  considerations  -  per  se  can  be
applied  to  the  task  of  determining  whether  an  appellant  meets   the
requirements of the  EEA  Regulations.  The  EEA  Regulations  are  in  this
respect a self-contained set of legal rules and an appellant  cannot  comply
with the Regulations unless able to show that those rules are met. Not  only
are the two legal regimes distinct but  there  are  significant  differences
between them. One example of the difference between the  two  legal  regimes
when it comes to issues of  expulsion  and  deportation  -  and  it  is  one
pertinent to this appeal - is that whereas Article 8  jurisprudence  permits
decision-makers when weighing matters on the public  interest  side  of  the
scales to have regard to matters of general prevention  or  deterrence  (see
e.g.  RU  (Bangladesh))  in  the  EU/EEA  context,  by  regulation  21(5)(d)
"matters" which relate to  "considerations  of  general  prevention  do  not
justify the decision."

21. The above analysis does not, of course, mean that human rights  have  no
part to play in analysis of an  EEA  decision.   EU  law  also  incorporates
human rights guarantees in the Charter of Fundamental Rights (which  is  now
part of primary EU law) many of whose rights are described  as  co-extensive
with ECHR rights; and the Court of Justice of the European Union (CJEU)  has
long treated  ECHR  rights  as  being  fundamental  principles  of  EU  law.
Nevertheless, the human rights dimension of EU law is not to be elided  with
ECHR  rights:  see  Opinion  Pursuant  to  Article  218(11)  TGFEU,  C-2/13,
December 18, 2014. It has its own autonomous scope of  application  as  part
of EU law.  Likewise ECHR  rights  ("Convention  rights"),  as  incorporated
into UK law by the Human Rights Act 1998, have their own distinct  scope  of
application. Whilst, therefore, Article 8 considerations may  arise  in  the
context of a determination of whether an appellant  meets  the  requirements
of the EEA Regulations or free movement provisions of EU  law   (in  respect
of which the Court of Justice has seen that Article to  play  a  role  as  a
general  principle  informing  the  meaning  of  EU  provisions  (see   e.g.
Carpenter  (Freedom  of  establishment)   [2002]   EUECJ   C-60/00),   their
application in that context is governed by EU law, not by the  ECHR  or  the
Human Rights Act or ss.117A-D.

22.  We observe that in regard to what we have just  set  out  -  that  ECHR
considerations cannot be  interpolated  into  decisions  as  to  whether  an
appellant meets the requirements of the 2006 EEA Regulations - both  parties
were in agreement. Mr Tufan indeed said that the  respondent  accepted  that
the FtT had elided regulation 21 and sections  117A  -  117D  considerations
and that it was wrong to do so, although he did  not  consider  this  was  a
material error.  He drew our attention to paragraph 2.6 of  the  Immigration
Directorate Instructions, Chapter 13:  criminality  guidance  in  Article  8
ECHR cases, which states:

    "2.6.1   The Immigration Rules and Part 5A of the 2002 Act do not apply
           directly to EEA nationals. However, Article 8 applies equally to
           everyone, regardless of nationality, and to consider  Article  8
           claims from EEA  nationals  differently,  either  more  or  less
           generously than claims from non-EEA nationals, would breach  the
           common law  principle  of  fairness.   Therefore,  decisions  in
           relation to  EEA  nationals  must  be  taken  consistently  with
           Parliament's view of the public interest as set out  in  primary
           legislation."

23. For the purposes of this appeal we are prepared to  accept  that  as  an
accurate rendition of the  legal  position  that  now  prevails,  but  would
emphasise that it only purports to  describe  "Article  8  claims  from  EEA
nationals", not EEA claims that are subject of an EEA  decision  as  defined
in regulation 2 of the 2006 Regulations.

24. It may assist to summarise the main conclusions we have  reached  as  to
the correct approach to  be  applied  by  tribunal  judges  in  relation  to
ss.117A-D in the context of EEA removal decisions. It is:

   (i) first to decide if a person satisfies requirements of the Immigration
   (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006. In this context ss.117A-D  has
   no application;
   (ii) second where a person has raised Article 8 as a  ground  of  appeal,
   ss.117A-D applies.

"Person" in (i) and (ii) above means the person  appealing,  whether  he  or
she is an EEA national or  is  the  (extended)  family  member  of  the  EEA
national.

25. In light of the above we consider Mr Tufan was correct to  concede  that
the FtT had wrongly treated sections 117A - 117D considerations as having  a
bearing on the decision it had to make under regulation 19(3)  of  the  2006
Regulations.  It may be, as is suggested by the final part of  its  sentence
in [26] that it only meant to apply sections 117A - 117D  considerations  to
the separate Article 8 ground before it (whether the EEA decision to  deport
was contrary to Section 6 of the Human Rights Act),  but  its  reference  in
[23] to the appellant representing  a  "genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
serious threat to the public interest" [emphasis added] muddied the  waters.
The opening sentence of the next paragraph ([24]) which states  that  "[t]he
crucial final consideration under section (sic) 21 is that the removal  must
comply with the principle of proportionality" continued the confusion.

26. We also think that the way the way the FtT formulated  matters  at  [21]
could, if read in isolation, be  understood  as  if  it  took  into  account
"considerations of general  prevention  of  crime"  contrary  to  regulation
21(5)(d).  It  did  not  help  clarity  either  that  the  FtT  referred  to
"sections" of the 2006 EEA Regulations.

27. Nevertheless (in disagreement with Mr  Mak  and  in  agreement  with  Mr
Tufan) we are not persuaded  that  these  shortcomings  amount  to  material
errors of law.

28. In relation to the FtT's reliance on the notion  of  "public  interest",
we are satisfied by its specific elaboration of regulations  19  and  21  of
the 2006 EEA Regulations in [20] - [21], that it was essentially using  that
phrase as a shorthand for the relevant EU concepts  of  "public  policy  and
public security" as set out in regulation 21 (and referred to by the FtT  at
[20]) and "fundamental interests  of  society"  as  set  out  in  regulation
21(5)(c) ("the personal conduct of the person  concerned  must  represent  a
genuine, present and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  one  of  the
fundamental interests of society").

29. Although the FtT did refer to sections 117A  -  117D  considerations  in
the context of addressing whether the deportation order was  "proportionate"
in accordance with regulation  21(5)(a),  all  the  considerations  it  then
proceeded to identify are equally germane to the  regulation  21  assessment
of his  personal  circumstances.  Further,  regulation  21(5)  requires  the
decision-maker to "comply with the principle of proportionality."

30. As already indicated, we do accept that read in isolation what  the  FtT
said in [21] might be seen to convey that  it  had  erroneously  taken  into
account "considerations of general prevention", but read together  with  the
preceding paragraph it is clear that all the FtT was seeking to  do  was  to
summarise the provisions of regulation 21.  Reinforcing our reading of  this
determination, even in [21] the FtT stated categorically that  its  decision
was "not based on a policy of general deterrence  but  is  actuated  by  the
personal conduct of the appellant" and the FtT said  nothing  thereafter  to
suggest that it did place weight on considerations  of  general  prevention.
There was no material failure to comply with regulation 21(5)(d).

31. Insofar as Ground 1 also sought to argue that the  FtT  failed  to  take
into account all relevant considerations  identified  in  regulation  21(5),
age in particular, we are not persuaded that is so.  It  is  true  that  its
reasoning  does  not  refer  to  each  and  every  criterion  specified   in
regulation 21(6), but it clearly took into account all of them.   Whilst  it
did not refer expressly to  the  appellant's  age  (Mr  Mak  in  submissions
highlighted the fact that the appellant had committed all his offences  when
still under 18), it is evident that his youth was at the  forefront  of  its
mind.  It was a factor heavily relied on in the evidence  of  the  witnesses
as recorded at [8] and clearly underpinned the FtT's assessment  in  [21]  -
[25].  We remind ourselves that  on  the  FtT  findings  the  appellant  had
continued beyond the age of 18  to  use  violence  in  the  Young  Offenders
Institute where he had been the subject of a number of adjudications.

32.  Two  particular  factors  which  were  plainly  germane  to  the  FtT's
assessment were the appellant's lack of integration  into  the  UK  and  the
state of the evidence about his family ties to Nigeria.   Its  appraisal  of
both matters  shows  close  application  of  the  criteria  as  set  out  in
regulation 21(6) ("the person's social and  cultural  integration  into  the
United Kingdom and the extent of the person's  links  with  his  country  of
origin").  Thus in [25] the FtT noted that he had not been  present  in  the
UK for a lengthy period of time and:

    "He has not shown himself to be integrated into the UK society,  indeed
    he is not integrated into the family of his mother."

33 We have already  outlined  the  FtT's  strong  dissatisfaction  with  the
evidence given by the appellant and his witnesses regarding his true  family
circumstances in Nigeria and his relationship with his father there (who  it
was satisfied had attended his  family  permit  interview,  despite  denials
regarding this by the appellant and his mother).  In short, the FtT  clearly
did take into account all the considerations set out in regulation 21.

34. As regards the contention that  the  FtT  failed  to  make  an  "overall
assessment" of regulation 21 considerations, it seems to us  that  a  proper
reading of the decision elicits the very opposite conclusion.

35. For the above reasons we conclude that despite certain  errors  the  FtT
did not materially err in law and hence its decision shall stand.

36. We would add that even had we found the FtT's decision  to  be  vitiated
by legal error such as to warrant our setting  it  aside,  the  decision  we
would have re-made would have been to dismiss the appeal.  No challenge  was
raised in the grounds to the FtT's findings of fact and in  respect  of  key
matters  -  in  particular   the   appellant's   lack   of   acceptance   of
responsibility for his crimes; his ongoing recourse to  violence  whilst  in
detention (it was clearly not accepted that he was merely a victim on  these
occasions); his lack of  integration  into  UK  society;  the  very  limited
degree of family life he enjoyed with his mother,  brother,  stepfather  and
half-siblings; his untruthfulness about his ongoing family ties  in  Nigeria
- our  firm  conclusion  would  have  been  that  his  age  notwithstanding,
deportation was justified on public policy and public security grounds.   We
would also have found that his deportation would not  breach  Article  8  of
the ECHR.

37. For the above reasons:

The First-tier Tribunal did not materially err in law.
Its decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal must stand.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Storey


