
 [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Oladeji (s.3(1) BNA 1981) [2015] UKUT 00326 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Field House                            |          Promulgated         |
|On 21 January 2015                              |                              |
|                                                |                              |
|                                                |..............................|
|                                                |.........                     |


                                   Before

                              MR JUSTICE NICOL
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY

                                   Between

                             Ms Yetunde Oladeji
                                  Miss M.A.
                                  MISS D.A.
           (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE for MISS M.A. and MISS D.A.)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms S Lloyd of Counsel instructed by Freemans
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer

     Whilst s.65 of the Immigration Act 2014, which came into  force  on  6
    April 2015 inserts new provisions into the British Nationality Act 1981
    for persons born before 1 July 2006 that create  a  registration  route
    for those who would currently have an entitlement to registration under
    the British Nationality 1981 Act but for the fact  that  their  parents
    are not married, those provisions (like the pre-existing policy set out
    in  Chapter  9  of  the  UK  Visas  and  Immigration  and   Nationality
    Instructions), are  predicated on there having been an application made
    under s. 3(1) of the British Nationality Act 1981.



                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellants are mother and two daughters born on  19.12.77,  25.8.2001
and 6.10.05 respectively.  The first and third appellants  are  citizens  of
Nigeria, the second a citizen of the U.S.A.  In a determination sent  on  18
August 2014 the First-tier Tribunal (FtT) comprising  Judge  Kaler  and  NLM
Bray dismissed the appeals of the first two appellants against decisions  by
the respondent dated 6 March 2013.  In  the  case  of  the  first  appellant
(hereafter "the  appellant"),  the  decision  was  a  refusal  to  revoke  a
deportation order (the latter which had been made on 9 November  2009  under
s.32(5) of the UK Borders Act).   In  the  case  of  the  second  and  third
appellants, the decision was to make a deportation order under s.3(5)(b)  of
the 1971 Immigration Act as the family members of  the  appellant.  The  FtT
took  into  account  the  decision  of  an  earlier  Tribunal  panel  (Judge
Hollingworth and NLM Endersby) (hereafter "first tribunal  decision")  dated
8  February  2010  dismissing  the  appeal  of  the  appellant  against  the
deportation order.  It will be apparent from what we have set out  thus  far
that we are satisfied that all three appellants  lodged  an  appeal  against
the aforementioned decisions taken in March 2013.  The FtT only  listed  the
first two appellants as appellants, but the grounds of appeal to it  clearly
identified the appellant and her  two  daughters  as  appellants.   We  will
return below to the jurisdictional implications of this for our disposal  of
the cases before us.

2. What led the respondent to decide to deport the appellant was that on  24
July 2009 she was convicted  upon  her  own  confession  of  two  counts  of
obtaining a money transfer by deception, one count of knowingly with  intent
possessing a false and improperly obtained ID document and  four  counts  of
making a false statement or representation so as to obtain benefit.   On  14
August 2009 she was sentenced to fifteen months' imprisonment on each  count
to run concurrently.  The appellant was served with a deportation  order  on
5 November 2009.  As already noted, her appeal  against  that  decision  was
dismissed by the first tribunal in February 2010. Later in 2010 and in  2011
she  made  further  representations  based  on  her  family   circumstances.
Because her claim was  made  after  the  deportation  order  the  respondent
treated her application for refusal to revoke as one for revocation  of  the
deportation order, attracting a further right of appeal.

First tribunal decision, 8 February 2010

3. The tribunal panel who decided her appeal against  deportation  in  early
2010 heard evidence from her and submissions from both representatives.   In
deciding to dismiss the appeal the  panel  first  noted  that  both  parties
accepted that Article 8 was the sole ground of appeal.  The  panel  accepted
that the appellant had established a family and private life in  the  UK  by
virtue of her length of residence and the fact that she  had  two  children.
It accepted that the decision made against her amounted to  an  interference
with her Article 8(1) rights. At [23] it said that "a decision will have  to
be taken whether or not the two children ...  proceed  with  [their  mother]
... [o]r remain with the father in the UK ..."  In respect  of  her  private
life, the panel said it accepted she had been in the  UK  for  most  of  the
time  unlawfully  since  the  mid-1990s,   had   obtained   an   educational
qualification  and  had  worked  sporadically.   The  panel  discounted  the
existence of any continuing  relationship  between  the  appellant  and  the
children's father and was sceptical of claims made by  the  first  appellant
that he was wanting sole custody  of  the  children  and  might  be  in  the
process of commencing matrimonial proceedings.

4. As regards the two children, then aged 8 and  4�,  the  panel  said  they
accepted they were both born in the UK  and  "[I]t  therefore  follows  that
these children  are  in  all  probability  British  citizens,  although  the
appellant's statement does not say this".  The panel found  that  they  were
in the custody of  their  father  until  the  appellant's  release  on  bail
comparatively recently.  It stated that it considered "far more  information
would have been required from the appellant's  side  if  significant  weight
was to be attached to the children's position ... [and] the effect  on  them
of prospective return to Nigeria".  The panel added that if it  was  decided
that the children were to accompany the appellant to Nigeria that would  not
be contrary to Article 8 as she had family there whose assistance she  could
seek.  The appellant had relatives in the UK but  she  was  not  financially
dependent on them and if the children were to be removed with  their  mother
they could keep in touch with them indirectly.

5. Turning to  public  interest  considerations,  the  panel  said  that  it
counted  against  the  appellant  that  she  had  embarked  on  a   "lengthy
criminality" from 2001 onwards involving a sophisticated criminal  deception
netting her almost �100,000 of state benefits.  Whilst it  acknowledged  the
pre-sentence report and similar documentation portrayed her as  a  low  risk
of reoffending, this was but one element in the  deportation  process.   The
panel also commented on  her  lengthy  history  of  dishonesty  and  on  her
"avarice".  Also counted against the  appellant  was  her  poor  immigration
history, she having been regarded as  an  absconder  since  1996  and  being
someone who had "engineered" her residence in  the  UK  from  the  mid  1990
through use of a false passport.

The First-tier Tribunal decision of 18 August 2014

6. Turning to the tribunal decision which is the subject of  the  appeal  to
us, the FtT heard oral evidence from the appellant and her sister  and  also
submissions from both representatives.  The panel stated that  it  took  the
findings of the previous tribunal as  its  starting  point.   It  considered
that the appellant had misled the first tribunal as to  the  nationality  of
the second appellant, M.A.  It was now clear that she was born  in  the  USA
and is a citizen of that country.  Whilst prepared to accept that M.A.  came
to the  UK  when  an  infant,  the  panel  said  "[w]e  cannot  accept  [the
appellant's] word that M.A. only left the country once as an infant  due  to
the averse credibility finding [on] the appellant".  Further, the FtT  said,
it considered that neither child was a British citizen.

7. As regards the two children, the FtT said that in the light of  a  social
worker report of 1  December  2011,  it  accepted  that  they  have  a  warm
relationship with their mother and expressed a wish to live with her,  which
was also that report's own recommendation.  It observed that there  was  now
more information available about the father, who was granted  ILR  in  2003.
There were family court orders showing he had sought  and  obtained  regular
contact with the children although he had withdrawn an application for  them
to live with him in February 2011.  It seemed that  he  had  little  contact
with the children thereafter until M.A. instigated contact in February  2014
since when he had had one day with them every fortnight.  The appellant  had
said he provided some financial support.  The FtT adverted  to  a  statement
from him dated 30  July  2014.   In  this  statement  he  said  he  saw  his
daughters on a regular basis and objected to their removal from the UK.   He
believed the appellant should be allowed to remain in the UK to  look  after
the children.  Having considered this statement in the light of the  further
evidence, the FtT concluded that whilst it is accepted that contact  between
the children and their father has been re-established, that was  only  since
February 2014, was infrequent and "we do not find that the father plays  any
significant role in the children's lives".

8. The FtT went on to observe that it did not  accept  the  appellant's  and
her sister's claims that their mother in Nigeria was  unwell.   Nor  did  it
accept that the appellant had shown real remorse for her crimes.

9. So far as concerns the legal framework to  be  applied,  the  FtT  stated
that it was required by new Part 5A  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
Asylum Act 2002 to have regard to certain  considerations  when  considering
the public  interest  question  under  Article  8.   Noting  that  s.117C(2)
stipulated that "[t]he more serious  the  offence  committed  by  a  foreign
criminal,  the  greater  is  the  public  interest  in  deportation  of  the
criminal", the FtT said that it considered the   appellant's  defrauding  of
the public purse for a period of at least seven  years  as  "very  serious".
It then addressed s.117C and the issue of whether the appellant fell  within
Exception 2.

10. Section 117C (3) and (5) provide:

    "(3) In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not been sentenced
    to a period of imprisonment of four years or more, the public  interest
    requires C's deportation unless Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies.
    ...
     (5)  Exception  2  applies  where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with a qualifying partner, or  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with a qualifying child, and the  effect  of  C's
    deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh."
11. The definition of "qualifying child" contained in s.117D is:

    " "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age of 18 and who-


          (a) is a British citizen, or
          (b) has lived in the United Kingdom for a  continuous  period  of
          seven years or more; "

12. As regards the new provisions set out in s.117C (3)  and  (5),  the  FtT
    concluded that:

         "Exception 2 does not apply because, although the appellant  has  a
         genuine and subsisting relationship with her children,  neither  of
         them is a qualifying child. [ M.A]. is a citizen of USA, [D.A.]  is
         a citizen of Nigeria".

13. At [30] - [31] it considered the nationality position of D.A.

    "30. It is submitted by Ms Lloyd that [D.A]  should  be  treated  as  a
         British citizen.  It is accepted that  no  formal  application  has
         been made to the Home Office, but the matter was adjourned for  the
         Home Office to consider whether she should be granted  citizenship.
         The matters pleaded in favour of this are that [their  father]  had
         settled status in the UK at the date of her birth.   Had  she  been
         born legitimately, she would have been a British citizen by  virtue
         of section 1(1) of the British Nationality Act 1981.   Illegitimate
         children can now be entitled to the same right by virtue of section
         9 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.   Section  1
         of the Family Law Reform  Act  1987  did  away  with  most  of  the
         distinctions between legitimate and illegitimate  children  but  it
         did not apply to citizenship.  The Respondent's policy as  set  out
         in  Chapter  9  of  the  UK  Visas  and   Immigration   Nationality
         Instructions stated that they may normally register an illegitimate
         minor child born before 1 July 2006 of a British or settled father.
          The case of Genovese v Malta, App No 53124, 11 October  2011  held
         that denying the illegitimate child of a Maltese father citizenship
         where  the  father  refused  to  recognise  him   amounted   to   a
         disproportionate interference with the right  to  respect  for  his
         right to private life under Article 8.  It was unreasonable of  the
         Respondent not to  recognise  her  as  being  entitled  to  British
         citizenship.


    31.  These arguments were not put to the Home  Office  directly  before
         they issued their letter of 19 September 2013, citing the  relevant
         law.  We have considered the arguments but are not  persuaded  that
         [D.A.] would unequivocally be entitled to citizenship  if  such  an
         application was made.  The fact remains that she is not  a  British
         citizen.  We do however acknowledge that she was born in the UK and
         has been in the country for her entire life.  That is a matter that
         must be placed in the balance when assessing  proportionality,  and
         the public interest."

14. The FtT went on to assess that it would "not be unreasonably  harsh  for
the appellant to relocate to  Nigeria".   Given  that  she  lives  with  her
children and was their main carer,  their  best  interests  were  served  in
being with her.  Their father was a remote figure.  "That the  children  are
doing well in their education and have no wish to go to Nigeria is just  one
of the factors to place in the balance".  At [34] there then  followed  this
passage:

    "The parties have a choice in the matter.  The appellant can choose  to
    take the children with her to Nigeria.  If the  father  is  willing  to
    look after them, then they can stay here with them.  She says he is not
    able to take care of them but he did so whilst she was in prison.   She
    said this was with the assistance of her sister; there is no reason why
    the sister could not give such assistance again."

Grounds of appeal

15. The grounds of appeal against the FtT decision of August  2014  advanced
three main points.  It was said that the FtT had erred in  failing  to  make
any specific decision in relation to the second  and  third  appellants  and
had erred in not even recognising  the  third  appellant  as  an  appellant.
Secondly it was said that  the  FtT  unlawfully  discriminated  against  the
third appellant, D.A., in deciding not to treat her as  a  British  citizen.
Thirdly it was submitted that  in  finding  that  Exception  2  set  out  in
s.117C(5) of the 2002 Act did not apply,  the  FtT  had  misdirected  itself
because that exception  covered  not  just  parents  of  children  who  were
British citizens but any child who "has lived in the  UK  for  a  continuous
period of seven years or more", which certainly covered D.A.

16. Also under the rubric of "ground 3" the grounds argued that the FtT  had
additionally misdirected itself in [32] when it stated that it would not  be
"unreasonably harsh" for the  appellant  to  relocate  to  Nigeria"  .  That
misapplied the test set out in paragraph 399 of the  Rules  which  concerned
whether it would be unduly harsh for the child (D.A.) to  be  deported.  (We
should note at this point that prior to 28 July  2014  the  phrase  used  in
paragraph 399(a) (ii)(a) was whether "it would not be reasonable  to  expect
the child to leave the UK". However, on that date,  for  the  latter  phrase
there was substituted "it would be unduly harsh for the  child  to  live  in
the country to which the person is to be deported" (emphasis added).

17. The grounds canvassed  three  further  points:  (i)  that  the  FtT  had
disregarded the fact that both children had been in the UK  over  the  seven
year period seen by past policy and continuing practice as  a  very  weighty
factor counting against deportation of a  parent;  (ii)  that  the  FtT  had
failed to carry out a holistic assessment as to whether it was in  the  best
interests of the children to go to Nigeria "before going on to  conduct  the
proportionality exercise" (the point was made that it was clearly  in  their
best interests to be with both their parents notwithstanding that they  have
only recently resumed their relationship with their father;  and  that  they
had close ties with aunts, uncles and cousins in the UK and  in  their  time
here had built up strong private life ties  at  their  schools);  and  (iii)
that  when  applying  paragraph  398  the  FtT  had   wrongly   applied   an
exceptionality test.  That test had been removed from the Immigration  Rules
dealing with foreign criminals on  28  July  2014.  Here  again,  we  should
explain that at the date of the respondent's  decision  in  March  2013  the
relevant parts of paragraph 398 stated:


    "398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary to
    the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the  Human  Rights  Convention,
    and
    ...
     (b) the deportation of the person from the  UK  is  conducive  to  the
    public good because they have been convicted of an  offence  for  which
    they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of  less  than  4
    years but at least 12 months; or
    (c) the deportation of the person from  the  UK  is  conducive  to  the
    public good because, in the view  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  their
    offending has caused serious harm or they are a persistent offender who
    shows a particular disregard for the law, the  Secretary  of  State  in
    assessing that claim  will  consider  whether  paragraph  399  or  399A
    applies  and,  if  it  does  not,  it  will  only  be  in   exceptional
    circumstances  that  the  public  interest  in  deportation   will   be
    outweighed by other factors." (Emphasis added)


18. By the time the FtT heard the appellants'  case  (in  August  2014)  new
Immigration Rules had come into force (with effect from 28  July  2014,  the
same date that ss.117A-117D came into force).


19. Paragraphs 390 - 397 of these new Rules set out the provisions  relating
to revocation of a deportation  order  and  the  rights  of  appeal  arising
hereunder as follows:


         "390. An application for revocation of a deportation order will be
             considered in the light of all the circumstances including the
             following:


             (i)  the grounds on which the order was made;
             (ii)     any representations made in support of revocation;
             (iii)    the interests of the community, including the
                  maintenance of an effective immigration control;
             (iv)      the  interests  of  the  applicant,  including   any
                  compassionate circumstances.


         390A. Where paragraph 398  applies  the  Secretary  of  State  will
             consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does
             not, it will only be in  exceptional  circumstances  that  the
             public interest in maintaining the deportation order  will  be
             outweighed by other factors.


         391.     In the case of a person who has  been  deported  following
             conviction for a  criminal  offence,  the  continuation  of  a
             deportation order against  that  person  will  be  the  proper
             course:


             (a)  in the case of a conviction for an offence for which  the
                  person was sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of  less
                  than 4 years, unless  10  years  have  elapsed  since  the
                  making of the deportation order when,  if  an  application
                  for revocation is received, consideration will be given on
                  a case by case basis  to  whether  the  deportation  order
                  should be maintained, or


             (b)  in the case of a conviction for an offence for which  the
                  person was sentenced to a period  of  imprisonment  of  at
                  least 4 years, at any time, unless, in  either  case,  the
                  continuation  would  be  contrary  to  the  Human   Rights
                  Convention or the Convention and Protocol Relating to  the
                  Status  of  Refugees,  or  there  are  other   exceptional
                  circumstances that mean the continuation is outweighed  by
                  compelling factors.


         391A. In other cases, revocation of the order will not normally  be
             authorised unless the situation has been  materially  altered,
             either by a change of circumstances since the order was  made,
             or by fresh information coming to light which was  not  before
             the appellate authorities  or  the  Secretary  of  State.  The
             passage of time since the person  was  deported  may  also  in
             itself amount to such a change of circumstances as to  warrant
             revocation of the order.


         392.     Revocation of a deportation order  does  not  entitle  the
             person concerned to re-enter the United  Kingdom;  it  renders
             him eligible to apply  for  admission  under  the  Immigration
             Rules. Application for revocation of the order may be made  to
             the Entry Clearance Officer or direct to the Home Office.


         Rights of appeal  in  relation  to  a  decision  not  to  revoke  a
             deportation order


         396. Where a person is liable to deportation the presumption  shall
             be that the public interest requires deportation. It is in the
             public interest to deport where the Secretary  of  State  must
             make a deportation order in accordance with section 32 of  the
             UK Borders Act 2007.


         397. A deportation order will not be made if the  person's  removal
             pursuant  to  the  order  would  be  contrary  to   the   UK's
             obligations under the Refugee Convention or the  Human  Rights
             Convention. Where deportation would not be contrary  to  these
             obligations, it will only be in exceptional circumstances that
             the public interest in deportation is outweighed."

20. The deportation and Article 8 provisions of Part 13 of  the  Immigration
Rules also apply when application has been made for a deportation  order  to
be revoked.  These are as follows:


         A398. These rules apply where:

       a)  a  foreign  criminal  liable  to  deportation  claims  that   his
          deportation would be contrary to the United Kingdom's  obligations
          under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention;


       b) a foreign criminal applies for a deportation  order  made  against
          him to be revoked.


          398. Where  a  person  claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
          contrary to the UK's obligations under  Article  8  of  the  Human
          Rights Convention, and


       a) the deportation of the person from the  UK  is  conducive  to  the
          public good and in the public  interest  because  they  have  been
          convicted of an offence for which they have been  sentenced  to  a
          period of imprisonment of at least 4 years;


       b) the deportation of the person from the  UK  is  conducive  to  the
          public good and in the public  interest  because  they  have  been
          convicted of an offence for which they have been  sentenced  to  a
          period of imprisonment of less  than  4  years  but  at  least  12
          months; or


       c) the deportation of the person from the  UK  is  conducive  to  the
          public good and in the public interest because, in the view of the
          Secretary of State, their offending has  caused  serious  harm  or
          they are a persistent offender who shows  a  particular  disregard
          for the law,


              The Secretary of State in assessing that claim  will  consider
          whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if  it  does  not,  the
          public interest in deportation will only be  outweighed  by  other
          factors where there are very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
          above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.


          399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c) applies
          if -


          (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
          with a child under the age of 18 years who is in the UK, and


          (i)  the child is a British Citizen; or


          (ii)    the child has lived in the UK continuously  for  at  least
          the 7 years immediately preceding  the  date  of  the  immigration
          decision; and in either case
          (a)     it would be unduly harsh for the  child  to  live  in  the
          country to which the person is to be deported; and


       b) it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain in the UK without
          the person who is to be deported; or




       b) the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  a
          partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen  or  settled  in
          the UK, and


       i) the relationship was formed at a time when the  person  (deportee)
          was in the UK  lawfully  and  their  immigration  status  was  not
          precarious; and


      ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live in  the  country
          to which the person is  to  be  deported,  because  of  compelling
          circumstances over and above those described in paragraph EX.2. of
          Appendix FM; and


     iii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner  to  remain  in  the  UK
          without the person who is to be deported.


          399A. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c) applies
          if -


       a) the person has been lawfully resident in the UK for  most  of  his
          life; and


       b) he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and


       c) there would be very significant obstacles to his integration  into
          the country to which it is proposed he is deported.


          399B. Where  an  Article  8  claim  from  a  foreign  criminal  is
          successful:


       a) in the case of a person who is in the UK unlawfully or whose leave
          to enter or remain has been  cancelled  by  a  deportation  order,
          limited leave may be granted for periods not exceeding  30  months
          and subject to such conditions as the Secretary of State considers
          appropriate;


       b) in the case of a person who has not been served with a deportation
          order, any limited leave to enter or remain may be curtailed to  a
          period not exceeding 30 months and conditions  may  be  varied  to
          such conditions as the Secretary of State considers appropriate;


       c) indefinite leave to enter or remain may be revoked  under  section
          76 of the 2002 Act and limited leave to enter  or  remain  granted
          for a period not exceeding 30 months subject to such conditions as
          the Secretary of State considers appropriate;


       d) revocation of a deportation order does not confer entry  clearance
          or leave to enter or remain or re-instate any previous leave."

21. It can be seen that amongst the changes  made  were  that  in  paragraph
398, for "it will only be  in  exceptional  circumstances  that  the  public
interest in deportation will be  outweighed  by  other  factors"  there  was
substituted "the public interest in deportation will only be  outweighed  by
other factors where there are very compelling circumstances over  and  above
those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A" (Emphasis added).  At  the  same
time, para 390A (which is one of several paragraphs dealing with  revocation
of  deportation  orders  (paras  390-392)  retained  wording  in  terms   of
exceptional circumstances ("Where paragraph 398  applies  the  Secretary  of
State...will consider whether paragraph 399 or  399A  applies,  and,  if  it
does not, it will only be  in  exceptional  circumstances  that  the  public
interest in maintaining the deportation order will be  outweighed  by  other
factors") (Emphasis added).

Our Assessment

22. We shall begin by dealing with grounds we find unpersuasive, taking  the
last ground first.

Paragraph 398: change from "exceptional circumstances" and "very  compelling
circumstances"

23. We reject the argument that the FtT erred in law on applying a  test  of
exceptional circumstances.  It is true that  at  the  date  of  decision  in
March 2013 the test set out in paragraph 398 was  exceptional  circumstances
("it will only be in exceptional circumstances that the public  interest  in
deportation will be outweighed by other factors") whereas on  28  July  2014
that requirement was changed to one of considering whether there were  "very
compelling circumstances". However, the  appellant  was  treated  as  having
made an application for revocation of a deportation order and even after  28
July 2014 the  test  in  390A  remained  one  of  exceptional  circumstances
("Where  paragraph  398  applies  the  Secretary  of  State...will  consider
whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, it will  only  be
in exceptional circumstances  that  the  public  interest  in  maintain  the
deportation order will be outweighed by other  factors".  Hence  the  First-
tier Tribunal panel should have considered the appeal under para  390A,  but
since  the  wording  of  that  provision  embodied  the  same   "exceptional
circumstances" test as the panel erroneously  thought  was  still  the  test
under para 398, this error was not material. (In any event,  we  doubt  that
even if para 398 had been the correct rule that it would have constituted  a
material error; it would only  have  done  so  if  the  new  rule  had  been
significantly different. In MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 the Master  of
the Rolls considered that the  expression  "exceptional  circumstances"  was
interchangeable  with  "very  compelling  circumstances"   and   both   were
consistent with Strasbourg jurisprudence:
    "43.The word "exceptional" is often used to denote a departure from a
    general rule. The general rule in the present context is that, in the
    case of a foreign prisoner to whom paras 399 and 399A do not apply,
    very compelling reasons will be required to outweigh the public
    interest in deportation. These compelling reasons are the "exceptional
    circumstances".
    44. We would, therefore, hold that the new rules are a complete code
    and that the exceptional circumstances to be considered in the
    balancing exercise involve the application of a proportionality test as
    required by the Strasbourg jurisprudence..."
24. We consider that the new rule has not imposed  a  higher  threshold  but
simply confirmed the approach of the Court of Appeal in MF (Nigeria)  [2013]
EWCA Civ 1192  which regarded the two  expressions  as  synonymous.  In  any
event, even if we are wrong about this and one version of the rule  is  seen
to establish a higher threshold, it would have to be the 2014, not the  2013
 version, on the basis that use of the  adverb  "very"  adds  force  to  the
adjective "compassionate" whereas in the earlier rule "exceptional"  has  no
amplifying adverb. If that is so, then the FtT effectively  applied  a  rule
that was more beneficial to  the  appellants  than  the  new  rule.  If  the
appellants could not succeed under the 2013 version, they could not  succeed
under the 2014 version.

 "Best interests of the children"

25. We see no error in the approach of the FtT to  assessment  of  the  best
interests of the child.  It stated more than once that  M.A.  had  said  she
did not wish to live in Nigeria and that the two children  were  doing  well
in education, participated in community affairs,  attended  church  and  had
regular contact  with  maternal  relatives.   They  carefully  analysed  the
extent to which their father played a part in their lives.   Their  ultimate
conclusion, that their welfare was best served in being with  their  mother,
was wholly in accord with principles governing the  best  interests  of  the
child as set out in Zoumbas v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
[2013] UKSC 74 and other leading cases.

26. So far as concerns the FtT's general assessment of the  period  of  time
the children had spent in the UK, it was clear that  albeit   not  accepting
that M.A.  had lived continuously in the UK (see [15])  they  were  prepared
to proceed on the basis that  both  children  had  been  in  the  UK  for  a
considerable period and in [31] they stated that D.A. had  been  in  the  UK
"for her entire life". Its assessment of their best interests and the  wider
proportionality assessment was clearly informed by that  understanding.   It
was not incumbent on the FtT to accord specific legal  significance  to  the
fact that the younger child, D.A., had been in the UK for over  seven  years
and the elder, M.A., for longer than that even if not continuously.

The British nationality issue

27. As regards the second ground, again we see no legal error  on  the  part
of the FtT.  It correctly observed that at the  date  of  D.A.'s  birth  she
could  not  qualify  for  British  citizenship  under  s.1  of  the  British
Nationality Act 1981 ("BNA 1981")  even though it was  not  now  in  dispute
that D.A.'s father had been granted indefinite leave to remain in the UK  in
January 2003, as she was born illegitimate. At the time of  her  birth  that
Act's provision for children born in  the  UK  did  not  cover  illegitimate
children.  Prior to 1  July  2006,  s.50(9)  of  the  BNA  provided  that  a
relationship between a father and a child was taken to exist only between  a
father and a legitimate child born to him. This was amended from  that  date
by s.9 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 but  it  did  not
have retrospective effect.

28. The FtT correctly took account of the fact  that  at  the  time  of  the
hearing before it there was also a policy set out in Chapter  9  of  the  UK
Visas and Immigration Nationality Instructions  stating  that  officers  may
normally register an illegitimate minor child born before 1 July 2006  of  a
British or settled father. Ms Lloyd drew  our  attention  to  the  following
extracts:

    "9.9.2 Section 1 of the Family Law Reform Act  1987,  which  came  into
    force on  4  April  1988,  did  away  with  most  distinctions  between
    legitimate and illegitimate children. It did not,  however,  alter  the
    citizenship position.
    9.9.3 Section 9 of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    amended the 1981 Act to allow fathers to transmit citizenship to  their
    illegitimate children born on or after 1 July 2006  provided  there  is
    satisfactory evidence of paternity. But the changes  do  not  apply  in
    respect of anyone born before that date.
    9.9.4 However, in accordance with the spirit of the 1987 Act  (and  the
    changes introduced by the 2002  Act),  we  may  normally  register  the
    illegitimate minor child, born before 1 July 2006, of a British citizen
    or "settled" father if the criteria at a-c. (and, if  appropriate,  d.)
    below are all satisfied:
    a. We are satisfied about the paternity of the child; and
    b. We have the consent of all those with parental  responsibility  (see
    9.22.6 below); and
    c. We are satisfied that,  had  the  child  been  born  to  the  father
    legitimately:
    i. the child would have had an automatic claim to  British  citizenship
    under s.1(1) or s.2(1) of the British Nationality Act 1981; or
    ii. the child would have  had  an  entitlement  to  registration  under
    either s.1(3), s.3(2) or s.3(5) (see Chapters 8, 10 or 11); or
    iii.  we  would  normally  have  registered  under  s.3(1);   and,   if
    appropriate
    d. There is no reason to refuse  on  character  grounds  (see  9.17.28-
    9.17.29 below and Annex D to Chapter 18)."

29. But this policy was entitled  "Chapter  9:  registration  of  minors  at
discretion - Section 3(1) British Nationality Act 1981"and para 9.1.1.  made
clear that operation of  this  section  was  dependent  on  there  being  an
application. That reflected the statutory  requirement  set  out  in  s.3(1)
which provides that: " [i]f while a person is  a  minor  an  application  is
made for his registration as a British citizen, the Secretary of State  may,
if he thinks fit, cause him to be registered as such a citizen."  (see  also
s.1(3)(b)). No application was made on behalf of D.A. We would observe  that
a requirement for an application to be made by persons  seeking  to  acquire
nationality by a voluntary act  is  entirely  consonant  with  international
law, certainly where the applicant holds a citizenship already, as  in  that
context it is not necessarily to be expected that they (or their parents  if
they are minors) will choose to acquire another. There  may  also  important
issues regarding consent of the parents.

30. Ms Lloyd sought to argue that the FtT erred in rejecting the  additional
submission she had made to it that denial of  British  citizenship  to  D.A.
was  contrary  to  Article  8  coupled  with  Article  14  of  the  ECHR  as
demonstrated by the judgment of the ECHR in the case  of  Genovese  v  Malta
app. no. 53124, 11 October 2011, in which  it  was  held  that  denying  the
illegitimate child of a Maltese father citizenship where the father  refused
to recognise him amounted  to  a  "disproportionate  interference  with  his
right to private life."  However, the applicant in  the  Genovese  case  had
made (or his mother had made on  his  behalf)  an  application  for  Maltese
citizenship; in fact his  mother  had  made  two  applications  for  Maltese
citizenship on his behalf, one before amendments made to  Malta  citizenship
law in 2007 and one after: see  [9],  [13]  and  [25].  The  Court  was  not
therefore dealing with the case of someone who has made no  application  and
it is difficult to see on its reasoning on admissibility (and whether  there
could be said to be a "victim of a violation") that it would  have  admitted
the applicant's case had he/his mother on his behalf made no application  to
the Maltese authorities. Further, in considering  the  compatibility  of  UK
law and policy on the acquisition of  British  citizenship  by  illegitimate
children with the ECHR, the existence  of  the  aforesaid  UK  Visa  policy,
being a policy as to the criteria applied  under  s.  3(1)  of  the  British
Nationality Act, it is far from clear that either the  Strasbourg  Court  or
any UK court or tribunal seized of  the  issue  would  find  these  domestic
provisions contrary to Article 8 in conjunction with Article  14.  We  would
certainly not have done so.

Postscript to the British Nationality Issue

31. Since we heard this appeal there has been a change in the  law  relating
to registration of illegitimate children.  Section  65  of  the  Immigration
Act,  which  was  commenced  on  6  April  2015,  inserts  new  registration
provisions (sections 4E to 4J) into the British Nationality Act 1981  so  as
to create a registration route for, inter alia,  those  who  would  have  an
entitlement to registration under the 1981 Act provisions but for  the  fact
that their parents are not married. Section  65  provides  in  its  relevant
parts:

    "Persons unable to acquire citizenship: natural father not  married  to
    mother
    This sectionnoteType=Explanatory Notes has no associated
    After section 4D of the British Nationality Act 1981 insert-

    "4E The general conditions
    For the purposes of sections 4F to 4I, a person ("P") meets the general
    conditions if-

    (a)P was born before 1 July 2006;

    (b) at the time of P's birth, P's mother-

    (i) was not married, or

    (ii) was married to a person other than P's natural father;

    (c) no person is treated as the father of P under  section  28  of  the
    Human Fertilisation and Embryology Act 1990; and

    (d) P has never been a British citizen.

    4F Person unable to be registered under other provisions of this Act
    (1)A person ("P") is entitled to be registered as a British citizen  on
    an application made under this section if-

    (a) P meets the general conditions; and

    (b) P would be entitled to be registered as a British citizen under-

    (i) section 1(3),

    ..."


32. If we had found that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law  and  set  its
decision aside, we would, of  course,  be  obliged  to  apply  s.65  to  the
benefit of D.A. However, we have found no material error and at the date  of
the hearing before the FtT the applicable law and policy was as we have  set
out in foregoing paragraphs. Further, even if we  had  been  able  to  apply
s.65 to the benefit of D.A., it remains as true under the amendments it  has
wrought to the British Nationality Act 1981  that  registration  under  this
route is only possible upon an application being made. As already noted,  no
application for registration has been made on behalf of D.A.

33. Moving to the third ground, which was that the FtT erred in  failing  to
find that the appellants succeeded under Exception  2  of  s.117(5)  of  the
2002 Act), whilst we see greater force to it than those considered  so  far,
we find ultimately that it fails too.

34. We should forewarn here that Ms Lloyd also sought to rely on a  separate
argument that even if the appellant could not  succeed  under  s.117(5)  she
was entitled to succeed under para 399(a) (via  para  390A)  which  required
undue  hardship  to  be  shown,  not  (as  the  panel   seemed   to   think)
unreasonableness. It is convenient to address that after we have  considered
the s.117C(5) issue.

Exception 2 and the meaning of "qualifying child" in ss.117A-D

35. Ms Lloyd is plainly right to say that the FtT misdirected  in  law  when
dealing with s.117C(5).  Contrary to how the FtT understood it,  it  is  not
asserted in this provision that in order  for  Exception  2  to  apply,  the
qualifying  child  be   a   British   citizen.    Section   117D(1)   states
disjunctively that:

     "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age of 18 and who
         (a)  is a British citizen, or
         (b)  has lived in the United Kingdom for  a  continuous  period  of
             seven years or more ...".


36. Mr Melvin submitted that this error on  the  part  of  the  FtT  in  not
applying s.117(5) (b) was not material for two reasons. First, at  least  in
respect of M.A., because according to the  wording  of  this  provision  the
period of seven years must be "continuous"  and  the  FtT  plainly  did  not
accept that her residence in the UK had been continuous.  It found it  could
not accept she had only left the  country  once  as  an  infant:  see  [15].
However, as Mr Melvin accepted when  we  raised  the  matter  with  him,  in
respect of D.A., by contrast, its finding of fact regarding  the  continuity
of her residence was unequivocal: it found at [31] that  "she  was  born  in
the UK and has been in the country for her  entire  life".   It  is  not  in
dispute that D.A. was born on 6 October 2005.  By the  time  the  respondent
came to issue her with the deportation decision in March 2013, she had  been
living in the UK unbrokenly for seven years five months.

37. Second, Mr Melvin submitted that even in respect of D.A. the  FtT  error
was still not material because in order to fall with Exception 2,  there  is
a further requirement, namely that "the effect of  C's  deportation  on  the
partner or child would be unduly harsh".  Mr Melvin  sought  to  argue  that
even if the Upper Tribunal was persuaded that the FtT has misread the  seven
year requirement as set out in Exception 2, its treatment of  the  situation
of D.A. showed that it did not consider the effect would be unduly harsh.

38. We agree with this submission.

The "unduly harsh" requirement under s.117C(5)

39. First of all, it is  clear  from  the  wording  of  s.117C(5)  that  for
Exception 2 of s.117C(5) to apply, it is not sufficient that  a  "qualifying
child" has lived in the United Kingdom for  a  continuous  period  of  seven
years or more; it is also necessary  that  "the  effect  of  [the  parent's]
deportation on ...the child would be unduly harsh".

40. Secondly, although the FtT did not in terms consider whether the  effect
of the appellant's  deportation  on  D.A.  would  be  unduly  harsh,  it  is
abundantly clear that it was  of  the  view  that  it  would  not  be.  When
assessing the issues of their best interests and the proportionality of  the
deportation decisions, they clearly took into  account  that  both  children
had lived in the UK for a considerable period; that both were doing well  at
school and have participated in community affairs and  attend  church;  that
both have regular contact with their material relatives; that  neither  have
set foot in Nigeria and neither wished to return there; and  that  both  had
stated that if they were deported to Nigeria, they would miss  their  family
and friends. The FtT  also  took  into  account  the  balance  of  arguments
relating to D.A.'s  potential  British  citizenship.  Notwithstanding  these
considerations, the FtT concluded that the factors  weighing  in  favour  of
the children not being deported were outweighed by those weighing in  favour
of their deportation.  In the latter connection, it found that it  would  be
in D.A.'s (and M.A.'s) best interests to stay with  her  mother;  that  both
were young enough to adapt to a different way of life and had grown up  with
people of a Nigerian background; that both would have a  grandmother  there.
It clearly also saw as detracting from the weight to be  attached  to  their
ties in the UK that their father is a remote figure.  Whilst  the  FtT  only
specifically stated that it  would  not  be  "unreasonably  harsh"  for  the
appellant to relocate to Nigeria (see [32]) it clearly  considered  that  it
also considered that the effect on the  children  of  being  deported  along
with their mother would not be unreasonably or unduly harsh either.

The "unduly harsh" requirements under para 399(a) of the Rules

41. As noted earlier, another string to Ms Lloyd's bow  was  to  argue  that
even if the FtT had  not  erred  in  applying  s.117C(5)  it  had  erred  in
deciding that the appellant did not meet the requirement of para  399(a)  of
the Rules because it misdirected itself in [32] in  stating  that  it  would
not be "unreasonably harsh" for the appellant to relocate  to  Nigeria".  It
was submitted that that misapplied the test set out in paragraph  399(a)  of
the Rules which concerned whether it would be unduly  harsh  for  the  child
(D.A.) to be deported. (We should note at this point that prior to  28  July
2014 the phrase used in paragraph 399(a) (ii)(a) was whether "it  would  not
be reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK". However, on  that  date,
for the latter phrase there was substituted "it would be  unduly  harsh  for
the child to live in the country to which the  person  is  to  be  deported"
(emphasis added).) In  making  this  submission  Ms  Lloyd  was  effectively
arguing that the FtT was required to consider whether the  appellants  could
benefit either under s.117C(5) or under the Rules. We are prepared  for  the
purposes of this appeal  to  proceed  on  this  basis  (which  is  the  most
favourable to the appellants). No point was  taken  about  whether  the  FtT
addressed both sets of provisions in the correct order.

42. It will assist our analysis to reproduce the provisions of  para  399(a)
here:

          "399. This paragraph  applies  where  paragraph  398  (b)  or  (c)
          applies if -


          (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
          with a child under the age of 18 years who is in the UK, and


          (i)  the child is a British Citizen; or


          (ii)    the child has lived in the UK continuously  for  at  least
          the 7 years immediately preceding  the  date  of  the  immigration
          decision; and in either case
          (a) it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in the  country
          to which the person is to be deported; and


          (b) it would be unduly harsh for the child to  remain  in  the  UK
          without the person who is to be deported;"

43. It can be seen that para 399(ii) requires an  applicant  to  show  undue
hardship in two respects: that it would be unduly harsh  for  the  child  to
live in the country to which the person is to be deported  ((a));  and  that
it would be unduly harsh for the child to  remain  in  the  UK  without  the
person who is to be deported ((b)). We are entirely satisfied that  whatever
meaning is given to the "unduly harsh" requirement it is  not  one  that  is
less stringent than the previous "reasonable[ness]"  test.  Hence,  even  if
the FtT erred in referring to reasonableness, it was an error that  made  no
material difference to its conclusion that  the  appellant  could  not  meet
para 399 of the Rules.

44. We have given consideration to whether there was any material  error  on
the part of the  FtT  in  stating  at  [34]  (as  already  noted)  that  the
children's parents "have a choice" as to whether  the  appellant  takes  the
children with her to Nigeria or, if the father was  willing  to  look  after
them, for him to have them stay in  the  UK  with  him  or  the  appellant's
sister. The reason why we have explored this is that  the  FtT  was  plainly
wrong to consider there was any such choice. The children were  the  subject
of a deportation order as family members  of  the  appellant.  They  had  no
right to be in the UK and no application had been made by  their  father  to
have them remain here as his dependent children.  However,  we  do  not  see
that this error had any material effect  on  the  FtT's  assessment  of  the
proportionality of the children's return to Nigeria,  which  they  expressly
found to be a proportionate measure. At best, the FtT appeared  to  consider
this issue as one arising in the alternative, on  the  assumption  that  the
children would not be deported with their mother.

45. For the above reasons, we conclude that the FtT did not  materially  err
in law and that its decision is to stand.

46. The one remaining matter we must consider is whether  the  FtT  decision
can be taken to include all three appellants  or  just  the  first  two.  As
already noted, we are satisfied that there was an appeal to the FtT  by  all
three appellants. The problem is that notwithstanding  this  fact,  the  FtT
only formally identified two appellants, the appellant and M.A. On one  view
this should be seen to entail that it has not as yet determined  the  appeal
of the third appellant. Indeed, in her  submission  Ms  Lloyd  asked  us  to
consider the FtT's silence about  the  third  appellant  (and  its  apparent
disregard of the second appellant when it referred on several  occasions  to
"the appellant" in the singular) as amounting to a material error of law.

47. In our judgment, for us to rule that there was no appeal  by  the  third
appellant would be to elevate formalism  over  substance.  We  have  already
noted that the grounds of appeal to the FtT expressly identified  the  third
appellant as an appellant.  It is clear from a reading of the  determination
as a whole that the FtT considered D.A.'s  circumstances  in  every  respect
that was relevant to determination of her appeal. Indeed there are  passages
in it that deal very  specifically  with  her  circumstances,  for  example,
those  addressing  submissions  made  concerning   her   potential   British
citizenship. They also state that the fact that she was born in the  UK  and
has been in the country for her entire  life  "is  a  matter  that  must  be
placed in  the  balance  when  assessing  proportionality,  and  the  public
interest". The decision also considers the  three  appellants  as  a  family
group.

48. For completeness, we should add that we reject, a fortiori,  Ms  Lloyd's
submission  that  the  FtT  erred  in  failing  to  determine   the   second
appellant's (M.A.'s) appeal: in her case, not only did they  formally  refer
to her as "the second appellant" and refer in the closing paragraph to  "the
appellants", but they dealt fully and substantively with her individual  and
family circumstances. Ms Lloyd was unable to identify any aspect of the  two
children's circumstances that were not considered and assessed by the FtT.

49. Accordingly, we consider that the FtT determined all  three  appeals  in
substance. So as to  formalise  matters,  we  direct  that  in  any  further
proceedings, the FtT's determination be read subject to  the  correction  by
us that it relates to three appellants, so as to include D.A.

Notice of Decision

50. To conclude:

The First-tier Tribunal did not materially err in law.

Its decision to dismiss the appellants' appeals [read so as to  include  the
appeal of D.A.] on all grounds is to stand.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or  court  directs  otherwise,  the  second  and
third appellants are granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings
shall directly or indirectly identify them.  Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Storey


