
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

BK (Deportation - s 33 "exception" UKBA 2007 - public interest) Ghana
[2010] UKUT 328 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London     |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 14 July 2010                  |                           |
|                                 |                           |

                                   Before

                             LORD JUSTICE SEDLEY
                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE LATTER
                        SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE WARD


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     BK
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Jegarajah, of Counsel instructed by Thompson &
Co., Solicitors

   1. Where an appellant is subject to a  decision  to  make  a  deportation
      order following a criminal conviction, is  not  subject  to  automatic
      deportation under s.32 of  the  UK  Borders  Act  2007  ("UKBA  2007")
      because he comes within one of  the  "exceptions"  set  out  in  s.33,
      relevant case law decided in respect  of  pre-UKBA  2007  deportations
      remains applicable.
   2. In such a case, in line with the Court of Appeal guidance in N (Kenya)
      [2004] EWCA Civ 104, the immigration judge must attach weight  to  the
      Secretary of State's view of the public interest in  arriving  at  his
      conclusion.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The Respondent, a citizen of Ghana, born 8  February  1991,  entered  the
United Kingdom as a visitor, aged 10, in December 2001.  His  leave  expired
in June 2002 but he remained unlawfully.  In June 2008 he was  sentenced  to
a total of four years' detention  in  a  Young  Offenders  Institution.  The
offences of which he had been convicted were  violent  disorder,  possession
of cocaine, possession of heroin, possession of a  firearm  and  ammunition,
and possession of a firearm  with  intent  to  endanger  life.  He  appealed
against his convictions but that was  dismissed  in  November  2008.  On  11
February 2009 the Appellant wrote to the governor of the prison in which  he
was held advising that he was considering making  a  deportation  order.  In
May 2009 representations were  made  to  the  Appellant  on  behalf  of  the
Respondent. Having considered those representations  the  Appellant  decided
to make a deportation order and rejected the  Respondent's  application  for
indefinite leave to remain, an application which was pending at  that  time.
The Respondent appealed against that decision and, by a determination  dated
7 January 2010, a panel  of  the  former  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal
consisting of Immigration Judge Bennett and Mr  Bremmer  (non-legal  member)
allowed his appeal. The Appellant sought and was granted  a  reconsideration
order. The  application  came  before  a  senior  immigration  judge  on  22
February 2010 and, following  the  demise  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
Tribunal, the application was considered as  an  application  for  leave  to
appeal to the Upper Tribunal (Immigration and  Asylum  Chamber).  Permission
to appeal was granted and thus the matter came before us.

Submissions

2. Both representatives made submissions, a full record of which appears  in
the Record of Proceedings.  A detailed skeleton  argument  was  provided  on
behalf of the Secretary of State. In  summary  it  was  submitted  that  the
panel had failed to give adequate reasons for findings on material  matters.
It was said that the panel allowed the appeal on Article 8 grounds  but  did
not have due regard to the Secretary of State's  position.  It  was  further
submitted that the panel did not have sufficient regard to  the  gravity  of
the  Respondent's  offences.  They  were  of  an  extremely  serious  nature
involving firearms and two different types of Class A drugs. The  panel,  it
was submitted, failed to give  proper  consideration  to  the  Secretary  of
State's view of the serious nature of those crimes. Reference  was  made  to
the words of Lord Justice Wall in the case of OP (Jamaica) [2008]  EWCA  Civ
440.  Mr Deller also referred us to the case of N (Kenya)  [2004]  EWCA  Civ
104 where it was said that where an appellant is not a British citizen,  the
public policy aspect involves  the  need  to  deter  and  express  society's
revulsion at the seriousness of the criminality and that this  can  tip  the
balance against the appellant.

3. It was further submitted that the panel had not grappled  with  the  full
circumstances of the Respondent, Mr Kofi, and  reference  was  made  to  the
principles set out in the case of �ner v The Netherlands  [2006]  ECHR  873.
Mr Deller also referred to the case of Chair  v  Germany  [2007]  ECHR  1053
where the Court placed weight on the fact  that  the  appellant  was  not  a
second-generation immigrant, and  investigated the level of ties  that  that
applicant had back in Morocco. In this current case, the Tribunal failed  to
look at the fact that the Respondent had spent the majority of his  life  in
his own country and had failed to consider his  ties  to  that  country.  Mr
Deller further submitted that there had  been  no  findings  on  whether  it
would be unreasonable for the Respondent's sister to relocate to  Ghana.  It
was also said that the panel had made a material  error  of  fact  regarding
the promise of a trial for the Respondent at West Bromwich  Albion  Football
Club; however this was not a point which Mr Deller pursued with  any  vigour
during the hearing.

4. Directing our attention to certain parts  of  the  determination  of  the
panel, Mr Deller argued that there was little engagement by  them  with  the
Secretary of State's side of the  balancing  exercise.  The  few  references
were to be found  in  paragraph  41  where  there  was  a  somewhat  oblique
reference to the judge's sentencing remarks, but no  real  consideration  of
the gravity of the offences.

5. On behalf of the Respondent, Ms Jegarajah provided grounds for  resisting
the appeal and detailed submissions therein. In summary she  submitted  that
the Respondent, who was aged 18 at the  date  of  the  appeal  hearing,  had
entered the United Kingdom  when  he  was  10,  and  had,  in  effect,  been
abandoned by his parents. He had suffered  violence  at  the  hands  of  his
father and been the  victim  of  bullying  at  college.  The  offences  were
committed when the Respondent was only 16. Throughout his residence  in  the
United Kingdom his family had been only his sister, who had been  living  in
the United Kingdom since 1999 and who had been granted indefinite  leave  to
remain in November 2008. The panel had carefully considered  the  statements
presented by the Respondent, his sister, and two family  friends.  They  had
also considered the sentencing remarks of the Crown Court judge.  The  panel
had made extensive reference to the judge's remarks at paragraphs 4,  5  and
6, and the rehabilitation of the Respondent in light of what the  sentencing
judge had referred to  as  "the  unbelievably  dreadful,  wicked  behaviour"
which he had engaged in. The panel had carefully directed themselves to  the
balancing exercise which they had to perform, and there  was  no  allegation
from the Appellant that this direction was unlawful.

6. Structurally the determination examined the nature of  the  offence,  the
approach of the sentencing court and the sentence itself and the  panel  had
identified the elements of the Appellant's case in  favour  of  deportation.
The panel then went on to consider the Respondent's case. It was clear,  she
submitted, from the determination that the  panel  had  allowed  the  appeal
because the Respondent had been resident in the United Kingdom since he  was
10, had no contact with anyone in Ghana, his only family, his  sister,   had
been resident and was still  resident  in  the  United  Kingdom,  and  that,
despite the serious nature of the offence,  the ultimate conclusion  of  the
sentencing judge  was  that  there  was  another  and  better  side  to  the
Respondent  and he should  be given the opportunity  to  make  something  of
his life. The panel  had  clearly  agreed  with  the  sentencing  judge  and
concluded  that  the  Respondent's  removal  would  run  counter   to   that
judgement.

7. Ms Jegarajah referred us to the case of JO (Uganda) and JT (Ivory  Coast)
[2010] EWCA Civ 10 and submitted that the approach  of  the  panel  in  this
current appeal was entirely consistent with the judgement  of  Lord  Justice
Richards in that case. For a settled migrant who had lawfully spent  all  or
substantial part of his or her childhood and  youth  in  the  host  country,
very serious reasons needed to be shown to justify  expulsion.  She  further
submitted that the  panel  did  pay  appropriate  regard  to  the  Court  of
Appeal's words in N (Kenya). It could not be said, she submitted,  that  the
panel failed to have regard to the public interest, and that, in effect  the
challenge to the determination was  one  simply  of  disagreement  with  the
findings.

8. At the end of the  submissions  the  Tribunal  retired  to  consider  its
decision and, upon return, announced its decision to dismiss the  appeal  as
no material error of law had been shown.   It  was  announced  that  reasons
would follow in writing, which reasons we now give.

No material error of law

9. This case concerns an appeal  against  a  deportation  order  made  under
section 5(1) of the Immigration Act 1971. Notwithstanding  the  coming  into
effect of section 32 of  the  UK  Borders  Act  2007  ("UKBA  2007"),  which
provides for the "automatic deportation" of a  "foreign  criminal"  (defined
in subsection 1 thereof as a person who is not a  British  citizen,  who  is
convicted of an offence in the United Kingdom and is sentenced to  a  period
of imprisonment of at least 12 months), the Respondent did not  come  within
that section as he fell  within  one of the exceptions set  out  in  section
33 of the Act, which disapplied it.  Exception 2, set out in section  33(3),
applies where "the Secretary of State thinks that the foreign  criminal  was
under the age of 18 on the date of conviction." In this case the  Respondent
was aged 16 at the time of the offences.

10. Our attention has been  drawn to the relevant passages of N (Kenya),  in
connection with the  submission that the  panel  did  not  engage  with  key
issues raised by the Secretary of State and did not give  sufficient  weight
to the matters weighing in favour of deportation.  May  LJ  stated  in  that
case:

    "64. In a deportation appeal under section 63(1) of the 1999  Act,  the
    adjudicator  has  an  original  statutory  discretion  as  provided  in
    paragraph 21(1) of Schedule 4 of the 1999 Act.  The  discretion  is  to
    balance the public interest against the compassionate circumstances  of
    the case  taking  account  of  all  relevant  factors  including  those
    specifically referred to in paragraph 364 of HC  395.  Essentially  the
    same balance is expressed as that  between  the  appellant's  right  to
    respect for his private and  family  life  on  the  one  hand  and  the
    prevention of disorder or crime on the other. Where a person who is not
    a British citizen commits a number of very serious crimes,  the  public
    interest side of the balance will  include  importantly,  although  not
    exclusively, the public policy need to deter and to  express  society's
    revulsion at  the  seriousness  of  the  criminality.  It  is  for  the
    adjudicator in the exercise of his discretion  to  weigh  all  relevant
    factors, but an individual adjudicator is no better able to  judge  the
    critical public interest  factor  than  is  the  court.  In  the  first
    instance, that is a matter for the Secretary of State. The  adjudicator
    should then take proper account of  the  Secretary  of  State's  public
    interest view."

11.  Judge LJ, as he then was, elaborated further in  his  judgment  on  the
public interest aspect in the balancing exercise:

        "83. "public good" and the "public interest"  are  wide-ranging  but
    undefined concepts. In my judgment (whether expressly  referred  to  in
    any decision letter or not) broad issues of social cohesion and  public
    confidence in the administration of the  system  by  which  control  is
    exercised over non-British citizens who enter and remain in the  United
    Kingdom are engaged. They include an element  of  deterrence,  to  non-
    British citizens who  are  already  here,  even  if  they  are  genuine
    refugees and to those minded to come, so as to ensure that they clearly
    understand that, whatever the circumstances, one of the consequences of
    serious crime may well be deportation. The Secretary  of  State  has  a
    primary responsibility for this system. His  decisions  have  a  public
    importance beyond the personal impact on the individual or  individuals
    who would be directly affected by them. The adjudicator must  form  his
    own independent judgment.  Provided  he  is  satisfied  that  he  would
    exercise the discretion "differently" to the  Secretary  of  State,  he
    must say so. Nevertheless, in every case, he should  at  least  address
    the Secretary of State's prime responsibility for the  public  interest
    and the public good, and the impact that these  matters  will  properly
    have had on the exercise of  his  discretion.  The  adjudicator  cannot
    decide that the discretion of the Secretary of State "should have  been
    exercised differently"  without  understanding  and  giving  weight  to
    matters which the Secretary of State was entitled or required  to  take
    into account when considering the public good."

  13. In the case of OH  (Serbia)  [2008]  EWCA  Civ  694,  Wilson  LJ  also
      reflected on this point, drawing on what was  said  in  N  (Kenya)  as
      follows:


    "15. ..(c)..Primary responsibility for the public interest, whose  view
    of it is likely to  be  wider  and  better  informed  than  that  of  a
    tribunal, resides in the respondent and accordingly a tribunal  hearing
    an appeal against a decision to deport should  not  only  consider  for
    itself all the facets of the public interest but  should  weigh,  as  a
    linked but independent feature, the approach to  them  adopted  by  the
    respondent in the context of  the  facts  of  the  case.  Speaking  for
    myself, I would not however describe the tribunal's duty in this regard
    as being higher than "to weigh" this feature."


14. We do not believe that the panel in this current appeal failed  to  heed
such guidance. The panel, stated at paragraph 41(c):

    " In view of the length of time to which Mr Kofi has been  resident  in
    the United Kingdom and the fact that he arrived when he  was  only  two
    months short of his 11th birthday, although he is  a  foreign  criminal
    within section 32  of  the  2007  Act  we  do  not  consider  that  any
    reasonable person, viewing the facts  of  his  case  objectively,  when
    considering  the  needs  identified  in  N  (Kenya)  to  deter  foreign
    criminals from committing serious crimes and to build  confidence  that
    foreign nationals who have committed serious crimes are dealt with with
    appropriate severity, would realistically consider  Mr  Kofi  to  be  a
    foreign criminal (in broad terms, using those words in  their  everyday
    usage, as opposed to  the  statutory  definition).  For  all  practical
    purposes, we conclude Mr Kofi is more properly categorised,  and  would
    be seen by all reasonable minded persons considering those needs, as  a
    homegrown criminal.  We  therefore  conclude  that  the  considerations
    identified in N (Kenya) and 0H  (Serbia)  are  of  only  the  slightest
    weight (if they have any weight at all) in the particular circumstances
    of Mr Kay's case."

15.  Mr  Deller's  submission  on   this   particular   passage   from   the
determination was that it evidenced the error on the part of  the  panel  in
not according any or any sufficient weight to the Secretary of State's  side
of the balance.  We do not accept this submission. While  the  Tribunal  may
have expressed itself forcefully, what it was saying  was  legitimate:  that
it was in this country that Mr Kofi had done most of his growing up and  had
acquired his criminal habits, so that, in that respect,  he  was  unlike  an
adult foreigner who  comes  here  and  commits  serious  crimes.  The  panel
clearly took the view that  there was little was to be gained  in  terms  of
deterrence or an expression of society's revulsion, or in terms of  building
public confidence that appropriate treatment would be  accorded  to  foreign
citizens who have commit serious crimes. We do not consider that  it  was  a
view which was not reasonably available to them.

16. Contrary to Mr Deller's submission, we take the view that the  reference
to giving only "slight weight or no weight at  all"  to  the  considerations
identified in N (Kenya) and  OH  (Serbia)  does  not  mean  that  the  panel
misdirected itself or did not give sufficient regard to what we  might  call
the "public interest factors" weighing in  favour  of  deportation.  On  the
contrary, a reading of the determination as a whole reveals that  the  panel
set out in some considerable detail the sentencing remarks of Judge  Worsley
and the disapproval expressed  therein.  In  doing  so  they  described  the
circumstances in which the offences had been committed, and details  of  the
offences  themselves  (paragraphs  4  and  5  of  the  determination).  They
particularly noted the judge's remarks that the Respondent was  involved  in
a "voluntary commercial business" for the sale of the drugs,  and  that  the
Respondent showed no remorse for the gun which he had with  him.  The  panel
quoted the judge's comments that Mr Kofi had been engaged  in  "unbelievably
dreadful, wicked behaviour ".   In the light of these  matters  set  out  in
the determination, we have no doubt that the panel was  well  aware  of  the
severity and seriousness of the offences, and we have no reason  to  believe
that they did not take these factors into consideration.

17. It may be that another judge and another panel  would  have  decided  to
attach a greater weight to those factors in the particular circumstances  of
this case, but we cannot say that in attaching little or no weight to  these
factors in this case the panel acted perversely or irrationally.  They  were
entitled to attach such weight as they saw fit to those factors.

18. The principal criticism of the Secretary of  State,  however,  was  that
the panel acted in disregard of the clear jurisprudence. We  do  not  accept
that  submission.  Clearly  the  panel  did  have  regard  to  the  relevant
jurisprudence and made express reference to N (Kenya) and  OH  (Serbia).  Mr
Deller submitted that the panel did not pay due regard to the  Secretary  of
State's view and failed to engage with the key issues  raised  by  her.   In
this regard, we note that, in at paragraph  32  of  the  determination,  the
panel set out passages from the judgement of Wilson LJ in  the  case  of  OH
(Serbia), which we have noted above.


19. In  order to ascertain what the Secretary of State's views were in  this
particular case  we have had regard to the decision letter dated  11  August
2009, and,  as far as we can see those views are  set  out  in  paragraph  8
thereof  where it is stated:

       "The Secretary  of  State  regards  as  particularly  serious  those
       offences involving violence, and drugs. Also taken into  account  is
       the sentencing court's view of the seriousness  of  the  offence  as
       reflected in the sentence imposed, the result  of  any  appeal  upon
       that sentence as well as the effect of that type  of  crime  on  the
       wider community. The type of offence in  its  seriousness,  together
       with the need to protect the  public  from  serious  crime  and  its
       effects are important factors when considering  whether  deportation
       is in the public interest."


 The refusal letter then goes on, in paragraph 9, to set out extracts  from
the judge's sentencing remarks. We can find nothing else in that letter  to
describe the key issues regarded by the Appellant as  requiring  particular
weight in favour of deportation.


20. We now turn to consider whether the panel had regard to those views.  As
we have set out above, the panel was clearly cognisant  of  the  seriousness
of the offences involved. The panel also noted that the Respondent's  appeal
had been unsuccessful (see paragraph 7 of  the  determination).  As  regards
the effect of this type of crime on wider community, it is difficult to  see
what the panel could have done with that statement. The Secretary  of  State
did not apparently provide any evidence to show the result of this  type  of
crime on the wider community. The Respondent  had  engaged  in  a  crime  of
violence and in the supply of Class  A  drugs.   The  impact  of  drugs  and
violence on the community is well known both to the  Appellant  and  to  the
Tribunal and there is no reason to think that  the  Tribunal  underestimated
it here.


21. As regards the "need to protect the public  from  serious  crime",  this
raises the  issue  of  risk  of  re-offending.  The  panel  noted  in  their
determination  that the Respondent had been convicted of minor matters,  two
motoring offences in January 2007 and an assault in  2003  when  he  was  12
years old. They had the various pieces of evidence from the  Young  Offender
institution in which Mr Kofi  had  been  detained,  and  from  his  personal
officer at HM Prison Rochester. They were satisfied that his  conduct  while
in custody had been more than  "simply  good".  They  also  noted  that  the
sentencing judge had been satisfied that  there  was  another  side  to  the
Respondent other than that shown by the offences, and that he  was  a  young
man "with good in him". The panel  indicated  that  they  agreed  with  this
assessment.

22. There does  not  appear  to  have  been  any  evidence  of  professional
assessment of future risk of re-offending, and therefore the  panel  had  to
do the best they could with the evidence that they had. There was no  expert
evidence to show that the Respondent posed any risk in the  community,  just
as  there  was  no  expert  evidence  to  show  that  he  did  not.  In  the
circumstances we cannot see how the panel could  have  done  any  more  than
they did when there simply was no real evidence in this regard.

23. We have concluded, therefore, that,  to  the  limited  extent  that  the
Secretary of State made known his views in the context of this case, it  has
not been shown that the panel failed to take them into consideration.

24. We note, as an aside, that N (Kenya) was decided at a  time  when  there
was  no  legislative  guideline  or  policy  in  place  to  determine  which
offenders  ought  to  be  deported,   subject   always   to   human   rights
considerations, and which need not be. Hence  the  weight  required  by  the
Court of Appeal to be given to the  Home  Secretary's  view  of  the  public
interest in  arriving  at  the  adjudicator's  or  immigration  judge's  own
conclusion. It is possible that this always difficult exercise - that is  to
say, giving weight but not primacy to the opinion of  another  authority  in
arriving at an independent judgment - has been superseded by  the  enactment
of section 32 of the UKBA 2007. This section draws a  bright  line,  calling
for no further judgment, where its  terms  are  met:  a  "foreign  criminal"
faces "automatic deportation".  Other foreign offenders do not  -  they  may
be deported, but there is no legislative  presumption  that  they  will  be.
Both classes may resist deportation on human  rights  grounds;  but  in  the
case of a "foreign criminal" the Act places in the proportionality scales  a
markedly greater weight than in other cases. In this  situation  it  is  not
easy to see what separate or additional weight is to be given  to  the  Home
Secretary's own judgment beyond the fact that it is known to  be  in  favour
of deportation. Arguably the executive's view of policy  and  its  immediate
requirements has been superseded by the legislature's.  However, we  do  not
need to decide this point in this appeal because, although touched upon,  it
was  not  directly  relevant  because  Mr  Kofi  comes  within  one  of  the
exceptions in section 33 of the UKBA 2007.


25. It was also submitted that there were no  findings  on  whether  it  was
reasonable or unreasonable  for  the  Respondent's  sister  to  relocate  to
Ghana. It was submitted that the panel had a duty to set  out  why,  on  the
basis of the evidence provided, the entire family unit  could  not  live  in
Ghana. The Appellant has argued that it may be  thought  that  it  would  be
unreasonable for the Respondent's sister to  relocate  to  Ghana  after  her
long residence in the UK, but that this was a matter which should  at  least
have been considered by the panel, and was not.

26. We agree that there  is  no  expression  in  the  determination  of  the
consideration of this point  by  the  panel.  However  the  panel  noted  at
paragraph 39 (g) that the Respondent had lived in the United  Kingdom  since
December 2001 and had no real connection with  Ghana  or  with  his  parents
there. They noted that the only member of his family with whom  he  had  any
real contact was his sister in the UK and that to remove him to Ghana  would
involve him being separated from her and sending him to a country  where  he
had no friends or relatives who were willing or able  to  assist  him.  They
further noted in paragraph 41 that his sister had been living in the  United
Kingdom for 10 years and had indefinite leave to remain here. Mr Deller  did
not direct our attention to any evidence which might be said  to  show  that
it was reasonable to expect the Respondent's sister to  relocate  to  Ghana.
Having had regard to the situation of the Respondent's sister in the  United
Kingdom we have little doubt that there is no real case  to  argue  that  it
was reasonable to expect this young lady to sever her connections  with  the
United Kingdom and return to a country which she had left in 2001  when  she
was 14 years old, and where she had no family with whom she was  in  contact
and to whom she could look to for help and support.   We  therefore  do  not
regard this as an  error  which  materially  affected  the  outcome  of  the
appeal.

Decision

27. For all the above reasons, we conclude that no  material  error  of  law
has been shown and the decision of the panel is therefore to stand.


                                             Signed
                                             Senior Immigration Judge Ward
                                             Judge of the Upper Tribunal



