








R (on the application of Gazi) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
(ETS - judicial review) IJR [2015] UKUT 00327 (IAC)

                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                       Judicial Review Decision Notice


             In the matter of an application for judicial review

                       The Queen on the application of

                          Abu Shahdat MD Sayem Gazi
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent



 Before The Honourable Mr Justice McCloskey, President of the Upper Tribunal

Having heard Mr N Armstrong, of Counsel, instructed by Bindmans  Solicitors,
on behalf of the Applicant and Mr M Gullick, of Counsel, instructed  by  the
Government Legal Department on behalf of the  Respondent  at  a  hearing  at
Field House, London on 21 April and 05 May 2015.

A challenge to the strength and quality of  the  evidence  underpinning  the
Secretary of State's decision to remove a student from  the  United  Kingdom
under section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999  on  the  ground  of
fraud in procuring a TOEIC English language qualification is best suited  to
the fact finding forum of the First-tier  Tribunal  and  is  unsuitable  for
determination by an application for judicial review.




                                  Judgment


                          delivered on 27 May 2015


McCloskey J


I.    INTRODUCTION


   1. The litigation context in which this challenge unfolds is conveniently
      identified in an earlier decision of  this  Tribunal,  R  (Mahmood)  v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] UKUT 00439 (IAC), at
      [1]:


           "This is another of the currently plentiful crop  of  soi-disant
           "ETS" judicial review cases.  These have  gained  much  currency
           during recent months, stimulated by action taken  on  behalf  of
           the Secretary of State for the Home Department  ("the  Secretary
           of State"), the Respondent  herein,  in  the  wake  of  the  BBC
           "Panorama" programme  broadcast  on  10  February  2014.   "ETS"
           denotes Educational Testing Services, a global agency contracted
           to provide certain educational testing and  assessment  services
           to the Secretary of State.  In order to secure leave  to  remain
           in the United Kingdom, by virtue of the relevant  provisions  of
           the Immigration Rules it  was  incumbent  on  the  Applicant  to
           provide evidence that  he  had  obtained  a  specified  type  of
           English language qualification.  The action taken on  behalf  of
           the Secretary of State, which the Applicant challenges by  these
           proceedings,  was  based  on  an  assessment  that  the  English
           language certificate on which he relied  had  been  procured  by
           deception."




      The decision in Mahmood was promulgated  in  September  2014.  At  the
      outset, it is convenient to be  aware  that  the  vocabulary  in  this
      sphere includes in particular the following:-

            "TOEIC":   this  denotes  "Test  of  English  for  International
      Communication".
      "ETS":  this denotes the entity Educational Testing  Service  Limited,
      one of the Home Office suppliers of "secure English language testing".




   2. The impugned decision of the Respondent, the Secretary  of  State  for
      the  Home  Department  (hereinafter  the  "Secretary  of  State")  was
      initially conveyed to the Applicant by letter dated 25 July  2014,  in
      these terms:


           "It  has  come  to  the  attention  of  the  Home  Office,  from
           information provided by Educational Testing Service  (ETS)  that
           an anomaly with your speaking test indicated the presence  of  a
           proxy test taker ...


      In light of this information it is the considered opinion of the Home
           Office that you have utilised deception to gain leave to  remain
           in the United Kingdom."


      The letter also spelled out the consequence of this assessment:  steps
      would be taken to remove the Applicant from the United  Kingdom  under
      section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act  1999.  Some  two  months
      following the initiation of these proceedings the Secretary  of  State
      made a fresh decision, evidently precipitated by the  case  made,  and
      evidence presented, by the Applicant. This further decision, which  is
      dated  19  January  2015,  maintained  the  predecessor  decision  and
      replicated the passages in  the  earlier  decision  reproduced  above.
      This is the current, operative decision which is challenged  in  these
      proceedings.  This  was  followed  by  service  of  formal  Notice  of
      Removal.


   3. Between the two last mentioned  events,  appropriate  case  management
      measures were taken and the  Applicant  applied,  unsuccessfully,  for
      interim relief in a form which would permit him to resume his  studies
      at the relevant university. Next, following an inter-partes hearing, I
      granted permission to apply for judicial review.   The  Applicant  was
      also permitted to amend his grounds  of  challenge.   The  substantive
      hearing ensued. In passing, I mention for completeness  an  even  more
      recent decision, dated 14 April 2015, whereby the Secretary  of  State
      has certified as clearly unfounded the Applicant's  outstanding  human
      rights claim, which was made on 13 August 2014.  This was  accompanied
      by a Notice of Removal of the same date, the terms whereof encapsulate
      the reasons for the impugned decision:


           "You are specifically considered a person who has  sought  leave
           to remain in the United Kingdom by deception.  For the  purposes
           of your application dated 04  November  2013,  you  submitted  a
           TOEIC certificate from [ETS] to the Home Office and your sponsor
           in order  for  them  to  provide  you  with  a  Confirmation  of
           Acceptance for Studies [a so-called "CAS" certificate]. ...


           ETS  has  a  record  of  your  speaking   test.    Using   voice
           verification software, ETS is  able  to  detect  when  a  single
           person is undertaking multiple tests.  ETS undertook a check  of
           your test and confirmed to the SSHD that there  was  significant
           evidence to conclude  that  your  certificate  was  fraudulently
           obtained by the use of a proxy test taker.  Your scores from the
           test taken on 28 August 2013 at Eden College International  have
           now been cancelled by ETS."

      The next ensuing sentence encapsulates the Secretary of State's  case:


           "On the basis of the information provided to  her  by  ETS,  the
           SSHD is satisfied that there is substantial evidence to conclude
           that your certificate was fraudulently obtained."


 II.  THE EVIDENCE CONSIDERED


      The Applicant's evidence


   4. The Applicant is a national of Bangladesh,  aged  33  years.   He  was
      lawfully present in the United Kingdom, as a student, from July  2007.
      During   the   following   years,   he   obtained   certain   academic
      qualifications.  In December 2013 he was granted a Tier 4 Visa,  valid
      until 30 October 2015.   This followed his admission to  a  course  at
      Glyndwr University (hereinafter "the university").  He then  undertook
      the stipulated English language ("TOEIC") tests and, in January  2014,
      was informed by the university  that  he  had  been  successful.   The
      advent of the first decision letter, in July 2014 (supra) followed his
      completion of the  first  semester.   Next,  in  September  2014,  the
      university informed him by letter that their Tier 4 licence  had  been
      suspended by the Secretary of State.   The  letter  further  intimated
      that the university was withdrawing its sponsorship of  the  Applicant
      as it had been informed that his TOEIC Certificate had  been  procured
      by deception.


   5. In the first of his two witness  statements,  the  Applicant  protests
      that his English language  skills  are  of  a  high  standard  and  he
      elaborates on the various qualifications obtained by him between  2007
      and 2011. He also describes the circumstances and  events  surrounding
      the test which he claims to have taken, on 28 August  2013.   Part  of
      the test involved the reading of certain sentences aloud.  There  were
      some ten students in attendance.  According to the Applicant:


           "Everyone taking the exam spoke loudly and it sounded like I was
           in a pub as we were all speaking at the same time."


      The other  elements  of  the  test  involved  writing,  listening  and
      reading. Continuing, he recounts that he  was  able  to  continue  his
      studies,  completing  the  second  semester,  between  September   and
      November 2014, in spite of the university's letter, having  apparently
      re-enrolled in error. It appears that his studies effectively came  to
      a halt at this stage.


      The Respondent's Evidence.

   6. The generic witness statement of Ms Collings is made in the context of
      a regulatory era wherein the  Immigration  Rules  and/or  Home  Office
      policies require large numbers of immigrants  to  demonstrate  English
      language  competence  to  a  certain  standard  and   via   prescribed
      mechanisms.  The ETS entity is one of a small number  of  Home  Office
      suppliers of so-called "Secure English Language Testing" ("SELT")  and
      was appointed in 2011 following a procurement exercise.  ETS  notifies
      those examined of their grades by a  certificate.   It  operates  test
      centres where the  requisite  examination  is  undertaken.   The  Home
      Office has consistently been alert  to  the  risk  of  fraud  in  this
      sphere.


   7. The Home Office was  first  alerted  to  "the  potential  issues  with
      testing at ETS" upon receipt of a letter dated 06  January  2014  from
      the BBC.  The makers of  the  "Panorama"  programme  claimed  to  have
      uncovered evidence of fraud which included the  active  collusion  and
      participation of employees at the ETS test centres.  The investigation
      focused on two specific centres. One of these  is  Eden  International
      College, where the Applicant underwent his test. On 06  February  2014
      the Home Office made a public announcement that  ETS  testing  in  the
      United Kingdom was being  suspended.   At  this  stage  ETS  had  been
      operating tests  for  almost  three  years.   The  Panorama  programme
      followed,  on  10  February  2014.   The  contents  of  the  programme
      convinced the Home Office that there had been "a serious breach of the
      licence and of use of the immigration system".  In particular:


           ".....  In relation to ETS test centres, individuals  were  able
           to pay to pass the English language  test.   Proxy  test  takers
           were seen taking the speaking element of the  test  and  answers
           were seen read out from the front of a class supposedly taking a
           multiple choice element of the test."


      Immediately thereafter, ETS interacted with the  Home  Office  in  the
      provision of unspecified "data, trend analysis  and  other  evidence".
      Next, in late March 2014, the Home Office was informed by ETS -


           "...  that it had been able to identify impersonation and  proxy
           testing  using  voice  recognition  software.   Early   analysis
           demonstrated evidence of cheating, but  ETS  confirmed  that  it
           would take time to complete analysis for all tests  taken  since
           the licence began in April 2011 ...


           ETS sent the Home Office the results  of  the  analysis  of  the
           first batch of test centres on 24 and 28 March 2014."


       Ms Collings averments continue:


           "Following the provision of this data  the  Home  Office  had  a
           teleconference with ETS on  01  April  [2014].   The  discussion
           focused on the first batch of test analysis.  ETS described that
           any test categorised as cancelled (which later became  known  as
           invalid) had the  same  voice  for  multiple  test  takers.   On
           questioning they  advised  that  they  were  certain  there  was
           evidence of proxy test taking of impersonation in those cases."


           [Emphasis supplied.]

      It is agreed that the Applicant's case is one of  those  belonging  to
this initial tranche.


   8. Continuing, Ms Collings explains  that  ETS  devised  two  categories,
      namely "invalid" and "questionable".  All were  subject  to  the  same
      sanction: cancellation of the test certificate.  At this, the initial,
      stage some 10,000 test scores had been analysed by ETS.  The  majority
      of these were cancelled as invalid, while the others were cancelled as
      questionable.


      The rationale of the ensuing decisions made under section  10  of  the
      1999 Act is explained thus:


           "We recognised that where ETS had cancelled a test score because
           of impersonation and proxy test taking that test score had  been
           obtained by deception.  We further recognised  that  persons  in
           that position who then used that test score had sought to obtain
           leave by deception."


      Ms Collings also makes the following claim:


           "Where the details of the certificate on the  Home  Office  file
           matched those provided in  the  data  from  ETS  as  an  invalid
           result, we undertook a consideration  of  all  relevant  factors
           (including for example  possible  human  rights  grounds)  which
           might mean that removal was  not  appropriate.   Where  no  such
           circumstances  existed,  we  took  a  decision  to  remove   the
           applicant ....  under section 10(1)(b) ...."


      It is far from clear whether this exercise entailed an examination  of
      each case individually. The averment is opaque. As the deponent notes,
      upon service of such decisions section 10(8)  operates  to  invalidate
      the leave  to  enter  or  remain  previously  granted  to  the  person
      concerned. While such decisions generate a right of  appeal,  this  is
      exercisable from abroad only.


   9. The second generic witness statement is that of  Mr  Millington.  This
      discloses that his rank within the Home Office is  that  of  Assistant
      Director, with current responsibility for the  net  work  of  "Sponsor
      Compliance Officers" in certain parts of the United  Kingdom.  He  had
      previously directed the unit which processed in country Tier 4 student
      applications.  This confirms that there was a first phase, which dated
      from February to June 2014. At this juncture,  it  is  appropriate  to
      highlight the single piece of documentary  evidence  relating  to  the
      decision in the Applicant's  case  which  has  been  produced  by  the
      Secretary of State.  It consists  of  a  photocopied  excerpt  from  a
      spreadsheet taking the form of a horizontal line containing six pieces
      of information: the "ETS Registration ID", the Applicant's  first  and
      last names, the test date, the Applicant's date of birth and the  name
      of the test centre.  Neither the word "invalid" or  "cancellation"  or
      any derivative of either appears.


  10. The active enquiries and other steps described by Mr Millington in his
      statement did not begin until June 2014, at which  stage,  accompanied
      by a government solicitor and a colleague, a visit  was  made  to  ETS
      headquarters in the USA.  ETS is described  as  "the  world's  largest
      private non-profit educational testing and  assessment  organisation",
      administering approximately 50 million tests annually in  25,000  test
      centres in 192 countries.  Its systems allow for the scoring of around
      64,000 tests daily.  It  is  also,  supposedly,  a  "world  leader  in
      respect of fraud prevention and detection".  ETS receives, and stores,
      the electronic files relating to the spoken and written  responses  of
      each student.  Random marking of individual  files  is  undertaken  by
      multiple accredited "markers".  The analysis of speech  recordings  is
      one of the anti-fraud measures which ETS has developed  during  recent
      years.  Conscious of the limitations attendant  upon  these  measures,
      ETS had, prior to the Panorama programme, begun testing and developing
      so-called "biometric voice recognition".  The mechanics  of  this  are
      described in these terms:


           "The  basic  technology  extracts  biometric  features  from  an
           individual's  speech  to  generate  voice   print   (the   voice
           equivalent of a finger print).  This voice print can then be run
           against samples to establish whether  the  sample  is  likely  a
           recording of the same person who had generated the  voice  print
           or a different person."


      It is claimed that in 2011 ETS procured the necessary software from  a
      provider which had successfully  operated  this  technology  in  other
      sectors.  No particulars of the provider, software or the arrangement,
      have been disclosed due to a confidentiality agreement.


  11. ETS claims (per Mr Millington) that technology testing  undertaken  in
      2012/13 entailed over 70,000  pairings  of  non-matching  comparisons.
      This was a pilot testing scheme and:


           "The results ....  were that matching  samples  produced  values
           that were higher than values from the non-matching  samples  the
           majority of the time, with a less than 2% error rate ....


           ETS  accepted  that  voice  biometric  technology  is  currently
           imperfect ...  too many false positives would fatally  undermine
           the integrity of the voice biometric system ...."


      As a result, it is claimed that  the  "thresholds"  were  reformulated
      conservatively, with a consequential reduction in "the probability  of
      false positives".  The trial of the technology was considered to  have
      been "successful" prompting a decision to extend its use to the  TOEIC
      arena.  Making due allowance for the opacity of some of the  averments
      which follow in the  witness  statement,  neither  the  date  of  this
      decision nor the date of its implementation is disclosed.  It appears,
      however,  that  the  Panorama   programme   was   the   stimulus   for
      implementation, notwithstanding that  ETS  "...   had  not  originally
      planned to roll out its voice biometric technology on  TOEIC  at  that
      point or to use it as a retrospective fraud identification tool  ...."
      The precise particulars of the decision said to have been taken in the
      wake of the Panorama programme are unclear.


  12. At this stage, comprehension of the  terminology  used  is  essential.
      The "electronic files" are those which contain  each  person's  spoken
      responses made during the course of the test.  For the purpose of  the
      biometric voice recognition exercise:


           "The electronic files generated at the testing stage required  a
           two step audio conversion process ..........."

      It appears that through  this  conversion  they  mutated  into  "audio
      files".  Continuing,  Mr  Millington  explains  that  the  "Office  of
      Testing Integrity" ("OTI"), an internal division of ETS, were -


           "....  provided with electronic files and for  each  test  taken
           identified the six audio files which were most  appropriate  for
           comparison."

      The most  appropriate  files  were  considered  to  be  "usually"  the
      largest/longest; those providing  the  clearest  responses;  or  those
      where all test takers were required to read a set  text.   As  regards
      the mechanics of what occurred thereafter:


           "Tests from a test centre were batched into groups of 300 -  400
           test takers ...


           These audio files were then run  through  the  voice  biometrics
           engine.  Each  batch  would  take  approximately  two  hours  to
           process.  The engine would compare each test to all other  tests
           in that batch and flag all suspicious results (those that were a
           'match') in  line  with  the  probability  thresholds  discussed
           above.  The output would be a list of flagged  cases  ranked  in
           order of the most likely match through to least likely."


      These averments conjure up  the  image  of  a  sliding  scale,  to  be
      contrasted  with  the  dichotomy  of  "invalid"   and   "questionable"
      described in Ms Collings' witness statement.


  13. During the visit of Mr Millington and  his  colleagues,  the  briefing
      which they received included the following:


           "They [ETS] acknowledged  that  the  technology  they  used  was
           imperfect and that  samples  could  be  incorrectly  flagged  as
           matches (ie false positives).  This could occur due to noise  in
           the background of a recording (eg an air conditioning system) or
           the detection of another noise in the background  which  matches
           another test taker (although ETS notes that test  takers  should
           not be sitting so close to one another that  they  can  overhear
           each other's responses)."


      In recognition of the risk of "false positives", it  is  claimed  that
      ETS ".... subjected each flagged match to a further human verification
      process".  This required the recruitment of additional staff  who,  it
      is said, received "mandatory training in voice  recognition  analysis"
      and were "initially mentored by experienced  OTI  analysts".   Neither
      the date when this recruitment was undertaken nor the date when it was
      completed is disclosed.  Equally, there is no disclosure of the period
      during which the supervision endured.  It is acknowledged that various
      numbers of redeployed staff were discarded "because they did not  have
      the necessary aptitude for the task".   Having engaged  the  necessary
      number of analysts,  the  process  operated  was  that  each  "flagged
      comparison" would be considered  by  two  analysts  separately.   Each
      analyst would then form an opinion.  The purpose of the  exercise  was
      to  establish  whether,  in  both  analysts'  opinion,   the   samples
      constituted a "match", having been thus designated by  the  "biometric
      engine" initially. It would appear that this verification exercise  is
      a purely human one.


  14. Mr Millington then describes certain demonstrations provided  by  ETS.
      Neither the duration of this exercise nor  the  number  of  individual
      cases considered is disclosed.  He makes the following claim:


           "It was very clear to me, from the samples I heard,  that  those
           samples were of the same person speaking.  I was able to compare
           tone, accent and the  distinctive  and  instinctive  expressions
           used to fill hesitations in speech."


      One observes, inevitably,  that  this  description  of  what  actually
      occurred is lean in detail and, further, as noted above, Mr Millington
      can lay claim to no relevant credentials or expertise in the field  of
      voice  recognition.   The  same  observations  apply  to  his  ensuing
      averments that non-verified matches were "confidently"  identified  by
      Mr Millington and his colleagues.  There is a discernible  element  of
      bombast in these claims.


  15. The novel  and  evolving  (if  not  embryonic)  nature  of  the  voice
      biometric technology emerges strikingly in the following averments  of
      Mr Millington:


           "During the demonstration, the senior analyst advised  that  the
           OTI  were  constantly  updating  their  guidance   and   sharing
           information to ensure that analysts  could  hone  their  skills.
           For example, they  shared  the  distinctive  use  of  particular
           idioms, verbal tics and/or answers being structured  in  exactly
           the same way between test takers.  We were also advised that, in
           order to maintain accuracy, analysts  were  encouraged  to  take
           regular breaks and every effort was taken to  avoid  an  analyst
           dealing with the same  testing  centre  or  the  same  questions
           repetitively."


            [My emphasis.]


      There is an unmistakable self-serving element in the  averments  which
      follow:


           "ETS statistics bear out the underlying reliability of the voice
           biometrics  technology.   Of  over   33,000   possible   matches
           identified  by  the  system  80%  were  confirmed  after   human
           verification.  As already discussed, many of these 'non-verified
           matches' would have been because of the presence of noise in the
           background  of  recordings.   The  analysts  adopt  an  approach
           whereby any doubt about the validity of a match will  result  in
           it being rejected. I am confident this  mitigates  significantly
           against the risk of a false positive."


            [Emphasis added.]


      Given the terms in which Mr Millington's ensuing averments are framed,
      they invite reproduction, rather than paraphrase:


           "ETS have identified thousands of  cases  where  speech  samples
           display marked similarities, leading OTI to believe an  imposter
           was involved and in such cases scores will be cancelled.  Within
           the tests analysed the OTI has identified many  instances  where
           the speech sample indicates the same individual has taken  tests
           in place  of  numerous  candidates.   Where  a  match  has  been
           identified their approach is to invalidate the test  result  ...
           ETS has informed the Home Office  that  there  was  evidence  of
           invalidity in those cases."


      The dichotomy of "invalidity" and "irregularity"  is  identifiable  in
      the immediately ensuing averments:


           "Where  a  match  has  not  been  identified  and  verified,  an
           individual's test result may still be invalidated on  the  basis
           of test administration  irregularity  including  the  fact  that
           their test was taken at a UK testing centre where numerous other
           results have been invalidated on the basis  of  a  'match'.   In
           those cases the individual would usually be invited  to  take  a
           free re-test.  These cases are clearly distinguished by  ETS  in
           its spreadsheets provided to the Home Office  from  tests  where
           there is substantial evidence of invalidity."


      No exhibited illustration of this distinction, even in redacted  form,
      is provided.  Finally, it is clear from the concluding averments in Mr
      Millington's witness statement that the Home Office invariably accepts
      the deception assessment provided by ETS,without more.


      The expert opinion of Dr Harrison


  16. Dr Harrison was engaged by the Applicant's solicitors for the  purpose
      of preparing an expert report. It would appear that the report was not
      commissioned  specifically  for  the  purpose  of  these,  or   other,
      proceedings. There is no issue about his expert credentials.  He is  a
      forensic consultant who obtained a First Class honours degree  in  the
      field of acoustical  engineering  who  currently  holds  research  and
      teaching appointments.  He is clearly an  experienced  expert  witness
      and has worked on over 1,000 cases in the  areas  of  "authentication,
      enhancement, transcription and speaker comparison". His expertise  was
      not disputed in these proceedings.


  17.  The  report  of  Dr  Harrison  contains  a  series  of   assessments,
      commentaries and opinions  which  are  susceptible  to  the  following
      breakdown:


     (i)   In criminal proceedings the mechanism commonly employed is  that
           of "forensic speaker comparison analysis" which he describes  as
           generally recognised and employed  throughout  much  of  western
           Europe.  It involves:


           "Analysing different aspects of the voice  and  speech  patterns
           found in a recording. The profiles  of  the  features  that  are
           found are then compared across  the  recordings.   The  analysis
           process usually takes between 10 and 15 hours for  a  comparison
           of two samples."


       ii) The editing of audio files prior to expert analysis is  standard
           practice.


      iii)  Segmental  analysis  of  speech  samples  is  carried  out   in
           accordance with the methodology approved  by  the  International
           Phonetic Association and is  designed  to  identify  the  "fine-
           grained nuances of speech".


       iv) The mechanics of analysing  voice  quality,  pitch,  intonation,
           rhythm and tempo form part of the exercise.


        v) In appropriate cases, it is also necessary to  examine  patterns
           of  language  and  grammar  or  to  undertake  acoustic-phonetic
           analysis or other specified forms of analysis.


       vi) Automatic speaker recognition systems have the modus operandi of
           "[taking]  the  recorded  voices  of  individuals,  [performing]
           complex mathematical operations on them and [reducing]  them  to
           statistical representations or models."


      vii) "The results produced by automatic systems  are  numeric  scores
           which reflect the degree of similarity  between  two  samples  -
           larger numbers reflect  great  similarity  and  smaller  numbers
           reflect a greater dissimilarity between samples .....


      Changing the threshold alters the errors rates of  the  system  since
           results from some pairs will change from a yes to a no or  vice-
           versa ..... as the threshold increases the false negative  error
           rate increases whilst the false positive  error  rate  decreases
           .... Therefore the choice of threshold is crucial in determining
           the errors rates and performance of the system".


     viii) Thus under  automatic  speaker  comparison  systems  both  false
           positives and false negatives are possible, with the consequence
           that "for a quoted error rate to  be  meaningful,  the  type  of
           error that it refers to must be stated". Mr Millington's witness
           statement does not provide this information.


       ix) The performance  of  automatic  speaker  comparison  systems  is
           affected by many factors, in particular the duration of  samples
           and the quality  of  samples,  which  embraces  surrounding  and
           background noise.


  18. Dr Harrison is critical of the level of detail provided in the generic
      witness statements of Ms Collings and Mr Millington. He  describes  it
      as insufficient.  The norm, he says, is that  the  analyst  concerned,
      rather  than  a  third  party  recipient  of  information,  makes  the
      statement (or  compiles  the  report).   He  criticises  the  lack  of
      information concerning the initial testing.   He highlights that there
      is a dearth of information concerning the comparability  of  the  test
      samples with the TOEIC samples.  There is no detail concerning  either
      duration or quality.  Nor  is  there  any  clear  description  of  the
      configuration of the automatic system which  was  used  in  these  two
      separate phases.  The Respondent's evidence is silent on the issue  of
      manufacturer's updates.  The non-disclosure of  the  identity  of  the
      manufacturer or the model of the system erects a barrier.  There is no
      indication of whether the files  selected  were  combined  to  form  a
      longer recording, nor is the specific  duration  of  individual  files
      particularised.  It is possible that short, poor  quality  samples  of
      reading may have been selected.  It is unclear whether  the  selection
      process was conducted manually or automatically.   Nor  is  there  any
      indication of whether the consistency of the speaker  across  the  six
      files was assessed by the automatic system.


  19. Dr Harrison also examines, with accompanying critique and  commentary,
      the discrete issues of  factors  affecting  performance;  the  typical
      performance of human verification; the definition of  thresholds;  the
      explicit acknowledgement of human errors; the lack of testing  of  the
      performance of analysts; the dubious touchstone of  "confidence"  (see
      Mr Millington's witness statement); the dearth  of  information  about
      the  actual  analysis  methodology;  the  lack  of  detail  about  the
      experience and knowledge of both  the  recruited  analysts  and  their
      supervisors; the indication that any training of the  newly  recruited
      analysts was hurried;  the  shortcomings  in  Mr  Millington's  speech
      recognition averments; and the clear acknowledgement on  the  part  of
      ETS that false  identifications  (viz  false  positive  results)  have
      occurred. One passage relating to the human  verification  process  is
      especially noteworthy:


           "... although the analysts only verified matches where they  had
           no doubt about their validity - ie where they were certain about
           their judgments -  this  should  not  be  taken  as  a  reliable
           indicator of the accuracy of  those  judgments.   This  approach
           does not remove the risk of false positive results."

      Dr Harrison also highlights that both the  automatic  system  and  the
      human analysts are capable of false positive errors.  The Secretary of
      State's evidence does not disclose either the percentage or the volume
      of such errors.


                   20. Dr Harrison summarises his opinion in  the  following
                       terms:


        i) In principle, the  ETS  methodology  constitutes  "a  reasonable
           approach".  However, the specifics  of  its  implementation  are
           insufficiently  particularised  in  the  Respondent's  evidence,
           which suffers from "a lack of technical information and detail".




       ii) The Secretary of State's evidence fails to acknowledge that  the
           human verification mechanism "is almost certain to have resulted
           in false positive results".


      iii) The fact of an unknown number of false positive results  results
           in "an unknown number of test takers who have  been  incorrectly
           identified as having fraudulently taken the TOEIC test".


       iv) The accuracy and reliability of the ETS results  overall  cannot
           be gauged in the absence of sufficient  technical  knowledge  of
           the process.


        v) This inadequacy could be rectified to some extent by  disclosure
           of  the  audio  material  from  individual  tests,  which  would
           facilitate independent auditing  through  the  auditory-acoustic
           phonetic testing methodology.


III.  THE APPLICANT'S CASE


  21. The grant of permission expressly limited the Applicant's challenge to
      two grounds, which are reflected in the ultimate amended pleading:


        i) The Secretary of State's most recent decision (see [3] supra) is
           vitiated by improper purpose, in that she knew or ought to  have
           known that there  was  no  or  insufficient  evidence  that  the
           Applicant had engaged in deception.


       ii)  The  impugned  decision  is  further  vitiated  by   procedural
           unfairness in that the Applicant was not afforded an opportunity
           to make representations before the original determination of  25
           July 2014, he was not provided with the material upon which  the
           decision was made and the case made by him  in  the  context  of
           these proceedings was not taken into account in  the  making  of
           the more recent decision.


      I shall consider each ground in turn.


      Improper Purpose


  22. It is appropriate to  begin  with  the  statutory  provisions  wherein
      repose the power exercised by the Secretary of  State  in  making  the
      impugned decision.  This power has  been  exercised  in  many,  though
      evidently not all, of the cases belonging to  this  sphere:  see,  for
      example, Mahmood (supra).  Section 10 of the  Immigration  and  Asylum
      Act 1999, under the rubric  "Removal  of  persons  unlawfully  in  the
      United Kingdom", provides:


     "(1)   A person who is not a British citizen may be removed  from  the
           United Kingdom,  in  accordance  with  directions  given  by  an
           immigration officer, if-


        a) having only a limited leave to enter  or  remain,  he  does  not
           observe a condition attached to the leave or remains beyond  the
           time limited by the leave;



        b) he uses deception in seeking (whether successfully or not) leave
           to remain; or

     (ba) his indefinite leave to enter or remain has  been  revoked  under
           section 76(3) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
           2002 (person ceasing to be refugee);


        c) directions have been given for the removal, under this  section,
           of a person to whose family he belongs.

     (2)   Directions may not be  given  under  subsection  (1)(a)  if  the
           person concerned has made an application for leave to remain  in
           accordance with regulations made under section 9.


        3) Directions for the removal of a person may not  be  given  under
           subsection (1)(c) unless the Secretary of State  has  given  the
           person written notice of the intention to remove him."


     (8)   When a person is notified that  a  decision  has  been  made  to
           remove him in accordance with  this  section,  the  notification
           invalidates any leave to enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom
           previously given to him."


      A removal decision under section 10 attracts a right of appeal to  the
      FtT, exercisable only out of country.


  23. In brief compass, the improper purpose ground is based on evidence, or
      the absence thereof, of which it is said the Secretary of  State  had,
      or ought to have had, cognisance which was  not  taken  into  account,
      properly or at all.  The  ingredients  of  this  ground  of  challenge
      consist of the following:  an  assortment  of  decisions  of  the  FtT
      allowing  appeals  brought  by  persons   against   whom   appropriate
      immigration action had been taken by the Secretary  of  State  on  the
      ground of alleged TOEIC fraud; the Secretary  of  State's  Enforcement
      Instructions and Guidance ("EIG");  an  attack  on  the  strength  and
      quality of the Respondent's evidence (paragraphs  [6]  -  [15]  supra)
      based largely on Dr Harrison's report; and the supposed large  numbers
      of  persons  against  whom  immigration  action  has  been  taken   in
      consequence of the "Panorama" programme.  Mr Armstrong also prayed  in
      aid the factor of large numbers, submitting on behalf of the Applicant
      that these elements combine to make good the  challenge  that  at  the
      time when the  impugned  decision  was  made,  19  January  2015,  the
      Secretary of State  knew  or  ought  to  have  known  that  there  was
      insufficient evidence of deception on the part  of  the  Applicant  in
      securing his TOEIC to  warrant  the  exercise  of  the  removal  power
      enshrined in section 10.


  24. The first  element  of  the  Applicant's  improper  purpose  challenge
      consists of three determinations of the First-tier  Tribunal  ("FtT"),
      promulgated in December 2014  and  early  January  2015.  While  other
      determinations of the FtT in this sphere were also disclosed,  I  have
      highlighted these three in particular as they were in  existence  when
      the impugned decision of 19 January 2015 was made. Given the manner in
      which these decisions were deployed in argument - and I highlight here
      my formulation of this ground of challenge at the  beginning  of  [23]
      supra - the proposition that later determinations  of  the  FtT,  from
      which one can identify something of a trend  of  allowing  appeals  in
      decisions belonging to this field, are irrelevant to  the  Applicant's
      case seems to me unassailable.


  25. In the first of these three cases [IA/37191/2014  and  Others],  which
      has a matrix essentially the same as that of the Applicant's case, the
      Tribunal allowed the  appeal,  finding  that  the  Appellant  had  not
      committed any act of deception in  obtaining  the  TOEIC  certificate.
      The Tribunal had available to it the testimony of  the  Appellant  and
      her husband, together with a record of her interview by the  Secretary
      of State's agents.  Of the generic  evidence  (summarised  above)  the
      Judge said the following:


           "However I am satisfied that this evidence is in effect  generic
           and does not show the  exact  reason  why  ETS  invalidated  the
           certificate of the  Appellant  in  particular  and  provides  no
           evidence relating to the Appellant's personal circumstances."


      As appears from the following passage, the Tribunal also  had  at  its
      disposal written evidence from ETS:


           "The ETS themselves actually confirm in writing that  there  are
           multiple reasons for invalidation, some of which may not involve
           fraud or deception."


            [Emphasis added]


      The Judge noted that the generic  evidence  itself  acknowledged  this
      phenomenon.  The appeal was allowed.


  26. In another case [IA/30818/2014], the determination of  the  FtT  notes
      that the Secretary of State failed to comply with the Tribunal's  pre-
      hearing directions:


           ".....  The Respondent had failed to comply with  directions  of
           the  Tribunal  by  not  providing  evidence  relating   to   the
           Appellant's  particular  English  language  test   and   related
           documents ...."


      The Appellant gave evidence and was not cross examined. There was also
      evidence from a sentimental partner.  The Secretary of State relied on
      the usual generic evidence.  In finding in favour of the Appellant  on
      the deception issue, the  Judge  reasoned  that  the  stringent  civil
      standard applicable in cases of fraud had not  been  achieved  by  the
      Respondent's evidence: see RP (Proof of Forgery) Nigeria [2006] UK AIT
      00086.   He noted the absence of individual evidence relating  to  the
      Appellant's test performance.  The Tribunal  was  not  satisfied  that
      fraud had been established.


  27. In a third case, a  differently  constituted  FtT  came  to  the  same
      conclusion.  The evidence includes several more  recent  decisions  of
      the FtT.  The total number of decisions available to this Tribunal  is
      less than ten.  In most of them the  appeals  have  succeeded  on  the
      ground that the Secretary of State has failed to discharge the  burden
      of proving fraud on the part of the appellant.  The  effect  of  these
      decisions, explicit in some and implicit in others, is  that  the  ETS
      testing has yielded false positive results.  In all of these cases the
      evidence considered by the FtT has included the witness statements  of
      Mr Millington and Ms Collings.  In one of  the  cases,  in  which  the
      Appeal was dismissed, the Judge described the ETS  testing  procedures
      as "extremely rigorous": see  IA/31380/2014  at  [44]  and  [48].   Mr
      Gullick, on behalf of the Secretary of State, informed  this  Tribunal
      of his instructions that there  are  applications  for  permission  to
      appeal in some of the cases to which I  have  referred.   Furthermore,
      the Court of Appeal has listed two judicial review appeals for hearing
      in early July 2015 (infra). I am also aware that  the  Upper  Tribunal
      has granted permission to apply for judicial review in a small  number
      of cases none of which has been  substantively  determined  yet.   The
      broader landscape is, therefore, unsettled and fluctuating.


  28. The second element of the Applicant's improper purpose case is the EIG
      (noted above).  Within chapter  50  of  this  instrument  there  is  a
      discrete section dealing with "Leave to  Remain  by  Deception",  with
      reference to section 10(1)(b) of the  1999  Act.   This  contains  the
      following passage:

           "The evidence of deception should be clear  and  unambiguous  in
           order to initiate action  under  section  10.   Where  possible,
           original  documentary  evidence,  admissions  under  caution  or
           statements from two or more witnesses should be  obtained  which
           substantiate that an offence has been committed before authority
           is given to initiate action under section 10 ....


           The evidence must always prove to a high degree  of  probability
           that deception had been used to gain the leave, whether  or  not
           an admission of deception is made.  The onus - as always in such
           situations - is on the officer making the assertion to prove his
           case."


      While the attention of the Tribunal was drawn to the most recent  EIG,
      within which the relevant section is Chapter 51, it  was  acknowledged
      that this did not apply at the time when  the  impugned  decision  was
      made.

  29. On behalf of the Applicant it is submitted  that  Chapter  50  of  the
      relevant EIG is a reflection of well established  principles  relating
      to the onus and standard of proof in fraud cases.  The Applicant  also
      links this to the well known decision of the House of Lords in Khawaja
      v SSHD [1984] 1 AC 74.  This  concerned  the  summary  removal  of  an
      allegedly illegal entrant under Schedule  2  to  the  Immigration  Act
      1971.  This power was held to be exercisable in respect of persons who
      had obtained leave to enter the United Kingdom  by  deception.   Their
      Lordships further held that the question of whether a person  obtained
      leave to enter by practising fraud or deception is  one  of  precedent
      fact.  Accordingly, where there is an application for judicial  review
      of an immigration officer's order detaining a person on this  supposed
      basis, the detention will not be justified simply on  the  basis  that
      there was some evidence on which  the  immigration  officer  had  been
      entitled to make the impugned decision or that there  were  reasonable
      grounds for believing that deception had been practised.  Rather,  the
      court has a duty to enquire, and determine,  whether  there  had  been
      sufficient evidence to justify the immigration officer's  belief  that
      the entry  had  been  illegal  through  deception.   This  enquiry  is
      conducted within a framework where the onus lies on the  executive  to
      prove  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  court,  on   the   balance   of
      probabilities, the facts relied on by the immigration officer.


  30. The Applicant's improper purpose ground of challenge is also  deployed
      in an endeavour to defeat the contention that judicial  review  is  an
      inappropriate mechanism in this case on account of the availability of
      an out of country appeal.  In R (Mahmood) v  SSHD  [2014]  UKUT  00439
      (IAC) I reviewed the authorities on this subject, concluding at [13]:

           "The above analysis and the conclusion it  yields,  namely  that
           the Applicant can pursue an out of country appeal, do  not  lead
           inexorably to the conclusion that permission  must  be  refused.
           This is so because, as acknowledged above,  the  effect  of  the
           relevant jurisprudence  is  that  an  application  for  judicial
           review of an appealable immigration decision lies where the test
           of special or exceptional factors is satisfied ....


           The out  of  country  appeal  available  to  the  Applicant  is,
           presumptively, an adequate alternative remedy.  The displacement
           of this presumption will, in any given  case,  require  suitable
           evidence."

      In the same passage I referred to the "strong  general  principle"  in
play.

  31. The Applicant's contention is that this principle is displaced in  the
      present case by the evidence of improper motive.  It  is  argued  that
      the remedy of judicial review is  properly  invoked  in  circumstances
      where there is reprehensible or abusive conduct on  the  part  of  the
      executive: R (Khan) v SSHD [2014] EWHC 2494 (Admin) at  [70](ix);  or,
      formulated in different terms, in cases  where  there  is  "a  serious
      abuse of power" entailing the invocation by the Secretary of State  of
      the deception "route" in order to stifle an appeal (the Court in  that
      case, I observe, seemingly overlooking the availability of an  out  of
      country appeal): Anwar v SSHD [2011] 1 WLR 2552, at [24];  or  in  so-
      called "precedent fact" cases: Khan at [70](iv) - (v). In this context
      Mr Armstrong also relied on the decision in R  (Shahbaz  Ali)  v  SSHD
      [2014] EWHC 3967 (Admin), a decision in a TOEIC  case  dismissing  the
      substantive application for judicial review.  I consider the  passages
      at [93] -  [95],  on  which  there  was  most  focus,  to  be  obiter.
      Furthermore, they  express  no  concluded  view  on  the  issue  being
      debated,  namely  whether  an  application  for  judicial  review   is
      appropriate in a case where the deception decision is  unheralded  and
      has not entailed  any  opportunity  for  the  subject  to  respond  or
      explain.  Further, and in any event, this is a first instance decision
      which does not have the status of binding precedent.


  32. The third, and final, element  of  the  Applicant's  first  ground  of
      challenge entails the  contention  that  judicial  review  provides  a
      suitable mechanism for challenge in the present case,  notwithstanding
      the availability of an out of country appeal,  because  of  the  large
      numbers of TOEIC fraud cases. This discrete aspect of the  Applicant's
      case is based largely on assertion, with no real supporting  evidence.
      I shall analyse it infra.


  33. The essence of the submission of Mr Gullick on behalf of the Secretary
      of State, was that the Applicant's challenge  fails  to  displace  the
      general principle that an out of country appeal  affords  an  adequate
      remedy. The high hurdle of "special or exceptional  factors"  has  not
      been overcome.  The mechanism which Parliament has established  for  a
      challenge to the impugned decision is ideally suited for resolving the
      issues raised by the  Applicant.   Mr  Gullick's  submissions  further
      highlighted that the  FtT  determinations  extant  when  the  impugned
      decision was made were few in number and  fact  sensitive  in  nature.
      Furthermore, Dr Harrison's report did  not  exist  at  the  time  and,
      hence, could not have been considered by the Secretary of  State.   As
      the court found in Shahbaz Ali, at [91], the evidence at the Secretary
      of State's disposal was sufficient to warrant the removal decision and
      was compatible with the EIG.

      Improper Purpose: Conclusions


  34. My conclusions in respect of the Applicant's first ground of challenge
      are, fundamentally, twofold.  First, I consider that improper  purpose
      has not been established.  There is, of course, no primary evidence of
      this contaminant.  Rather, the Applicant invites the Tribunal to infer
      this vitiating factor.  This ground of challenge can succeed  only  if
      the Applicant establishes that the purpose for which the Secretary  of
      State invoked the discretionary power under section 10 of the 1999 Act
      was motivated by a design other than furthering the policy and objects
      of the statute (the  Padfield  principle).   The  quest  to  establish
      improper motive in the context of this challenge engages, in my  view,
      a relatively elevated threshold. Improper purpose, or motive, is  not,
      as a general rule, easily proved.  Furthermore, I consider that it  is
      not to be lightly inferred.  An inference on the part of any court  or
      tribunal that a public law power has been misused in this way requires
      a solid and persuasive evidential foundation.  In  the  present  case,
      this directs attention to the evidence in existence at the time of the
      impugned decision, namely the decisions of the  FtT  allowing  appeals
      and the Secretary of State's generic evidence. It  is  appropriate  to
      highlight, in this context, that Dr Harrison's  report  postdated  the
      impugned decision of the Secretary of State.  Neither it nor  anything
      comparable existed at the material time.


  35.  In  my  view,  taking  into  account  Chapter  50  of  the  EIG,  the
      Respondent's evidence, summarised in Chapter II above, was  sufficient
      to warrant the assessment that the Applicant's TOEIC had been procured
      by deception and,  thus,  provided  an  adequate  foundation  for  the
      decision made under section 10 of the 1999 Act.  True it is  that,  at
      this remove and with the benefit of Dr Harrison's report, there may be
      grounds for contending that said  evidence  is  not  infallible.   And
      there may be sufficient material for a lively debate about its various
      ingredients.   However,  this  Tribunal,  as  emphasised  above,  must
      evaluate and determine the Applicant's improper purpose  challenge  by
      reference to the material presumptively considered by or available  to
      the decision maker when the impugned decision  was  made.  I  find  no
      clear or logical basis for distinguishing between the first tranche of
      decisions  and  those  made  later.  Furthermore,  while  the   policy
      evidential requirements enshrined in the EIG are strict, they  require
      neither absolute certainty nor  infallibility.   For  the  purpose  of
      disposing of this ground of challenge and bearing  in  mind  that  the
      jurisdiction being exercised is one of supervisory review rather  than
      merits appeal, its suffices for this Tribunal to be satisfied that the
      evidence upon which the impugned decision was made has  the  hallmarks
      of  care,   thoroughness,   underlying    expertise   and   sufficient
      reliability.    The cornerstone of the Applicant's case  is  that  the
      evidence was insufficient for this purpose. I reject this challenge.


  36. At this juncture it is convenient to consider the issue of alternative
      remedy, given the  inextricable  nexus  between  this  issue  and  the
      Applicant's first ground of challenge. In my  judgment  the  substance
      and contours of the Applicant's improper purpose case confirm that  an
      appeal to the FtT, pursued out of country, is a demonstrably  superior
      mechanism for this  species  of  challenge  than  an  application  for
      judicial review which, as has  been  repeatedly  observed,  invokes  a
      judicial supervisory jurisdiction and is  not  an  appellate  process.
      The presentation of the Applicant's case involved a detailed, forensic
      examination of the Secretary  of  State's  evidence,  coupled  with  a
      lengthy exposition of the main issues raised in the expert  report  of
      Dr Harrison.   I  consider  it  appropriate  to  highlight  what  this
      judicial review hearing lacked: there was no examination in  chief  or
      cross examination of the Applicant or any witness on his  behalf;  nor
      was there any  live  evidence  from  any  witness  on  behalf  of  the
      Secretary of State; and there was no examination  in  chief  or  cross
      examination of Dr Harrison or any other expert witness.  All of  these
      missing factors arise in a litigation context in which the bona  fides
      and character of the Applicant are important issues.   However,  there
      was no opportunity to evaluate the Applicant's demeanour or to  assess
      his performance under cross examination.


  37. Furthermore, the presentation of the Applicant's case highlighted  the
      technical  and  scientific  nature  of  the  subject  matter.   In  my
      consideration of the evidence in Chapter II above I have,  in  several
      places, raised questions and made observations.   In  the  context  of
      this judicial review  hearing,  there  was  no  opportunity  for  this
      Tribunal to probe and elucidate these matters via the  questioning  of
      witnesses. I do not overlook  that  the  pursuit  of  an  appeal  from
      overseas is not ideal, not least because of the cost and disruption to
      the individual.  However, I take into  account  that,  evidently,  the
      only person whose evidence will be given via a medium  such  as  video
      link is the Applicant.  The evidence of other witnesses, including any
      expert such as Dr Harrison,  will  be  received  by  the  FtT  in  the
      conventional way.  Furthermore, there is no contention  on  behalf  of
      the Applicant that an out of country appeal will  not  entail  a  fair
      hearing.


  38. Finally, mindful that "bad faith" is the terminology found in  certain
      places in the  Applicant's  submissions,  I  add  the  following.   In
      contemporary public law, bad faith and improper motive  are  sometimes
      interchangeable terms, or concepts.  Fundamentally,  both  denote  the
      misuse of power.  See, generally,  De  Smith's  Judicial  Review  (7th
      Edition), para 5 - 087.  In SCA v Minister of Immigration [2002] FCAFC
      397, bad faith is defined uncontroversially as "a lack of an honest or
      genuine attempt to undertake the task and involves a  personal  attack
      on the honesty of the decision maker": see [19].  The  authors  of  De
      Smith continue, at paragraph 5 - 089:

           "Bad faith is a serious allegation which attracts a heavy burden
                 of proof."

      In practice, bad  faith  typically  (though  not  invariably)  denotes
      conduct on the part of a  public  official  which  is  dishonest.   It
      "always involves a grave charge":   per  Megaw  LJ  in  Cannock  Chase
      District Council v Kelly [1978] 1  WLR  1  at  6.   Furthermore,  this
      serious allegation requires, in every case, ample advance  notice  and
      detailed particularisation.

  39. The final element of the Applicant's  improper  purpose  challenge  is
      that there  are  large  numbers  of  TOEIC  cases.  This  prompts  the
      immediate observation that the evidence relating to this issue is  far
      from clear and comprehensive.  It includes a report  compiled  by  the
      National Union of Students ("NUS")  which  was  one  of  the  agencies
      invited by the Immigration Minister to form part of  a  working  group
      established in June 2014.  The impetus for  this  step  was  the  Home
      Office public announcement that it was proposing  to  take  action  to
      revoke the licences of 57 private  colleges  and  three  universities.
      This large scale enforcement operation was, evidently,  stimulated  by
      the "Panorama" programme and the subsequent fall out detailed  in  the
      Respondent's evidence.  The remit of the working group was to  support
      affected students, to enable effective communication with them and  to
      promote the interest  of  protecting  the  reputation  of  the  United
      Kingdom education sector. The Working Group  was  effective  during  a
      period of some seven months viz to February 2015.  The NUS report  was
      published at this  stage.   The  Tribunal  has  been  alerted  to  the
      publication of two Home Office reports,  including  one  published  as
      recently as 21 May 2015.  This, it is suggested,  documents  that  the
      number of Home  Office  refusal,  curtailment  and  removal  decisions
      belonging to this field is now of the order of 19,700.


  40. For present purposes, it matters not whether this figure is unerringly
      accurate.  The numbers are, on any showing,  of  enormous  dimensions.
      However, this  circumstance,  in  my  judgment,  cannot  overcome  the
      reality that a judicial review court or tribunal is, for  the  reasons
      elaborated above, ill equipped to adjudicate in cases  of  this  kind.
      Secondly, the present case illustrates that every  case  belonging  to
      this field will be unavoidably fact sensitive.  Each litigant will put
      forward his or  her  individual  disputed  assertions,  agreed  facts,
      considerations and circumstances.  These will be evaluated by  a  fact
      finding tribunal, to  be  contrasted  with  a  court  or  tribunal  of
      supervisory  jurisdiction.   This  analysis  is,  in  my  view,  amply
      confirmed by the growing number  of  FtT  decisions  in  this  sphere.
      Within these one finds emphasis  on  self-evidently  important  issues
      such as the appellant's evident English  language  ability,  demeanour
      and  previous  life  events.   Furthermore,  it  is  trite  that   the
      assessment of each  appellant's  demeanour  and  credibility  will  be
      carried out on a case by case basis.


  41. Finally, the reality of the present challenge  is  that  the  impugned
      decision was made on a  particular  date  in  the  circumstances  then
      prevailing. As the evidence  considered  by  this  Tribunal  confirms,
      those circumstances have  evolved  subsequently.  In  particular,  the
      panorama now includes the expert report of Dr Harrison and  a  cluster
      of further FtT decisions. The analysis that every decision and ensuing
      challenge will be shaped by their special individual context is, in my
      estimation, irresistible.  It is, frankly, difficult to envisage how a
      single decision of the Upper Tribunal in a TOEIC judicial review might
      be determinative of large numbers of other such cases, the more so  in
      the absence of a group or representative challenge.


      Second Ground of challenge: Procedural Unfairness


  42. The essence of this ground of challenge is that the impugned  decision
      of the Secretary of State is vitiated by procedural  unfairness  since
      the decision making process did not involve a prior opportunity to the
      Applicant to consider the case against him  and  respond  accordingly.
      Notably, it was not argued on behalf of the Applicant, correctly in my
      view, that a complaint of procedural unfairness of this species  gives
      rise to  an  exception  to  the  strong  general  principle  that  the
      availability of an out of country appeal  provides an adequate remedy.
       In light of my conclusion that the availability of an out of  country
      appeal provides this Applicant with an adequate remedy, this ground of
      challenge is rendered moot.


  43. It will be open to the Applicant to pursue his complaint of procedural
      unfairness as a freestanding ground of appeal to the FtT,  since  this
      raises an issue of whether the impugned  decision  was  in  accordance
      with the law: see section 82(1)(ii) of  the  Nationality,  Immigration
      and Asylum Act 2002.  The  FtT  will  be  well  equipped  to  consider
      arguments based  on  the  context  of  the  impugned  decision,  which
      includes  the gravity of the allegation (fraud),  the severity of  the
      consequences for the affected person,  the  ability  of  the  affected
      person to make representations post-decision (as in the present  case)
      and the availability of an out  of  country  appeal.   As  this  brief
      summary demonstrates, the  emphasis  on  individual  context  at  once
      points up the reality of having to consider evidence, resolve disputed
      issues of fact and make findings accordingly.  These functions  belong
      to the appellate jurisdiction of the FtT, rather than the  supervisory
      review jurisdiction of the Upper Tribunal.


  44. The question of law for the FtT  in  this  and  other  cases  will  be
      whether the context engaged the Doody principles,  in  particular  the
      requirement that the affected person be  accorded  an  opportunity  to
      make informed representations in advance of the impugned decision: see
      Doody v Secretary of State for the Home Department [1994]  1  AC  531.
      In deciding this question the FtT will take into account the  entirety
      of  the  context,   including   the   possibility   of   post-decision
      representations and the availability of an appeal (which the prisoners
      in Doody did not have).  The FtT will also have to decide whether  the
      recent decisions of this Tribunal  in  Miah  (Interviewer's  Comments:
      Disclosure: Fairness)  [2014]  UKUT  515  (IAC)  and  Mushtaq  (ECO  -
      procedural fairness)(IJR) [2015] UKUT 224 (IAC) apply.  The FtT should
      also take into account the fundamental principle that the requirements
      of procedural fairness  vary  according  to  the  individual  decision
      making context.  Thus what is considered essential in any  given  case
      will not slavishly apply to others.


      A Footnote: The Broader Landscape


  45. Some of the decisions in the broad ETS/TOEIC category have generated a
      right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT"), in  country.  This
      has occurred typically in cases where the student concerned  has  been
      challenged at port upon returning to  the  United  Kingdom  from,  for
      example, a visit to the country of origin, followed by  an  in-country
      appealable decision of the Secretary of State. Others have generated a
      right of appeal exercisable only out of country  (as  in  the  present
      case).   Other cases, believed to  be  the  majority,  have  generated
      judicial review challenges, as in Mahmood and the present  case.  Thus
      there is a slowly expanding body of case law in this sphere.   In  all
      of these cases, the Secretary of State has relied  on  evidence  of  a
      generic kind.  This consists of  the  witness  statements  of  Rebecca
      Collings  and  Peter  Millington,  both  dated  23  June  2014.    The
      statements of these two witnesses have  neither  evolved  nor  altered
      since then.  In some cases, as in the present  one,  these  statements
      are supplemented by a further witness statement of another Home Office
      official.


  46. Repeated attempts have been made in the Upper  Tribunal  to  establish
      the number of judicial reviews belonging to this field which  are  "in
      the system" at any given time. These endeavours have been assisted  by
      the co-operation of the solicitors representing the Applicant  in  the
      present case.  This firm  is  retained  by  NUS  and  represents  both
      judicial review applicants and FtT appellants in a  number  of  cases.
      This Tribunal  is  grateful  to  all  who  have  co-operated  in  this
      endeavour. It is  estimated  that  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  some  100
      judicial review permission  applications  have  been  processed,  with
      permission refused or a totally without  merit  certification  in  the
      large majority. There are approximately 70 undetermined cases  in  the
      system at present. There have been two transfers to  the  High  Court.
      The total number of decided appeals to  the  FtT,  at  this  juncture,
      appears to be around 20. As regards the Court  of  Appeal,  there  are
      several extant cases. It is appropriate to highlight that the grant of
      permission to appeal, accompanied by the highly desirable  measure  of
      expedition, has materialised in some cases which have the potential to
      provide some generic guidance.  These include:


      R (Mehmood) v SSHD [C4 / 2014/1300]
      R (Ali) v SSHD [C4/2014/4122]
      R(Giri) v SSHD [C4/2014/1475]
      R (Sanyaniya) v SSHD [C4/2014/1473]


       These appeals are listed for hearing (at least provisionally)  on  06
      and 13 July 2015.


  47.  The  landscape  is,  therefore,  evolving.   I  have  considered   it
      appropriate to deliver this judgment now rather than await the outcome
      of the Court of Appeal decisions since this challenge has assumed  the
      status of lead case in the Upper Tribunal, has entailed the investment
      of considerable resources and further delay cannot, in  my  judgement,
      be justified.  I would add that, to my knowledge, this  is  the  first
      substantive decision of the Upper Tribunal in this  category.   Taking
      into account the imminence of the Court of Appeal hearings, permission
      decisions in certain other cases in this Tribunal have been deferred.




CONCLUSION


  48.  I conclude:


      (i)   The Applicant's improper purpose  ground  of  challenge  is  not
      established.


     (ii)  The general principle that an out of country appeal provides  an
           adequate remedy in cases of this kind applies.


      (iii) This renders moot the Applicant's  second  ground  of  challenge
           based  on  procedural  unfairness.  This  ground  can  be  fully
           explored before the FtT in any event.



                     Signed :
                       [pic]
                 The Honourable Mr Justice McCloskey
                 President of the Upper  Tribunal,  Immigration  and  Asylum
Chamber


            Dated:    22  May 2015







Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

A party may appeal against such a decision to  the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was given (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3(2)).

