
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Mugwagwa (s.72 - applying statutory presumptions) Zimbabwe [2011] UKUT
00338 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 6 May 2011                                 |                             |
|                                              |20 July 2011                 |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE GRUBB
                          IMMIGRATION JUDGE HOLMES

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           OBRIEL TAMUKA MUGWAGWA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr G Brown instructed by Miles Hutchinson and
Lithgow, Solicitors


1. The First-tier Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) is  required  to
apply  of  its  own  motion  the  statutory  presumptions  in  s.72  of  the
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 to the effect  that  Art  33(2)
of the Refugee Convention will not prevent refoulement of  a  refugee  where
the factual underpinning for the application of s.72 is present even if  the
Secretary of State has not relied upon Art 33(2) and s.72.

2. Equally, the Secretary of State is entitled to take the point before  the
Upper Tribunal in the event of an appeal.

3. The obligation of the First-tier Tribunal (or Upper Tribunal) is  subject
to the common law requirement of fairness.  If the Secretary  of  State  has
not raised the s.72 point in  the  refusal  letter,  then  an  unrepresented
appellant may need to be warned of the statutory provisions which raise  the
rebuttable presumptions against him and be given  the  opportunity  to  deal
with them.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State appeals against a  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  (Immigration Judge Zucker and  Mr  A  Armitage)  allowing  an
    appeal against the Secretary of State's decision that s.32(5) of the UK
    Borders Act 2007 ("the 2007 Act") applied and  to  make  a  deportation
    order.

 2. For convenience, in this determination we  continue  to  refer  to  the
    parties as appellant and respondent respectively as  they  were  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

Background

 3. The background to the appeal is as follows.  The appellant is a citizen
    of Zimbabwe who was born on 10 August 1972.  He arrived in  the  United
    Kingdom on 13  December  2001  and  claimed  asylum.   That  claim  was
    rejected by the Secretary of  State  and  the  appellant's  appeal  was
    dismissed by Mrs R Goldfarb, an Adjudicator, following a hearing on  11
    April 2002.  Subsequently the appellant committed a number of  criminal
    offences culminating in his conviction on 27 August  2008  at  Teesside
    Crown Court of the offence of conspiring to supply  a  controlled  drug
    (heroin) for which he received a sentence of  33  months'  imprisonment
    following a guilty plea.  On 6 November 2009 the appellant  was  served
    with notice of  his  liability  to  be  deported  under  the  automatic
    deportation provisions of the 2007  Act  and  on  23  December  2009  a
    deportation order was made.  He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

 4. The Tribunal allowed the appeal on the basis that the appellant  was  a
    refugee and that his removal to Zimbabwe would  breach  Art  3  of  the
    European  Convention  on  Human  Rights  ("ECHR").   Although  Tribunal
    expressed some concerns about the credibility of the appellant, in part
    on the basis of a previous finding  made  by  the  Adjudicator  in  the
    earlier appeal, the Tribunal found that the appellant "had a low  level
    of activity in the MDC" and  on  the  basis  of  the  relevant  country
    guidance case law, namely RN (Returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2008] UKAIT 00083
    and HS (Returning Asylum Seekers) Zimbabwe CG [2007] UKAIT 00094,  that
    the appellant was at risk on return  to  Zimbabwe.   Consequently,  the
    appellant was entitled to the benefit of 'Exception 1'  in  s.33(2)  of
    the 2007 Act.

 5. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on two grounds:  (1)
    that the Tribunal in allowing the appeal on refugee grounds had  failed
    to apply s.72 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the
    2002 Act"), such that despite being a refugee within the meaning of the
    Refugee Convention, the appellant was nevertheless removable by  virtue
    of Art 33(2) of that Convention because he had  been  convicted  of  an
    offence for which he  received  a  sentence  of  at  least  two  years'
    imprisonment; and (2) that the Tribunal had erred  in  finding  on  the
    facts that the appellant would be at risk on return to Zimbabwe.

 6. On 8 November 2010, the Upper Tribunal (Senior Immigration Judge Grubb)
    granted permission  to  appeal.   At  the  hearing  Ms  Petterson,  who
    represented the Secretary  of  State,  indicated  that  she  no  longer
    pursued the second ground on which permission  to  appeal  was  sought.
    She relied exclusively upon the first ground of appeal.

Submissions

 7. Ms Petterson submitted that  in  allowing  the  appeal  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had erred in law in failing to apply s.72  of  the  2002  Act.
    Although, as she accepted, the appellant  was  at  risk  on  return  to
    Zimbabwe on the Tribunal's findings, he  fell  within  the  presumptive
    provisions in s.72(2) in that he had been convicted of  an  offence  in
    the UK for which he had been sentenced to a period of  imprisonment  of
    at least two years.  Therefore, by virtue  of  s.72(2)  it  was  to  be
    presumed  that  he  had  been  convicted  by  a  final  judgment  of  a
    "particularly serious crime and to constitute a danger to the community
    of the United Kingdom".   On  that  basis,  his  removal  to  Zimbabwe,
    despite the fact that he was a refugee, would not be a  breach  of  the
    Refugee Convention by virtue of  Art  33(2).   Ms  Petterson  submitted
    that, subject  to  any  issues  of  fairness  that  might  arise  in  a
    particular case such as putting an appellant (if unrepresented) or  his
    representatives on notice of the case he had to meet under s.72 and  of
    having a fair opportunity to present evidence to rebut the presumption,
    the First-tier Tribunal was under a legal obligation to apply s.72 even
    if it had not been raised by the Secretary of  State  in  the  decision
    letter or explicitly by the Presenting Officer at the hearing.

 8. Mr Brown candidly accepted that the Tribunal had erred  in  failing  to
    apply s.72 even though the  Secretary  of  State  had  not  placed  any
    reliance upon it before the First-tier Tribunal.   His case  was  that,
    in re-making the decision, we should find on the basis of the  evidence
    before the First-tier Tribunal, namely the Offender  Assessment  System
    ("OASys") Report  dated  26  November  2008,  that  the  appellant  had
    rebutted the presumption under s.72 that he constituted a danger to the
    community of the United Kingdom.

Section 72 of the 2002 Act

 9. The starting point is Art 33 of the 1951 Refugee Convention.  Art 33(1)
    of the Refugee Convention sets out the prohibition  against  "expulsion
    or return" of a refugee in the following terms:

         "1.      No Contracting State shall expel or return ('refouler')  a
             refugee  in  any  manner  whatsoever  to  the   frontiers   of
             territories where his life or freedom would be  threatened  on
             account of his race, religion, nationality,  membership  of  a
             particular social group or political opinion."

10.  That  provision  enshrines  a  state's  obligation   not   to   return
    ('refouler')  a  refugee  falling  within  Art  1A(2)  of  the  Refugee
    Convention to a place where he  or  she  has  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution for a Convention reason (R v SSHD ex p  Sivakumaran  [1988]
    AC 958).

11. However, sub-paragraph (2) of Art 33 sets  out  an  exception  to  that
    prohibition against refoulement.  It is in the following terms:

         "2.      The benefit of the present provision may not, however,  be
             claimed by a refugee whom there  are  reasonable  grounds  for
             regarding as a danger to the security of the country in  which
             he is, or who, having been convicted by a final judgment of  a
             particularly  serious  crime,  constitutes  a  danger  to  the
             community of that country."



12. It is that underlying provision which the Secretary of State argues  in
    this appeal applied to the appellant.  The provisions of Art  33  -  in
    particular Art 33(2) - are replicated in Art 21  of  the  Qualification
    Directive (Directive 2004/83/EC).

13. For our purposes, the effect of Art 33(2) is that a  person  who  is  a
    refugee falling within Art 1A(2) of the Convention may be  refouled  if
    he  has  been  convicted  of  a  "particularly   serious   crime"   and
    "constitutes a danger to the community".  The  burden  of  proving  the
    requirements of Art 33(2)  lies  upon  the  Secretary  of  State.  (The
    provisions excluding a person from humanitarian protection in para 339D
    are similar but are not in identical terms.)

14. Section 72 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 contains
    a number of provisions which apply,

         "For the purpose of the construction  and  application  of  Article
         33(2) of the Refugee Convention (exclusion from protection)".

15. In particular, s.72 creates statutory presumptions that (1) a crime  is
    a "particularly serious crime"  and  (2)  an  individual  convicted  of
    certain offences is a "danger to the  community".   These  presumptions
    relate to certain crimes committed in the  UK  (s.72(2)  and  (4))  and
    abroad (s.72(3)).  The presumptions are rebuttable by evidence (s.72(6)
    and EN (Serbia) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 630).  We concentrate on s.72(2)
    which is relevant to this appeal and which provides that:

         "A person shall be presumed to  have  been  convicted  by  a  final
         judgment of a particularly serious crime and to constitute a danger
         to the community of the United Kingdom if he is -


         (a)      convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence, and


         (b)      sentenced to a period of  imprisonment  of  at  least  two
         years."

16. We should also set out sub-sections  (9)  and  (10)  which  set  out  a
    certification process and the procedure to be followed  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (or Upper Tribunal when re-making a decision) where  such
    a certificate has been issued by the Secretary of State.   Sub-sections
    (9) and (10) provide that:



         "(9)     Subsection (10) applies where -

             (a) a person appeals under section 82, 83 or 101 of this Act
                  or under section 2 of the Special Immigration Appeals
                  Commission Act 1997 (c. 68) wholly or partly on the ground
                  that to remove him from or to require him to leave the
                  United Kingdom would breach the United Kingdom's
                  obligations under the Refugee Convention, and

             (b) the Secretary of State issues a certificate that
                  presumptions under subsection (2), (3) or (4) apply to the
                  person (subject to rebuttal).

         (10)     The Tribunal or Commission hearing the appeal -

             (a) must begin substantive deliberation on the appeal by
                  considering the certificate, and

             (b) if in agreement that presumptions under subsection (2),
                  (3) or (4) apply (having given the appellant an
                  opportunity for rebuttal) must dismiss the appeal in so
                  far as it relies on the ground specified in subsection
                  (9)(a)."


17. In this appeal, no certificate was issued under sub-section (9) of  the
    2002 Act.  If it had, the terms of sub-section (10) are such  that  the
    Tribunal would have been required to begin its substantive deliberation
    of the  appeal  by  considering  whether  the  certificate  -  and  the
    statutory presumptions relied upon within it  -  had  been  established
    such that Art 33(2) of the Refugee Convention applied.

18. The Secretary of State relies upon the terms of s.72(2)  which,  it  is
    submitted, demonstrably apply to the appellant.  As we have  indicated,
    Mr Brown did not demur from the Secretary of State's  submissions  that
    the Tribunal had a duty to apply s.72(2).  He was right not to do so.

19. In an automatic  deportation  case  such  as  the  present  appeal,  an
    individual who relies  upon  the  Refugee  Convention  to  challenge  a
    deportation order prays in aid 'Exception  1'  in  s.33(2)  of  the  UK
    Borders Act 2007 which applies, so far as relevant,

            "where removal of the  foreign  criminal  in  pursuance  of  the
            deportation order would breach -

              a) ... or

              b)  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations  under  the   Refugee
                 Convention."

20. The terms of s.33(2) of the 2007 Act  mirror  the  relevant  ground  of
    appeal generally applicable in appeals under s.82 of the 2002 Act found
    in s.84(1)(g):

             "that removal of the appellant  from  the  United  Kingdom  in
             consequence of  the  immigration  decision  would  breach  the
             United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention...."

21. The position would appear to  be  the  same  where  the  appeal  is  an
    'upgrade' appeal under s.83 or s.83A of the  2002  Act  brought  by  an
    individual where leave has been granted but it has been decided  he  is
    not a refugee.  The ground of appeal in both instances remains  whether
    the individual's removal  would  breach  the  Refugee  Convention  (see
    s.84(3) and 84(4) respectively).

22. An individual's removal will only breach the Refugee Convention if

          i) he is a refugee (usually because Art 1A(2) applies); and

         ii) his removal is prohibited by Art 33(1).

    Removal will not be prohibited if Art 33(2) applies.

23. Section 72(2) creates statutory presumptions that the  requirements  of
    Art 33(2) are met  and,  as  a  consequence,  the  prohibition  against
    refoulement will not apply.  Section 72 is  in  mandatory  terms:  "[a]
    person shall be presumed...".  In our judgment, where s.72(2) or any of
    the other statutory provisions creating presumptions in  s.72  applies,
    the Tribunal is under a duty to apply s.72 to  the  individual  in  the
    appeal. Given the  evidential  base  provided  by  these  presumptions,
    subject to rebuttal, Art 33(2) will apply in such circumstances so that
    that  a  refugee's  removal  will  not  be  a  breach  of  the  Refugee
    Convention.  Of course, the individual  will,  whilst  he  fulfils  the
    definition in Art 1 of the Refugee Convention, still have the status of
    a refugee in international law; and he cannot be removed from the UK to
    his country of nationality as that would inevitably infringe Art  3  of
    the ECHR.  However, given the terms of the  2002  and  2007  Acts,  his
    appeal relying on 'asylum' or 'refugee' grounds cannot succeed.

24. Mr Brown referred us to the decision of Bean J in R (TB) v SSHD  [2007]
    EWHC 3381 (Admin).  In the end, Mr Brown did not rely upon the decision
    in TB in his submissions.  The case is, however,  important  not  least
    for what was said  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  ([2008]  EWCA  Civ  977)
    concerning the Tribunal's obligation to apply s.72 of the 2002 Act.  We
    are not clear why Mr Brown omitted to refer us to the Court of Appeal's
    decision.

25. In TB, the Secretary of State decided to deport the  claimant  who  had
    been convicted of an offence for which, following reduction on  appeal,
    he received a sentence of three years  and  ten  months'  imprisonment.
    Following the  decision,  the  claimant  successfully  appealed  to  an
    Immigration Judge who allowed his appeal on refugee  and  human  rights
    grounds.  The Secretary  of  State  did  not  seek  to  challenge  that
    decision.  Subsequently, the Secretary of State  refused  to  recognise
    the claimant as a refugee and to grant him the appropriate leave on the
    basis that Art 33(2) of the Refugee Convention, read with s.72  of  the
    2002 Act, applied to  him.   The  claimant  sought  to  challenge  that
    decision by way of judicial review.  Bean J held that the Secretary  of
    State's decision was unlawful on the basis that it amounted to an abuse
    of process for the Secretary of State to raise the s.72 issue after the
    Immigration Judge's decision had been given.

26. The Court of Appeal upheld Bean J's  decision  although  preferring  to
    characterise the Secretary of State's decision as  an  abuse  of  power
    (see [36]).  For our purposes, it suffices to  identify  the  Court  of
    Appeal's reasoning at [32]:

         "32. As a matter of principle, it cannot  be  right  for  the  Home
         Secretary to be able to circumvent  the  decision  of  the  IAT  by
         administrative decision. If she could do so, the  statutory  appeal
         system would be undermined; indeed, in a case such as the  present,
         the decision of the Immigration Judge on  the  application  of  the
         Refugee  Convention  would  be  made  irrelevant.  That  would   be
         inconsistent with the statutory scheme." (per Stanley Burnton LJ):

27. It was the Secretary of State's reliance upon s.72 after  the  Tribunal
    proceedings were completed (and during which proceedings s.72  had  not
    been raised) that was unlawful.  The Court of Appeal was  led  to  this
    conclusion not least by the fact that the Secretary of State could have
    relied upon s.72 at the initial hearing and, further, if the judge  had
    failed to apply it, that the Secretary of State could  have  challenged
    the Tribunal's decision on the basis that the judge had erred  in  law.
    At para [29] Stanley Burnton LJ said:

         "29. Given the general wording  of  subsection  (1)  [of  s.72],  I
         accept that the presumptions are to be applied generally,  both  by
         the Secretary of State when making a decision on an application for
         asylum and by the Tribunal  on  the  hearing  of  an  appeal.  (For
         present purposes, it is unnecessary to consider proceedings  before
         the  Special  Immigration  Appeals  Tribunal  separately.)  In   my
         judgment, once the facts giving rise to the statutory  presumptions
         have been  established,  it  would  be  an  error  of  law  for  an
         Immigration Judge to fail to apply a presumption  required  by  the
         section, irrespective of whether or not the Secretary of State  had
         issued a certificate under subsection (9)(b)."

28. Then at para [30], his Lordship added:

         "30. ... it was open to the Secretary of State to seek to establish
         that Article 33.2 applied to TB on the hearing of his appeal; and
         it was open to the  Secretary  of  State  to  seek  to  appeal  the
         determination of the  Immigration  Judge  on  the  ground  that  in
         failing to apply the statutory presumption she erred  in  law.  She
         did not do so, and it is not easy to see why, if she  is  bound  by
         the Immigration Judge's decision, she should be able  to  take  the
         same point subsequently." (our emphasis)

29. The emphasised words were said in the  context  of  a  case  where  the
    Secretary of State had not relied  upon  s.72  before  the  Immigration
    Judge.  That is the situation in this appeal.  But this is also  not  a
    case in which reliance is placed upon s.72 after the completion of  the
    appeal proceedings.

30. Subsequent to the hearing in this appeal, in AQ (Somalia) v SSHD [2011]
    EWCA Civ 695 the Court of Appeal emphatically endorsed TB and concluded
    that the presumptions in s.72 apply whether or  not  the  Secretary  of
    State has issued  a  certificate  under  s.72(9):  see  especially  per
    Sullivan LJ at [27]-[30]: at [29] his Lordship noted that "the  meaning
    of Section 72 is plain".

31. What is said in TB and (now) AQ  strongly  supports  the  view  we  had
    reached independently and which, without sight of the Court of Appeal's
    decision in TB, was accepted by the parties before us.

32. In our judgment, the First-tier Tribunal is required  in  principle  to
    apply s.72 of its own motion in an appropriate case where  the  factual
    underpinning for the application of  s.72  is  present.   Equally,  the
    Secretary of State is entitled to  take  the  point  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal in the event of an appeal.

33. There is, of course, the caveat that appeal proceedings must  be  fair,
    and so if the Secretary of State has not raised the point in the letter
    setting out  the  reasons  for  her  decision,  then  an  unrepresented
    appellant may need to be warned of the statutory provisions which raise
    the rebuttable presumptions against him and be given the opportunity to
    deal with them. It may be that this could sensibly be done by the First-
    tier Tribunal at the stage of any pre-hearing review when a judge could
    make the necessary directions and timetable  for  the  hearing  of  the
    appeal to ensure that the appellant has  a  fair  opportunity  to  call
    evidence to rebut the statutory presumptions. The same steps  are  less
    likely to be required where an appellant is legally represented because
    such representatives can be taken to be  familiar  with  the  statutory
    provisions and able to inform the First Tier Tribunal of what  evidence
    (if any) is to be relied upon to rebut the presumptions and a timetable
    for its availability.  These are, however, matters for  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  What is legally important is that any hearing  is  conducted
    fairly.

Application of s.72(2) to this appeal

34. In this appeal, s.72(2) created presumptions that, if not  rebutted  by
    evidence, would have led the Tribunal to a finding  that,  even  though
    the appellant was a refugee because he would be at risk on return,  his
    removal to Zimbabwe would nevertheless not be a breach of  the  Refugee
    Convention by virtue of the exception to the prohibition on refoulement
    set out in Art 33(2) of that  Convention.   For  the  reasons  we  have
    given, we have concluded that the First-tier Tribunal erred in  law  in
    failing to apply s.72 to the appellant.

35. That said, it is clear that that error was not material to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal's decision.  Mr Brown  submitted  that  on  the  evidence
    before the First-tier Tribunal, the presumption that the appellant  was
    a "danger to the community" was  rebutted.   The  evidence  before  the
    Tribunal concerning the appellant's risk to  the  community,  including
    the risk of his re-offending,  was  contained  with  the  OASys  Report
    following an assessment on 26 November 2008.   At  page  6  of  39  the
    report states that the risk of reconviction by the appellant for "other
    offences", that is non-violent or sexual offences, within two years  of
    release was "low".  It will be recalled that  the  appellant  had  been
    convicted of the offence of conspiring to  supply  a  controlled  drug,
    namely the Class A drug heroin.  Again, at page 6  of  39,  the  report
    notes that the appellant has  no  history  of  committing  offences  of
    violence or sexual offences.  The report concludes that the risk of re-
    imprisonment within two years of release is "low".   Those  conclusions
    are expanded upon later in the report when  the  circumstances  of  the
    appellant are analysed.

36. It is not necessary for us to set out in any further detail  the  OASys
    Report because, on behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State,  Ms  Petterson
    accepted that this evidence rebutted the presumption that the appellant
    was a "danger to the community" created by s.72 of the  2002  Act.   On
    this evidence, we agree that the presumption that the  appellant  is  a
    danger to the community in s.72(2) of the 2002 Act is rebutted.

Decision

37. For these reasons,  although  we  are  satisfied  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred in law in failing to apply s.72 of  the  2002  Act,  the
    decision to allow the appeal was correct and stands.  'Exception 1'  in
    s.33(2) of the 2007 Act applied because the  appellant's  removal  from
    the UK would breach the Refugee Convention.

38. The First-tier Tribunal also allowed the appeal under Art 3 of the ECHR
    which was not challenged before us and that decision also stands.

39. For these reasons, the appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Secretary of
    State is dismissed.




Signed



Senior Immigration Judge Grubb
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
