



                                                            [pic]


Upper Tribunal
                      (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


RLP (BAH revisited - expeditious justice) Jamaica [2017] UKUT 00330 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


      |Heard at Hill Street, Birmingham              |      Decision promulgated    |
|On 17 March 2017                              |      On                      |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before


                THE PRESIDENT, THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between


                                     RLP
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

                                  ANONYMITY

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal)  Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation

For the Appellant:           Ms E Rutherford, of Counsel, instructed by
             Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:      Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


   i) The decision of the Upper Tribunal in BAH (EO - Turkey - Liability  to
      Deport) [2012]  UKUT  00196  (IAC)  belongs  to  the  legal  framework
      prevailing at the time when it was made: it has long been overtaken by
      the significant statutory and policy developments and reforms effected
      by the Immigration Act 2014 and the corresponding  amendments  of  the
      Immigration Rules, coupled with YM (Uganda) [2014] EWCA  Civ  1292  at
      [36] - [39].


  ii) In cases  where  the  public  interest  favouring  deportation  of  an
      immigrant is potent and pressing, even egregious and unjustified delay
      on the part of the Secretary  of  State  in  the  underlying  decision
      making process is unlikely to  tip  the  balance  in  the  immigrant's
      favour in the proportionality exercise under Article 8(2) ECHR.


                                  DECISION


Preamble


The provisions of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  and  the
Immigration Rules are assembled  in  Appendix  1  and  Appendix  2  to  this
judgment.


Introduction


 1. It is a regrettable truism that from time to  time  one  encounters  an
    appeal which has been  in  the  Tribunal  system  for  an  indefensibly
    lengthy period.  Sadly, the present case is a paradigm illustration  of
    this thankfully rare phenomenon.  It provides an important reminder  of
    the overarching importance of expeditious  justice,  the  ever  present
    need for robust case management and the avoidance of certain  practices
    which are antithetical to both.


Chronology

 2. The chronology speaks for itself:


      a) The impugned decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  whereby  the
         application of the Appellant for asylum and his human rights  claim
         were refused, in the context of a deportation decision, is dated 04
         September 2012.


      b) The First-tier Tribunal (the "FtT")   heard the appeal  on  09  May
         2013 and promulgated their decision  some  two  weeks  later.   The
         appeal was dismissed.


      c) Prior to the hearing on 09 May 2013, there had been a total of four
         case management review ("CMR") hearings conducted  by  FtT  Judges,
         spanning the period October 2012 to March 2013.  On  each  occasion
         the decision taken was that the hearing of  the  appeal  should  be
         deferred  having  regard  to  ongoing  Family   Court   proceedings
         involving the Appellant.


      d) At the fourth of these CMRs the appeal was listed to be heard on 09
         May 2013.  This hearing did not result in the determination of  the
         appeal.  Rather, it yielded a somewhat unorthodox judicial decision
         purporting to require the Secretary of State to grant the Appellant
         a period of discretionary leave pending completion  of  the  Family
         Court proceedings.  The FtT has no power to make such an order.


      e) The Secretary of State appealed against this decision.   The  Upper
         Tribunal heard the appeal on 21 August 2013 and,  on  27  September
         2013, it set aside the decision of the FtT and remitted the  appeal
         to that forum, giving rise to  the  substantive  dismissal  of  the
         Appellant's appeal by a decision  of  the  FtT  promulgated  on  26
         November 2013 (supra).


      f) Next, the Appellant's application for permission  to  appeal,  made
         timeously, was refused by a Judge of the FtT.


      g) By its decision dated 11 March  2014  the  Upper  Tribunal  granted
         permission  to  appeal.   Pausing,  at  this   stage   the   appeal
         proceedings (in their totality) were of some  18  months'  vintage.
         Regrettably, three further years were to elapse until  the  listing
         of the appeal before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia and me.


      h) The initial listing of the appeal before the Upper Tribunal was  on
         02 October 2014.   The  appeal  was  delisted  in  somewhat  opaque
         circumstances, one feature of which was that the Appellant and  his
         counsel attended the relevant venue on the scheduled date  only  to
         learn of this development.


      i) The manifestly unjustifiable delay  which  has  characterized  this
         appeal throughout continued.  The appeal was not relisted until  30
         April 2015.  By its decision promulgated on 29 May 2015  the  Upper
         Tribunal set aside the decision of the FtT. The Upper Tribunal  did
         not proceed to remake the decision.  No  explanation  for  this  is
         provided in its decision.  It directed that the appeal be  relisted
         in the Upper Tribunal "on the next available date". It would appear
         that no proper regard was had to either the Upper Tribunal Practice
         Directions relating to the remaking of FtT decisions or the vintage
         of the appeal which, by  this  stage,  was  approaching  its  third
         anniversary.


      j) The appeal was next listed in the Upper Tribunal  on  07  September
         2015.  A hearing ensued.  However, this did  not  give  rise  to  a
         judicial decision.  Instead, on 01 October 2015 written  directions
         were issued requiring the parties' representatives to make  further
         written submissions relating to the significance of the decision in
         Bah  (EO-Turkey-Liability  to  Deport)  [2012]  UKUT  00196   (IAC)
         (hereinafter "Bah").   Pausing again, some 1  �  years  later,  the
         appeal remains uncompleted, for reasons which will emerge below.


      k) Both parties' representatives duly complied with the time limit (29
         October 2015) for the provision of further submissions.  The  terms
         of the final paragraph of the Upper Tribunal's  directions  suggest
         that, following  receipt,  the  appeal  would  be  decided  without
         further hearing. The next development suggests that  an  assessment
         that a further hearing would be convened.


      l) By further Directions dated 12 November 2015 it was  directed  that
         the appeal "...  will be set down  for  oral  hearing,  submissions
         only on the first available date"  and  made  a  further  direction
         regarding possible fresh  evidence  under  Rule  15(2A).  [Emphasis
         added].


      m) On 15 December 2015 the parties' representatives were notified of a
         resumed    hearing to proceed on  22  January  2016.   However,  by
         Notice dated 07 January 2016, the hearing was postponed for reasons
         which are unclear.


      n) This was repeated in respect of a rescheduled hearing  date  of  15
         February 2016.


      o) At this stage, the chronology struggles and staggers on to 14 April
         2016 when the appeal was relisted.   A  hearing  ensued.   However,
         once again, this did not yield a decision.  Rather, the outcome was
         a judicially devised and signed "Adjournment and Directions", which
         included:


             "I adjourn this hearing part heard to be relisted before me on
             the first available date after 07 July 2016."


        The reason for this  course  was  recorded  as  ".............  the
        potential unlawfulness of a decision taken to remove the  Appellant
        under section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act  1993  dated  13
        June 2003 ...." [my emphasis], coupled with a desire on the part of
        the Secretary of State "to seek further instructions".




      p) The parties were directed to provide written submissions as to  the
         lawfulness of the June 2003 removal decision and a further  hearing
         was to be reconvened before the same Judge after three months.


      q)  The Appellant's representatives then made further  representations
         to the Secretary of State.

      r) The Secretary of State failed to  comply  with  the  aforementioned
         directions.




 3. The appeal was relisted for hearing on 13 October 2016.   The  decision
    made on that date records that counsel for the Appellant applied for an
    adjournment on the ground that (a) the  Judge  who  had  adjourned  the
    appeal on 14 April 2016 had directed that it be relisted  before  them,
    (b) the Home Office Presenting Officer claimed not  to  have  seen  the
    directions made arising out of the aborted hearing  on  14  April  2016
    (notwithstanding that they had been pronounced orally in  the  presence
    of the parties) and (c) there were  ongoing  Family  Court  proceedings
    relating to the Appellant's daughter (then aged  14)  which  had  given
    rise to an order dated  24  August  2016  and  were  progressing  to  a
    "contact" hearing listed to be heard on 24 October 2016.  The  assigned
    Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal stated:


         "In these circumstances it is  only  right  and  proper  that  this
         matter be adjourned."




    and directed that the Upper Tribunal directions of 14 April  2016  "are
    given full  effect."   The  Deputy  Judge  further  directed  that  the
    relisting would give effect  to  the  convenience  of  the  Appellant's
    Counsel.




 4. On 17 January    2017   there was a CMR  conducted  by  the  medium  of
    telephone.  The   outcome was the relisting of this appeal for  hearing
    on 17 March 2017.

 5. The appeal was eventually relisted before this panel of  Judges  on  17
    March 2017.  Significantly, on this occasion there  was  no  suggestion
    that the hearing should not proceed on the basis that it  was  retained
    exclusively by a   particular    judge.

 6. It is necessary to mention some even more distant dates and events. The
    sole conviction  underpinning  the  Secretary  of  State's  deportation
    decision of September 2012 was a conviction for wounding with intent to
    do grievous bodily harm dating back to 2001, generating a  4-year  term
    of imprisonment.  This was followed  by  service  of  the  conventional
    removal notices on the  Appellant,  on  13  June  2003,  based  on  his
    asserted status of illegal entrant.   This  gave  rise  to  an  appeal,
    resulting in a decision of the FtT promulgated on  11  September  2003.
    This decision records that the Secretary of State had also, on the same
    date, decided to refuse to grant the Appellant asylum.  This was not  a
    decision on the merits:  it  was,  rather,  a  decision  based  on  the
    Appellant's asserted failure to provide supporting evidence and  attend
    for an interview  when  requested  to  do  so.   The  FtT  decision  of
    September 2003  records the absence of any  conceivable  basis  for  an
    asylum claim. The only live issue was the  Appellant's  case  based  on
    Article 8 ECHR.  The appeal was dismissed  on  both  asylum  and  human
    rights grounds.

   7. This was followed by seven years unexplained inertia on  the  part  of
      the Secretary of State.  This somnambulance was disturbed  only  by  a
      second asylum claim made by the  Appellant  in  November  2010.   This
      followed seven years after his  unsuccessful  appeal  to  the  FtT  in
      September 2003 against the Secretary of State's refusal of  his  first
      asylum claim. A screening and asylum interview  was  completed  on  30
      January 2012.  No explanation of the Secretary of State's  failure  to
      interview the Appellant until January 2012 (14 months after his claim)
      or to determine the Appellant's second asylum claim until 04 September
      2012 has been proffered.  At the end of this discrete period of almost
      two years, the Secretary of State's decision stated, inter alia:


         "Your claim is based on your fear of gang violence. These  are  not
         reasons for claiming a well-founded fear of persecution  under  the
         [Refugee Convention] ...."




    In other words, the  claim  was  quite  hopeless.   No  appeal  ensued.
    Rather, the quite separate decision stimulating the  five  year  appeal
    documented laboriously above was the Secretary of State's  decision  to
    make a deportation order based on the  Appellant's  conviction  of  the
    offence of wounding with intent to cause grievous bodily harm  made  on
    20 September 2001, generating a sentence of four years imprisonment.




 8. The completion of this judgment was delayed pending a response  by  the
    Appellant's solicitors to the multiple issues raised by the  chronology
    dated in [2] above.  That this discrete phase of delay was confined  to
    a handful of days  only  is  attributable  to  the  commendably  quick,
    thorough and comprehensive response which was made.  Having  considered
    the further materials thus provided, it is clear that  the  Appellant's
      representatives have not been responsible for any of  the  successive
    delays noted above.


Lessons

 9. The lessons to be learned are the following:


      i)  Experience  has  frequently  shown  that   "reserving   to   self"
         orders/directions of Upper  Tribunal  Judges  simply  do  not  work
         efficiently in practice. These are not readily accommodated by this
         Chamber's work allocation systems and practices.


     ii) A part-heard appeal is to be distinguished  from  one  in  which  a
         hearing has not taken place at all.  That is not to say that  there
         may not be good reason for a "reserve to  oneself"  order/direction
         in either case.  However, there is a very broad  spectrum  of  part
         (or incomplete) hearings, many of which do not require  a  "reserve
         to self" direction.  Where a Judge considers that  this  course  is
         appropriate, it must always be followed by proactive and  assiduous
         post-direction monitoring.


    iii) "First available date"  relisting  directions  are  understandable.
         However, in practice, they rarely deliver efficiency or expedition.
          Best practice dictates that a concrete rearranged hearing date  be
         specified in directions of this kind.


     iv) Strict and rigorous case  management  timetables  are  required  in
         every case.


      v) A claim by a representative  at  a  resumed  hearing,  many  months
         later, that previous directions have not been seen might  be  true:
         however,  it   must   be   vigorously   probed,   particularly   in
         circumstances where the earlier directions were  pronounced  orally
         in the presence of both parties' representatives.


     vi) It is entirely unacceptable for a Tribunal  to  be  informed  on  a
         hearing date that there are/have been relevant proceedings in  some
         other judicial forum having a possible  impact  upon  the  Tribunal
         proceedings.  A failure to proactively and timeously bring this  to
         the  attention  of  the  Tribunal   will   require   a   compelling
         explanation.


    vii) Tribunals do  not  conduct  rolling  appeals.   An  adjournment  of
         specified and brief proportions may be  unavoidable  from  time  to
         time. However, the guillotine will fall at an appropriate stage  as
         soon as it appears that the overarching values  of  expedition  and
         finality are being unacceptably threatened, the more so where there
         are indications of misuse (or abuse) of process.


   viii)  The  duty  of  co-operation  with  the   Tribunal   imposed   upon
         representatives by  the  overriding  objective  cannot  be  over  -
         emphasised.



Determining this Appeal

10. It is convenient at this point to reproduce  [19]  of  this  Tribunal's
    rather elderly error of law decision:


         "The panel did not take into account in  assessing  proportionality
         in respect of Article 8,  the respondent's delay  of  10  years  in
         issuing the deportation decision after the  appellant's  conviction
         on 20 September 2001 in determining proportionality.  The panel did
         not have a discussion as to the consequences of the fact  that  the
         appellant claimed asylum in January 2000 and  his  application  was
         refused on 3 August 2001 and his appeal against that  decision  was
         dismissed on 11 September 2003.  The appellant reapplied for asylum
         on 10 November 2010 and his interview did not take place  until  30
         January 2012.  If the panel had taken the  respondent's  inordinate
         and unexplained  delay  into  account,  they  might  have  possibly
         reached a different decision."




      This sole basis upon which the decision of the FtT was set  aside  was
      the Judge's flawed Article 8 proportionality assessment.




11. The most egregious of the  multiple  incremental  discrete  periods  of
    delay in the history of  this  appeal  was  stimulated  by  an  earlier
    assessment that further written argument addressing the implications of
    the Bah decision should be provided.  This occurred some 18 months ago.
     We juxtapose this with a passage in the decision  of  the  FtT  which,
    having recorded that the Secretary of State had ordered the deportation
    of the Appellant on the  "conducive  to  the  public  good"  ground  in
    section 3(5) of the Immigration Act 1971 (in circumstances where the UK
    Borders Act 2007 did not apply), stated at [21]:


         "We are obliged to  consider  the  section  72  Certificate  first.
         Having  received  a  sentence  of  four  years'  imprisonment,  the
         Appellant is presumed to be a danger  to  the  community  and  that
         [sic] his deportation is conducive to the public good. If  it  were
         the case that the Appellant is a danger to  the  community,  it  is
         difficult to see how the public good or public interest  is  served
         by waiting for over 10 years before consideration is given  to  the
         issue  of  deportation.  The  delay  itself   suggests   that   the
         presumption may not be appropriate or justified in the  Appellant's
         case."




    And at [22]:


         "The Appellant's offence is a one-off.  He has no prior convictions
         and no subsequent convictions either.  This is not a case where the
         Appellant has spent time seeking to evade deportation or  to  delay
         such proceedings.  The delays are entirely of the Home Office's own
         making and there is no explanation for  them.   The  Appellant  has
         kept out of trouble without the threat of deportation hanging  over
         him and so his good behavior cannot be said to have been influenced
         by the need to make a good impression on that score."




    The FtT continued, at [23]:


         "The presumption under section 72 can be rebutted.  The Appellant's
         behaviour against the significant delays, none of  his  making,  in
         which he has been out of trouble for over 12 years lead us to  find
         that the Appellant is not a danger to the community  and  that  the
         presumption in his case is inappropriate."


    [Our emphasis.]


    The FtT continued, at [24]:

         "The presumption is that the  Appellant's  deportation  is  in  the
         public interest and under paragraph 398 it is only  in  exceptional
         circumstances that the public interest in deportation is outweighed
         by  other  factors.   In  this  case  the  delays  are  inordinate,
         unexplained and entirely the fault only of the Home Office."


         [Emphasis added.]




12. At this juncture we must identify the legal framework applicable to the
    remaking of     the decision of the FtT which we hereby  undertake.  By
    virtue of the decision in YM     (Uganda) [2014] EWCA Civ 1292, we must
    apply the legal rules currently  in  force.   In     this  context,  we
    distinguish between legal rules and the Secretary  of  State's  policy.
    The applicable legal rules are contained in Part 5A of the Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the "2002 Act"). This is reproduced in
    Appendix 1 to this  judgment.   The  Secretary  of  State's  policy  is
    contained in paragraphs A398, 398, 399  and  399A  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  These provisions are reproduced in Appendix 2.


13. As noted above, there was earlier consideration of how  one  aspect  of
    the decision in Bah might impact on the resolution of this appeal. This
    concerned the exhortation in Bah that the  first  step  in  deportation
    appeals not involving the 2007 Act is to consider whether the Appellant
    is liable to be deported on the grounds set out  by  the  Secretary  of
    State, an exercise  which  normally  involves  an  examination  by  the
    Tribunal of:


      a) whether the material facts alleged by the Secretary  of  State  are
         accepted and, if not, made  out  to  the  civil  standard  flexibly
         applied;


      b) whether on the  facts  established  and  viewed  as  a  whole,  the
         conduct,  character   or associations of the appellant reach such a
         level of seriousness as to justify a decision to deport; and


      c) in considering (b), taking   into   account any  lawful  policy  of
         the  Secretary  of  State     relevant  to  the  exercise  of   the
         discretion to deport and whether the discretion has been  exercised
         in accordance with such policy.

      The overtly prescriptive nature of the decision in  Bah  involves  two
      further steps.  First, subject to the outcome  of  the  aforementioned
      exercise, the Tribunal  will  then    consider  any  human  rights  or
      protection objections  to  deportation  and,  finally,  will  consider
      whether the "discretion to deport" has been  exercised  in  accordance
      with the applicable immigration rules.




14. The proposition that the decision in Bah was made in the context  of  a
    particular legal framework then extant but long superseded seems to  us
    unexceptional.  The main constituent elements of  such  framework  were
    section 3(5) and section 5(1) of the 1971 Act and paragraph 364 of  the
    Immigration Rules.  This is not the legal/policy  framework  applicable
    to the remaking of the FtT's decision hereby undertaken by us: see [12]
    above.  The transformation of the legal landscape  postdating  Bah  has
    been substantial. It has three  features  in  particular.   First,  the
    introduction of new primary legislation in the form of Part 5A  of  the
    2002 Act. Second, the repeal of paragraph 364 of the Rules (which  took
    effect on 9  July  2012  coupled  with  the  introduction  of  the  new
    provisions of the Immigration  Rules  assembled  in  Appendix  2,  with
    effect from 28 July 2014.  Third, the advent of  a  series  of  binding
    decisions of the Court of  Appeal  relating  to  the  construction  and
    impact of the new primary legislation provisions  and  their  interplay
    with the Rules, crowned by the recent decision of the Supreme Court  in
    Hesham Ali (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2016]
    UKSC 60 and R (Agyarko) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    [2017] UKSC 11.


15. Stated succinctly, the decision in Bah was  based  on  a  provision  of
    primary legislation and a provision of the Immigration Rules neither of
    which has any application whatsoever  to  the  exercise  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal remaking the decision of the FtT.  The test enshrined  in  Bah
    namely whether  on  the  facts  established  viewed  as  a  whole,  the
    conduct, character or associations of the appellant reach such a  level
    of seriousness as to justify a decision to deport no longer applies. It
    has been overtaken and extinguished  by  the  significant  developments
    noted  above.  While  we  invited  Ms  Rutherford   (representing   the
    Appellant) to formulate a submission to the contrary, she struggled  to
    do so, understandably.  The submissions of both  representatives  were,
    unavoidably, directed to the new statutory and policy 9ie Rules) regime
    which we must apply.


16. Next, we  would  highlight  that  the  main  elements  of  the  factual
    framework to which we shall apply the governing legal rules are largely
    uncontroversial.  We summarize the first elements thereof thus:


      a) The Appellant is a citizen of Jamaica, now aged 50 years.


      b) His initial presence in the United  Kingdom,  from  April  1997  to
         December 1999 was lawful, pursuant to visitors and student visas.


      c) The Appellant's presence in the United Kingdom  has  been  unlawful
         since 01 January 2000.


      d) He was convicted on 20 September 2001 of wounding with intent to do
         grievous bodily generating a sentence of four years' imprisonment.


      e) The Appellant married a British Citizen on 23  September  2000.  He
         divorced in 2011.  There is a child of that relationship  and  thus
         the Appellant is the father of a British citizen child now aged  15
         years.


      f) The previously extant application for contact that was  before  the
         Family Court was determined by that Court on 24 October 2016.



17. The factual matrix  is  augmented  as  follows.   In  response  to  the
    Tribunal's direction, the Appellant's solicitors have  provided,  inter
    alia, certain Orders and directions of Family Courts.  The most  recent
    Order is  dated  24  October  2016.   Considered  in  conjunction  with
    previous Orders and directions, this discloses that the  Appellant  has
    had no contact with his daughter during most of her life,  neither  she
    nor her mother wishes contact to be established and  the  only  contact
    permitted by the Court is of the indirect variety by "letters and cards
    including  gifts   twice   per   year   (birthdays   and   Christmas)".
    Furthermore, the  Appellant  is  prohibited  from  making  any  further
    Children Act Application until  his  daughter  leaves  school  in  2018
    without the permission of the Court.   This represents the  outcome  of
    the third contact application which the Appellant has made since  2011.
    There is  no  evidence  of  anything  comparable  or,  indeed,  of  any
    involvement by the Appellant in his daughter's life during the previous
    nine years, beginning with the year of her birth.


18. The main elements of the period 2002 - 2012 have  already  been  noted.
    The stand out milestones belonging to this period are:


      g) The Secretary of State's decision dated 13 June 2003 to remove  the
         Appellant from the United Kingdom  on  account  of  his  status  of
         illegal entrant.


    (ii)    The  FtT's  decision  of  11  September  2003  dismissing   the
         Appellant's appeal against refusal of asylum.


    (iii)  The Appellant's second application for asylum, dated 10 November
         2010.


    (iv)   The deportation notices - evidently  stimulated  by  the  asylum
         application - of 16 September 2011 and 14 February 2012.


    (v)    The asylum interview held on 30 January 2012.


    (vi)   The asylum refusal decision dated  04  September  2012,  coupled
         with an assessment that the deportation of the Appellant would  not
         infringe any of his Convention Rights,  consideration  having  been
         given to paragraphs 396, 398 and 399A of the Rules, in  conjunction
         with  Article  8  ECHR  and  s55  of  the  Border,  Citizenship   &
         Immigration Act 2009.

19. At this  juncture  we  would  highlight  another  aspect  of  the  "Bah
    diversion" considered particularly in [13] - [15]  above.   The  belief
    (or expectation) that the  Upper  Tribunal,  in  the  context  of  this
    appeal, would adjudicate on the lawfulness of the Secretary of  State's
    decision in 2003 to remove the Appellant is evident from everything  we
    have reviewed.  It was plainly misconceived.  The Upper Tribunal has at
    no time been seized of any challenge, regular or otherwise, to the 2003
    removal decision. That removal decision was the subject of  the  appeal
    determined in September 2003.  Furthermore, while that decision, now of
    some 14 years vintage, has at no  time  been  implemented  neither  the
    parties' representatives nor the Tribunal  have  identified  any  legal
    rule, statutory or otherwise, suggesting that  the  2003  decision  has
    lapsed with the effluxion of time.  Absent any such rule,  we  consider
    that it remains  presumptively  lawful,  giving  effect  to  the  omnia
    praesumuntur principle.


20. Finally, we turn to apply the legal framework  to  the  factual  matrix
    outlined above.  As we have made clear, the applicable legal  framework
    is not that in vogue at the time of the Secretary of  State's  decision
    or the FtT's determination.  Nor is it the legal framework underpinning
    the decision in Bah.  Rather, with the passage of time,  the  governing
    legal  framework  has  evolved  significantly  and  now  comprises  the
    components set forth in [12] above.   This  formulation  of  the  legal
    framework governing the determination of this appeal is dictated by the
    decision of the Court of Appeal in YM (Uganda) [2014] EWCA Civ 1292  at
    [36] - [39].

21. We give effect firstly to Part 5A of the 2002 Act, insofar as relevant:




    (i)    We begin by acknowledging the public interest in the maintenance
         of effective immigration controls: section 117B(1).


    (ii)   There is no evidence that the "English speaking" public interest
         in section 117B(2) is engaged.


    (iii)  There is no evidence that  the  "financial  independent"  public
         interest in section 117B(3) is engaged.


    (iv)   As regards section 117B(4), the Appellant has been progressively
         strengthening and expanding his private life in the United  Kingdom
         throughout the entirety of a sojourn which has been unlawful  since
         January 2000.   On  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  it  was
         expressly acknowledged that the Appellant's  case  belongs  to  the
         upper level of the "little weight" spectrum: see  Kaur  (Children's
         Best Interests/Public Interest Interface) [2017] UKUT 00014 (IAC).


    (v)    As regards section 117B(5), the Appellant's  immigration  status
         in the United Kingdom has at all times been precarious, dating from
         his initial entry in April 1997,  some  20  years  ago.   The  same
         "little weight" assessment as above applies.


    (vi)   The public interest in the deportation of foreign  criminals  is
         acknowledged: section 117C(1).


    (vii)   The  Appellant's  offending  belongs  to  the  highest  of  the
         categories established by section 117C.


    (viii) The public interest requires the Appellant's deportation  unless
         there are "very compelling  circumstances,  over  and  above  those
         described in Exceptions 1 and 2": section 117C(6).


     ix) The Appellant cannot bring his case  within  the  ambit  of  either
         Exception 1 or Exception 2.




22. At this juncture we turn to consider the  relevant  provisions  of  the
    Rules, reminding ourselves of the emphasis in Hesham  Ali,  these  have
    the status of neither statutory provisions nor legal rules of any kind.
     They are, rather, an expression of the Secretary of State's policy  to
    which substantial weight must be attributed.  Paragraphs 398,  399  and
    399A are, in a sense, a self-denying ordnance to which the Secretary of
    State must give effect, subject to and in accordance  with  established
    principles of public law, having opted for the mechanism of a published
    policy in this way.  We have reproduced these provisions in Appendix  2
    above.  In brief compass, these  provisions  of  the  Rules  yield  the
    following analysis and conclusions in this case:


    (i)    Paragraph 398(a) applies, as the sentence  of  imprisonment  was
         one of four years, with the result  that  the  deportation  of  the
         Appellant is presumptive conducive to the public good  and  in  the
         public interest.


    (ii)   Neither paragraph 398(b) nor 398(c) applies.


    (iii)  The next question is whether paragraph 399 of 399A applies: this
         was not, properly, argued and we answer this in the negative in any
         event.


    (iv)   Thus the question becomes, per  paragraph  398:  is  the  public
         interest in deporting the Appellant outweighed  by  "other  factors
         where there are very compelling circumstances over and above  those
         described in paragraphs 399 and 399A"?




    The submission of Ms Rutherford is  that  this  test  is  satisfied  by
    reason of the extreme delay on the  part  of  the  Secretary  of  State
    during the period 2002 - 2012, the hallmarks whereof were  incompetence
    and maladministration.


23. We reject this argument.  On the one hand, the delay on the part of the
    Secretary of State can only be characterised egregious, is  exacerbated
    by the absence of any explanation and is presumptively the  product  of
    serious incompetence and  maladministration.   However,  on  the  other
    hand, the case against the Appellant is a formidable  one:  the  public
    interest favours his deportation; the potency of this  public  interest
    has been emphasised in a series of  Court  of  Appeal  decisions;   the
    Appellant's case does not fall within any of  the  statutory  or  Rules
    exceptions; the greater part of his life was spent in  his  country  of
    origin; there is no indication of a dearth of ties or connections  with
    his country of origin; he is culturally and socially integrated  there;
    his family life in the United Kingdom is at best flimsy;  and  most  of
    his sojourn in the United Kingdom has  been  unlawful  and  precarious.
    We take into account all of these  facts  and  factors  in  determining
    whether very compelling circumstances have been demonstrated.   This is
    a self-evidently elevated threshold  which,  by  its  nature,  will  be
    overcome  only   by   a   powerful   case.   In   our   judgement   the
    maladministration  and  delay  of  which  the  Secretary  of  State  is
    undoubtedly guilty fall measurably short of the mark in displacing  the
    aforementioned   potent   public   interest   in   the   Article   8(2)
    proportionality balancing exercise.  We conclude that  the  Appellant's
    case fails to surpass the threshold by some distance.


24. This analysis and conclusion are in no way affected by the findings  of
    the FtT noted in [11] above.  The decision of the FtT is locked in  the
    legal time warp in which it was made.  The legal landscape within which
    we remake its decision is the significantly different one which we have
    outlined.

Decision

  25. We remake the decision  of  the  FtT  by  dismissing  the  Appellant's
      appeal.






                                                                       [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                                                               24 March 2017



                                 APPENDIX 1

Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002

117A Application of this Part

(1) This Part applies where a court or tribunal is required to determine
whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-
      (a) breaches a person's right to respect for private and family life
      under Article 8, and
      (b) as a result would be unlawful under section 6  of the Human Rights
Act 1998.
(2) In considering the public interest question, the court or tribunal must
(in particular) have regard-
      (a) in all cases, to the considerations listed in section 117B, and
      (b) in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals, to the
      considerations listed in section 117C.
(3) In subsection (2), "the public interest question" means the question of
whether an interference with a person's right to respect for private and
family life is justified under Article 8(2).

117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all cases
(1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the public
interest.
(2) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests of the
economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter
or remain in the United Kingdom are able to speak English, because persons
who can speak English-
      (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
      (b) are better able to integrate into society.
(3) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests of the
economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter
or remain in the United Kingdom are financially independent, because such
persons-
      (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and
      (b) are better able to integrate into society.
(4) Little weight should be given to-
      (a) a private life, or
      (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,
that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the United
Kingdom unlawfully.
(5) Little weight should be given to a private life established by a person
at a time when the person's immigration status is precarious.
(6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the public
interest does not require the person's removal where-
      (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with
      a qualifying child, and
      (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the United
Kingdom.


117C Article 8: additional considerations in cases involving foreign
criminals
(1) The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest.
(2) The more serious the offence committed by a foreign criminal, the
greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.
(3) In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not been sentenced to a
period of imprisonment of four years or more, the public interest requires
C's deportation unless Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies.
(4) Exception 1 applies where-
(a) C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most of C's
life,
(b) C is socially and culturally integrated in the United Kingdom, and
(c) there would be very significant obstacles to C's integration into the
country to which C is proposed to be deported.
(5) Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and subsisting relationship
with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting parental
relationship with a qualifying child, and the effect of C's deportation on
the partner or child would be unduly harsh.
(6) In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to a period of
imprisonment of at least four years, the public interest requires
deportation unless there are very compelling circumstances, over and above
those described in Exceptions 1 and 2.
(7) The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to be taken into
account where a court or tribunal is considering a decision to deport a
foreign criminal only to the extent that the reason for the decision was
the offence or offences for which the criminal has been convicted.

117D Interpretation of this Part

(1) In this Part-
"Article 8" means Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights;
"qualifying child" means a person who is under the age of 18 and who-
      (a) is a British citizen, or
      (b) has lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of seven
years or more;
"qualifying partner" means a partner who-
      (a) is a British citizen, or
      (b) who is settled in the United Kingdom (within the meaning of the
      Immigration Act 1971 - see section 33(2A) of that Act).
(2) In this Part, "foreign criminal" means a person-
      (a) who is not a British citizen,
      (b) who has been convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence, and
      (c) who-
           (i) has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least
      12 months,
           (ii) has been convicted of an offence that has caused serious
      harm, or
           (iii) is a persistent offender.
(3) For the purposes of subsection (2)(b), a person subject to an order
under-
      (a) section 5  of the Criminal Procedure (Insanity) Act 1964 (insanity
etc),
      (b) section 57  of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995
(insanity etc), or
      (c) Article 50A of the Mental Health (Northern Ireland) Order 1986
(insanity etc),
has not been convicted of an offence.
(4) In this Part, references to a person who has been sentenced to a period
of imprisonment of a certain length of time-
      (a) do not include a person who has received a suspended sentence
      (unless a court subsequently orders that the sentence or any part of
      it (of whatever length) is to take effect);
      (b) do not include a person who has been sentenced to a period of
      imprisonment of that length of time only by virtue of being sentenced
      to consecutive sentences amounting in aggregate to that length of
      time;
      (c) include a person who is sentenced to detention, or ordered or
      directed to be detained, in an institution other than a prison
      (including, in particular, a hospital or an institution for young
      offenders) for that length of time; and
      (d) include a person who is sentenced to imprisonment or detention, or
      ordered or directed to be detained, for an indeterminate period,
      provided that it may last for at least that length of time.
(5) If any question arises for the purposes of this Part as to whether a
person is a British citizen, it is for the person asserting that fact to
prove it.





                                 APPENDIX 2
Immigration Rules

Deportation and Article 8

   A398. These rules apply where:
      (a) a foreign criminal liable to deportation claims that his
      deportation would be contrary to the United Kingdom's obligations
      under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention;
      (b) a foreign criminal applies for a deportation order made against
      him to be revoked.
   398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary to
   the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention, and
      (a) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to the
      public good and in the public interest because they have been
      convicted of an offence for which they have been sentenced to a period
      of imprisonment of at least 4 years;
      (b) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to the
      public good and in the public interest because they have been
      convicted of an offence for which they have been sentenced to a period
      of imprisonment of less than 4 years but at least 12 months; or
      (c) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to the
      public good and in the public interest because, in the view of the
      Secretary of State, their offending has caused serious harm or they
      are a persistent offender who shows a particular disregard for the
      law, the Secretary of State in assessing that claim will consider
      whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, the public
      interest in deportation will only be outweighed by other factors where
      there are very compelling circumstances over and above those described
      in paragraphs 399 and 399A.
   399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c) applies if -
      (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with
      a child under the age of 18 years who is in the UK, and
        (i) the child is a British Citizen; or
        (ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for at least the 7
        years immediately preceding the date of the immigration decision;
        and in either case
                 (a) it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in the
                 country to which the person is to be deported; and
                 (b) it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain in the
                 UK without the person who is to be deported; or
      (b) the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship with a
      partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen or settled in the
      UK, and
           (i) the relationship was formed at a time when the person
           (deportee) was in the UK lawfully and their immigration status
           was not precarious; and
           (ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live in the
           country to which the person is to be deported, because of
           compelling circumstances over and above those described in
           paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and
           (iii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to remain in the
           UK without the person who is to be deported.
      399A.
      This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c) applies if -
           (a) the person has been lawfully resident in the UK for most of
      his life; and
           (b) he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and
           (c) there would be very significant obstacles to his integration
           into the country to which it is proposed he is deported.

