



                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Jan (Upper Tribunal: set-aside powers) [2016] UKUT 00336 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Promulgated on               |
|22 January 2016                               |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                                  FAWAD JAN
                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Applicant:     Ms Keelin McCarthy, instructed by  Derby  Immigration
                    Aid Consultants
For the Respondent:    Mr  Steven  Walker,  Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
Officer.


The decision of the Court of Appeal in Patel [2015] EWCA  Civ  1175  entails
the view that the Upper Tribunal's powers to set  aside  its  own  decisions
are limited to those in rules 43 and 45-6 of the Upper Tribunal Rules.

                        DETERMINATION OF APPLICATION

 1. The applicant, a national  of  Pakistan,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the respondent's decision on 6 January 2015 to  refuse
    to vary his leave and to give directions for his removal.  He  appealed
    to the First-tier Tribunal and after a hearing on 21 April  2015  Judge
    Mather gave her determination on 1 May 2015 dismissing his appeal.   He
    applied for permission to appeal against that decision: permission  was
    refused by Judge Chohan in the First-tier Tribunal on 13 July 2015.  He
    renewed  his  application  for  permission  to  the   Upper   Tribunal.
    Permission was refused by Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy on 3  September
    2015.  The decision was sent to the applicant and his then  solicitors,
    as well as to the respondent, on 9 September 2015,  under  cover  of  a
    letter reading, in part, as follows:

          "There is no further right of appeal in  these  circumstances.   A
          decision by the Upper Tribunal refusing permission  to  appeal  to
          itself is an "excluded decision" and therefore no appeal lies from
          such  a  decision  to  the  Court  of  Appeal:  Section   13(a)(c)
          Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007."

 2. The applicant then changed his representatives and by letter  dated  16
    October 2015 Derby Immigration Aid Consultants applied  on  his  behalf
    for the decision of Judge McGeachy to be reviewed under s.  10  of  the
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.  The grounds supporting the
    letter refer to rule 43 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008 (as amended), which we set out below.  The grounds appear to
    be based on an assertion that, because Judge McGeachy had not  referred
    specifically to part of the wording of Judge Mather's  decision,  there
    was a "serious procedural irregularity" in Judge  McGeachy's  decision;
    and that it would  be  in  the  interests  of  justice  to  review  the
    decision.  Thus, the application argued that the relevant  requirements
    of the Rules were met.  The application acknowledged that it  was  made
    outside the time limited by rule 43, but argued  that  it  was  in  the
    interests of justice for time to be extended, for reasons given in  the
    application.   We extend time because it is in the interests of justice
    to consider the issues arising from the application.

 3. The Tribunal had seen a number  of  similar  applications  and  it  was
    considered advisable to  list  one  for  full  consideration  with  the
    assistance of submissions by the parties.  Thus  this  application  was
    listed before us.   At  the  beginning  of  the  hearing,  Ms  McCarthy
    indicated that she  conceded,  for  reasons  set  out  in  her  written
    submissions, the application could not succeed.  As we indicated at the
    time, we agree that  the  application  could  not  succeed.   In  these
    circumstances the case has provided an opportunity to  reflect  on  the
    Tribunal's jurisdiction to set aside its own decisions, particularly in
    the light of the recent decision of the Court  of  Appeal  in  Manorama
    Patel and Others  v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 1175 ("Patel").

The position before Patel

 4. Before the decision of the Court of Appeal in Patel, it  appeared  that
    there were four possible sources of a power in the  Upper  Tribunal  to
    set aside its own decisions.

 5. First, r 43 of the UT Rules provides as follows:

          "(1) The Upper Tribunal may set aside a decision which disposes of
          proceedings, or part of such a decision, and re-make the  decision
          or the relevant part of it, if -
               a) the Upper Tribunal considers that it is in the  interests
                  of justice to do so; and
            b)  one  or  more  of  the  conditions  in  paragraph  (2)  are
               satisfied.


          (2) The conditions are -
               (a)    a document relating to the proceedings was  not  sent
                  to, or was not received at  an  appropriate  time  by,  a
                  party or a party's representative;
               (b)    a document relating to the proceedings was  not  sent
                  to the Upper Tribunal at an appropriate time;
               (c)    a party, or a party's representative, was not present
                  at a hearing related to the proceedings; or
               (d)    there has been some other procedural irregularity  in
                  the proceedings."

    Paragraphs (3)-(5) limit the time during  which  an  application  under
    rule 43 may be made.  The rule applies to the Upper Tribunal as a whole
    with the exception  of  the  Lands  Chamber;  but  there  are  separate
    provisions for the timing of an application in relation  to  an  asylum
    case or an immigration case, as defined.

 6. Rule 43 is made in the exercise of specific powers derived from  s.  22
    of the 2007 Act and set out in paragraph 15 of Schedule 5 to that  Act.
    Paragraph 15(2) of the Schedule allows rules for the setting aside of a
    decision in proceedings before the First-tier  Tribunal  or  the  Upper
    Tribunal in the circumstances mentioned in  sub-paragraphs  (a)-(d)  of
    rule 43(2).   Paragraph 15(1) also permits a  "slip  rule".   Paragraph
    15(3) of the Schedule is of some interest:

          "Sub-paragraphs (1) and (2) shall not be taken to prejudice, or to
          be prejudiced by,  any  power  to  correct  errors  or  set  aside
          decisions that is exercisable apart from rules made by  virtue  of
          those sub-paragraphs.

 7. The power under rule 43 is, as the rule itself makes clear, limited  to
    cases where the decision to be set aside  is  one  which  "disposes  of
    proceedings".  As well as the setting-aside being in the  interests  of
    justice, one of the reasons in paragraph (2) has to be present.   These
    are all what may be termed procedural reasons.  A refusal of permission
    to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  is  a  decision  which  disposes  of
    proceedings; but rule 43 does not permit such  a  decision  to  be  set
    aside on grounds which are wholly substantive.  The challenge to such a
    decision on  substantive  grounds  is  therefore  brought  by  judicial
    review, as the decision of the Supreme Court in R (Cart)  v  The  Upper
    Tribunal [2011] UKSC 28 makes clear.  There is no reference in rule 43,
    or  in  the  enabling  legislation,  to  the  notion  of  an  "excluded
    decision": if the decision is one which disposes of proceedings, it  is
    potentially within the ambit of rule 43.

 8. Although rule 43 contains provisions about the timing of an application
    for a decision to be set aside, no application is required.  Thus,  the
    Tribunal can exercise its jurisdiction under rule 43 on its own motion.



 9. Secondly, the 2007 Act includes a power of review.  So far as the Upper
    Tribunal is concerned, the principal provisions are in s. 10:

           "10. Review of decision of Upper Tribunal


            1) The Upper Tribunal may review a decision made  by  it  on  a
               matter in a case, other than a decision that is an  excluded
               decision  for  the  purposes  of  section  13(1)  (but   see
               subsection (7)).
            2) The Upper Tribunal's power under subsection (1) in  relation
               to a decision is exercisable -
            a) of its own initiative, or
                 b) on application by a  person  who  for  the  purposes  of
                    section 13(2) has a   right of appeal in respect of  the
                    decision.
        3) Tribunal Procedure Rules may -
                 a) provide that the Upper Tribunal may not under subsection
                    (1)  review  (whether  of  its  own  initiative  or   on
                    application under subsection (2)(b))  a  decision  of  a
                    description specified for the purposes of this paragraph
                    in Tribunal Procedure Rules;
                 b) provide that the Upper Tribunal's power under subsection
                    (1) to review a decision of a description specified  for
                    the purposes of this  paragraph  in  Tribunal  Procedure
                    Rules  is  exercisable  only  of  the   tribunal's   own
                    initiative;
                 c) provide that an application under subsection (2)(b) that
                    is of a description specified for the purposes  of  this
                    paragraph in Tribunal Procedure Rules may be  made  only
                    on grounds specified for the purposes of this  paragraph
                    in Tribunal Procedure Rules;
                 d) provide, in relation to  a  decision  of  a  description
                    specified for the purposes of this paragraph in Tribunal
                    Procedure Rules, that the Upper Tribunal's  power  under
                    subsection  (1)  to  review  the  decision  of  its  own
                    initiative is exercisable only on grounds specified  for
                    the purposes of this  paragraph  in  Tribunal  Procedure
                    Rules.
            4) Where the Upper Tribunal has under subsection (1) reviewed a
               decision, the Upper Tribunal may in the light of the  review
               do any of the following -
        a) correct accidental errors in the decision or in a record of  the
           decision;
        b) amend reasons given for the decision;
        c) set the decision aside.
            5) Where under subsection (4)(c)  the  Upper  Tribunal  sets  a
               decision aside, the Upper Tribunal must re-decide the matter
               concerned.
            6) Where the Upper Tribunal is acting under subsection (5),  it
               may make such findings of fact as it considers appropriate.
            7) This section has effect as if a  decision  under  subsection
               (4)(c) to set aside an earlier decision were not an excluded
               decision for the purposes of section 13(1),  but  the  Upper
               Tribunal's only  power  in  the  light  of  a  review  under
               subsection (1) of a decision under subsection (4)(c) is  the
               power under subsection (4)(a).

            8) A decision of the Upper Tribunal may not be  reviewed  under
               subsection (1) more than once, and once the  Upper  Tribunal
               has decided that an earlier decision should not be  reviewed
               under subsection (1) it may not then decide to  review  that
               earlier decision under that subsection.
            9) Where under this section a decision is  set  aside  and  the
               matter concerned is then re-decided, the decision set  aside
               and the decision made in re-deciding the matter are for  the
               purposes of subsection (8)  to  be  taken  to  be  different
               decisions."

10. As permitted by sub-s (3), the Upper Tribunal Rules provide, at r 45(1)
    and  r  46(1)  that  review  may  be  undertaken  in  the   course   of
    consideration of an application for permission to appeal from the Upper
    Tribunal to the appropriate Appeal Court (in  England  and  Wales,  the
    Court of Appeal), but not under any other  circumstances.   Further,  a
    decision may be reviewed only on the grounds set out in r 45(1)(a)  and
    (b), which are as follows:

           "(a) when making the decision the Upper  Tribunal  overlooked  a
           legislative provision or binding authority which could have  had
           a material effect on the decision; or
           (b) since the Upper Tribunal's decision,  a  court  has  made  a
           decision which is binding on the Upper Tribunal and  which,  had
           it been made before the Upper Tribunal' decision, could have had
           a material effect on the decision."

    Thus the apparent general  power  in  s.  10  is  firmly  and  severely
    restricted by rules made as permitted by rule 10(3)(a).

11. The right of appeal to the relevant Appeal Court lies, by s.  13(1)  of
    the 2007 Act, "on any point of law arising from a decision made by  the
    Upper Tribunal other than an excluded  decision".   Excluded  decisions
    are set out in s. 13(8) and in subordinate legislation  made  under  s.
    13(8)(f).  The definition includes, at s. 13(8)(c):

           "Any decision of the Upper  Tribunal  on  an  application  under
           section  11(4)(b)  (application  for  permission  or  leave   to
           appeal)."

12. Thus, the combined effect of the 2007 Act  and  the  Rules  is  that  a
    decision of the Upper Tribunal other than an excluded decision  carries
    a right of appeal to the  Court  of  Appeal.   If  an  application  for
    permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal is made, the  decision  may
    be reviewed under s. 10.  But if the decision is an excluded  decision,
    it does not carry a right of  appeal  to  the  Court  of  Appeal,  and,
    because of the provisions of s. 10(1), it cannot  be  reviewed  either.
    Rules 45 and 46 exclude review in any other circumstances.

13. The third potential source of a power in  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  set
    aside its own decisions is that apparently recognised by the  Court  of
    Appeal in Akewushola v SSHD [1999] Imm AR 594, and perhaps by the Privy
    Council in Hip Foong Hong v H. Neotia & Co. [1918] AC 888.

14. In Akewushola the Immigration Appeal  Tribunal,  a  statutory  tribunal
    created by the Immigration Act 1971, had before it an appeal against an
    adjudicator's decision.  At the hearing the appellant's representatives
    were not present.  The Tribunal, constituted by a  Vice  President,  Mr
    O'Brien Quinn QC, and two lay members proceeded and, in the absence  of
    submissions on behalf of the appellant, dismissed  the  appeal.   Their
    decision was  sent  out  in  writing  in  the  usual  way.   Some  time
    afterwards, Mr O'Brien  Quinn  became  aware  that  there  had  been  a
    properly supported application for an adjournment of the  hearing.   He
    considered that the adjournment ought to have been  granted.   On  that
    basis he purported to rescind the determination of  the  Tribunal  over
    which he had presided;  and  he  directed  a  fresh  hearing  before  a
    differently constituted Tribunal.  At  that  hearing,  chaired  by  the
    President, His Honour Judge Pearl, a preliminary issue was whether  the
    appeal was properly before the Tribunal, given the determination by the
    earlier Tribunal.  The question, in other words, was whether Mr O'Brien
    Quinn had had power to  set  aside  the  Tribunal's  determination  and
    direct a re-hearing.  The second Tribunal  examined  the  powers  of  a
    Chairman of the Immigration Appeal Tribunal acting alone, and concluded
    that, whether or not the Tribunal had any general power  to  set  aside
    its own decisions, Mr O'Brien Quinn acting by himself did not have that
    power.

15. The appellant  then  appealed  to  the  Court  of  Appeal.   The  Court
    considered both the substantive issues (that is to say, on appeal  from
    the first determination) and the question whether the  second  Tribunal
    was right to consider that it had no jurisdiction.   The  judgment  was
    given by Sedley LJ, with whom Peter Gibson and Laws LJJ agreed.

16.  Sedley  LJ's  judgment  decides  the  substantive  issue  against  the
    appellant.  On the procedural question, Sedley LJ noted that the powers
    of a Chairman acting alone were set  out  in  its  rules  and  did  not
    include the setting aside of a decision of the Tribunal.  He then  went
    on to consider the wider issue of whether even a  full  Tribunal  could
    rescind its own or another Tribunal's decision.  There was no  explicit
    power in the Rules, and he said that he could see a number  of  reasons
    why no such power should be inferred or implied.  The  first  was  that
    rule 38 of the Tribunal's Rules allowed "any irregularity" to be  cured
    "before  an  appellate  authority  has  reached  its  decision".   That
    appeared to impose a time limit (at least) on the exercise of  a  power
    such as was under consideration.

17. But there was a more general difficulty.  After citing a  passage  from
    the then current edition of Wade and Forsyth on Administrative Law, and
    referred to the slip rule in the Rules of the  Supreme  Court  and  the
    decision in Hip Foong Hong v H. Neotia & Co., Sedley LJ  said  this  at
    600:

           "For my part I do not  think  that,  slips  apart,  a  statutory
           tribunal  -  in  contrast  to  a  superior  court  -  ordinarily
           possesses any inherent  power  to  rescind  or  review  its  own
           decisions.   Except  where  the  High  Court's  jurisdiction  is
           unequivocally excluded by privative  legislation,  it  is  there
           that the power of correction resides.


           This  is  particularly  so  where,  as  is  the  case  with  the
           Immigration Appeals (Procedure) Rules 1984,  repeated  provision
           is made for the circumstances in which a Tribunal can decide for
           itself what steps to take. ... Although  there  may  be  further
           powers which arise by necessary implication from  those  spelled
           out  in  the  rules  -  for  example,  to  make  provision   for
           interpreters - it is  not  feasible  to  deduce  from  them  the
           interstitial existence of an internal  power  of  rescission  or
           review.  If something  has  gone  procedurally  wrong  which  is
           capable of having affected the outcome, it is to the High  Court
           - if necessary on a consensual application - that recourse  must
           be had."

18. That discussion appears to recognise,  in  the  first  sentence  quoted
    above, that a Superior Court does have an inherent power to rescind  or
    review its own decisions.  That is, of course, not necessarily  to  say
    that the power is unrestrained.  Hip Foong  Hong  v  H.  Neotia  &  Co.
    concerned the exercise of the jurisdiction where a judgment was said to
    have been obtained by fraud, but it, and many other decisions including
    that of the Court of Appeal in Taylor v Lawrence  [2002]  EWCA  Civ  90
    appear to recognise an inherent power to reopen a case  even  after  an
    order has been perfected and reconsider the decision in  the  interests
    of justice.

19. By s. 3(5)  of  the  2007  Act,  the  Upper  Tribunal  is  (unlike  the
    Immigration Appeal Tribunal) a Superior  Court  of  Record.   It  might
    therefore be supposed that the Upper Tribunal has the  inherent  powers
    of a Superior Court of Record, whatever they may be.

20. The fourth possible source of a power to set decisions aside is  s.  25
    of the 2007 Act, which is as follows:

           "Supplementary powers of the Upper Tribunal
        1) In relation to the matters  mentioned  in  subsection  (2),  the
           Upper Tribunal -
                 a) has, in England and Wales or in  Northern  Ireland,  the
                    same powers, rights, privileges  and  authority  as  the
                    High Court, and
                 b) has, in Scotland, the same  powers,  rights,  privileges
                    and authority as the Court of Session.
        2) The matters are -
            a) the attendance and examination of witnesses,
            b) the production and inspection of documents, and
            c)  all  other  matters  incidental  to  the  Upper  Tribunal's
               functions.
        3) Subsection (1) shall not be taken -
            a) to limit any power to make Tribunal Procedure Rules;
                 b) to be limited by anything in  Tribunal  Procedure  Rules
                    other than an express limitation.
           (4)    A power, right, privilege or  authority  conferred  in  a
           territory  by  subsection  (1)  is  available  for  purposes  of
           proceedings in the Upper Tribunal that take place  outside  that
           territory (as  well  as  for  purposes  of  proceedings  in  the
           tribunal that take place within that territory)."

    It might well be thought that regulating its own  procedure,  including
    setting aside its own previous decisions in appropriate  circumstances,
    are "matters incidental to the Upper Tribunal's functions".  Section 25
    provides that in such matters the Upper Tribunal has the powers of  the
    High Court  and  any  other  powers  that  the  High  Court  including,
    presumably, both its inherent powers and those conferred by legislation
    or rule.

21. Looking more generally, it is to be noted that  the  third  and  fourth
    possible sources are applicable to the Upper Tribunal as a whole.   The
    first and second are applicable to those Chambers of the Upper Tribunal
    to which the Upper Tribunal Rules apply, that is to  say  all  Chambers
    with the exception of the  Lands  Chamber.   Both  paragraph  15(3)  of
    Schedule 5 to, and s. 25(3) of  the  2007  Act  have  provisions  which
    counter the effect of any expressio unius exclusio  alterius  argument;
    but those provisions apply  only  to  the  first  and  fourth  possible
    sources.  There is no similar provision in s. 10(3); and  clearly  such
    an argument might have effect in relation to the inherent jurisdiction.



22. Finally, we remind ourselves that both the Upper Tribunal Rules  (at  r
    42) and the Procedure Rules of the First-tier Tribunal include  a  slip
    rule, in terms similar to that in CPR 40.12.  The  Upper  Tribunal  has
    held that the First-tier Tribunal's slip rule is not available for  the
    purpose of reversing a decision already communicated  to  the  parties:
    Katsonga v SSHD [2016] UKUT 00228 (IAC).



Patel

23. In Patel there was a long procedural  history.   The  two  most  recent
    steps prior to the hearing before the  Upper  Tribunal  were  that  the
    Upper Tribunal had refused permission to appeal,  and  the  High  Court
    had,  in  judicial  review  proceedings,  quashed  that  refusal.   The
    application for permission thus awaited  lawful  determination  by  the
    Upper Tribunal, and a hearing was arranged in  order  to  determine  it
    and, if appropriate, any resulting appeal.  The Tribunal considered the
    substantive grounds and decided to grant permission.  It then commenced
    the hearing of the appeal and discovered what had not  previously  been
    made clear either to the Tribunal or to the judge who  dealt  with  the
    judicial review, that the application which the Tribunal had originally
    refused was substantially out  of  time.   It  thereupon  purported  to
    rescind its decision granting leave, substituted  a  decision  refusing
    leave, and declined to consider the substantive appeal.  The  applicant
    appealed to the Court of Appeal on the basis that the Tribunal  had  no
    power to rescind its grant of permission.  We add, because as presently
    constituted we are authoritatively able to do  so,  that  the  Tribunal
    thought that it was exercising the inherent jurisdiction of a  Superior
    Court of Record, the third possible source.

24. The judgment of the Court of Appeal was given by  Sir  Richard  Aikens,
    with whom Lewison LJ agreed.  The Court was faced with  the  difficulty
    that the Tribunal had clearly made two decisions.  If the Tribunal  had
    no jurisdiction to set aside  its  decision  granting  permission,  the
    second decision, refusing permission, nevertheless had to be dealt with
    as it stood unless quashed by an appropriate Superior Court.  We do not
    need to concern ourselves with that difficult  question  of  procedure.
    What is important for present purposes is the Court's decision  on  the
    question whether the Tribunal indeed had  the  power  it  purported  to
    exercise.

25. Sir Richard  Aikens'  treatment  of  that  issue  is  perfectly  clear.
    Section 10 of the 2007 Act permits review of a decision, but not if the
    decision is an excluded decision.  There had in the present case been a
    decision; but, being a decision on an  application  for  permission  to
    appeal, it was an excluded decision.  The Tribunal accordingly  had  no
    power to review its decision under s. 10 and accordingly  no  power  to
    set aside the grant of permission.

26. In reaching his decision to that effect, Sir  Richard  Aikens  rejected
    submissions made on behalf of the Secretary of State about the  nature,
    timing and form of decisions of the Upper Tribunal.  He  noted  that  r
    40(1) permits a decision to be given orally at a hearing, and that  the
    UT Rules do not require a decision of this sort  (as  distinct  from  a
    decision refusing permission)  to  be  given  in  writing.   Thus,  the
    decision given orally could not be regarded as merely provisional until
    it was reduced to writing.  The learned judge also pointed out that, in
    the procedure of the Upper  Tribunal,  there  is  not  the  distinction
    between judgment and order that applies in the High Court.  Any general
    or inherent power to vary a judgment before the order was drawn up  and
    sealed therefore had no relevance to the Upper Tribunal.  None  of  the
    points raised by the Secretary of State therefore deflected the learned
    judge from his conclusion that the decision granting  permission  could
    not be the subject of review and therefore once taken,  albeit  orally,
    it could not be rescinded.

27. Evidently the Court of Appeal thought it desirable  to  deal  with  the
    matter in those general terms.  Reaching the view that it did,  it  did
    not need to point out that the decision could not have been the subject
    of review under s.10  in  any  event,  because  the  Tribunal  was  not
    considering an application for permission to appeal  to  the  Court  of
    Appeal: see rr 45 and  46,  and  s.  10(3)(a),  discussed  above.   The
    judgment is clearly binding on the Upper Tribunal in all its  Chambers,
    and it is in our judgment of considerable importance as much  for  what
    it does not say as for what  it  does.   The  Court  was  concerned  to
    discover whether the Upper Tribunal had power to set aside  a  decision
    that, in the Tribunal's view, had been reached in the absence of a full
    appreciation  of  the  facts.   In  these  circumstances  the   Court's
    concentration on the review power under s. 10 of the 2007 Act  and  the
    absence of any reference to either the inherent  power  of  a  Superior
    Court of Record or the powers given by s. 25 must constitute a decision
    that those powers either do not exist  or,  if  they  do,  were  wholly
    irrelevant to the issue before the Court.  It appears to us, therefore,
    that Patel puts to an end any speculation  based  on  the  judgment  of
    Sedley LJ in Akewushola and, further, decides that whatever powers  are
    granted by s. 25 of the 2007 Act, they do  not  include  any  power  to
    rescind that deserved examination in the circumstances of the facts  of
    Patel.  That is important.  It appears to mean that  the  Tribunal  (in
    all its Chambers) has no inherent power to set aside its decisions, and
    no power derived from the powers of the High  Court;  further,  in  the
    Chambers governed by the UT Rules, it has no power  to  set  aside  its
    decisions other than in the circumstances set out in rules 43 and 45-46
    respectively.  That means that the power to set  aside  a  decision  is
    limited to (i) setting aside a decision that terminates proceedings, on
    the ground of procedural error, and (ii) setting aside  a  decision  by
    way of review, where an application for permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Court of Appeal is being considered and one of the two circumstances in
    rule 45(1) applies.

The present application
28. Having set out the  circumstances  in  which  the  Upper  Tribunal  has
    jurisdiction to set aside decisions of the Upper Tribunal,  we  proceed
    to apply the  law  to  the  present  application.   It  is  immediately
    apparent that, potentially, rule 43 applies,  but  rule  45  does  not.
    Rule 43  applies,  because  the  decision  refusing  permission  was  a
    decision disposing of the proceedings before the Tribunal;  the  review
    power does not apply, because the Tribunal was and is  not  considering
    an application for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Court  of  Appeal.
    Further, that power could not be applicable, because the decision under
    consideration is an "excluded decision".

29. Ms McCarthy's concession that the application cannot succeed  is  based
    on her recognition that the decision under challenge  is  an  "excluded
    decision".   That  characterisation  is,  however,  only  relevant   in
    relation to the power of review; it has  no  application  to  the  only
    power which could be applicable in the  present  case,  which  is  that
    under rule 43.  Rule 43 does not apply here, however, because  none  of
    the conditions in paragraph (2) of that  rule  is  present.   Evidently
    none of sub-paragraphs  (a)  (b)  or  (c)  applies;  and  although  the
    applicant sought to  suggest  that  there  was  "a  serious  procedural
    irregularity",  the  truth  is  that  there  has  been  no   procedural
    irregularity at all.  The applicant's complaint is based solely on  the
    substance of the decision.  Further, bearing in mind the  interests  of
    both parties, the basis for suggesting that the  interests  of  justice
    require the decision to be set aside is wholly elusive.  Indeed, if the
    Tribunal had the wider powers now authoritatively  excluded  by  Patel,
    the result would have been the same:  there  is  no  proper  basis  for
    exercising a set-aside power in the present proceedings.

Conclusion

30. Our conclusions are as follows.

     1) Following the decision of the Court of Appeal in Patel, it  appears
        that the Tribunal's powers  to  set  aside  its  own  decision  are
        limited to those in rules 43 (set-aside) and 45-6 (review).


     2) The power under rule 43 (but not the power  under  rules  45-6)  is
        exercisable in relation to an "excluded decision",  but  only  when
        the decision has been reached following a procedural  irregularity.



     3) In the present case there was no procedural  irregularity  and  the
        application is therefore refused.








                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL



                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                          Date: 29 June 2016
