
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

             ES (s82 NIA 2002; negative NRM) Albania [2018] UKUT 00335 (IAC)




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|Heard at Field House                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 June 2018                             |On 6 September 2018           |
|                                            |                              |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH
                                   Between
                                     ES
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                           Appellant
                                    -and-
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT



                                                              Respondent
Representation
For the Appellant:              Mr. P. Bonavero of counsel, instructed by
Kilby Jones Solicitors
For the Respondent:                  Mr. P. Duffy, Home Office Presenting
Officer

1.    Following the amendment to s 82 of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
   Asylum Act 2002 ('the 2002 Act'), effective  from  20  October  2014,  a
   previous decision made by the Competent Authority  within  the  National
   Referral Mechanism (made on the balance  of  probabilities)  is  not  of
   primary relevance to the determination of an asylum appeal, despite  the
   decisions of the Court of Appeal in AS (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2013]  EWCA
   Civ 1469 and SSHD v MS (Pakistan) [2018] EWCA Civ 594.

2.   The correct approach to determining whether a person claiming to  be  a
   victim of trafficking is entitled to  asylum  is  to  consider  all  the
   evidence in the round as at the date  of  hearing,  applying  the  lower
   standard of proof.
3.   Since 20 October 2014, there is also no right of appeal  on  the  basis
   that a decision is not in accordance with the law  and  the  grounds  of
   appeal are limited to those set out in the amended s 82 of the 2002 Act.

                            DECISION AND REASONS






ANONYMITY ORDER

Pursuant to rule 14(1) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
2008

IT IS ORDERED THAT:

Nothing shall be  published  that  would  or  might  tend  to  identify  the
Appellant in these proceedings.

This Order is to remain in force until further order.

Failure  by  a  person,   body   or   institution   whether   corporate   or
unincorporated or any party to this appeal to  comply  with  this  direction
may lead to proceedings for contempt of court.

BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Appellant is a national of Albania.  She  was  born  in  Fiera  and
    attended university in Tirana between October 2009 and September  2012.
    Whilst there, she met a  man  called  Florian  Buzzi,  who  became  her
    boyfriend in May 2010.  He was an Albanian who was living in Italy  and
    she believed that she was going to  join  him  there  to  study  for  a
    Masters degree.

2.   She did not initially tell her parents  about  their  relationship,  as
    her father was very strict. However, she had to do so in May 2012  when
    her parents said that they wanted her to marry into her sister-in-law's
    family. They then demanded that Florian marry her but he told her  that
    it was too early for them to get engaged. The Appellant told her family
    that she had stopped seeing Florian but continued to do so.

3.   In October 2012,  just  after  she  had  completed  her  first  degree,
    Florian took her to see a man called Artan in  Sauk,  stating  that  he
    could help them obtain the necessary documents to live in Italy. Whilst
    there, she believes that her  drink  was  spiked.  When  she  woke  up,
    Florian had gone and Artan told her the she had  been  "sold"  to  him.
    She was then detained and beaten until she submitted to  working  as  a
    prostitute. She remained imprisoned in his house  until  February  2014
    when she was taken to Italy and prostituted there. She was then brought
    back to Albania in June 2014 and held and  prostituted  in  Durres  and
    Vlore and once again in Sauk.

4.   She managed to escape on 25 May 2015 whilst the men guarding  her  were
    preoccupied by the death of Artan's nephew. By this time, she had saved
    the equivalent of over 2,700 Euros in tips that she had  received  from
    "clients" and hidden away. She fled to her parents' home but they would
    not assist her and she went to stay with a friend in Patos. She  stayed
    there until she learnt that Artan had gone to her family  home  looking
    for her and her friend thought it was no longer safe for her to  remain
    in her home. Her friend's father assisted her to find  someone  willing
    to smuggle her to the United Kingdom in the back of  a  lorry  and  she
    arrived here on 5 June 2015.

5.   She applied for asylum that same day but her  application  was  refused
    on 31 March 2016. Meanwhile, the Immigration Service had  referred  the
    Appellant into the National Referral Mechanism, as a  potential  victim
    of human trafficking on 8 June 2015. The Competent Authority, which  is
    located in the Home Office, found that there were reasonable grounds to
    suspect that she was a victim of human trafficking on 12 June 2015  but
    on 10 December 2015 it found that, applying a balance of probabilities,
    she had not established that there were conclusive grounds for  finding
    that she had been a victim of human trafficking. The findings  in  this
    decision formed the basis of the  subsequent  decision  to  refuse  her
    asylum.

6.   She appealed against the decision to refuse her asylum and  her  appeal
    was initially allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Heatherington  in  a
    decision promulgated  on  13  October  2016.  However,  the  Respondent
    appealed and in a decision, promulgated  on  16  February  2017,  Upper
    Tribunal  Judge   Hanson   found   that   First-tier   Tribunal   Judge
    Heatherington had made material  errors  of  law  and  the  Appellant's
    appeal was remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard de novo.

7.   Her appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew, who  dismissed
    her appeal in a decision, promulgated on 7 August  2017.  She  appealed
    and in a decision, promulgated on 27 March 2018, Dr Storey, a Judge  of
    the Upper  Tribunal,  set  aside  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Andrew's
    decision but ordered that the appeal be retained in the Upper  Tribunal
    for a de novo hearing.





ERROR OF LAW HEARING

8.   At the start of the hearing, counsel for the  Appellant  applied  under
    regulation 15(2A) of The  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, as amended, to rely upon the further evidence  contained  in  her
    Supplementary Bundle. This had been submitted to the Upper Tribunal  on
    18 June 2018 along with a covering letter stating that  she  wished  to
    rely upon it. Therefore, I find that the Appellant had given notice  to
    the Upper Tribunal of the  new  material,  as  required  by  regulation
    15(2A)(a). The Home Office Presenting Officer had read the documents in
    the Supplementary Bundle and took no objection to them being  admitted.
    Furthermore, in her supplementary  statement  the  Appellant  explained
    that she had become pregnant after her last hearing before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal and it can be  inferred  from  this  statement  that  the
    material contained in the Supplementary Bundle could not have  been  in
    existence at the time of her last hearing before a First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge. Consequently, I find that there was  no  unreasonable  delay  in
    submitting this evidence.

9.   When exercising my discretion to  admit  the  Supplementary  Bundle,  I
    have also taken into account the fact that when Dr Storey, a  Judge  of
    the Upper Tribunal, found that there had been an error of law in First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Andrew's decision and set  it  aside,  he  did  not
    preserve  any  of  the  findings  made  in  the  First-tier   Tribunal.
    Therefore, the appeal comes before me de novo.

THE APPELLANT AS A VULNERABLE WITNESS

10.   I  have  also  reminded  myself  of  the  case  of  the  case  of   AM
    (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017]  EWCA
    Civ 1123 in which Sir Ernest Ryder, Senior President, referred  to  the
    Joint Presidential Guidance Note No. 2 of 2010: Child, Vulnerable Adult
    and Sensitive Appellant ("the guidance note")  and  also  the  Practice
    Direction, First-tier and Upper Tribunal Child,  Vulnerable  Adult  and
    Sensitive Witnesses. He went on  to  state  that  "the  directions  and
    guidance contained in them are to be followed and...Failure  to  follow
    them will most likely be a material error of law".

11.  Paragraph 2 of the Guidance Note states that, when considering  whether
    an individual is vulnerable, any mental health  problems,  his  or  her
    social and cultural background and any domestic circumstances are to be
    taken into account. In the Appellant's case, the letter by Dr Ceaser, a
    specialist clinical psychologist, dated 18 December 2017,  stated  that
    "the Appellant presented with symptoms  associated  with  Type  2  PTSD
    (complex trauma) and that she continued to  experience  flashbacks  and
    nightmares alongside symptoms of anxiety, panic, low mood and low self-
    esteem.  Other  symptoms  include  dissociation,   hypervigilance   and
    hyperarousal, constantly  checking  her  surroundings  to  monitor  her
    safety, emotional regulation difficulties,  with  intense  feelings  of
    sadness, anger and irritability with associated low self-esteem".

12.  All of these symptoms were likely to  lead  to  her  having  difficulty
    giving cogent oral evidence. In addition, the  medical  documents  from
    the Queen's Medical Centre Campus in Nottingham confirmed that  she  is
    pregnant with an expected due date of 17 July 2018 and  that  the  fact
    that she had another appeal hearing in relation to her claim for asylum
    was having a negative effect on her mood. (I have noted  that  she  was
    not receiving any psychotherapy or  counselling  at  the  time  of  the
    hearing but take into account that the medical evidence explained  that
    this was because she had reached the end of the services that could  be
    provided by the NHS and that her clinician had recommended that her  GP
    refer her to a generic counselling  service  after  the  birth  of  her
    child.)

13.  On the basis of  this  evidence,  I  found  that  the  Appellant  is  a
    vulnerable witness and, in accordance with paragraph 8 of the Guidance,
    I considered whether it was necessary to hear oral  evidence  from  the
    Appellant. She was in court and the Home Office Presenting Officer  had
    discussed with her counsel, whether it would be appropriate to  adjourn
    the appeal hearing until after the birth of her child. However, counsel
    for  the  Appellant  stated  that  he  was  instructed  to  resist  any
    application for an  adjournment  due  to  her  on-going  mental  health
    difficulties.

14.   The  Home  Office   Presenting   Officer   accepted   that,   although
    "inconsistencies" were referred to in the Respondent's refusal  letter,
    the issues raised generally went to the plausibility, as opposed to the
    consistency, of her evidence. He informed me that he  was  content  for
    the hearing to proceed on the basis of oral submissions, as long  as  I
    addressed the issues raised in the refusal letter and did not treat his
    failure  to  cross-examine  the  Appellant  as  an  acceptance  of  the
    credibility of her account.  I have not done so and have  proceeded  to
    assess the credibility of her account below.

THE PRELIMINARY ISSUE

15.  Counsel for the Appellant drew my attention to  the  recently  reported
    case of AUJ (Trafficking - no conclusive grounds  decision)  Bangladesh
    [2018] UKUT 00200 (IAC); a case of which I was already aware.  In  this
    case, Upper Tribunal Judge Gill stated at paragraph 62(ii) that:

     "in cases in which the  Competent  Authority  has  reached  a  negative
    "conclusive grounds decision" but the appellant continues to  rely  (in
    his statutory appeal) upon evidence  that  he  had  been  a  victim  of
    trafficking or modern slavery, the judge should decide, at the start of
    the hearing and before oral evidence is given, whether the decision  of
    the Competent Authority was perverse or irrational  or  not  reasonably
    open to it. At this stage, evidence subsequent to the decision  of  the
    Competent Authority must not be taken into account. If  (and  only  if)
    the  judge  concludes  that  the  Competent  Authority's  decision  was
    perverse or irrational or one that was not reasonably open to  it,  the
    judge can then re-determine the relevant  facts  and  take  account  of
    subsequent evidence".

16.  However, this paragraph did not form part of  the  ratio  of  the  case
    before Upper Tribunal Judge Gill. In the  case  of  AUJ,  a  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had adjourned an initial hearing of AUJ's asylum  appeal
    so that  the  Respondent  could  refer  AUJ's  case  to  the  Competent
    Authority under the National Referral Mechanism. The Respondent  failed
    to make any such referral and at the adjourned  hearing  the  Appellant
    withdrew his consent to any referral being made.  Therefore,  as  there
    had not been any referral into  the  National  Referral  Mechanism,  no
    negative conclusive grounds decision had been made.

17.  In addition, this part of Upper Tribunal Judge Gill's decision did  not
    form any part of the headnote to the case and was clearly obiter.

18.  However, the Home Office Presenting Officer did rely  on  the  case  of
    The Secretary of State for the Home Department v MS  (Pakistan)  [2018]
    EWCA Civ 594.

19.  After considering the oral submissions made to me at  the  hearing  and
    Articles 14.5 and 40  of  the  Council  of  Europe  Convention  against
    Trafficking in Human  Beings  and  paragraph  10  of  the  recitals  to
    Directive 2011/36/EU on preventing and combating trafficking  in  human
    beings and protecting its victim, I gave  further  directions  for  the
    parties to make written  submissions  in  relation  to  Convention  and
    Directive and on the decision in MS (Pakistan). These  directions  were
    sent to both parties on 11 July 2018  and  counsel  for  the  Appellant
    filed his written submissions on 24 July 2018. When the Respondent  had
    not provided any written submission in accordance with the  directions,
    he was contacted to see if he intended to make any written submissions.
      No  such  submissions  have  been  received  and,  having  given  the
    Respondent further time to take into account the holiday period, I  now
    proceed to complete my decision.

20.  In paragraph 2 of MS (Pakistan) Lord  Justice  Flaux,  giving  judgment
    for the Court, noted that:

     "The appeal raises an issue of principle as to the jurisdiction of  the
    First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal on a statutory appeal  under
    section 84 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  ("the
    2002 Act") to undertake an  indirect  judicial  review  of  a  negative
    trafficking  decision  made  by  the  Secretary  of   State   in   that
    individual's case".

21.  He also went on to state that "In that  context,  the  appeal  concerns
    the scope and effect of the previous  decision  of  this  Court  in  AS
    (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]  EWCA
    Civ 1469".

22.  It is important to note  that  in  paragraph  18  of  AS  (Afghanistan)
    Longmore LJ said that:

     "...a decision to refuse asylum is not itself an  immigration  decision
    appealable pursuant to section 82(2) of the 2002 Act (any more  than  a
    trafficking decision is such  a  decision).  The  relevant  immigration
    decision is the decision to remove the appellant under  section  10  of
    the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 (see s.82(2)(g) of the  2002  Act).
    It is in reaching the decision to remove that the  Secretary  of  State
    must consider relevant matters including (where  relevant)  whether  an
    applicant for asylum is  a  victim  of  trafficking.  No  doubt,  if  a
    conclusive decision has been reached by the Competent Authority,  First
    Tier Tribunals will be astute not (save perhaps in rare  circumstances)
    to allow an appellant to re-run a case already decided against  him  on
    the facts....".

23.  In paragraph 17 of MS (Pakistan), Lord Justice Flaux stated that:

     "Before considering the decision of the Upper Tribunal in more  detail,
    it is convenient to set out some of the legal framework.  At  the  time
    that this appeal was lodged, section 82(1) of the 2002 Act set out that
    a person against whom an "immigration decision"  had  been  made  could
    appeal to the Tribunal. Sub-section (2) then set out the categories  of
    immigration decision, which included, so far as presently  relevant  at
    (g) a decision that a person was to be removed from the United Kingdom.
    The categories of immigration decision did not  include  a  trafficking
    decision".

24.  Therefore, it is clear that the Court in both AS (Afghanistan)  and  MS
    (Pakistan) were giving judgment on the role of a previous decision made
    by the Competent Authority in  an  appeal  against  removal  under  the
    previous appeal regime under section 82 of the 2002 Act which pertained
    prior to 20 October 2014.

25.  The appeal before me relates to a decision made  after  section  82  of
    the 2002 Act was amended on 20 October 2014, as she applied for  asylum
    on 5 June 2015, and section 82 now reads:

     "(1)     A person ("P" may appeal to the Tribunal where-
         (a) the Secretary of State  has  decided  to  refuse  a  protection
    claim made by P,
         (b) the Secretary of State had decided to  refuse  a  human  rights
    claim made by P, or
         ...

     (2) For the purposes of this Part-
         (a)  a "protection claim" is a claim made by a  person  ("P")  that
         removal of P from the United Kingdom-
         (i)  would  breach  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations  under  the
         Refugee Convention, or
         (ii) would breach the United Kingdom's obligations in  relation  to
             person eligible for a grant of humanitarian protection".

26.  Therefore, her appeal was against the Respondent's decision  to  refuse
    her protection claim not a decision  to  remove  her  from  the  United
    Kingdom. This was important for a number of different reasons.

27.  Firstly, the only issue before the First-tier Tribunal was whether  the
    Appellant  qualified  for  protection  under  the  Refugee  Convention.
    Therefore, when reaching a decision, the First-tier Tribunal Judge  was
    obliged to look at the evidence in the round and  give  it  due  weight
    before reaching a decision as to the  credibility  of  the  Appellant's
    account. (See Karanakaran v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    [2000) EWCA Civ 11.)

28.  Secondly, after 20 October 2014, the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  could
    no longer find that the decision reached by the Respondent was  not  in
    accordance with the law, as this remedy had been removed from the  2002
    Act. This  is  significant  as  the  National  Referral  Mechanism  was
    established to give effect to provisions contained in  the  Council  of
    Europe  Convention  against  Trafficking  in  Human  Beings  when   the
    Convention was ratified but not incorporated into the  law  of  England
    and Wales. Therefore,  any  failure  to  properly  apply  the  National
    Referral Mechanism amounted to a failure to  apply  a  policy  and  the
    remedy lay in a claim for judicial review.

29.  A failure to properly apply the National Referral  Mechanism  could  no
    longer give rise to the basis for dismissing an appeal under section 86
    of the 2002 Act as the First-tier Tribunal Judge could only determine a
    matter raised in a ground of appeal and the only ground before him  was
    whether the Appellant's removal from the United Kingdom would give rise
    to a breach of the Refugee Convention.

30.  Furthermore, Article 14.5 of the Council of Europe  Convention  against
    Trafficking in Human Beings states that:

     "Having regard to the obligations of Parties to  which  Article  40  of
    the Convention refers, each Party  shall  ensure  that  granting  of  a
    permit according to this provision shall be without  prejudice  to  the
    right to seek and enjoy asylum".

31.  Article 40 of the Convention states that:

     "(4) Nothing in this Convention shall affect  the  rights,  obligations
    and responsibilities of States and individuals under international law,
    including international humanitarian law and international human rights
    law and, in particular, where applicable, the 1951 Convention  and  the
    1967 Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees and the  principle  of
    non-refoulement as contained therein".

32.  As the United Kingdom has ratified the Convention,  it  is  obliged  to
    act in accordance with these Articles and not restrict the  Appellant's
    access to protection under the  Refugee  Convention  even  if  she  had
    previously been referred into the National Referral Mechanism.

33.  Furthermore, the fact that the Government decided to  adopt  a  balance
    of probabilities as the appropriate standard of proof for a  conclusive
    decision within the National Referral Mechanism, as opposed to the  far
    lower standard of proof applicable  in  Refugee  Convention  decisions,
    indicates that it did recognise that  the  two  processes  were  to  be
    distinguished from each other.

34.  For all of these reasons, the fact that  the  Competent  Authority  did
    not find, on a balance of  probabilities,  that  the  Appellant  was  a
    victim of human trafficking does not prevent the Tribunal finding  that
    she is entitled to asylum as a person who has  been  subject  to  human
    trafficking on the lower standard of proof and  in  the  light  of  all
    relevant evidence.



BURDEN AND STANDARD OF PROOF

35.  I have reminded myself that, when  considering  whether  the  Appellant
    has a well-founded fear of persecution for the purposes of the  Refugee
    Convention, the burden of proof lies with the Appellant but that I have
    taken into account the fact that she is a vulnerable witness, which may
    have affected her ability to give evidence. The standard  of  proof  is
    that of a reasonable degree of likelihood or a serious possibility.  In
    contrast, when a person has been referred into  the  National  Referral
    Mechanism, as a potential victim of human trafficking, the standard  of
    proof when making a conclusive grounds decision is that of a balance of
    probabilities. Therefore, I have to apply the requisite low standard of
    proof for considering an  asylum  appeal  and  not  just  rely  on  the
    decision reached by the Competent Authority.

REFUGEE CONVENTION REASON

36.  A person is entitled to refugee status under the Refugee Convention  if
    she  has  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  on  account  of   her
    nationality, religion, race, membership of a particular social group or
    political opinion.

37.  Regulation 6(1)(d) of the Qualification Directive states that:

     "A group shall be considered to form a particular  social  group  where
    in particular

     a)  members of that group share an innate characteristic, or  a  common
    background that   cannot be  changed,  or  share  a  characteristic  or
    belief that is so fundamental to identity or conscience that  a  person
    should not be forced to renounce it, and
     b)  that group has a distinct identity in the relevant  country  as  it
    is perceived as being different by the surrounding society".

38.  At page 7 of 20 of the refusal letter,  the  Respondent  accepted  that
    women who have been victims of trafficking for the purposes  of  sexual
    exploitation do share  an  immutable  characteristic  which  cannot  be
    changed.

39.  I also note that in TD and AD (Trafficking  women)  Albania  CG  [2008]
    UKAIT 00002 the Upper Tribunal held that "trafficked women from Albania
    may well be members of  a  particular  social  group  on  that  account
    alone".

40.  The Respondent accepted that the Appellant was a  national  of  Albania
    but did not accept that she had  been  trafficked  within  Albania  and
    between Albania and Italy between 2012 and  2015.  Therefore,  for  the
    purposes of re-making her asylum appeal, I must consider whether  there
    is a serious possibility that the Appellant was trafficked as claimed.

41.  Section 2 of the Modern Slavery Act 2015 states that:

    (1)  A person commits an offence of [human trafficking] if  the  person
         arranges or facilitates the travel of another person with a view to
         V being exploited.


    (2)  It is irrelevant whether V consents to the travel (whether V is an
         adult or a child).


    (3)  A person may, in particular, arrange or facilitate V's  travel  by
         recruiting  V,  transporting  or  transferring  V,  harbouring   or
         receiving V, or transferring or exchanging control over V.


    (4)  A person arranges or facilitates V's travel with a view to V being
         exploited only if-
     (a) the person intends to exploit V or
     (b) the person knows or ought to know that another person is likely to
         exploit V...


    (5)  "Travel" means-
     (a) arriving in, or entering, any country;
     (b) departing from any country;
     (c) travelling within any country".


42.  It is the Appellant's case that  she  was  moved  between  Albania  and
    Italy and within Albania in order to be sexually exploited. It is  also
    her case that Florian recruited her and arranged for her to  travel  to
    Sauk for the purpose of being exploited by Artan and  that  then  Artan
    and his associates exploited her in Albania and Italy. Whilst doing  so
    her account indicates that they  transported,  transferred,  harboured,
    received and exchanged control over her at different times.

43.  When considering the credibility of the Appellant's account  of  travel
    and exploitation, I have taken  into  account  that  in  Karanakaran  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2000]  EWCA  Civ  11  Lord
    Justice Brooke held that:

      "when  considering  whether  there  is  a   serious   possibility   of
    persecution for a Convention reason if an asylum seeker is returned, it
    would be quite wrong to exclude matters totally from  consideration  in
    the balancing process simply because the  decision-maker  believes,  on
    what may be somewhat fragile  evidence,  that  they  probably  did  not
    occur. Similarly, even if  a  decision-maker  finds  that  this  is  no
    serious possibility of persecution for a Convention reason in the  part
    of the country to which the Secretary of  State  proposed  to  send  an
    asylum  seeker,  it  must  not  exclude  relevant  matters,  from   its
    consideration altogether when determining whether it  would  be  unduly
    harsh to return the asylum seeker to that  part,  unless  it  considers
    that there is no serious possibility that those facts are as the asylum
    seeker contends".

44.  Therefore, it is necessary to consider  all  relevant  evidence  before
    reaching a holistic assessment of the credibility  of  the  Appellant's
    account.

45.  The Appellant's account largely relies on her own recollection of  past
    events and, as human trafficking and any consequent sexual exploitation
    are clandestine and criminal acts, it is not reasonable to presume that
    the organised and criminal gangs profiting  from  these  actions  would
    leave a "paper trial" of their activities. At  the  hearing,  the  Home
    Office Presenting Officer accepted that the "inconsistencies" listed in
    the  refusal  letter  were  more  accurately  described  as  issues  of
    plausibility and that there were no  internal  inconsistencies  in  the
    Appellant's account.

46.  I have reminded myself of the inherent dangers of  judging  an  account
    to be implausible  on  the  basis  of  experiences  gained  in  a  very
    different culture and country. For example, what was characterised as a
    normal happy relationship between the Appellant and  Florian  could  as
    easily have been part of the lover-boy syndrome described  below,  when
    viewed through the prism of life in Albania.

47.  In addition, the weight given by the Respondent to the  length  of  the
    relationship between the Appellant and Florian was disproportionate  in
    the context of Florian not living in Albania on a regular basis and the
    Appellant still being a student, who would not  be  in  a  position  to
    agree to travel with him.

48.  The Respondent also asserted  that  the  Appellant  had  been  able  to
    travel to Greece by car on 16 May 2013 and return to Albania  the  next
    day.  However,  the  Respondent  did  not  produce  any   evidence   to
    substantiate this bare assertion.

49.  It was also held against the Appellant that there was no record of  her
    being trafficked back to Albania. However, given the clandestine nature
    of human trafficking, this is not  necessarily  inconsistent  with  the
    Appellant's account of being exploited.

50.   The  Respondent  also  asserted  that  it  was  implausible  that  the
    Appellant would not have been able  to  escape  during  her  period  of
    exploitation. However, the unchallenged medical evidence of  Dr  Ceasar
    records that she was informed by the Appellant that she  did  not  have
    the option of leaving as she was threatened with harm if  she  did  so.
    She also told the clinician that  she  only  risked  escaping  when  it
    became so bad that she decided to risk her life by  trying  to  escape.
    The fact that she was able to  escape  on  that  one  occasion  is  not
    necessarily implausible as she explained why her traffickers  left  her
    with a woman in charge when a nephew of one of them died.

51.   However,  the  credibility  of  her  account  can  also  be   assessed
    holistically by looking at its consistency and plausibility, as  above,
    and also by comparing it to what is known about the modus  operandi  of
    Albanian  gangs  who  traffic  women  for  the   purposes   of   sexual
    exploitation.  For example, in paragraph 5.2.1. of  the  Home  Office's
    own Country Guidance on Albania: Female victims of trafficking, Version
    5.10, July 2016, it was noted that in January  2016,  the  EU  Observer
    stated that:

     "Thousands of women and girls have been trafficked from  Albania  alone
    to Western Europe as sex slaves in the last two decades. Well-organised
    criminal gangs control the trafficking...and launder profits by  buying
    property back in Albania, police and experts say".

52.  At paragraph 5.2.2. it was also said that:

     "The US Department  of  State's  Trafficking  in  Persons  Report  2016
    stated that 'Albania' is a source  and  destination  country  for  men,
    women and children  subject  to  sex  trafficking...GRETA  stated  that
    'Albania is  primarily  a  country  of  origin  for  victims  of  human
    trafficking".

53.  In addition, it was stated in paragraph 5.2.5 that:

     "GRETA further stated that "...as  regards  transnational  trafficking,
    the main countries of destination of Albanian victims were Italy...".

54.  Furthermore, in relation to  the  Appellant's  asserted  experience  of
    being trafficked within Albania, paragraph 5.2.3. stated that:

     "The Albanian Helsinki Committee noted in a report dated December  2015
    that 'trafficking of persons for  prostitution,  particularly  domestic
    trafficking of women and children, has increased".

55.  It is  also  the  Appellant's  account  that  she  was  trafficked  and
    exploited at two seaside resorts, Durres and Flore,  between  June  and
    August of 2014. This accords with what is said at  paragraph  5.2.4  of
    the Guidance, where:

     "GRETA stated the  following  in  a  report  published  in  June  2016;
    'trafficking and exploitation for different purposes of women, men  and
    children within Albania has been on the rise and there have  been  more
    identified  victims  of  internal  trafficking  than  of  transnational
    trafficking. The risks of human trafficking increase during the tourist
    season, including for the purposes of sexual exploitation...'

56.  Therefore, the Appellant's account of being trafficked from Albania  to
    Italy and within Albania for sexual exploitation is consistent with the
    objective evidence.

57.  It is also the Appellant's case that Florian duped her  into  believing
    that he wished to take her to Italy as his  girlfriend  and  that  they
    would live there together as a couple. This is a well-recognised method
    of entrapment of victims of trafficking, which may be  effective  (even
    when a woman is well-educated). This is confirmed in paragraph 5.2.5 of
    the Guidance where it says that:

     "GRETA further stated:

     '...No breakdown into types of exploitation...is available,  but  GRETA
    was informed that that identified victims were mainly women  and  girls
    subject to sexual exploitation. The authorities have referred to  cases
    linked to the "lover-boy" phenomenon, where men seduce women and  girls
    and then force them into prostitution".

58.  Therefore, the manner in which the Appellant says  that  she  became  a
    victim of human trafficking  in  also  consistent  with  the  objective
    evidence.

60.  Taking all of the above into account and  applying  the  requisite  low
    standard of proof, I find that the Appellant  was  a  victim  of  human
    trafficking and therefore a member of a  particular  social  group,  as
    asserted.

SUFFICIENCY OF PROTECTION

61.  The Home Office Presenting Officer submitted  that,  if  the  Appellant
    were returned to Albania, she would be protected by her own family. The
    Appellant had told Dr Ceasar and said in her evidence that when she did
    escape from her traffickers and  went  to  her  family  home,  she  was
    rejected for having started a relationship against their wishes.  As  I
    have found, applying the requisite low  standard  of  proof,  that  the
    account given by the Appellant is credible, I find  that  this  is  the
    case. It is also in accordance with the objective evidence relating  to
    the position of women in Albania and the strict  moral  code  which  is
    expected of them.

62.  At the hearing, the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  also  made  his
    submissions on the basis that the Appellant would  give  birth  to  her
    illegitimate child on or around 17 July 2018. Therefore, I  have  taken
    this into account when considering whether she  would  be  sufficiently
    protected  in  Albania  in  the  future.  Having  given  birth  to   an
    illegitimate child will be a further barrier to being reunited with her
    family as in TD and AD the Upper Tribunal found that:

     "Much of Albanian society is governed by a strict code of honour  which
    not only means that  trafficked  women  would  have  very  considerable
    difficulty in reintegrating into their home areas on  return  but  also
    will affect their  ability  to  relocate  internally.  Those  who  have
    children outside marriage are particularly vulnerable. In extreme cases
    the close relatives of the trafficked woman  may  refuse  to  have  the
    trafficked woman's child return with her and could force her to abandon
    the child".

63.  In the  alternative,  the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer,  and  the
    Respondent in the refusal letter, relied on the fact that the Appellant
    would be able to turn to a shelter for  support.  In  relation  to  the
    availability of shelters in Albania, I note that in TD and AD the Upper
    Tribunal found that:

     "There is now in place a  reception  and  reintegration  programme  for
    victims of trafficking. Returning victims of trafficking  are  able  to
    stay in a shelter on arrival, and in 'heavy cases' may be able to  stay
    there for up to 2  years.  During  this  initial  period  after  return
    victims  of  trafficking  are  supported  and  protected.  Unless   the
    individual has particular vulnerabilities, such as physical  or  mental
    health issues, this option cannot generally be said to be unreasonable;
    whether it is must be determined on a case by case basis".

64.  The medical evidence indicates that the Appellant is an individual  who
    does have particular vulnerabilities.   In  particular,  in  a  letter,
    dated 26  June  2017,  Dr  Ceaser  confirmed  that  the  Appellant  was
    experiencing symptoms of Type 2 Post Traumatic  Stress  Disorder,  also
    known as Complex Trauma and that she often  experiences  thoughts  that
    life is not worth living. She also noted that if  the  Appellant  feels
    under threat she will  immediately  try  to  remove  herself  from  the
    situation. This and other parts of the medical evidence  indicate  that
    there is a serious possibility that the Appellant would not be able  to
    benefit from a reception and reintegration programme.
65.  At the hearing the Respondent did not submit that the  Appellant  would
    be able to turn to the Albanian police  for  support.  This  correlated
    with  the  unchallenged  assertion  by  the  Appellant  in  her  asylum
    interview that the police had collaborated  with  her  traffickers  and
    that  some  of  those  who  sexually  exploited  her  were   themselves
    policemen.

66.  For all these reasons  and  applying  the  requisite  low  standard  of
    proof, I find that there would not be a sufficiency of  protection  for
    the Appellant in Albania.

INTERNAL RELOCATION

67.  The Appellant fears persecution by non-state agents but her ability  to
    relocate elsewhere in Albania and evade notice by her traffickers  must
    be assessed in relation to the particular circumstances of her case.

68.  In TD and AD that  Upper  Tribunal  found  that  re-trafficking  was  a
    reality in Albania and that whether that risk exists for an  individual
    will turn in part on the factors which led to the initial  trafficking,
    personal circumstances, background, age and willingness and ability  to
    seek help from the authorities.

69.  As found above, there is a serious possibility that the Appellant  will
    not benefit from the reception and reintegration  programme.  Paragraph
    4.4.1 of the Guidance also stated that the US Department of State noted
    in its Trafficking in Persons Report 2016, that no trafficking  victims
    had participated in  the  witness  protection  programme  and  that  no
    victims of trafficking had obtained restitution in the civil courts.

70.  The  Appellant's  vulnerability  to  being  recognised  by  members  of
    Artan's gang or by the man who sold her to Artan will be exacerbated by
    the fact that in the past she lived and attended school in Fier,  which
    is in the south of Albania. Her family and at least one of her  friends
    knows her history of being trafficked. She then went to  university  in
    Tirana for three years and it was there that she met and went out  with
    Florian. She has also been prostituted in Durres  and  Vlore,  both  of
    which are on the coast and Saur a village near Tirana and she often saw
    between seven and eight men a night. These men will have been in  touch
    with Artan. Artan also employed a number of people to ensure  that  the
    Appellant and other women continued to act as  prostitutes.  Therefore,
    the chances of her being recognised in a number of different  areas  in
    Albania and this being communicated back to Artan is significant.

71.  In his decision letter the Respondent asserted that it  would  be  safe
    for the Appellant to go and live in Korce, which is in  the  south-east
    of Albania close to the border with Greece. However, this is  not  that
    far from Vlore or Tirana, where she was previously  prostituted.  There
    is also no evidence  to  indicate  that  there  are  any  shelters  for
    trafficked women in Korce, which could accommodate a  person  with  her
    level of vulnerability and a young baby.

72.  I have also taken into account that it was  also  held  in  TD  and  AD
    that:

     "Once asked to leave the shelter a victim of trafficking  can  live  on
    her own. In doing so she will face significant  challenges,  including,
    but  not  limited  to,  stigma,  isolation,  financial   hardship   and
    uncertainty, a sense of physical insecurity and the subjective fear  of
    being found either by their families or former traffickers. Some  women
    have the capacity to negotiate these challenges without undue hardship.
    There will however be victims of trafficking with characteristics, such
    as mental illness or psychological scarring for whom  living  alone  in
    these circumstances would  not  be  reasonable.  Whether  a  particular
    appellant falls into that category will call for a  careful  assessment
    of all the circumstances."

73.   The  medical  evidence  in  this  case  strongly  indicates  that  the
    Appellant would fall within the category of women for whom living alone
    would not be a reasonable option. In particular, in her  letter,  dated
    26 June  2017,  noted  that"  the  Appellant's  anxiety  and  panic  is
    triggered by loud voices (especially in the Albanian language), meeting
    new people, being around males, thoughts about her past,  memories  and
    smells that remind her of her past traumatic experiences". If she  were
    to have to live in her own there would be nobody  to  shield  her  from
    these triggers.  In her letter, dated 18 December 2017, Dr Ceasar  also
    noted  that  the  Appellant  experienced  significant  difficulties  in
    forming and maintaining friendships due to her lack of trust  in  other
    people.

74.  The Appellant's situation is now complicated by the fact  that  she  is
    pregnant and expecting her first child in July 2018. In her  statement,
    dated 14 June 2018, the Appellant explained  that  the  father  of  her
    child deserted her after he discovered  she  had  been  trafficked  and
    prostituted in the past. This part of her account is supported  by  her
    medical records where she was recorded as single on 23 January 2018 and
    where it is noted each time that she attended for  an  appointment  she
    was seen alone.

75.  Taking all of this evidence into account  and  applying  the  requisite
    low standard of proof I find that the Appellant would not  be  able  to
    relocate within Albania.

DECISION

(1)  The Appellant's appeal is allowed.



Nadine Finch


Signed                                  Date 28 August 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch


