

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

         HM and Others (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2010] UKUT 331 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 8-10 June 2010                             |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before
                         MR JUSTICE BLAKE, PRESIDENT
                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE STOREY
                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

                                     HM
                                     RM
                                     ASA
                                     AA

                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                                     And

         UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR REFUGEES (INTERVENER)


Representation:

For the Appellants:    No appearance
For the Respondent:    Christopher Staker and David Blundell instructed by
the Treasury Solicitor

   i. Rule 9(5) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, which
      provides for UNHCR participation in Upper Tribunal proceedings  as  an
      intervener in an "asylum case", is  to  be  construed  purposively  to
      include subsidiary (humanitarian) protection.

  ii. In deciding whether to  accept  an  application  by  an  appellant  to
      withdraw an appeal in an asylum-related case which  the  parties  have
      previously agreed was suitable for fresh  Tribunal  country  guidance,
      particularly relevant will be the importance to the public interest of
      the Tribunal assisting immigration judges, primary decision-makers and
      litigants  in  giving  such  guidance  wherever  it  is  possible  and
      reasonably practical to do so.

 iii. The Tribunal may decide that permission to adduce an expert report  on
      a country guidance case shall be given on the basis that the report is
      disclosed  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  irrespective   of   whether   the
      commissioning party intends to call the witness.

  iv. Following Elgafaji, Case C-465/07 and QD (Iraq) [2009] EWCA  Civ  620,
      in situations of armed conflict in which civilians are affected by the
      fighting,  the  approach  to  assessment  of  the  level  of  risk  of
      indiscriminate violence must be an inclusive one, subject only to  the
      need for there to be a sufficient causal nexus  between  the  violence
      and the conflict.

   v. The degree of indiscriminate violence characterising the current armed
      conflict taking place in Iraq  is  not  at  such  a  high  level  that
      substantial grounds have been  shown for believing that  any  civilian
      returned there, would, solely on account of his presence there face  a
      real risk of being subject to that threat.

  vi. If the figures relating to indices such as the number  of  attacks  or
      deaths affecting the civilian population in a region or city  rise  to
      unacceptably high levels, then, depending on the population  involved,
      Article 15(c) might well be engaged, at least in respect of the  issue
      of risk in that area, although it is emphasised that any assessment of
      real risk to the appellant should be one that is both quantitative and
      qualitative and takes into account a wide range of variables, not just
      numbers of deaths or attacks.

 vii. If there were certain areas where the violence in Iraq reached  levels
      sufficient to engage Article 15(c) the Tribunal considers it is likely
      that internal relocation would achieve safety and would not be  unduly
      harsh in all the circumstances.

viii. The evidence relating to UK returns of failed asylum seekers  to  Iraq
      in June 2010 does  not  demonstrate  that  the  returns  process  will
      involve serious harm. Further, it is significant that UKBA is  already
      taking steps to improve procedures in the light of concerns  expressed
      by UNHCR and others over the two charter flights in that month.

  ix. So far as concerns UK enforced returns to Iraq, the  Tribunal  is  not
      satisfied that recent problems demonstrate that the process results in
      serious harm.







                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The decisions reached in this determination are the  decisions  of  all
    three of us. Each of us  has  also  contributed  significantly  to  its
    writing.

Part 1: The procedural history and case management issues

The M brothers (RM and HM)

 2. RM arrived in the UK in June 2007 aged 17  and  claimed  asylum  a  few
    weeks thereafter. His brother HM  arrived  in  July  2007  and  claimed
    asylum the same day. On the 17 January 2008 the respondent refused  the
    protection claims of both brothers and decided to remove them to Iraq.

 3. On the 20 March 2008 the IJ dismissed their appeals. He  accepted  that
    their father was a former resident of the territory of Kurdish Regional
    Government (KRG) (now also referred to as the Kurdish  Region  of  Iraq
    (KRI)) concerned with the oil business who had encountered difficulties
    with the Kurdish authorities. He had separated from  their  mother.  In
    1998 he came to the UK where he sought asylum in 1999. He  was  granted
    exceptional leave to remain. Since 1998 the brothers had been living in
    Kirkuk in the Tameem governorate

 4. The IJ did not accept the core  elements  of  the  brothers'  claim  to
    protection and concluded that they did not have a well founded fear  of
    persecution in Kirkuk. Notwithstanding evidence of extremely  difficult
    conditions in Kirkuk with respect  to  the  security  and  humanitarian
    situation he rejected the claim to subsidiary protection "for the  same
    reasons" and concluded that  the  high  threshold  required  to  engage
    Article 3 was not met.

 5. On 10 April 2008 grounds for  reconsideration  of  this  decision  were
    drafted by the  appellants'  then  representative,  the  Refugee  Legal
    Centre (RLC). The grounds submitted that  the  IJ  had  not  considered
    properly or at all  humanitarian  protection  under  Article  15(c)  of
    Council Directive 2004/83/EC, the EU Qualification Directive.  By  this
    time the Asylum and Immigration  Tribunal  (AIT)  had  promulgated  its
    decision in KH (Article 15(c) Qualification Directive) Iraq  CG  [2008]
    UKAIT 00023 to which further reference will be made in  this  judgment.
    The RLC contended that the AIT had erred in applying too narrow a  view
    of "indiscriminate violence" in that country guidance case and attached
    their grounds of appeal to the Court of Appeal in KH to the grounds for
    reconsideration in the present case. Reconsideration was refused on  24
    April 2008 by SIJ Storey. It was renewed to the High Court and Blake  J
    directed that reconsideration should take place but be stayed until the
    decision of the Court of Appeal in KH was promulgated.

 6. In fact the appeal of KH was never determined by the Court  of  Appeal.
    Laws LJ had stayed the case pending the outcome of the reference to the
    European Court of Justice (ECJ) by the Dutch  Court  in  Case  C-465/07
    Elgafaji v Staatssecretaris van Justitie and it seems  that  thereafter
    KH abandoned his appeal  by  voluntarily  returning  to  Iraq.   On  16
    September 2008 SIJ Storey noted these events and  gave  effect  to  the
    High Court's order by staying reconsideration until another  Iraq  case
    concerned with the scope of Article 15(c) was heard  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal.

 7. On 17 February 2009 the ECJ gave its judgment in Elgafaji.  On 24  June
    2009 the Court of Appeal gave its judgment in QD (Iraq) and  another  v
    Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department  [2009]  EWCA  Civ  620
    disapproving the construction of Art 15(c) adopted by the AIT in KH and
    remitting the case to a different constitution of the Tribunal for  re-
    determination.

 8. On 26 August 2009 following a case management review (CMR) hearing, the
    decision of the IJ  was  set  aside  but  the  findings  of  fact  were
    preserved and the case proceeded to  second  stage  reconsideration  on
    whether "considered simply as two male civilians from Kirkuk these  two
    appellants would face a real risk of serious harm under paragraph  339C
    of  the  Immigration  Rules  (Article  15(c)   of   the   Qualification
    Directive)."  Thereafter the cases were joined with others  to  proceed
    as a country guidance case.

ASA

 9. On 18 October 2008 the appellant ASA arrived  in  the  UK  and  claimed
    asylum and humanitarian protection  as  a  citizen  of  Iraq  born  and
    resident in the city of Baquabah in  the  governorate  of  Diyala.  The
    claim was rejected by the Home Office and on 3 February 2009 his appeal
    was dismissed by the  IJ.  The  judge  found  that  the  appellant  had
    fabricated his claim to refugee status and there was nothing by way  of
    a well founded fear of persecution to  prevent  him  returning  to  his
    family in Baquabah.  Summary conclusions were also reached on the claim
    to humanitarian protection relying on the Qualification  Directive  and
    the judge concluded:


         "I do not consider that there is sufficient evidence to  show  that
         in the Baquabah   area there is  indiscriminate  violence  of  such
         severity to pose a threat to  life  or  person  generally.  In  his
         report Dr Rebwar [Fatah] concludes that Baquabah has been the scene
         of some serious activities by insurgent groups but in  my  judgment
         that is an opinion which falls far short  of  the  requirement  for
         evidence that  indiscriminate  violence  in  Baquabah  is  of  such
         severity as to pose a threat to life or person generally - KH (Iraq
         CG [2008] 00023. KH is also  authority  for  the  proposition  that
         neither civilians in Iraq generally nor civilians even in provinces
         and cities worst affected by armed conflict can show  they  face  a
         'serious and individual threat' to their 'life  or  person'  within
         the meaning of Article 15 (c) merely by virtue of being civilians."



10. Reconsideration was granted by SIJ Storey on the question of Article 15
    (c) protection in the light of the ECJ's decision in Elgafaji making it
    clear at the same time that there was no basis for challenging the IJ's
    adverse factual findings. By October 2009 this  case  was  joined  with
    that of the other appellants to form a  country  guidance  case  to  be
    heard in due course.


AA

11. AA arrived in the UK in October 2006 on a visit visa and claimed asylum
    on 16 October 2006. He claimed to be a Shi'a Muslim  from  Baghdad  but
    the IJ did not find his account credible and concluded  that  save  for
    the fact that he was from Iraq and around 30 years of age,   "there  is
    nothing in his account that I find reasonably likely to be  true".  The
    IJ concluded that such a finding was also  fatal  to  his  claim  under
    paragraph 339C and that the general security situation in Iraq did  not
    provide him with a right to humanitarian protection. He  dismissed  the
    appeal on 23 April 2007.

12. Reconsideration was granted on 16 May 2007 but on 19 December 2007  SIJ
    Jordan concluded that the IJ had made no material error of law and  the
    original determination of the  appeal  should  stand.  The  same  judge
    refused permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal on the  basis  that
    merely being an Iraqi citizen was not enough to establish a serious and
    individual threat by reason of indiscriminate violence. Permission  was
    renewed to the Court of Appeal and the case stayed pending the  outcome
    in QD following which on 2 September 2009 the  appeal  was  allowed  by
    consent to the extent of setting aside SIJ Jordan's decision and for  a
    fresh reconsideration and determination by a different constitution  of
    the Article 15(c) issue. Thereafter in October 2009 the case was joined
    with that of RM and HM as a country guidance case.

      The progress of the Country Guidance case


13. By these various means these four appeals came together to form country
    guidance as to the risk to Iraqi civilians who were young men  and  who
    apparently came  from  the  cities  of  Kirkuk,  Baquabah  and  Baghdad
    respectively. It was notable that as a result of  the  adverse  factual
    findings on credibility reached by the IJ in  each  appeal,  there  had
    been no detailed consideration of the levels of violence  in  different
    parts of Iraq at the material time and the implications of those levels
    for young men who had  no  distinguishing  characteristics  other  than
    their place of residence in Iraq.


14. At a CMR hearing on 1 December 2009, HM, AM and ASA were represented by
    counsel instructed by Refugee and Migrant Justice (RMJ) - as RLC had by
    then become - and  AA  by  counsel  instructed  by  Wilson  and  Co.  A
    memorandum of the discussion at the direction hearing  reveals:

           i) The AIT was aiming to list the case  in  March  2010  (having
              originally intended the cases would be heard in January)  and
              that while counsel's availability would be taken into account
              it could not be decisive.
          ii) While the Home Office agreed to reply to some queries  raised
              by RMJ as soon as possible,


              "The Tribunal  expects  instructing  solicitors  to  seek  to
              obtain evidence from country experts  as  soon  as  possible.
              Whatever the reply to the  aforementioned  questions,  it  is
              clear that the experts will need to address the issue of  the
              levels of indiscriminate violence  in  Iraq  and  how  it  is
              considered they might give rise to a  real  risk  of  serious
              harm to civilians living there, bearing in  mind  that  these
              levels may vary from area to  area.  They  can  be  preparing
              their reports on this subject now".


         iii) The Tribunal expected that the parties  would  prepare  their
              cases to  address  not  merely  the  issue  of  risk  in  the
              appellants' home areas but the viability of internal location
              to other parts of Iraq.  That expectation would  only  change
              if the respondent notified the appellants to the contrary.


15. On 3 February 2010 notices were issued that these cases would be  heard
    as country guidance cases between 7 and 11 June 2010. In due  course  a
    further CMR hearing was set down for 10 May 2010.  Ignoring  a  request
    to vacate the hearing date through the unavailability of  counsel  that
    was rejected, the next developments in the case were shortly before the
    CMR. They may be summarised as follows:


           i) On 5 May 2010 UNHCR sought to intervene in this  case  as  it
              had done in the case of QD in the Court of Appeal.


          ii) On 10 May RMJ wrote seeking a response to  the  questions  it
              had posed to the respondent before the last CMR  in  December
              and to which it had not received an answer.  It  stated  that
              although it had commissioned an expert to produce an  opinion
              in order to assist the tribunal the expert could not finalise
              instructions unless the questions were answered.

         iii) RMJ further pointed out that in  a  recent  decision  of  the
              Court of Appeal in HH & Others (Somalia) [2010] EWCA Civ  426
              the question whether there was a duty to consider  the  route
              of return to a safe area of a country in  a  state  of  armed
              conflict at the time of the original protection claim was one
              that may need a reference to the ECJ/Court of Justice of  the
              European  Union  (CJEU).   It  was  suggested  that  such   a
              reference was now necessary to resolve the present  case  and
              that four further questions arising from the decision of  the
              AIT  in  the  case  of  GS  (Article  15(c);   indiscriminate
              violence) Afghanistan CG [2009] UKAIT 00044 would  also  need
              to be made the subject of such a reference.


          iv) On the same day Wilson & Co for AA associated themselves with
              RMJ's request for a reference to the CJEU.

           v) Again on the same day, the Home Office responded to  the  RMJ
              request for information from December  2009  indicating  that
              the place of intended return was by way of air  transport  to
              Baghdad with any necessary onward travel being  by  means  of
              public transport. No admissions were made as to whether there
              was a state of internal armed conflict in Iraq  as  that  was
              deemed irrelevant in the light of QD. In the case of  HM  and
              RM  internal  relocation  to  the  KRG   was   a   reasonable
              possibility as they  originated  from  there.  In  the  other
              cases, as an alternative to the primary submission that there
              was no part of Iraq where the Art 15(c)  test  was  met,  the
              viability of  internal  relocation  to  safe  parts  of  Iraq
              notably the south would be a secondary submission in  respect
              of any of these Appellants.


16. Following the representations of all parties at the  CMR  the  Tribunal
    decided not to join a further case as country guidance but  issued  the
    following directions:


        1.        (The)  appeals  to  be  country  guidance  cases  on  the
              application of Art 15(c) of the  Qualification  Directive  to
              the appellants and address:-


              a. Whether there is a risk to the appellants of indiscriminate
                 violence arising from armed conflict within the meaning  of
                 Article 15 (c) in their home areas in Iraq.


              b. If so whether internal relocation within Iraq is  available
                 to any of the appellants.


              c. If so whether the intended route of return enables them  to
                 access such a place in safety.


           1. The UNHCR is joined as a party to these appeals.


        2. We find that there is an error of law in the case of ASA, namely
           determining the Article 15(c) point by application of KH  [2008]
           UKAIT 00023. The consequences of  such  error,  if  any,  to  be
           determined at the hearing of the appeals.


        3. The appellants to serve a report of its expert Dr Herring on the
           parties and the Tribunal by 4.00 pm on 24 May 2010. In the event
           that the report cannot address all aspects of the evidence  that
           the appellants intend to lead,  the  appellants  shall  indicate
           what issues will be addressed in a supplementary report and when
           such report shall be made  available  to  the  parties  and  the
           Tribunal. Leave to adduce such supplementary report will only be
           granted if it served in good time before the  hearing  of  these
           appeals.


        4. The respondent to serve any documentary  material  on  which  it
           intends to rely at the  appeal  that  is  supplementary  to  the
           material to be served by the appellants as  material  considered
           by Dr Herring at the same time.


        5. The appellants to serve a skeleton argument for  the  appeal  on
           the parties and the Tribunal by 4.00 on 27 May 2010.

        6. The UNHCR to inform the parties and the Tribunal by 4.00  on  27
           May 2010 whether its submissions at the hearing will differ from
           the submissions referred to in the CA decision in QD subject  to
           any response  made  to  the  skeleton  arguments  of  the  other
           parties.


           7. The respondent to serve its skeleton  argument  by  4.00pm  3
              June 2010.


        8. Any further documentary material (other than that referred to in
           7. above) that the respondent considers necessary to  adduce  in
           response to the appellants case shall be served promptly and  in
           any event no later than 4.00pm 3 June 2010.


        9. The parties cooperate with each other and produce a joint bundle
           of all relevant legal materials by 4.00pm 3 June 2010.


          10. The hearing shall start at 11.00am on 7 June.


Reference to the CJEU

17. The question of a reference to the Court of  Justice  of  the  European
    Union was not pursued to a formal determination at the hearing  in  the
    light  of  the  Tribunal's  indication  that  it  was  not   considered
    appropriate at this stage in the proceedings.   Since  the  entry  into
    force on 1 December 2009  of  the  Treaty  of  Lisbon  (Treaty  on  the
    Functioning of the European Union (TFEU)) the Upper Tribunal  is  aware
    that any court or tribunal in the UK may make a reference on any  issue
    of EU law including those where references were formally reserved to  a
    final court of appeal.  At the same time the  name  of  the  court  was
    changed from ECJ to CJEU.

18. The previous practice of the AIT with respect to making  references  to
    the ECJ has been abrogated. No Practice Direction has been made by  the
    Senior President  of  Tribunals.  Pending  the  issue  of  any  further
    guidance that may be needed on the question, it is apposite to set  out
    the intended basic practice  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Immigration  and
    Asylum Chamber with respect to references to the  CJEU  in  immigration
    and asylum cases.

19. We have had regard to the  case  law  both  of  the  ECJ/CJEU  and  the
    superior courts in the United Kingdom  and  the  Information  Note  for
    National Courts issued by the Court of Justice  OJC  2009  C/297/01,  5
    December 2009.  We conclude:-

          i)  A reference should only be made  to  the  CJEU  where  it  is
             necessary to do so to resolve a live and material issue  in  a
             pending appeal that  the  Tribunal  could  not  with  complete
             confidence answer for itself.[1]


         ii)  A reference has the  consequence  of  substantial  delay  and
             further costs in the determination of immigration  and  asylum
             appeals, whereas there is  a  public  as  well  as  a  private
             interest in speedy resolution of the question. Accordingly the
             Tribunal will normally only make a reference where the  answer
             to the question to be referred is likely to prove decisive  to
             the determination of the appeal.


        iii)  The Tribunal could only conclude that a reference  is  either
             necessary or likely to be decisive when the relevant facts  in
             the case have been identified and are either  the  subject  of
             agreement or prior determination by the Tribunal.[2]


         iv)  It follows that for so long as there remains the  possibility
             of  the  factual  basis  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal   being
             disturbed on appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,  we  consider  it
             would be highly unusual and normally premature for  the  First
             tier Tribunal to make such a reference.

          v)  Where it is apparent that the criteria in  i)  to  iii)   are
             met, then the Tribunal  ought  to  make  a  reference  at  the
             earliest opportunity in order to obtain the earliest  guidance
             from the Court of Justice on the question.


20. In the present appeals it was apparent that there was no need to make a
    reference to the CJEU either at the CMR on 10 May 2010 or  subsequently
    either because the issues suggested did not arise in point of  fact  or
    the Upper Tribunal considers it is well able to resolve for itself with
    complete confidence all relevant matters of law in  the  light  of  the
    guidance it has received from the Court of Justice in Elgafaji and  the
    Court of Appeal in QD.

UNHCR intervention

21.  Rule 9(5) of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
    provides that in an asylum case the United  Kingdom  representative  of
    the UNHCR may give notice to the  Upper  Tribunal  that  it  wishes  to
    participate in the proceedings and on  giving  such  notice  Rule  9(6)
    provides that it is entitled to participate and to  receive  copies  of
    the documents.

22. 'Asylum case' is defined by Rule 1(3) as an appeal under ss. 82-83A  of
    the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 where a  person  claims
    that being required to leave would breach the UK's obligation under the
    Convention relating to the status of refugees  of  1951  and  the  1967
    Protocol.  This definition does not include  protection  subsidiary  to
    refugee status under the  Qualification  Directive  whose  purpose  and
    scope is defined as laying down minimum standards for the qualification
    of third country nationals or  stateless  persons  as  refugees  or  as
    persons who otherwise need international protection and the content  of
    the protection granted.

23. UNHCR has substantial experience of and interest in both refugee status
    and subsidiary forms of protection. Its  mandate  is  somewhat  broader
    than simply refugees under the 1951 Convention  and  it  has  important
    experience of and engagement with the evolution of protection norms  in
    the European Union. It has frequently made oral and written submissions
    on protection issues to the higher courts in  the  United  Kingdom.  We
    consider that in a case where UNHCR has decided that it is  appropriate
    to give notice to participate in the proceedings,  it  is  very  likely
    that the Tribunal will receive invaluable assistance independent of the
    parties drawing attention to comparative case law or other materials of
    which the parties may be unaware. Its submission to the CA in QD was an
    extremely helpful compilation of issues and principles that  proved  to
    be of great assistance to that Court in construing the  objectives  and
    purposes of  subsidiary  protection,  who  took  the  unusual  step  of
    appending the submissions to its judgment.

24. We are also aware that where the meaning of the Qualification Directive
    may require a reference to the CJEU, the only means by which UNHCR  can
    participate as a party in those proceedings is if it is joined  in  the
    national proceedings. The Rules of Procedure of the European Court make
    no provision for  non  state  party  interveners  in  reference  cases.
    Following a Seminar of Judges - in Luxembourg on 22 and 23  March  2010
    ("The entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty and the consequent  effects
    on the court system of the European Union"), it  is  our  understanding
    that the participation of the  UNHCR  through  appropriate  joinder  in
    national proceedings would be welcomed by the CJEU as that would bridge
    a present gap in the present Rules of Procedure. This is an unfortunate
    omission by comparison with the Rules  of  Procedure  of  the  European
    Court of Human Rights (ECtHR). We note that  a  third  party  had  been
    joined in proceedings before the Administrative Court when a  reference
    to the ECJ was under contemplation: see Case C-192/99 R. v Secretary of
    State for the Home Department [2001]  2  C.M.L.R.  24  where  the  non-
    governmental organisation Justice was joined to  the  proceedings.  Any
    such direction by the national court must be made before the order  for
    reference is made.

25. We are satisfied that we have power to permit the participation of  the
    UNHCR in this case, whether under the express powers conferred by  Rule
    9(5) or the general case management power under Rule 5(1).  We conclude
    that there is a compelling case that Rule 9(5)  should  be  interpreted
    purposively to include  subsidiary  protection  in  the  light  of  the
    developments in protection law emanating from the European  Union.   We
    draw support for this proposition from the decision  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal in FA (Iraq) v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 696 18 June 2010 at [23]  to
    [25] where it concluded that  ss.82-83A  of  the  2002  Act  (the  same
    statutory provisions, we note, that are specified in Rule 1(3))  should
    now be read as  including  an  appeal  claiming  subsidiary  protection
    status. In any event we  shall  draw  the  attention  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure Committee to this judgment to consider whether the definition
    of  asylum  should  be  broadened  in   the   light   of   contemporary
    developments.  We  accordingly  granted  the  UNHCR's  application   to
    intervene.

26. In the light of subsequent events it is fortunate that we did  so.   We
    are grateful to the UK Representative for the written  submissions  and
    supporting materials received promptly  in  accordance  with  our  case
    management  directions  and  some  further  information  and  materials
    provided to us in response to post-hearing directions.

Subsequent events to 8 June

27. On 26 May, 2 days after the time when the appellants should have lodged
    Dr Herring's report or preliminary report,  RMJ  advised  the  Tribunal
    that the delay in obtaining the information from the Secretary of State
    as to the proposed place of return and internal relocation hampered its
    ability to  comply  with  the  timetable.   When  the  information  was
    delivered  it  was  necessary  to  provide  Dr  Herring  with   further
    instructions.  In consequence:


         "We propose to serve the joint  bundle  of  country  material,  the
         expert opinion   and any further evidence by Friday 28 May 2010. We
         further hope to file a skeleton argument by Tuesday 1st June  2010.
         We reiterate  that  we  have  made  every  effort  to  comply  with
         directions and regret failing to do so."


28. We accept, of course, that the Home Office delay in responding  to  the
    fairly simple questions posed in December was unacceptable and may have
    left some issues unresolved. But we confess  to  having  difficulty  in
    understanding why an expert's report commissioned in December 2009  for
    a March 2010 hearing on the intensity of the current violence  in  Iraq
    and the risks it posed for simple civilians was not available by the 10
    May hearing in the light of the express terms of the  directions  given
    in December that preparation could not be contingent on  obtaining  the
    answers sought. The Tribunal is aware from  the  way  that  Dr  Herring
    presented his evidence in the case of KH that he pays careful regard to
    the available factual material concerning  conditions  in  Iraq  on  an
    ongoing basis.

29. RMJ would be well aware  as  an  experienced  specialist  legal  agency
    representing in refugee and protection cases that from  the  autumn  of
    2009 the UK had started  to  return  failed  Iraqi  asylum  seekers  to
    Baghdad. The issue of internal relocation was also expressly  addressed
    in the December directions,  and  we  doubt  that  the  delayed  answer
    finally received could have come as a particular surprise. In any event
    it need not have delayed lodging the basic  report  with  any  addendum
    needed in the light of the answers to  be  a  little  later.  We  would
    further have expected that whether the report was in its  final  stages
    of preparation or not the broad approach would have  been  communicated
    so the legal representatives could prepare for the appellants' cases to
    be presented by them, the  burden  being  on  them  to  show  that  the
    relevant level of risk existed applying the correct test.

30.  The  RMJ  letter  of  26  May  also  stated  that  they  were  without
    instructions in the case of ASA and applied to be taken off the  record
    and as a result believed the five days allowed for the hearing could be
    reduced to four days. It subsequently emerged that RMJ had lost contact
    with ASA and considered it could not continue  to  act.   The  Tribunal
    does not know when  contact  was  last  made  with  ASA  and  what  his
    instructions were then. The country guidance appeal did not  depend  on
    his personal instructions. If he  was  willing  to  continue  with  his
    appeal on Article15(c) grounds in the autumn of 2009, we cannot see why
    he would be unwilling for it  to  be  determined  subsequently.  It  is
    disappointing to say the least given the efforts that had been made  to
    select suitable cases that would address relevant aspects of the  issue
    from October 2009 onwards, that no earlier warning had been given of  a
    potential problem in selecting this case for guidance.

31.  On  28  May  the  Tribunal  indicated  that  in  the  light   of   the
    representations made the appeal would not begin until  8  June  (rather
    than 7 June as originally envisaged).

32. On 1 June Wilson & Co wrote to the Tribunal informing it  that  in  the
    light of the expert evidence commissioned for this  case  it  could  no
    longer represent AA in the forthcoming appeal. It sought the Tribunal's
    consent to the withdrawal of the appeal pursuant to Rule 17(2)  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 as amended and indicated
    that it could no longer claim public funds  pursuant  to  its  contract
    with the Legal Services Commission as it could no longer estimate  that
    prospects of success in the appeal were 50% or higher.  The  solicitors
    explained that AA had intended to rely on the  report  commissioned  by
    RMJ to save costs and that "the expert evidence in finalised  form  was
    not  consistent  with  the  direction  that  the  drafts   and   verbal
    communications (to which we had been party throughout  the  preparation
    of the report) were taking".

33. On the same day RMJ sent a fax to the Tribunal to the following effect:

         "We have taken up to date instructions from our clients (the RM and
         HM brothers) and write to explain that we are as of today no longer
         instructed in either appeals. We should therefore be grateful if we
         could be taken off record as their legal  representative.  We  have
         advised  the  appellants  of  the  need   to   secure   alternative
         representation for the hearing".

34. These letters understandably produced inquiries from the respondent  as
    to what was happening or intended to happen. No bundles had been served
    on them although the material on which it intended  to  rely  had  been
    served on the appellants on 21 May 2010. The Tribunal indicated that it
    was not prepared to accede to Wilson & Co's request to withdraw, sought
    further information as to the position of  RMJ  and  the  clients  they
    formerly represented and issued  further  directions  with  a  view  to
    keeping open the possibility of hearing these appeals on 8 June 2010.

35. On 8 June 2010 when the case was  called  on  none  of  the  appellants
    appeared in person. Mr Symes of Counsel appeared for Wilson & Co and Mr
    Knafler QC appeared for RMJ.  The latter explained that Dr  Herring  's
    report was made available  late  on  the  28  May  2009.  It  had  been
    considered by counsel on the following day and a  conference  had  been
    held with RM and HM on the day following the  Whitsun  Bank  Holiday  1
    June 2010.  At  that  conference  instructions  were  withdrawn.  Legal
    professional privilege prevented further information being given as  to
    the reasons why instructions were withdrawn  and  litigation  privilege
    prevented the disclosure to the Tribunal of the report itself. Later in
    the morning RM and HM themselves attended  the  hearing  and  indicated
    through an interpreter provided by  the  court  that  they  wanted  the
    appeal to continue and they wanted the RMJ to  represent  them  in  the
    appeal.

36. The present appeals had  long  been  designated  as  intended  to  give
    guidance in circumstances where  many  hundreds  of  cases  before  the
    Tribunal and the higher courts have been  stayed  awaiting  a  judicial
    assessment of risk in Iraq applying Article 15(c) and related criteria.
    "Country Guidance" is a well  established  technique  in  the  AIT  and
    transferred to the Upper  Tribunal  pursuant  to  Senior  President  of
    Tribunal (SPT) Practice Directions. A duplication of  time  effort  and
    public funds by appellants, respondents and judges considering  appeals
    at all levels can be avoided by thorough and painstaking review of  the
    background materials, with commentaries and assessment by objective and
    informed experts where necessary and the material  tested  through  the
    participation of experienced legal teams on both sides  to  assist  the
    Tribunal  to  identify  the   relevant   issues   and   direct   itself
    appropriately in law.

37. The system has recently been described by Robert Thomas in his article,
    "Consistency in Asylum Adjudication: Country Guidance  and  the  Asylum
    Process in the United Kingdom" IJRL [2008] vol 20 (4). As  his  article
    makes plain the development of the system has been  encouraged  by  the
    higher courts, who have been concerned with the problem of inconsistent
    decisions in different panels of the AIT.  The challenge of the  system
    of asylum appeals is to ensure  that  cases  are  reviewed  as  country
    guidance with sufficient frequency to record changed  circumstances  so
    that previous guidance as a mandatory starting point for the assessment
    of an individual case does not outlive its utility (see Sedley LJ in KH
    (Sudan) v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 887 at [4]).

38. Although any appeal in the field of protection has importance  for  the
    individual appellant, country guidance cases  have  an  importance  far
    beyond that.  This country guidance case in particular was not  founded
    on any individual characteristic of any of the  appellants  other  than
    their  place  of  normal  residence,  nationality,  age   and   gender.
    Considerable public funds had already been expended in  processing  the
    cases from their original rejection in 2007 and 2008 to 2010. Since the
    cases had been identified as country guidance cases  in  October  2009,
    the Home Office had prepared three volumes of country material and  the
    UNHCR had prepared written submissions and  two  volumes  of  material.
    Five days had been set aside for a three  person  panel  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal with the President in the chair to hear the case.

39.  The circumstances in which a late change of mind was communicated were
    for the reasons set out above wholly unsatisfactory and in  RMJ's  case
    at least did not condescend to an explanation of whether the appellants
    sought to withdraw the appeal altogether or why instructions were  said
    to have been  withdrawn.  Although  legal  professional  privilege  may
    constrain what a representative can tell the Tribunal,  the  profession
    will be aware that an explanation of why professional instructions have
    been withdrawn will be an important factor in  whether  an  adjournment
    for fresh representation should be contemplated, and in the absence  of
    any  credible  explanation  adverse  inferences  may   in   appropriate
    circumstances be drawn. We draw attention  to  the  important  duty  of
    cooperation with the Tribunal spelt out in Rule 2 (4)(b)  to  which  we
    make further reference below.

40. We indicated that we were unwilling to accede to  the  applications  to
    withdraw the appeals at this late stage, and concluded that  there  was
    an overriding public interest  in  proceeding  to  determine  them.  We
    adjourned the matter for a few hours for the parties to consider  their
    positions further, and for RMJ to consider whether it could  after  all
    represent their clients in the light of the RM and HM's request.

41.  On the afternoon of 8 June, the position  regarding  AA  remained  the
    same. Mr Symes informed us that he still wished to withdraw his appeal;
    in the event that the appeal was not withdrawn the appellant would  not
    be represented, did not wish to participate  and  had  no  evidence  or
    submissions he wished to advance to us.  We had already  been  informed
    that this  was  based  on  the  legal  representatives'  assessment  of
    prospects of success in the light of the expert's report.

42. As regards HM and RM, we were informed that the appellants did not want
    the expert report to be adduced in their appeals. No  instructions  had
    been given to amplify the matter.  The  brothers  now  wished  also  to
    withdraw their appeal and had been informed of the consequences  of  so
    doing. It appeared that even though the public interest in the  appeals
    continuing and RMJ continuing to act had been brought to the  attention
    of  the  Legal  Services  Commission   (LSC),   further   funding   for
    representation was refused applying its established criteria.

43. It was apparent that the appeal of ASA  had  to  be  determined  as  no
    instructions had been received  to  withdraw.  This  would  require  an
    examination of the background  evidence  in  respect  of  Baghdad  (the
    intended place of return) and Baquabah in Diyala (the intended place of
    residence) as set against the legal criteria identified by the Court of
    Appeal in QD. Examination of  the  material  specifically  relating  to
    Kirkuk (the intended place of residence for RM and HM) added little  by
    way of further time in hearing submissions and making a determination.

44. We remained of the view that the  public  interest  reasons  why  these
    appeals should be determined and  the  material  so  carefully  brought
    together  judicially  assessed  were  overwhelming.  We   refused   the
    application to withdraw the appeals and we now give  full  reasons  for
    doing so.

The decision to proceed with the appeals

45. We had regard to the overriding objective to deal with  appeals  justly
    and fairly under Rule 2 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules.  We concluded that in a country  guidance  case  of  this  type,
    justice and fairness was also owed to the many hundreds  of  appellants
    whose cases would be materially affected by a thorough  review  of  all
    the available up to date material and the application of  the  test  in
    QD.

46. As regards  the specific factors in Rule 2(2) we concluded:

          a. "dealing with the case in ways which are proportionate  to  the
             importance of the case,  the  complexity  of  the  issues,  the
             anticipated costs and resources of the parties"


        The importance was considerable,  and  the  costs  already  largely
        incurred in the previous six months. The costs  would  be  entirely
        wasted if we did not determine the appeals and  would  fall  to  be
        regenerated in future appeals where the parties may  not  have  had
        the experience or the  resources  of  the  RMJ  in  identifying  an
        appropriate expert.


          b. "avoiding unnecessary formality and seeking flexibility in  the
             proceedings"


        We had through paper directions, active case management  and  short
        adjournments sought to explore every practical way to  advance  the
        over-riding objective.  We considered whether we  should  call  the
        expert Dr Herring ourselves, despite the  fact  that  assertion  of
        litigation privilege had prevented us knowing of  his  conclusions.
        Although this  course  was  clearly  open  to  us  and  may  be  an
        appropriate course of future action, we decided against it in  this
        case. Neither the tribunal nor the respondent knew what the  expert
        might say although we were aware it would be based on consideration
        of  documents  already  before  us.  The  costs  of  the   expert's
        attendance may  be  wasted  if  attendance  added  nothing  to  the
        documents. Two expert teams of legal advisers had now  told  us  in
        one way or another that in their opinion  the  report  reduced  the
        prospects of the appellants succeeding  to  below  50%.  It  seemed
        unlikely that it would present a materially  different  picture  to
        that  contained  in  the  Home  Office  compilation  of   documents
        supplemented by the UNHCR materials. It risked created extra  delay
        and costs for an uncertain or no  apparent  tangible  benefit.   We
        will address  later  in  this  judgment  how  we  consider  country
        guidance cases should be case managed in the future to  avoid  this
        unfortunate outcome.


          c. "ensuring so far as practicable that the parties  are  able  to
             participate fully in the proceedings"


        We had done what we  could  to  ensure  that  the  appellants  were
        represented and assisted. The funding criteria for the LSC are  not
        for the Upper Tribunal far less their application to an  individual
        case.  Nevertheless we propose to send a copy of this  judgment  to
        the LSC to draw its attention to what we consider  the  undesirable
        consequences of withdrawing funding  at  the  last  moment  thereby
        placing in jeopardy the ability of the Upper Tribunal to perform an
        important part  of  its  recognised  function  in  giving  informed
        guidance on country conditions in the most efficient way for public
        resources  and  litigation  costs  generally.  Although   we   were
        concerned that RM and HM who initially expressed to us  a  wish  to
        continue  with  their  appeals  would  be  severely  restricted  as
        unrepresented litigants with little or no English, we noted that on
        further instructions they had expressly  indicated  that  they  did
        want to place any further material before the  Upper  Tribunal  and
        had sought to withdraw the appeal thus indicating  that  there  was
        nothing further they wished to draw to our attention. We  add  here
        that the brothers stayed to listen to the  subsequent  appeal,  the
        gist of which  was  translated  to  them  by  the  interpreter  and
        confirmed on more than one occasion that they did not wish  to  add
        anything or make any submissions.


          d. "using any special expertise of the Upper Tribunal effectively"


        We consider that the Upper Tribunal has special responsibility  and
        expertise to assist Immigration Judges, primary decision-makers and
        litigants by engaging  in  up  to  date  assessments  of  risks  in
        countries giving rise to commonly occurring situations, where it is
        possible and reasonably practical to do so.


          e. "Avoiding delay so far as compatible with proper  consideration
             of the issues"


        The narrative of events in these cases speaks for itself.  It would
        probably  have  taken  another  six  months  to  set   up   another
        constitution to deal with further  appeals  raising  these  issues.
        Avoiding delay is always an important consideration in  immigration
        cases to both sides for differing reasons. In our  judgment  it  is
        particularly important in  Article  15(c)  cases  where  levels  of
        general violence arising in armed conflict may  change  rapidly  in
        the course of weeks or months and there is always the  considerable
        likelihood of assessments being out of date.

47. We accordingly directed that the appeal start at 2.00pm on 9 June 2010.
    We had the benefit of a detailed skeleton argument from the respondent,
    although it did not bear a burden of establishing a  negative  in  this
    case, and it had been sensibly anticipated that its  skeleton  argument
    should address the appellant's case rather than  deal  with  protection
    issues entirely in the abstract.  The  hearing  took  the  form  of  an
    elaboration of aspects of the written arguments  by  reference  to  the
    factual materials, a formal response  to  the  written  submissions  of
    UNHCR, and response to questions put by members of the Tribunal  as  to
    various matters of law, fact and the  practicalities  of  the  intended
    return to Iraq. At the end of the  hearing  some  information  remained
    outstanding or subject to confirmation in writing. We asked that it  be
    provided within 14 days. RM and HM indicated they would like to receive
    a copy of this further information and we directed that  it  should  be
    sent to them. Whilst  our  decision  was  under  consideration  further
    information relating to the return of failed  asylum  seekers  to  Iraq
    came to our attention and we asked for further information  from  UNHCR
    and from the respondent, the appellants again being  copied  in.   This
    was provided to us in accordance  with  the  time  limits  set  and  is
    considered below. We are again grateful to all those who assisted us.



Future case management of country guidance cases

48. We recognise of course that whether to  pursue  an  appeal  or  not  is
    primarily a question for the parties and not infrequently contingencies
    arise in the course of litigation that lead to a  change  of  heart  or
    mind for one reason or another. These four appellants had  persistently
    sought to challenge the summary dismissals of their humanitarian claims
    by the IJs in the light of the developing jurisprudence and a  body  of
    data extending back to 2005 and 2006 that revealed a serious  state  of
    affairs regarding the situation of civilians in Iraq.

49. We feel it necessary to repeat the view we expressed at  the  start  of
    the appeal that we found the RMJ  letter  of  1  June  2010  profoundly
    unsatisfactory as to what it said, what it did not  say,  and  when  it
    said it. We  have  already  expressed  our  surprise  that  experienced
    representatives instructing an experienced expert in the field would be
    completely unsighted as to the overall conclusions likely to be reached
    in the case until 28 May 2009. If that was the case then it should  not
    have been and something has seriously  gone  wrong  with  the  task  of
    preparing  the  case  in  accordance  with  the  directions  issued  in
    December. We are aware, of course, that around this period RMJ  was  in
    the throes of a funding crisis, which led  shortly  thereafter  to  its
    closure. Whilst accepting that there were good reasons why,  therefore,
    RMJ members involved in these appeals must have  had  a  lot  on  their
    mind, that does not excuse inattention to their duty  to  the  Tribunal
    and to the public interest in effective pursuit of these appeals.

50.  It is also unsatisfactory that the  Tribunal  should  be  put  in  the
    position of making its assessment of risk  without  the  assistance  of
    objective  relevant  expert  opinion  that   is   available   and   was
    commissioned to assist the UT to perform its task. We would  regard  it
    as unacceptable if the Home Office were to  suppress  relevant  opinion
    evidence it commissioned to assist the Tribunal because  it  considered
    that it did not assist the case it wished  to  put  forward.  We  would
    equally be unwilling to accede to a late application to withdraw a Home
    Office appeal or resistance to an appeal if it appeared that the result
    was to  prevent  the  Upper  Tribunal  receiving  the  evidence  on  an
    important question that it was in the public interest  that  it  should
    receive.

51. Whilst the legal  representative  of  an  appellant  is  not  a  public
    authority with the same public law responsibilities as the Home Office,
    in our judgment the Rule 2(4)(b) duty of cooperation in the context  of
    a country guidance case where  the  public  interest  is  apparent  and
    longstanding requires the representatives to consider and promote  that
    public interest when preparing for important appeals as this one is.

52. Having regard to the above rule, together  with  Rules  5  and  15,  we
    conclude that for the future case management of country guidance  cases
    should proceed along the following lines:

        i.   The Tribunal should  identify,  with  the  assistance  of  the
        parties, the particular questions of fact or  assessment  on  which
        any expert witness is to be instructed in the appeal.


        ii. In order to do so the Tribunal should require at an early stage
        detailed grounds of appeal identifying how the appellant  puts  the
        case.


        iii.  The Tribunal should  explore  the  possibility  of  a  single
        jointly instructed expert being used by both sides as is  the  case
        in civil litigation under CPR 35.7 and more  frequently  in  family
        law cases where the interests of the child may be   more  important
        that the interests of any one party to the litigation.


        iv. The expert witness should be identified at an early  stage  and
        informed that he or she has the right of access to the Tribunal  in
        case of difficulty with completing the report (see by analogy  with
        civil proceedings, CPR 35.14).


        v. The documents that either side  wants  the  expert  to  consider
        should be assembled at an early stage, indexed  and  paginated  and
        any supplementary materials arising subsequently added sequentially
        to the bundles.


        vi. The Tribunal may  direct  that  permission  to  use  an  expert
        granted at the outset of case management shall be on the basis that
        the report commissioned shall be disclosed to the Tribunal and  the
        other party to the appeal irrespective of whether the commissioning
        party  intends  to  rely  on  the  report  at  trial.    In   these
        circumstances litigation privilege  may  well  cease  to  exist  in
        respect of the report.


        vii. An expert's report should be disclosed well before the  appeal
        date or final CMR, enabling the Tribunal or either  party  to  pose
        supplementary questions (see by analogy, CPR 35.6).


        viii. In a country guidance case skeleton arguments and authorities
        bundles should be prepared in advance  of  the  last  CMR  so  that
        informed decisions as to the length, form and nature of the  appeal
        can then be taken.


        ix.   When the case has reached an advanced level  of  preparation,
        the interests of a party in not wishing to continue with the appeal
        are likely to  carry  considerably  less  weight  than  the  public
        interest in continuing with it.


53. With these measures in place, it is hoped that last-minute  changes  of
    position can be avoided, and that  if  the  Tribunal  is  left  in  the
    unfortunate position that one party is no longer  willing  or  able  to
    participate in the appeal it will have that party's submissions and the
    documentary form of any material it had intended to rely on before  it.
    It is also hoped that the LSC will be able to consider means  by  which
    public funding could be continued in such a case.




Part 2:  The meaning of Article 15(c) Qualification Directive

Submissions on the law

54. The written submission from the UNHCR, whom the Tribunal had joined  as
    an intervener on 11 May, recalled that  this  body's  position  on  the
    application of Article 15(c) to Iraq was placed  before  the  Court  of
    Appeal in QD in the form of submissions that were formally  annexed  to
    the judgment of the Court. It was not considered necessary  to  add  to
    those submissions on the law save to draw attention to two matters. The
    first was the decision of the Conseil  d'tat  in  Office  Franais  de
    Protection des Rfugis  et  Apatrides  v  Baskarathas,  3  July  2009,
    No.32095 (as translated by UNHCR) in which the Conseil d'tat upheld  a
    decision by the French National Court of Asylum that had found  that  a
    Sri Lankan national was entitled to subsidiary protection under Article
    15(c) on the basis that there was a situation of  generalised  violence
    existing in the eastern part of Sri Lanka, notwithstanding that the Sri
    Lankan army had taken control of that area. It was  submitted  that  in
    addition to illustrating the effect of Article  15(c)  in  relation  to
    regional levels of indiscriminate  violence,  the  judgment  also  made
    clear that the threat to a person's life or person need not arise  from
    actions of a combatant to the armed conflict and that the violence from
    which protection is granted need not be  limited  to  areas  where  the
    armed conflict itself is concentrated.  This was  consistent  with  the
    submissions made by UNHCR in QD that it is not necessary for the threat
    to life or person to derive from protagonists in the armed conflict  in
    question - it can simply be the product of the  breakdown  of  law  and
    order - and there does not have to be active military or  armed  combat
    taking place in that precise area at that precise time.

55. A second decision UNHCR wished to highlight was  that  of  the  Supreme
    Administrative Court of the Republic of Bulgaria, First College dated 5
    March 2009 (Administrative Case No 300/2009 in  the  matter  of  Hassan
    Fayed (again as  translated  by  UNHCR)).  In  upholding  a  claim  for
    subsidiary protection based on Article 15(c) the Supreme Administrative
    Court stated that in the light of "irrefutable evidence, including  but
    not limited to the opinion of the International Law Directorate of  the
    Ministry of Foreign Affairs", the situation in Iraq was one of internal
    armed conflict and the situation in the appellant's home area (Diwaniq,
    Kadisha Province in southern Iraq) "is defined as unstable with acts of
    indiscriminate violence and therefore, there is  a  real  threat  of  a
    basic attack(s) against [the appellant]."

56. We shall consider UNHCR's written submissions on the factual  situation
    in Iraq below in Part 4.

57. The respondent's position as to the law was that  the  Tribunal  should
    follow the guidance given in Elgafaji and QD.

58. With regard to the submissions put in on behalf of the  UNHCR,  it  was
    submitted that the decision of the Conseil d'tat referred to in  their
    written submission was not an Iraqi case, so though it was relevant  to
    the legal principles in question it was not relevant to  the  facts  of
    this case. It was argued that in any event the point  of  law  analysed
    there did not arise in this case.

59. In respect of the Bulgarian case cited by UNHCR,  which  was  concerned
    with Iraq, the point was made that the only evidence referred to  there
    was an opinion of  the  Bulgarian  Foreign  Ministry,  and  there  were
    insufficient accompanying reasons for the Tribunal to draw support from
    it.  At best it could only be persuasive authority by way of a  factual
    assessment made as of March 2009.

60. The respondent urged the Tribunal to ensure when applying Article 15(c)
    that proper differentiation was  made  between  targeted  violence  and
    indiscriminate violence and between the level of risks  encountered  by
    "ordinary" (Iraqi)  civilians  and  deaths  and  injuries  suffered  by
    combatants.

  61. As regards the question of safety of route of  return  the  respondent
      submitted that although the conclusions on this  set  out  in  HH  and
      Others were expressly stated to be obiter,  they  confirmed  that  the
      burden of proof was  on  the  appellants.  Mr  Staker  said  that  the
      Secretary  of  State  reserved  her  position  as  to  whether   these
      conclusions were correct, but did not seek to argue  for  a  different
      approach in these appeals. He only sought to highlight  that  what  is
      said in HH and Others does not mean that simply because the  Secretary
      of State does not deal with or consider that there is any  issue  with
      the route of return, the decision on entitlement is rendered  unlawful
      as a result. An appellant can always appeal and  raise  the  issue  on
      that appeal. Only where the appellant raises a cogent argument on  the
      issue, is it for the Tribunal to deal with it. At  the  appeal  stage,
      where it is the Secretary of State's  case  that  there  would  be  no
      difficulties involved in the route of return, it is for  an  appellant
      to set out alleged difficulties and demonstrate them to  the  required
      standard of proof. There is no general requirement on the Secretary of
      State to specify all routes and methods of return within  the  country
      of destination.



Discussion



  62. The principal focus of these appeals is whether all or  any  of  these
      appellants is entitled to the form of subsidiary protection spelt  out
      in Article 15(c) as interpreted by the ECJ in  Elgafaji  C-465/07  (17
      February 2009) and the CA in QD and HH and Others.

63. Our focus is  the  Directive   because  there  is  no  indication  that
    national transposition has been more generous,   and  if  its  language
    might incline to narrower reading  such  language  must  yield  to  the
    requirement to interpret national measures in accordance with Community
    law (see Marleasing [1990] ECR 1 4135 and Elgafaji at [42]).

64. The relevant terms of the Directive are as follows:

         Art 2
              "(e) 'person eligible  for  subsidiary  protection'  means  a
              third country    national...who does not qualify as a refugee
              but in respect of whom substantial grounds  have  been  shown
              for believing that the person concerned, if returned  to  his
              or her  country  of  origin,...would  face  a  real  risk  of
              suffering serious harm as  defined  in  Article  15...and  is
              unable, or, owing to such risk, unwilling to avail himself of
              the protection of that country.
                   ...

                   Art 15    Serious harm consists of

               a) death penalty or execution; or


               b) torture or inhuman or degrading treatment of an applicant
                  in the country of origin; or


               c) serious and individual threat to  a  civilian's  life  or
                  person by reason of indiscriminate violence in situations
                  of international or internal armed conflict".


65. The application of the Directive is ultimately a factual assessment  of
    all relevant material available to us at the date of the  determination
    of this appeal but before we can decide whether any of  the  appellants
    meets the test we need to remind ourselves what we are looking  for  in
    the evidential part of the assessment.

66. It is plain from QD at [18]) that in its conclusions in KH at [206]  to
    [209] the AIT's misconception that international humanitarian law (IHL)
    should drive the construction of the kind of harm identified in Article
    15 led it to read the terms  "indiscriminate  violence"  and  "life  or
    person" too narrowly and to set the threshold of  risk  too  high.  Our
    task is to revisit the evidence that is now available  as  to  risk  to
    civilians in the light of the broader approach identified  in  QD:  "to
    locate the evidence within a different legal paradigm and reach a  fact
    sensitive fresh conclusion".

67. We identify the following passages of the case-law  binding  on  us  as
    particularly apposite in the identification of the test for  Article 15
    (c) protection in the present case:

        a. The Article seeks to elevate the state practice of not returning
           unsuccessful asylum seekers to war zones or situations of  armed
           anarchy for reasons of common humanity into a  minimum  standard
           (QD at [21]).


        b. The scope of protection is an autonomous concept  distinct  from
           and broader than Art 3 protection even  as  interpreted  by  the
           European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) in NA  v  United  Kingdom
           (Elgafaji at [33]-[36]; QD at [20], [35]);  HH  and  Others)  at
           [31]).


        c. It is concerned with "'threat .. to a civilian's life or person'
           rather than to specific  acts  of  violence  ..  the  threat  is
           inherent in a general  situation  of   ..  armed  conflict...The
           violence  that  gives  rise  to  the  threat  is  described   as
           indiscriminate, a term which  implies  that  it  may  extend  to
           people irrespective of their personal  circumstances"  (Elgafaji
           [34]).


        d. The Article is intended  to  cover  the  "real  risks  and  real
           threats presented by the kinds of endemic acts of indiscriminate
           violence - the placing of car bombs in  market  places;  snipers
           firing methodically at people in the streets  - which have  come
           to disfigure the modern world". It is  concerned  with  "serious
           threats of real harm" (QD at [27] and [31]).


        e. "Individual must be understood as  covering  harm  to  civilians
           irrespective   of   their   identity   where   the   degree   of
           indiscriminate violence characterising the armed conflict taking
           place reaches such a high level  that  substantial  grounds  are
           shown for believing that a civilian ...would solely  on  account
           of his presence on the territory... face a real  risk  of  being
           subjected to the serious threat" (Elgafaji [35]).


        f. "The more the applicant is able to show that he is  specifically
           affected by  reason  of  factors   particular  to  his  personal
           circumstances, the lower the level  of  indiscriminate  violence
           required" (Elgafaji [39]).


        g.  A  consistent  pattern  of  mistreatment  is  not  a  necessary
           requirement to meet the real harm standard. "The risk of  random
           injury or death which indiscriminate  violence  carries  is  the
           converse of consistency" (QD at [32]).


        h. There is no requirement that the armed conflict itself  must  be
           exceptional but there must be "an  intensity  of  indiscriminate
           violence great enough to meet the test spelt out by the ECJ" and
           this will self evidently not characterise every  such  situation
           (QD at [37]).


        i. "The overriding purpose of Article 15(c) is  to  give  temporary
           refuge to people whose safety is placed in serious  jeopardy  by
           indiscriminate violence, it cannot matter whether the source  of
           the violence is two or more  warring  factions  (which  is  what
           conflict  would  ordinarily  suggest)  or  a  single  entity  or
           faction" (QD at [35]).


        j. 'Civilian' means all genuine non-combatants at the time when the
           serious threat of real harm may materialise (QD [37]).


68. In the light of the above, and  the  circumstances  of  each  of  these
    appellants we pose to ourselves the question identified in Elgafaji  at
    [43], namely, does:


        "the degree of indiscriminate  violence  characterising  the  armed
        conflict taking place... (reach) such a high level that substantial
        grounds are shown for believing that any civilian, returned to  the
        relevant country or, as the case may be, to  the  relevant  region,
        would solely on account of his presence on the  territory  or  that
        country or region , face a real  risk  of  being  subject  to  that
        threat ?"


69. In the case of GS, decided after Elgafaji and  QD  but  before  HH  and
    Others, the AIT considered the distinction between  indiscriminate  and
    targeted violence and suggested at [62] that there may be a distinction
    between bombing insurgents hiding in  civilian  areas  and  a  targeted
    attack with individuals caught in the cross-fire so as to  exclude  the
    latter scenario from the ambit of Article 15(c).

70. In the written submissions before us the respondent had suggested  that
    figures of overall civilian casualties in Iraq had to be discounted  by
    reference to a number of  factors  including  the  distinction  between
    targeted killings of security service personnel and unintended civilian
    casualties. There was reference back to the distinctions that  the  AIT
    explored in GS. As the oral submissions developed it became plain  that
    the respondent did not contend that as a matter  of  law  the  ways  in
    which civilians might come by death or serious injury had  to  be  sub-
    divided into targeted or non-targeted killings. Rather it was  advanced
    as a matter of practicality that the class of civilians  who  might  be
    exposed to these risks would be smaller if they arose not  from  random
    killings in the market place but were directed at  the  elimination  of
    security service personnel or government functionaries.

  71. The  respondent's submissions imported a further related  proposition,
      namely that when determining the levels and extent  of  indiscriminate
      violence in a particular country or area decision-makers should  adopt
      a non-inclusive approach, making sure to  subtract  certain  types  of
      violence, in particular that between combatants. Mr Staker stated that
      the Court of Appeal had confirmed, in [37] of QD, that a civilian must
      be  a  genuine  non-combatant.   For  the  respondent  there  was   an
      additional reason why "civilians" should not be treated  as  including
      military personnel: plainly such individuals could not be described as
      ordinary civilians with no particular features  which  could  increase
      risk.



  72. Similarly in KH the AIT sought to apply a  non-inclusive  approach  to
      indiscriminate violence. It stated that  in  general,  the  level  and
      degree of targeted violence which combatants direct against each other
      [defined in IHL terms] should not be  taken  into  account  unless  it
      turns out to consist in acts carried out in the course of  hostilities
      in a way which disproportionately affects civilians ([100]).

Our conclusions on the law

73. We consider that an attempt to  distinguish  between  a  real  risk  of
    targeted and incidental killing of civilians during armed conflict  (as
    in GS: see [67] above) is not a helpful  exercise  in  the  context  of
    Article 15(c) nor does it reflect the purposes of the Directive  in the
    light of the factors set out at [65] above. The judgment of the ECJ  in
    Elgafaji indicates that the scope of protection in  this  part  of  the
    Article is a broad one at least during such time  as  the  conflict  is
    intense and the risks to civilians greater.

74.  The  evidence  of  the  unhappy  and  prolonged  history  of  civilian
    casualties in Iraq since 2003 demonstrates that in predominantly twelve
    urban centres very large numbers of people have  died  from  improvised
    explosive devices, shootings, hostage-taking,  aerial  bombardment  and
    many other means. While it can be said that  many  of  these  incidents
    that resulted in civilian deaths may have  been  aimed  at  eliminating
    members of the security force or insurgents, or particular religious or
    ethnic  minorities,  the  means   employed   frequently   resulted   in
    significant numbers of non-combatant deaths whether  such  deaths  were
    specifically targeted or otherwise.

  75. In the light of Elgafaji and QD it is also clear that a  non-inclusive
      approach to the assessment of violence as advocated in KH (and also to
      a lesser extent in GS) must be regarded as flawed and in at least some
      respects unduly restrictive. Whilst there  are  important  differences
      between targeted and non-targeted attacks we know all  too  well  from
      armed conflicts arising in Iraq and elsewhere in the world today  that
      civilians can be adversely affected by violence whatever  its  source.
      For example, many targeted attacks  can  result  in  heavy  collateral
      damage.  Causing death and injury not just to particular groups but to
      the civilian  population  at  large  can  sometimes  be  a  deliberate
      strategy employed by one or more parties to the  conflict.  The  lines
      between civilians and combatants can sometimes be blurred.  There  can
      also be a  heavy  overlap  between  criminal  and  military  violence.
      Further as we shall note later on, attempts to subtract certain  types
      of violence can lead to a futile exercise in analysing  statistics  of
      deaths and casualties which fails to take into account common problems
      such as underreporting.



  76. It is also salient to recall that we are concerned in the  context  of
      Article 15(c) not just with threats to life but also to  person;  and,
      even if the term "life or person" is not construed as widely as  UNHCR
      and some other commentators have advocated, it is certainly  the  case
      that it must extend to significant physical injuries,  serious  mental
      traumas and serious threats to bodily integrity. That has significance
      for the type of evidence  relevant  to  establishing  whether  Article
      15(c) is engaged. Such evidence cannot be confined to the  numbers  of
      casualties.

77. Once freed from the constraints of a requirement  to  evaluate  whether
    the indiscriminate violence is a breach of IHL or otherwise  legitimate
    in armed conflict, we cannot see that the true  purpose  and  scope  of
    Article 15(c) requires some precise assessment  of  the  intentions  or
    culpability  of  the  actors  to  the  conflict.  Nor  do  we  consider
    ordinarily that it would be consistent with the broad approach enjoined
    by the ECJ in Elgafaji to adopt a non-inclusive approach when assessing
    the level and extent of indiscriminate violence.  There  may  be  armed
    conflicts in which civilians are little affected by the fighting  going
    on, but far more often that is not the case.

  78. Further, as noted in GS (following AM and  AM  (Armed  conflict:  risk
      categories) Somalia CG [2008] UKAIT 00091), in the context of  Article
      15(c) the serious and individual threat involved does not have to be a
      direct effect of the indiscriminate violence; it is sufficient if  the
      latter is an operative cause.

79. That is not to say that it can be assumed that every type  of  violence
    occurring in a country  always  impacts  on  civilians.  Article  15(c)
    requires there to be a sufficient causal nexus between the violence and
    the conflict; an operative cause  that  is  not  too  remote.  In  that
    context the Tribunal in GS recognised  that  general  criminality  that
    caused  harm  of  the  necessary  degree  of  seriousness  could  be  a
    consequence of armed conflict where normal law and order provisions are
    significantly disrupted.

  80.  We agree with that approach. In our judgment the  nexus  between  the
      generalised armed conflict and the indiscriminate  violence  posing  a
      real risk to life and person is met when the intensity of the conflict
      involves means of combat (whether permissible under the laws of war or
      not) that seriously endanger non-combatants as well as result in  such
      a general breakdown  of  law  and  order  as  to  permit  anarchy  and
      criminality occasioning the serious harm referred to in the Directive.
       Such violence is indiscriminate in effect even if not necessarily  in
      aim. As the French Conseil d'tat observed in Baskarathas, it  is  not
      necessary for the threat to life or person to derive from protagonists
      in the armed conflict in question: it can simply be a product  of  the
      breakdown of law and order.

81. The immigration judge in finding the facts and reaching a conclusion is
    not passing any form of judgment on the legitimacy of  the  actions  of
    the  parties  to  the  conflict  whether  international,  national   or
    regional. If there is a serious risk of injury and death  to  civilians
    in the location by reason of the fact that the armed conflict is  being
    fought out in areas where civilians happen to be, that is a  sufficient
    reason not to return them to war zones until that risk has decreased to
    the point where it is no longer real or substantial.

82. There must be a serious threat of real  harm,  but  if  the  return  in
    question is at a time when there is real harm being  perpetrated  on  a
    very substantial number of civilians  in the country in question,  that
    harm is taking place in cities or provinces to which the  appellant  is
    expected to return and there is no  readily  accessible  internal  safe
    haven predictably free of such harm where it  would  be  reasonable  to
    expect the appellant to go as an alternative,  then  the  IJ  would  be
    entitled to find the conditions for protection made out. What cannot be
    required is a clear prediction of when  a  particular  individual  will
    become the victim of indiscriminate harm. All that is necessary is that
    there are substantial grounds  for  considering  that  there  exists  a
    serious threat of the real harm. In the  context  of  this  case,  that
    means assessing whether the scale of the harm caused  to  civilians  by
    the variety of means by which they come to harm is substantial  because
    of the intensity of the conflict as it is waged at the relevant time.

83.  We accept that if the insurgent activity is no longer happening  on  a
    wide scale and the security forces have sufficiently  regained  control
    of the situation so as to greatly reduce any real  risk  of  collateral
    damage to the lives of civilians, then it can well  be  said  that  the
    intensity of the conflict does not reach or no longer reaches the level
    required to engage Article 15(c) protection.

84.  Even if the level of violence in Iraq  today  can  still  sensibly  be
    considered as "armed conflict" involving organised  parties  with  some
    continuing capacity to inflict deadly force, the ultimate question  for
    us in this case is whether the intensity of  the  violence  threatening
    life and bodily integrity is such as to pose a real risk of harm  to  a
    civilian such as any of these four appellants, among others. They  have
    no personal characteristics other than that they are young male  Iraqis
    from Kirkuk, Baquabah and Baghdad. A  mere  possibility  of  being  the
    victim of such violence as is still taking place will  not  suffice  in
    such circumstances. Something more is required.

85. This case is not concerned with people who have  a  credible  claim  to
    exposure to violence based on something other than  simple  nationality
    of Iraq (or young age or particular geographical location). It  is  not
    concerned, for example, with government employees, families of  members
    of  the  security  forces,  political  leaders,  members  of  religious
    minorities in vulnerable areas, who may  be  at  significantly  greater
    risk  of  being  the  victims  of  such  violence  by  reason  of  such
    characteristics.

86.  Irrespective  of  whether  they  have  claims  to  refugee  status  or
    protection under Articles 2 or 3 of  the  ECHR,  appellants  can  still
    claim to be victims of indiscriminate violence within Article 15(c)  as
    the  ECJ  has  made  plain  at  [39]  of  Elgafaji.  They  may  not  be
    individually identified on death lists and  specifically  targeted  for
    harm as identified individuals but they are at greater risk than others
    because, for example, they are more likely to  be  in  or  near  places
    where attacks are made: churches, mosques,  government  buildings,  the
    homes of security force members and the like.

87. There are clearly considerable overlaps  between  refugee  status,  the
    protection afforded by Articles 2 and 3 ECHR and that afforded  against
    the serious harm in Article 15 (a), (b) (c), but there also differences
    at least in emphasis.  Whilst in NA v UK the ECtHR recognised at  [115-
    117] that in  exceptional  cases  of  generalised  violence  Article  3
    protection may  be  available,  the  essential  concept  was  based  on
    personalised individual risk, and only in the most extreme cases  would
    it extend to risk of ill  treatment  on  a  more  general  basis.  Thus
    Article 3 has broadened so that it can apply to certain kinds  of  harm
    in situations of armed conflict.

88. Article 15(c) also  has  a  different  starting  point:  indiscriminate
    violence in a situation of armed conflict. The reference to the  threat
    being "individual" includes a real risk to anyone in that situation. It
    is  now  clear  that  being  singled  out,  targeted  or   subject   to
    differential impact is not a necessary precondition  of  Article  15(c)
    protection, although the greater the risk factors arising by reason  of
    relevant personal characteristics the less  is  the  need  to  rely  on
    generalised violence.  We should add  for  the  sake  of  clarity  that
    neither is being singled out a precondition of  refugee  or  Article  3
    ECHR protection. The distinction between the protection afforded  under
    Article 3 ECHR and that referred to in Article 15(b) may  therefore  be
    narrow in practice but that does not mean that 15(c) does not have  its
    distinct ambit and purpose that should be the focus of analysis.  If an
    applicant falls within one or other it may not be necessary to  specify
    which. The observations of the ECJ at [39] of  Elgafaji  indicate  that
    there is no rigid allocation of different degrees of targeted  harm  to
    different parts of the Directive.

89. "Armed conflict" must mean something other than unpredictable and short
    lived outbreaks of deadly criminality  however  indiscriminate  or  the
    lone gunman on the rampage.  Armed conflict and indiscriminate violence
    are not terms of art governed by IHL, but are terms  to  be  generously
    applied according to the objects and purpose of the Directive to extend
    protection as a matter  of  obligation  in  cases  where  it  had  been
    extended to those seeking to avoid war conflict zones as  a  matter  of
    humanitarian practice.

90. Although IHL does not  define  the  operative  concepts,  in  order  to
    identify circumstances when  they  are  clearly  engaged,  we  can  see
    nothing in the case law binding on us that makes  it  impermissible  to
    draw assistance from the rules of IHL as to when violence  goes  beyond
    casual criminality and becomes armed conflict.  We understand from  the
    submissions of UNHCR and other sources that IHL continues to inform the
    judgments of some other national courts and tribunals in the EU.

91. We have also drawn assistance from the review of case law and  concepts
    by Helene Lambert and Theo Farrell "The  Changing  Character  of  Armed
    Conflict and the Implications  for  Refugee  Protection  Jurisprudence"
    IJRL (2010) Vol  22  (2)  at  237.  The  authors  note  the  continuing
    reference to IHL to inform the spirit of the measures by French  courts
    (at 251-255).  They regard  it  as  self-evident  that  the  metric  of
    battlefield deaths used by the Correlatives of War Project  since  1963
    for inter state conflicts is not  an  appropriate  means  of  measuring
    civilian  deaths  (260-261).  The  authors  recognise   that   civilian
    casualties are a material metric in the present context  but  note  the
    difficulty in  obtaining  reliable  data  whilst  the  conflict  is  in
    progress and the risks in excluding indirect casualties who are "killed
    or suffer serious illness as a consequence of the effects of  war,  for
    example, from imprisonment, abuse, starvation, or even the  destruction
    of critical infrastructure and services"  (262-263).  They  accordingly
    suggest that attention can also be directed as a way of measurement  of
    the intensity  of  the  conflict  to  population  displacement  and  to
    evidence of state failure (263-266 and 272).

92. We see no reason why these considerations should not be  factored  into
    the overall assessment provided that there is a sufficient although not
    necessarily exclusive causal nexus between the violence arising in  the
    conflict and the harm suffered. The AIT in GS  was  right  to  conclude
    that this could include risk of exposure to criminal violence resulting
    from the failure of protection arising from armed conflict. Destruction
    of the necessary means of living, if not simply  a  remote  consequence
    (as was found by the Tribunal in GS to be the case  in  Afghanistan  in
    2009),  may  equally  be  a  relevant  factor.  Similarly,   population
    displacement may  well  be  an  indicator  of  the  intensity  of  such
    problems, whilst consideration of the availability of state  protection
    itself and its efficacy is required under Article 2 of  the  Directive.
    An applicant is unable to access protection that is not available.

  93. We recognise that the terms of the Directive  indicate  that  internal
      relocation may be as  relevant  to  Article  15(c)  protection  as  to
      refugee status and  that  the  provisions  of  the  Directive  can  be
      informed by the case law of the House  of  Lords  on  what  is  unduly
      harsh: see Januzi [2006] UKHL 5 and AH (Sudan) [2007]  UKHL  49  where
      their Lordships approved the UNHCR legal approach to the question.

94. We have yet to state our conclusions on  the  submissions  made  by  Mr
    Staker concerning the issue of safety of  internal  travel.  We  remind
    ourselves that the Court of Appeal in HH  and  Others  stated  at  [58]
    that:

         "[...] in any case in which it can be shown either directly  or  by
         implication what route and method of return is envisaged,  the  AIT
         is required by law to consider and determine any challenge  to  the
         safety of that route or method. That conclusion is consistent  with
         AG and GH; it is consistent with past established practice and,  as
         we will later explain, it is consistent with  the  requirements  of
         the Qualification and Procedures Directive."




  95. Further, at [ 84] it was stated:
         "...In any case in which the  Home  Secretary  did  not  deal  with
         safety during return (because he did not consider  that  any  issue
         arose) but where the appellant raises a cogent argument that  there
         might not be a safe route of return, the appeal tribunal would have
         to deal with that issue, possibly  after  calling  for  information
         from the Home Secretary as to his intentions. In any event,  as  it
         seems to us at present, the decision on entitlement must  be  taken
         within a  reasonable  time  and  cannot  be  left  until  the  Home
         Secretary is in a position to set safe removal directions."



96. The Court had described "technical obstacles" to  return  as  "probably
    confined to administrative difficulties such as documentation; they may
    include physical difficulties such as the lack of return flights":  see
    [83].


  97. The appellants in these appeals did not make any submissions to us  on
      this matter. However, we remind ourselves that at the last CMR hearing
      when the Tribunal had the HH & Others judgment to hand, the  issue  of
      internal safety of travel was identified as a relevant  issue  by  the
      Tribunal and (separately)  in  the  course  of  receiving  replies  to
      further directions issued shortly after the hearing we came  to  learn
      of concerns expressed by UNHCR and others about the treatment of  some
      returnees involved in charter flights that took place on 9th and  16th
      June. In such circumstances we deem it incumbent on us to examine  and
      assess the evidence and submissions we have relating to these matters.
      In HH & Others the Court of Appeal makes clear  that  it  is  for  the
      appellant in any case to show to the lower standard that  the  methods
      of return involve ill treatment or that the route they would  need  to
      travel in order to return to their home area is unsafe.

98. Our decision will constitute new country guidance on the application of
    Article 15(c) in Iraq and as such  should  be  applied  by  immigration
    judges under the SPT Practice Direction 12. 2. The  questions  we  have
    posed for ourselves summarising our legal conclusions and the questions
    that an IJ should consider where the issue needs to be addressed  where
    there is no current country guidance  or  there  has  been  a  material
    change in the evidence are:-

              i) Is there a situation of armed conflict in any part  of  the
                 country that produces harmful effects for civilians who are
                 non-combatants, that are not too remote?


             ii) Do the effects resulting from the  armed  conflict  include
                 violence that poses a real risk  to  the  life  and  bodily
                 integrity of such civilians?


            iii) Are there substantial grounds for believing that  any  non-
                 combatant civilian who is returned to that country faces  a
                 real risk of being the victim of such violence?


             iv) If a claimant  has  additional  characteristics  (over  and
                 above being a mere civilian) that pose a  greater  risk  of
                 adverse consequences, do  these  additional  features  when
                 added to the background position for any civilian meet  the
                 threshold for subsidiary protection?


              v) If either (ii),  (iii)  or  (iv)  is  satisfied,  is  there
                 internal protection available to the claimant  in  an  area
                 where it reasonable to expect him or her to go  to,  having
                 regard to Articles 7 and 8 of the Qualification Directive?


             vi) Will the proposed route of return for the  claimant  enable
                 him or here to access such protection without violation  of
                 fundamental human rights?



Part 3: The Background Evidence

General security situation

99. The UNAMI report, 1 Jan-30 June 2009, notes at [3]:

         "The first half of 2009 was characterised by  further  improvements
         in the security situation with fewer high-visibility  mass-casualty
         attacks by militias, insurgents and criminal groups  than  recorded
         in 2008. However, notwithstanding the reduction in  the  number  of
         attacks, indiscriminate attacks as well  as  targeted  killings  of
         security  forces,  high-ranking  officials  and   civil   servants,
         religious and political leaders,  members  of  professional  groups
         such as journalists, educators, medical doctors, judges and lawyers
         continued to claim lives throughout the reporting period.  Numerous
         reports indicated  an  increased  number  of  attacks  directed  at
         persons based  on  their  perceived  sexual  orientation.  Violence
         against women and "honour"-related homicides also remained to be of
         serious concern, as particularly reported in the KRG where, despite
         the efforts of legislators, many crimes were unpunished."

100. The  COIR,  December  2009   at  8.07  notes  that  the  United  States
    Department of Defence (USDoD) report, December 2008, stated that:

         "Many factors  have  contributed  to  an  environment  of  enhanced
         security and political  progress,  including  increasingly  capable
         Iraqi Security Forces (ISF) aided by  the  Sons  of  Iraq  (SoI  ),
         Coalition forces' continuing support to the ISF,  the  demonstrated
         will of the Government of Iraq (GoI) to counter extremists, and the
         rejection of terrorists by the Iraqi people."


101. The US Department of State (USSD)  Report,  11  March  2010  gives  the
    following summary of the evolving security  situation  in  Iraq  during
    2009:

        "During the year, the general security  situation  in  the  country
        improved substantially. Violence  decreased  to  the  lowest  level
        since 2004, although attacks on  military,  police,  and  civilians
        continued. Compared to the  previous  year,  civilian  deaths  from
        violence during the year fell 47 percent to  an  average  of  seven
        civilian deaths per day and Iraqi Security Forces (ISF) deaths from
        violence fell by 52 percent to an average of  1.4  ISF  deaths  per
        day. Successful ISF operations contributed to  decreasing  violence
        by consolidating government control of areas Shi'a  special  groups
        and  other  extremists  previously  dominated.  Sectarian   killing
        declined due to the continued observance, except by some  breakaway
        factions, of a series of unilateral ceasefires  the  Shi'a  militia
        Jaysh al-Mahdi (JAM) first announced in  2007,  and  the  continued
        efforts of ... SoI neighbourhood security forces  --  initiated  in
        2007 and 2008 and mostly affiliated with Sunni tribal groups --  to
        undermine the influence of the terrorist group  Al-Qa'ida  in  Iraq
        (AQI) and other largely Sunni extremists.
        ...


        Although overall violence against the civilian  population  greatly
        decreased  during  the  year,  insurgent  and  terrorist  bombings,
        executions, and killings were regular  occurrences  throughout  all
        regions and sectors of society."


102. The Internal  Displacement  Monitoring  Centre  (IDMC),  4  March  2010
    report from the Norwegian Refugee Council states  that  the  number  of
    civilian  deaths  has  fallen  significantly  but   "violence   remains
    endemic".

103. The UN Secretary General (UNSG) report for March  2010  notes  that  in
    2009 hundreds of civilians were reportedly killed in attacks that  have
    targeted  Christian,  Shabak,  Turkmen  and  Yazidi  communities,  with
    minorities in Ninewah governorate being a particular target.

104. The Amnesty  International  (AI)  report,  April  2010  entitled  Iraq:
    Civilians Under Fire focuses on civilians who are particularly at  risk
    of attack because of their human rights  or  professional  work,  their
    political activities, their identity, gender or sexual  orientation  or
    their plight as displaced people.

105. The UN 2010 Humanitarian Action Plan (HAP), a document setting out  the
    joint  humanitarian  strategy  developed  by   9   UN   agencies,   the
    International Organisation for Migration (IOM) and 12  non-governmental
    organisations operating in Iraq,  states at [3.1]:

         "Iraq in 2009 has become a more  secure  and  stable  country  when
         compared to the peak of sectarian violence  and  counter-insurgency
         operations in August 2007, although the security  risks  are  still
         considerably higher than in 2003 to 2004. Levels of  violence  have
         dropped by more than  85%  compared  to  2006-2007.  Despite  these
         visible  improvements  Iraq  is  still  a   country   affected   by
         significant levels of  violence,  with  a  considerable  impact  on
         civilian lives. The security gains made during the second  half  of
         2008 have not continued at the same  pace  during  2009,  with  the
         number of security incidents hovering around the same level  of  27
         incidents per day since November 2008 [UNAMI]".


106. In the same paragraph reference is made to the  wider  effects  of  the
    violence:

        "Six years of violence have visibly affected the  fabric  of  Iraqi
        society. Casualties among civilians have had a direct and long-term
        effect on families through loss  of  livelihoods,  particularly  in
        conservative parts of the country where  women's  participation  in
        the workforce may be low in some areas. Loss of parents and  family
        members has had a devastating effect on the lives of  thousands  of
        children and the subsiding conflicts continue to  harm  the  mental
        health of the population in conflict-affected  areas.  Almost  half
        (48%) of the population has experienced a war-related trauma."


Actors

107.  One  obvious  feature  of  the  current  situation  in  Iraq  and  its
    susceptibility to continuing violence is that there remains an  ongoing
    internal armed conflict involving  a  number  of  parties,  principally
    foreign troops, Iraqi government forces and various insurgent groups.

108. Since 1 January 2009, under the Iraq-United States  Bilateral  Security
    Agreement, the Government of Iraq (GoI) assumed security responsibility
    for all 18 provinces  supported  by  US  forces.  The  Status-of-Forces
    Agreement (SOFA) of 30 June 2009 saw the Iraqi  authorities  take  over
    full responsibility for the security of the country.

109. According to a Prism interview in early 2010 with US General Raymond  T
    Odierno, in September 2007 the US had around 175,000  troops  in  Iraq.
    Under the Obama  administration  the  US  has  committed  itself  to  a
    "responsible drawdown" of US Forces. This  began  in  Jan  2008.  On  1
    January 2009 the US commenced the transfer of the Green Zone in Baghdad
    to the Iraq Army. The US armed forces withdrew from Iraqi cities at the
    end of June 2009, leaving around 750,000 members of  the  ISF  to  take
    charge. According to the UNAMI 1 Jan-30 June 2009 report at  [26],  the
    new arrangements which came into effect on 1 January 2009  resulted  in
    "a lighter footprint of MNF-I military operations".

110. Since January 2010 the Multi-National  Force-Iraq  (MNF-I)  has  become
    the United States Forces-Iraq (USF-I). Numbers of US troops  were  then
    around 100,000. We do not have the very latest figures to hand, but  we
    understand from recent news reports that since 31 August 2010 less than
    50,000 US troops remain to focus on  stability  operations  centred  on
    training, advising and equipping the ISF, protecting  US  military  and
    civilian personnel, conducting  targeted  counter-terrorism  operations
    and supporting civilian agencies  and  international  organisations  in
    their capacity-building efforts., operating from their  military  bases
    only. The date set for withdrawal of all US troops is the end of 2011.

111. The USDoD report of July 2009 stated that as of  April  30,  2009,  the
    ISF numbered  approximately  645,000  forces.  The  USSD  report,  2010
    assesses  total  trained  ISF  numbers  as  655,000.  The  CFR  report,
    published 27 March 2008, stated that in the KRG the Peshmerga consisted
    of around 100,000 fighters. The  FCO  human  rights  report  for  2008,
    released March 2009, stated "There are now around 400,000 Iraqi  Police
    Service (IPS) officers nationwide". At 10.68  the  COIR  December  2009
    cites the FCO report, 27 March 2009, stating that:


         "The  FCO  Erbil  stated  that  the  KRG  is  policed  and  secured
         effectively by a combination of the Peshmerga (the Kurdish military
         force that is technically part of the Iraqi  armed  forces),  local
         police and the  Asayeesh  security  force.  The  KRG  maintains  an
         effective border (the 'green line') between the KRG and the rest of
         Iraq and controls entry into the KR to keep insurgent and terrorist
         elements out of the KRG."

112. There are plans for the  integration  of  significant  numbers  of  the
    Awakening Councils or SoI into the  security  infrastructure,  although
    whether they will be realised is  open  to  some  doubt.  According  to
    SIGIR, April 2010, by April 2010, of the 94,000  SoI,  some  9,000  had
    transitioned into the ISF and a further 30,000  into  other  government
    employment.

113. Several  Sunni  nationalist  groups  remain  in  armed  resistance  and
    continue to conduct attacks against  US  and  Iraqi  forces.  Remaining
    Shi'a militants have reorganised themselves into  three  main  militant
    groups.

114. As regards the role played by  non-state  criminal  actors,  the  UNAMI
    report for  1 Jan-30 June 2009 notes at[15]:

         "With regard to the motivations behind these attacks, it  is  often
         difficult to draw a  line  between  ideologically-driven  insurgent
         operations and criminal actors  committed  by  organised  gangs  as
         there is frequently overlap between the two".

Levels and extent of violence

115. Violence in Iraq continues to be  heavily  researched.  Until  recently
    most surveys were conducted by US or international  bodies.  The  USDoD
    continues to release monthly trends including those relating  to  Iraqi
    civilian,  police  and  security  forces  deaths.  The   most   notable
    international  bodies  analysing  trends  in  civilian  casualties  and
    related aspects of the armed conflict  have  been  the  United  Nations
    Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)  and  UNAMI.
    Several Iraqi ministries also release casualty figures.

116.  Nongovernmental  bodies  producing  analyses  include  the  Associated
    Press,  the  Brookings  Institution,  Iraq  Body   Count   (IBC),   the
    International  Institute  for  Strategic  Studies  (IISS),   the   Iraq
    Coalition Casualty Count, Iraq Family Health Survey, the British Lancet
    study and the British survey firm, Opinion Research Business (ORB).

117. Few of these bodies use identical methodologies. In the view of  Hannah
    Fischer, in the Congressional Research Service study of  February  2010
    (Iraq Casualties: US Military Forces and Iraqi  Civilians,  Police  and
    Security Forces) this calls for caution  in  seeking  to  rely  on  any
    particular survey:

         "Because the estimates of Iraqi casualties contained in this report
         are based on varying time  periods  and  have  been  created  using
         different methodologies, readers should exercise caution when using
         them  and  should  look  to  them  as  guideposts  rather  than  as
         statements of fact."


118. The John Hopkins survey published in the Lancet in October 2006,  which
    was based on  remote  supervision  of  locally  hired  researchers  and
    estimated 450,000 more deaths from violence in Iraq than the WHO-funded
    study (which estimated 151,000  deaths  by  July  2006)  has  been  the
    subject of strong criticism in a new peer-reviewed study  by  Professor
    Michael Spagat of Royal  Holloway  University.   In  January  2008  the
    Opinion Research Business (ORB), an independent polling agency who  had
    surveyed Iraqi households asking for information of deaths revised  its
    original estimate of 1.2 million deaths since 2003  down  to  1,033,000
    deaths. Its study has not been peer-reviewed and, by virtue  of  having
    survey methods similar to the Lancet  study,  does  not  appear  to  be
    regarded as a reliable source.

119. The IISS armed conflict database, under the  heading   "Human  security
    developments Jan-Feb 2010," states that  Iraqi  defence,  interior  and
    health ministries said that 2,800 civilians were killed during  2009  -
    less than half of the total for 2008  (5,886)  and  the  lowest  annual
    estimate since 2003. In 2009, in  addition  to  2,800  civilians  being
    killed there were 439 police and 202 military.

120. However, the IISS added:

         "Whilst causalities appear to be on the  decline  since  2008,  the
         Iraqi Interior Ministry said on 21 January that there  had  been  a
         36% increase  in  violent  acts  in  2009  compared  to  2008  (700
         kidnappings, 129 armed robberies and 656 homicides)".

121. The Iraq Body Count (IBC) website (accessed 4 June  2010)  states  that
    during 2009 4,644 Iraqis were  killed,  half  of  the  amount  of  2008
    (9,219). In 2006, by contrast, their figures  listed  25,774  -  27,599
    deaths reported and in 2007 22,671 - 24,295. "At 25 per day",  the  IBC
    notes, "the 2008 rate for violent civilian deaths is equivalent to that
    existing throughout the first 20 months of post-invasion Iraq, from May
    2003 to December 2004".


122. On IBC figures, on a per capita basis Mosul was the  most  deadly  city
    (756 recorded deaths in an estimated population of  1.8m).  Baghdad  by
    comparison had 1,545 deaths in an estimated population of 6.5m.

123. A Wikipedia entry accessed on 8 June 2010 contains a list of  countries
    by "intentional homicide rate", giving rates per 100,000 population for
    2004 - 2008/9. It lists Iraq's rates as being 101 in 2006, 89 in  2007,
    21 in 2008 and "most recent[ly]" 9.99. For comparison, based on figures
    for 2004, the rates were Jamaica  58,  South  Africa  37,  Somalia  33,
    Mexico 12 and United States 5.48. The latest rate in England and  Wales
    is given as 1.37. So far as concerns figures for Iraq it  is  not  made
    clear whether the figures include all intentional  homicides  including
    those inflicted by combatants in the course of armed conflict, but such
    would seem to be suggested by the source given ("All Iraqi deaths  from
    violence     from     2005      to      present".      icasualties.org:
    http://icasualties.org/Iraq/IraqiDeaths.aspx. Retrieved 2010-04-09)")

124. The IDMC, 4 March 2010  report  from  the  Norwegian  Refugee  Council,
    p.10, concludes:

         "Despite the decline in violence, the UN and humanitarian community
         have continued to report human rights abuses against  civilians  by
         militias, criminal  gangs  and  security  forces  (UNAMI,  December
         2009).  In mid-2009 it was reported that 500 civilians  were  being
         killed and over  2,000  injured  each  month,  mainly  in  Ninewah,
         Baghdad and Diyala (ICRC, August 2009)".

 125. Some leading surveys seek to  cover  multiple  aspects  of  the  armed
      conflict. The Brookings Iraq Index of 25 May 2010  uses  a  number  of
      "tracking variables". One variable consists of an estimated number  of
      civilian casualties (=deaths) by year (3,000 in 2009, down from  6,400
      in 2008; for Jan - March 2010 the figure is 590). The complete figures
      since 2003 are:




         |2003   |2004   |2005   |2006   |2007   |2008   |2009   |2010    |
|       |       |       |       |       |       |       |(January|
|       |       |       |       |       |       |       |-March) |
|7,300  |16,800 |20,200 |34,500 |23,600 |6,400  |3,000  |590     |


126. The authors of this Index  note  that  the  figures  for  January-March
    2010, assuming no change over the course of the year, would produce  an
    annualised figure of 2,360 civilian casualties.

127. But there are a number of other variables used by  this  Index:  enemy-
    initiated attacks against  the  coalition  and  its  partners;  weapons
    caches found and cleared;  killed  and  wounded  in  multiple  fatality
    bombings; multiple fatality bombings targeting civilians  by  sectarian
    group; US troop fatalities; number  of  foreigners  illegally  crossing
    into Iraq to support the insurgency;  attacks  on  Iraqi  oil  and  gas
    pipelines, installations  and  personnel;  number  of  daily  insurgent
    attacks; and surveys of Iraqi public opinion on security  situation  in
    Iraq.

128. The USDoD analyses also take a multidimensional approach. It is  stated
    in its March  2010  report  that  in  December  2009  -  February  2010
    "security incidents" remained at lower levels than in  the  five  years
    previously. "Security incidents"  are  said  to  include  all  reported
    attacks against civilians, the ISF and US forces.  The same report also
    gives figures for "high profile attacks (Explosions)", "Ethno-Sectarian
    Deaths", "average daily executed attacks by provinces", "weapons caches
    found by Coalition and Iraqi Forces" and public  opinion  surveys.   It
    was stated  that  monthly  high-profile  attacks  remained  essentially
    unchanged from the previous reporting period.

129. The Centre for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) in its  March
    2010 report, Iraq:  Meeting  the  Challenges  of  2010,  gives  figures
    drawing on MNF-I SIGACTS III Database (Coalition and Iraqi Reports)  of
    Security incidents, IED Incident Trends, Civilian Deaths and Casualties
    by Type, Insurgent, Jayish Al-Mahdi (JAM) and Iranian Activity,  Ethno-
    sectarian  deaths,  Average  Daily  Attacks,  Average  Daily   Executed
    Attacks, High-profile attacks (Bombings) and Weapons Caches Found.  The
    report notes that figures for these different indices disclose  similar
    patterns emerging showing a decline in  civilian,  ethno-sectarian  and
    military casualties. In  the  CSIS  reports  "security  incidents"  are
    defined as incidents involving the  death  of  more  than  one  person.
    Civilian deaths do not include deaths due  to  accidents  unrelated  to
    friendly or enemy actions.

130. Although all background sources document  reduced  levels  of  violence
    generally, none suggest it has been in the form of a continuous  linear
    reduction in levels of violence. For example, the UNSG  10  March  2010
    noted various "spikes" in the number  of  incidents,  after  successful
    adoption of the election law and the targeting of Shi'a pilgrims during
    Ashura commemorations.

131. In terms of the geographical spread or distribution  of  the  violence,
    according to the Special  Inspector  General  for  Iraq  Reconstruction
    (SIGIR), April 30, 2010, nearly 70% of all attacks occurred in Baghdad,
    Diyala, Ninewah and Salah-Al-Din provinces which  are  home  to  approx
    half of Iraq's population. In northern Iraq Mosul remains the principal
    area of concern. Incidents in central Iraq continue to be  concentrated
    around Kirkuk.

132. In the view of the CSIS report of February 2010, most of  the  violence
    remains  concentrated   in   provinces   with   mixed   ethno-religious
    demographics, particularly in the  areas  surrounding  Baghdad  and  in
    Northern Iraq, in territories shared by both  Arabs  and  Kurds.  "Most
    reflect a pattern directed at creating a broad climate  of  insecurity,
    efforts to discredit the government, and attacks that probe  at  ethnic
    and sectarian fault lines in an effort to  provoke  reprisals  and  new
    outbreaks of major ethnic and sectarian violence ".

133. According to this same report, the average number of  monthly  security
    attacks did rise in some provinces and in disputed  areas  adjacent  to
    the KRG - Ninewah, Tameem, and to a lesser extent,  Diyala  -  tensions
    remained high between the Peshmerga and the  ISF.  Levels  of  violence
    fell in each province over the course of 2009 with the decline  ranging
    from 48% in Tameen to 77% in Diyala. Security incidents in Baghdad  and
    Salah Al-Din decreased by 78 and 79% respectively, indicating a decline
    in Sunni - Shi'ite violence, though  there  were  provinces  where  the
    number of average monthly security incidents had  risen  from  2007  to
    2009.

Patterns/Trends

134. As regards patterns of violence,  according  to  the  SIGIR  April  30,
    2010, Iraq remains vulnerable to sporadic, low-grade violence and well-
    coordinated mass-casualty attacks.  The  country's  ability  to  manage
    underlying ethno-sectarian divisions through the political process  and
    state security apparatus may be  increasingly  stressed  as  US  forces
    continue to draw down. An article/report by Reuters of 28 October  2009
    (cited in the COIR December 2009 at 12.07) noted:

         "Counter-terrorism experts say insurgent tactics in Iraq  follow  a
         typical pattern of  targeting  that  cycles  between  the  security
         forces, the wider public and economic institutions  and  government
         facilities or personnel.  When  one  set  of  targets  becomes  too
         protected, or the public and government become inured and no longer
         shocked, a new set is selected. The aim is to keep the  authorities
         guessing. The political aims of insurgents may also be shifting  --
         having failed to reignite sectarian war through attacks  mainly  on
         Shi'ites,  insurgents  may  be  focusing   more   specifically   on
         destabilizing the political system and upsetting the elections."


135. The report further noted that factors such as a shortage  of  resources
    used by AQI in suicide bombings and an increased number of  checkpoints
    had led them to  focus  their  resources  on  conducting  attacks  less
    frequently but with a greater impact.

136. The COIR at 21.16 quotes the CSIS report of  7  October  2009,  stating
    that:


         "The decline in the Sunni Jihadist and  Sadrist  threats  has  also
         been offset by rising internal political  tensions.  These  include
         serious tensions between Iraqi Arabs, Kurds, Turcomans,  and  other
         minorities in the north. Arab and Kurdish tensions are now the most
         serious near-term  threat  to  Iraq  stability  and  involve  power
         struggles over control of a broad band of disputed  territory  from
         Mosul to the  Iranian  border  in  the  area  south  of  the  three
         provinces that make up the Kurdish zone, as well as over control of
         the nation's petroleum reserves and income ... Most of the violence
         in  Iraq  remains  concentrated  in  provinces  with  mixed  ethno-
         religious  demographics,  particularly  in  the  areas  surrounding
         Baghdad and in Northern Iraq, in territories shared by  both  Arabs
         and Kurds. Shi'ites and Kurds have been the most  frequent  targets
         in these attacks, most likely carried out by  Sunni  insurgents  or
         AQI."

 137. As  the  passage  from  Reuters  illustrates,  there  is  considerable
      evidence that the insurgency has also changed the focus of its attacks
      in recent times. According to Anthony J Cordesman of  the  Centre  for
      Strategic Studies writing on 17 February 2010:

         "[...] insurgents have  replaced  attacks  on  civilian  population
         centres for attacks aimed at the state through large-scale bombings
         of  government   facilities   and   hotels   where   foreign   news
         organizations operate starting with the bombings of the  Ministries
         of Finance and Foreign Affairs on August 19th and  continuing  with
         bombings in October, December and January [...]"


 138. To similar effect, the SIGIR in his Quarterly Report  and  Seminannual
      Report to the United States Congress, 30 January 2010 commented that:

         "November 2009 had the fewest Iraqi civilian casualties since 2003,
         and December was the first month since  the  invasion  that  no  US
         service members died  in  combat  in  Iraq.  Attacks  against  soft
         civilian targets, such  as  marketplaces,  have  been  replaced  by
         attacks aimed at the state, either through large-scale car bombings
         or assassinations.

         [...]

         A wave of targeted political violence swept Iraq this quarter  with
         the  apparent  aim   of   destabilizing   Iraq's   government   and
         exacerbating  sectarian  and  ethnic  tensions.  Targets   included
         judges, significant security officers, and leading public officials
         in prominent cities, including Mosul and Telafar."



 139. According to General Odierno in the Prism interview the change in  the
      patterns of violence is symptomatic  of  the  weakening  of  insurgent
      groups such as AQI:




         "...our consistent pressure has degraded AQI, and they have had  to
         morph into a covert terrorist organization  capable  of  conducting
         isolated high-profile attacks. The Iraqi people  have  rejected  Al
         Qaeda,  and  the  organization  is  no  longer  able   to   control
         territory."



 140. The SIGIR report also notes a concomitant shift in the means  used  to
      perpetrate attacks:



         "Improvised explosive device (IED) attacks in Iraq  have  decreased
         nearly 80% during the same time, while car  bomb  and  suicide-vest
         attacks decreased by 92%."

141. According to CSIS,  February  2010,  the  future  is  unlikely  to  see
    violence fall below current levels. Despite the relative success of the
    March 2010 elections, which were  generally  considered  to  have  been
    credible and legitimate by UN and international observers, there remain
     various "drivers of instability",  including  communal  and  factional
    struggles for power and resources, insufficient GoI  capacity,  violent
    extremist groups and interference from  external  state  and  non-state
    actors, Arab-Kurds  tensions,  AQI,  Sunni  extremist  groups,  Shi'ite
    militant groups, lack of agreement on core issues such  as  oil  wealth
    distribution, management of oil resources, the resolution  of  disputed
    internal boundaries and persistent Sunni-Shi'a tensions.

    Socio-economic, political and humanitarian factors


142. A number of studies  see  socio-economic,  political  and  humanitarian
    factors as relevant to existing and likely future levels  of  violence.
    Three  features emphasised  in  this  regard  are  that  corruption  is
    rampant (COIR December 2009 at 2.09), that the Iraqi economy  is  still
    ailing  with  few  job  opportunities  (ibid,  2.11  which  cites   the
    International Organisation for Migration (IOM) Enhanced and  Integrated
    Approach regarding Information on Return and Reintegration in Countries
    of Origin (IRRICO) report, dated 5 May 2009) and that poverty is  still
    an ongoing issue (see the United Nations Security Council (UNSC) report
    of 2 June 2009 which states:

         "...The Iraq Household Socio-Economic Survey, released  in  January
         2009 by the World Bank and the Government of Iraq, confirms that 13
         per cent of all Iraqis have a monthly per  capita  income  of  less
         than $51; in rural  areas,  the  rate  is  26  per  cent.  It  also
         underlined problems with municipal  services  in  many  areas.  For
         example,  71  per  cent  of  Iraqis  have  no   municipal   garbage
         collection, and only 12 per cent of household water connections are
         deemed reliable. An analysis  of  the  country's  labour  force  in
         January showed that 450,000 young people were likely to  enter  the
         workforce in 2009, with limited employment opportunities."

143. The Report of the UN Secretary General, 14 May 2010 notes  that  access
    to quality education, shelter, electricity and sanitation services  are
    compromised for many Iraqis.

144. Bearing in mind our earlier agreement with  Lambert  and  Farrell  that
    "state failure" is also a matter that should  be  factored  in  to  the
    overall assessment under Article 15(c) (see [90]-[91] above),  we  note
    that in the Brookings  Institution  Index  of  State  Weakness  in  the
    Developing World for 2008 (to which they refer) Iraq is  ranked  fourth
    (Afghanistan was second). A related foreignpolicy.com  website  dealing
    in very similar terms with "failed states" shows Iraq having a  ranking
    of second in 2007 and  seventh  in  2010  (this  index  refers  to  the
    following  indices:   demographic   pressures,   refugees/IDPs,   group
    grievance,  human  flight,  uneven   development,   economic   decline,
    delegitimisation of state,  public  services,  human  rights,  security
    apparatus, factionalised elites and external intervention).


International assistance

145.  Another  relevant  variable  is   the   continuing   high   level   of
    international assistance. As already noted, there  are  9  UN  agencies
    involved in Iraq, several other international bodies and a considerable
    number of NGOs. On 11 May 2010 the UN and  Iraq  signed  the  first  UN
    Development Assistance Framework for Iraq for the period 2011-2014. The
    latest Brookings Iraq Index charts a tenfold increase in the amount  of
    foreign direct investment in Iraq since 2007.

Returns of refugees and IDPs

146. The UNAMI report for 1 Jan 2009 - 30 June 2009 at [49]  notes  that  in
    the six month  period  there  were  101,490  returning  Iraqis,  either
    internal IDPs returning to  their  places  of  origin  within  Iraq  or
    refugees returning from outside Iraq  (these  numbers  included  22,290
    refugees). These were attributable to the relative improvement  of  the
    security situation. The Brookings  Institution  publication,  Resolving
    Iraqi Displacement, Nov  2009  notes  at  p.16  that  imposed  security
    levels, together with better coordination with national and local level
    institutions, have allowed humanitarian assistance to  reach  virtually
    all  of  Iraq's  sub-districts,  including   those   where   IDPs   are
    concentrated.

147. At the same time the 2010 HAP report notes at  [31] that Iraq  has  yet
    to see large-scale returns of IDPs and refugees and, according  to  the
    same Brookings Institution publication, , "[r]eturn is neither feasible
    nor desirable for a large number of the displaced".

148. According to IOM, November 2009, their research  established  that  43%
    of returnees cited improved security as the main reason for deciding to
    return to their places of origin, while  33%  cited  a  combination  of
    improved  security  and  harsh  conditions  of  displacement.  However,
    security still remains a concern for returnee families once  they  have
    come home: 61% reported feeling safe and 38% said they felt  safe  only
    some of the time.

149. In a June entry, 2010  UNHCR  Country  Operations  Profile  notes  that
    "[s]ome 300,000 IDPs and nearly 80,000 refugees returned  spontaneously
    in 2008 and 2009". It adds, however, that  the  majority  of  some  1.5
    million IDPs have not found solutions to their plight.

150. According to UNHCR between April 2009 and March 2010 there were  34,570
    refugee returns. The countries listed as the previous country of asylum
    include Netherlands, Germany, the UK, Denmark,  Australia,  Canada  and
    Norway.

Documentation

151. The Ministry of Displacement and Migration (MODM)  is  the  responsible
    government body for registering IDPs in all  15  southern  and  central
    governorates. Registration practices are  not  uniform  and  vary  from
    place to place.

152. The IDMC, Feb 2010 report notes continuing  difficulties  for  refugees
    and IDPs in registration and obtaining documentation.

153. In a 4 March 2010 report from the Norwegian  Refugee  Council  for  the
    IDMC, it is stated that in Iraq documentation is central to exercise of
    citizenship rights, including registration as IDPs or returnees, voting
    and accessing basic services, to  access  income/financial  assistance,
    (pension, service records,  driver's  licenses  and  car  registration,
    medical committee certificates and property deeds). "Some kind  of  key
    documentation  was  reported  lacking",  it  is  said,  quoting  UNHCR,
    December 2009 (a reference to the UNHCR Iraq Factsheet, November 2009).



154. One of the main forms  of  assistance  offered  by  UNHCR's  Protection
    Monitoring Assessment network was to refugee returnees in  relation  to
    documentation (UNHCR, Jan-March 2010 report).

155. UNHCR  also  assists  the  Government  of  Iraq's  return  registration
    centres (UNSG March 2010, [42]).

156. Despite a February 2009 directive to lift restrictions on  registration
    by the Ministry of Displacement and Migration (MoDM),  the  responsible
    government body for registering IDPs in all the  southern  and  central
    governorates, it is said, by UNHCR in its  Eligibility  Guidelines  for
    Assessing the International Protection Needs of  Iraqi  Asylum  Seekers
    April  2009  (hereafter  "April  2009  Guidelines")  that  restrictions
    continue to exist in several governorates including the requirement  to
    originate from a "hot area" or face a  direct  threat  to  one's  life.
    Like the former, the latter is not defined and has  been  left  to  the
    discretion of local authorities. There may be requirements  to  have  a
    sponsor from the area of relocation and/or to provide  proof  that  the
    person originates from the area of relocation.  It is  said  that  some
    IDPs in remote areas may not be able, for example for lack of resources
    or security, physically to approach MoDM which has its offices  in  the
    urban centres. It is said  that  protection  monitoring  undertaken  by
    UNHCR revealed that three quarters or more of the IDPs in  the  Central
    and  Southern  governorates  had  registered   with   MoDM   or   other
    authorities.  Recently the MoDM in Baghdad had informally  ordered  its
    branch offices to put on hold IDP registration and several governorates
    stopped the registration process for any arriving IDPs or IDPs who  had
    not been registered at  the  time  in  late  2008/early  2009.   On  19
    February 2009 the Council of Ministers officially instructed  all  MoDM
    offices to halt registration of IDPs.   UNHCR  states  that  this  puts
    unregistered IDPs at risk of harassment by the  police  and  the  local
    authorities and hampers access to assistance and basic services such as
    access to social welfare grants and  emergency  assistance,  access  to
    education, employment, food, fuel and land allocation and inability  to
    transfer PDS cards all of which  may  be  restricted  for  unregistered
    IDPs.

157. In its report entitled "IOM Emergency Needs Assessment  Four  Years  of
    Post-Samarra Displacement in Iraq", which it seems is  dated  16  April
    2010, the IOM refer to the fact that  the  MoDM  continue  to  register
    returnee families and provide the 1,000,000 Iraqi Dinar ($850)  stipend
    for those who are eligible and through its  Return  Assistance  Centres
    (ARCs) MoDM also provides referral to other  ministries,  services  and
    some direct assistance.   The  report  refers  to  the  fact  that  IDP
    registration has currently stopped  in  the  majority  of  governorates
    across Iraq but says that this is due to both lack of new displacements
    and the current focus on return, integration and reintegration for  IDP
    families.

158. In the IOM Report there is reference to the continuing return  home  of
    displaced Iraqi families. At the time of  the  report  62,361  returnee
    families (an estimated 374,166 individuals) had been identified  across
    the country by IOM field monitors.

159. It is said that across the  country  some  88%  of  IDPs  and  returnee
    families are reported lacking documentation, most commonly  PDS  ration
    cards  (64%),  national  ID  cards  (60%),  birth  certificates  (58%),
    marriage certificates (46%).   It  seems  that  over  95%  in  Baghdad,
    Ninewah and Basra have nationality certificates although the figure  is
    lower for birth certificates.  It  is  said  that  in  particular  PDSI
    identification cards remain an  issue  for  some  who  face  delays  in
    transferring them and thus are unable to access  their  rations  or  to
    vote.  Registering as IDPs is said to be required in many  governorates
    and  thus  the  consequence  of  non-registration  is  exclusion   from
    government assistance. In the paper dated June 2009 from the  Brookings
    Institution entitled "Internal Displacement in  Iraq:  the  Process  of
    Working Toward Durable Solutions", it is said that about  60%  of  IDPs
    and  returnees  stated  that  they  resided   in   governorates   where
    registration was required and around 78% of those required to  register
    had done so.

160. Figures are given by UNHCR for December 2009 of different kinds of  key
    documentation,  reporting  returnees  lacking   most   commonly   civil
    identification (20% IDPs, 45% IDP returnees,  35%  returnee  refugees),
    PDS ration cards (31% IDPs, 12% IDP returnees, 24% refugee  returnees),
    civil  ID  (25%  IDPs,  18%  IDP  returnees,  22%  refugee  returnees),
    nationality certificate (22%  IDPs,  11%  IDP  returnees,  29%  refugee
    returnees); and passport (21%  IDPs,  9%  IDP  returnees,  15%  refugee
    returnees).  In a survey in January 2007 surveys of the IDP communities
    revealed that 97% held nationality certificates, 97% had identification
    cards, 74% had marriage documents, 47% had birth certificates  and  18%
    had death  certificates.   These  figures  come  from  the  IOM.   They
    contrast somewhat with the UNHCR figures of  30  December  2009  quoted
    immediately afterwards stating that from January to March 2009 some 25%
    of IDPs, 18% of IDP returnees and 22%  of  refugee  returnees  reported
    lacking civil ID.  This seems a very significant decline from  the  97%
    who had identification cards in January 2007.

161. According to the US Embassy, Baghdad, by the end of 2009, roughly  half
    of some 64,000 registered returnee families  had  received  a  promised
    lump-sum payment of roughly $850 from the GoI (SIGIR,  April  30,  2010
    report). There were two assistance centres in Baghdad and one  each  in
    Diyala, Anbar, Salah Al-Din and Basrah provinces where returnees  could
    present documents and verification of property ownership and ask police
    to evict illegal occupants. The KRG Department of Displacement has been
    struggling to provide adequate relief in northern  Iraq  as  well,  and
    IDPs in the Kurdistan Region face a particularly restrictive employment
    environment.

EU and UK returns

162. In  a  recent  witness  statement  prepared  in  response  to  Tribunal
    directions of 21 June, Mr Walker of the Country  Specific  Policy  Team
    within the Directorate of Central Operations and Performance, UK Border
    Agency states that UKBA is aware from  Foreign  &  Commonwealth  Office
    (FCO) personnel  in  Baghdad  that  Sweden,  Norway,  Denmark  and  the
    Netherlands are currently returning failed asylum seekers  to  Baghdad.
    In an annex figures are given for "EEA returns to  Iraq  based  on  the
    European Union Network for asylum practitioners  (Eurasil)  source  for
    2007 - Sept/Oct 09".  This  shows  that  both  voluntary  and  enforced
    returns have also been made either to "Any area" of Iraq or to the  KRG
    by Switzerland, Germany, the Czech Republic and Finland.  In  2009  the
    country returning the most was Sweden  (1,495  voluntary  returns,  211
    enforced returns).

163. The statement annexes Home Office  statistics,  showing  that  in  2009
    enforced removals and notified voluntary departures from the UK to Iraq
    totalled 2,100.

164. The statement cites an FCO letter of  7  June  2010  stating  that  the
    security situation in Iraq is significantly better than  it  was  since
    2008 and assisted voluntary returns to Iraq have increased year on year
    since 2007:

         "Further to this the UK negotiated a mutually satisfactory  returns
         agreement with the Government of Iraq; provision was made to ensure
         that returns occur in a safe and  dignified  manner,  with  the  UK
         providing a returns package for those cases that have been found to
         have no lawful right to remain in the UK. The emphasis  was  placed
         on the ability of those returning being able  to  travel  to  their
         home area should they wish  and  receive  assistance  in  order  to
         reintegrate into their country of origin as smoothly as possible."


165. The statement adds that returnees are provided with contact details  of
    the two Iraqi Ministries that provide official  support  for  returnees
    (Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs).

June 2010 Charter Flights

166. Subsequent to the hearing several press reports  were  brought  to  the
    attention of the Tribunal. They concerned events surrounding the return
    of a number of Iraqi failed asylum seekers on charter flights  back  to
    Baghdad on 9th and 16th June 2010.  In a direction dated  21  June  the
    Tribunal sought the assistance of the respondent and  UNHCR  with  what
    information they had concerning these events. On 5 July 2010  Wilson  &
    Co acting for Mr AA reconfirmed he wished to withdraw  his  appeal  but
    enclosed nevertheless a letter from Amnesty International  (AI)  of  15
    June 2010 and a statement from Tori Sicher of Immigration and  Advisory
    Service dated 10  June  2010.  The  AI  letter  recalled  that  AI  had
    repeatedly called on  European  states  to  cease  forcible  return  of
    individual to Iraq because AI considered their  human  rights  were  at
    serious risk  there.  Noting  that  several  European  governments  had
    forcibly  returned  rejected  Iraqi  asylum   seekers   (Denmark,   the
    Netherlands, Norway, Sweden and  the  UK)  it  made  reference  to  the
    forcible return on 15 October 2009 by the UK authorities of 44 rejected
    Iraqi asylum-seekers to Baghdad and the fact that the Iraqi authorities
    only allowed 10 of them to enter. The letter said that AI had spoken to
    several Iraqis from a group of 35 who had been forcibly returned by the
    Netherlands government on 30 March 2010 including a  22  year  old  man
    from Tal Afar, a city north of Mosul, who  said  he  was  "stranded  in
    Baghdad out of fear for his life should he return  to  a  region  where
    hundreds  of  civilians  have  been  killed  in  sectarian   or   other
    politically motivated violence". It said that on  9  June  2010  an  AI
    representative had met a Kurd from  Erbil  who  claimed  to  have  been
    returned to  Baghdad  from  the  Netherlands  on  30  March  2010:  "He
    confirmed that those who were from the three Kurdish governorates  were
    held for up to one week at a Baghdad Airport  detention  centres  while
    their identities were checked. Conditions  at  the  detention  facility
    were poor. After their eventual release the returnees  had  to  arrange
    for their own travel to the Kurdistan region".

167. The statement of Tori Sicher made reference to a telephone call from  a
    client on 10 June. She said he was from Kurdistan and  he  had  applied
    for voluntary return to Iraq due to his personal circumstances. In  the
    call the man said that all the other Kurds  with  him  had  been  flown
    straight to Erbil but he was put in detention at a  police  station  at
    the airport in Baghdad with 13 people in one small room  without  sleep
    or food. As  soon  as  the  UK  immigration  official  left  the  Iraqi
    authorities were angry, "some of them kicked us".  The authorities  had
    let people from Sweden and Holland go but detained people from the  UK.
    He said the Iraqi authorities had put a gun to people's heads and asked
    them why did they leave and why had they complained about Iraq and  the
    government. The client told Ms Sicher that none had solicitors. He  was
    able to give her the details of the other 9 detainees. She  had  passed
    this  information  on  to  UNHCR  who  then  also  passed  it  to   the
    International Red Crescent.

168. In respect of the 16 June return,  the  UNHCR  response  to  directions
    dated 5 July stated that  their  implementing  partners  were  able  to
    interview some of them at the airport and also to conduct some  follow-
    up interviews by  telephone.   Some  claimed  to  have  experienced  or
    witnessed mistreatment during their removal. Eleven deportees from  the
    UK were reportedly held at Baghdad International Airport in  one  small
    room, with two beds and one toilet for twelve persons. It was confirmed
    by the Iraqi authorities to UNHCR that  all  returnees  were  held  for
    routine security and identity screening purposes. Because the  majority
    of these screened said they felt extremely unsafe it was  not  possible
    to follow normal UNHCR procedures and obtain their written  consent  to
    having their accounts placed on record, nor had  it  been  possible  to
    establish identity to the extent desirable. The response  gave  further
    details about four of the individuals on the 16 June flight.  KFA  made
    no claim of ill treatment  during  the  deportation  process.  Although
    reunited with his family he did not have  access  to  medical  care  or
    education and wished to leave Iraq due to protection concerns. FOK, who
    had been deported after more than five years in prison in the  UK,  had
    now been reunited with his family but had no access to medical care  or
    education and was unemployed. HAS  said  he  had  not  experienced  ill
    treatment himself but had witnessed  the  beatings  of  others  in  his
    group. He had been detained for 18 months in the  UK  and  was  now  in
    hiding because he believed it would be dangerous for him to  stay  with
    his mother and he was seeking to leave Iraq as soon as  he  could.  RJH
    said that those rejected asylum seekers who refused to board the  plane
    were  handcuffed  by  British  security  guards.  On  17th  June,  when
    deportees refused the request of an Iraqi officer to leave  the  plane,
    they were dragged out by force and one of the British  security  guards
    had grabbed him by  the  neck  and  he  believed  they  were  about  to
    suffocate him. He was denied an interpreter and was insulted.  All  the
    deportees, he said, were locked up for 11  days  under  very  difficult
    conditions where they had limited access to the  toilet  and  only  one
    meal a day. RJH claimed that an official requested $200  per  head  for
    releasing each of them. After release from detention they were flown to
    Erbil. There they were received by airport officials and transferred to
    a security prison inside Erbil town for one night.  The  next  day  all
    were released after providing  necessary  documentation  proving  their
    nationality.

169. A uruknet.info report dated  19  June  stated  that  "the  UN"  was  to
    investigate claims that handcuffed Iraqi asylum seekers were beaten  by
    British security officers during a charter flight back  to  Baghdad.  A
    UNHCR spokesman, Andre Mahecic, was quoted as  saying  that  UNHCR  was
    looking into the accounts of the deportees they  had  interviewed.  "We
    met six of the men and saw fresh bruises that  indicate  mistreatment".
    The item quotes one returnee called Abdullah stating  that  during  the
    flight he had taken his seat belt off and officers had  jumped  on  him
    and grabbed him by the neck. When the plane had landed Iraqi  officials
    had told them if they did not get off the plane  voluntarily  "we  will
    kick and beat you". Abdullah said  that  British  officials  and  Iraqi
    officers beat  them.  The  same  item  mentions  that  a  group  called
    International Federation of Iraqi  Refugees  who  monitor  deportations
    said they had received a text message from some in custody saying  they
    were locked up with 24 others in one small cell, some  being  seriously
    ill because of the hunger and the heat. The item concluded with  quotes
    from a UKBA spokesman and a G45 spokesman saying that  no  unreasonable
    force had been used.

170. In a BBC news  item  dated  28  July  2010  a  BBC  journalist  Gabriel
    Gatehouse described interviewing S, a 35 year old, in Sulaymaniyah, who
    said he had been deported from the UK on 16 June. He had refused to get
    off the plane and officers from the UKBA had then beaten him and others
    in the ribs. At the airport he was held  for  10  days  along  with  11
    others. On 27 June he had been flown to Erbil from where  he  made  his
    way to Sulaymaniyah. There he had been taken in by someone who had been
    a fellow UK deportee.

171. The witness statement from Mr Walker of the  UKBA,  to  which  we  have
    referred  earlier,  in  addition  to  dealing  with   general   returns
    procedures, also addresses the specific charter flight returns  of  9th
    and 16th June. He explained that where facts stated  were  not  derived
    from his own knowledge, they were  derived  from  information  on  Home
    Office files or that provided to him by colleagues in UKBA, the FCO  in
    London, the British Embassy in Baghdad and the British  Embassy  Office
    in Erbil. Some of the information was obtained by  FCO  officials  from
    the Iraqi and Kurdish authorities.

172. Mr Walker states that since the October 2009 charter  flight  on  which
    34 of 44 returnees had to be brought back to the UK, the FCO  and  UKBA
    had been working closely with the GoI to establish a systematic  method
    of returning Iraqi nationals with no legal basis of stay in the  UK  to
    Iraq via Baghdad. For this purpose a team of  Iraqi  officials  visited
    UKBA between 31 May  and  8  June  to  conduct  nationality  interviews
    (between 1-3 June) of 137 Iraqi citizens. In all some  83  of  the  137
    were found to be eligible for return to Iraq.  "This  general  approach
    is in line with how some other EU Member States arranged enforced Iraqi
    returns direct to Baghdad". His statement explains that Iraqi nationals
    possessing valid passports can enter Iraq without  difficulty.   People
    who do not possess a valid re-entry document can return with a European
    Union Format Letter (an EU letter) issued by UKBA in accordance with an
    agreement with the Iraqi authorities. EU letters  provide  prima  facie
    evidence of identity and nationality.  It is said that  they  are  only
    used  in  cases  where  UKBA  has  strong  grounds  for  believing  the
    individual to be  a  national  of  the  country  to  which  removal  is
    envisaged.  If on arrival in the receiving country they are  found  not
    to be a national of that country, UKBA will accept their return without
    delay and at UK expense. If a voluntary returnee  is  participating  in
    the UK's Assisted Voluntary Return (AVR) programme, UKBA  will  provide
    the EU letter to the IOM.

173. Returnees are given $100 for incidental needs,  a  further  $100  grant
    for onward travel to their home even if they are from the KRG  and  $50
    for onward travel if they are from elsewhere.  They are  given  contact
    details for AGEF, a German NGO with an established programme to provide
    advice about enhancing employment opportunities.  They are  also  given
    contact details for the Ministry of Displacement and  Migration  (MoDM)
    which is charged with supporting the  integration  of  returning  Iraqi
    citizens. If any enforced returnee shows that they would  be  genuinely
    homeless on their return to Iraq, there is provision to  find  and  pay
    for affordable accommodation for a month.

174. Under the three standard  AVR  programmes   -  the  Voluntary  Assisted
    Return and  Reintegration  Programme  (VARRP)  (running  since  October
    2007), for those in the asylum process; the Assisted  Voluntary  Return
    for  Irregular  Migrants  (AVRIM)  programme  and  the  pilot  Assisted
    Voluntary Return for Families and Children (AVRFC) programme  -  return
    is by scheduled airline, and a cash grant  of  $500  is  paid  to  each
    returnee  where required with the travel arrangements back to the  home
    locality, and  IOM  will  have  agreed  an  individual  plan  with  the
    returnee, which will entail  agreeing  the  most  effective  option  on
    return for establishing an income-generating activity.  On  arrival  in
    Iraq the  returnee  contacts  the  local  IOM  office  to  arrange  the
    provision of their re-integration assistance (which  is  currently  "in
    kind" rather than in cash).

175. On arrival in Baghdad, Iraqi law requires that any returning  nationals
    seeking to enter the country without  documentation  appears  before  a
    judge to confirm their nationality and identity.  This  is  a  standard
    practice, and individuals may be detained in  advance  of  their  court
    appearance.  This procedure is not waived  even  if  someone  has  been
    through the nationality verification exercise involving Iraqi officials
    carried out in the UK. UKBA does not routinely monitor the treatment of
    individual unsuccessful asylum seekers on return to  their  country  of
    origin.  IOM  does  not  monitor  voluntary  returnees,  though  if  an
    individual receives re-integration assistance  on  return,  contact  is
    maintained for up to a year, with reviews  of  how  the  assistance  is
    progressing six and twelve months after return.   The  FCO  advised  Mr
    Walker that almost all returnees to the Kurdistan  region  are  met  by
    family and friends, so onward costs are minimal.  There are no  flights
    to Kirkuk, but a good road system is available, and coaches  and  taxis
    go  to  Kirkuk.  The  $100  provided  for  onwards  transportation   is
    sufficient for those needing to travel to the KRG.

176. Addressing the two June  charter  flights,  Mr  Walker  confirmed  that
    Sweden, the Netherlands and the UK had participated in a joint  returns
    charter to Baghdad on 9 June. Neither the UKBA nor the FCO had received
    any substantiated reports from enforced returnees  of  difficulties  on
    return. The IOM had not reported to the UKBA  any  voluntary  returnees
    experiencing difficulties with the  authorities  or  third  parties  on
    return. All 11 of the UK returnees on the joint charter flight  of  9th
    June travelled on EU letters. On this occasion their detention  by  the
    Iraqi authorities while enquiries were made was prolonged  because  the
    judge was not available before the Iraqi weekend (11 and 12  June)  and
    so were not seen by a judge until 14 June. The judge found that  10  of
    the 11 were from the KRG area and that  they  should  therefore  travel
    there for  further  checks  to  be  made.  The  eleventh  returnee  was
    released. The 10 were flown to Erbil on 15 June; the Iraqi  authorities
    had put them on an Iraqi airways flight to  Erbil  (cost  of  a  single
    ticket $90).

177. However, the flight was delayed for several hours at Baghdad due  to  a
    dust storm. When the time came for the returnees  to  take  the  flight
    they claimed no longer to have any of the US$200 cash UKBA had provided
    ($100 being for onward travel). This necessitated a further delay until
    16 June. On arrival at Erbil  the  10  were  detained  pending  further
    checks by the KRG authorities, 9 were released by 21  June,  the  final
    returnee was released on 28 June, the delay in his case  being  due  to
    the reluctance of  his  family  to  attend  to  provide  the  necessary
    supporting documentation.  The journey time between  Erbil  and  Kirkuk
    was only 45 minutes by road.

178. Mr Walker states that the 16 June flight was the first  UK-led  charter
    operation since October 2009. All 42 involved had been cleared  by  the
    nationality verification interview exercise. Mr Walker states that  the
    entire boarding process was  recorded  on  a  hand-held  camcorder  and
    portable CCTV by G45 and was witnessed by a number  of  UKBA  officials
    including a Deputy Director (Grade  6)  and  a  CIO.  The  footage  and
    documentation relating to the use of  force  had  been  reviewed  by  a
    second Deputy Director from Detention Services, who had concluded  that
    the force used was necessary and reasonable and for  a  minimum  period
    necessary.  During  the  boarding  process  two  returnees  had  to  be
    physically restrained (but not handcuffed) because they tried to escape
    boarding.  On board one was handcuffed because  he  was  becoming  non-
    compliant; the  handcuffs  were  removed  after  70  minutes.  A  third
    returnee who had been brought to the aircraft separately on account  of
    his non-compliant behaviour was handcuffed before he left  the  Removal
    Centre and prior to boarding and during the flight as he  continued  to
    be aggressive and abusive at various times during  the  flight.  During
    the flight  each  returnee  was  provided  with  $100  as  is  standard
    procedure for enforced returns. Five originally refused the  money  but
    later asked for and were given it.

179. On arrival thirty detainees refused  to  disembark.  The  head  of  the
    receiving authority in Iraq was  informed  of  this  and  attended  the
    aircraft where he spoke to one of the returnees and  led  him  off  the
    aircraft by the arm. As a result, others followed, leaving the two  who
    were still in handcuffs. They were then  escorted  off  the  plane  and
    their handcuffs removed.

180. On arrival on 17th June UKBA officials observed the  returnees  in  the
    immigration  hall;  there  was  no  disruption.   Two   were   released
    immediately  because   of   passport   or   other   adequate   official
    documentation. The remaining forty were detained at  a  police  station
    pending checks into their identity and appearance before a judge. By 21
    June all but twelve had been released. The remaining 12 were cleared to
    fly to Erbil on 23 June but the next available flight was not until  27
    June. On the morning of 28 June an FCO official in Erbil confirmed that
    all had been released by the KRG authorities.

181. Mr Walker said  that  following  allegations  in  the  media  the  UKBA
    Professional Standards Unit (PSU) was conducting an investigation  into
    complaints of mistreatment, although no complaint of  mistreatment  had
    been made directly to UKBA. PSU had spoken to the UK Representatives of
    UNHCR  who  had  confirmed  that  UNHCR  was  not  conducting  its  own
    investigation but that it was seeking  information  from  some  of  the
    returnees about the allegations. UNHCR had said  they  would  pass  the
    information they obtained onto PSU to inform  the  UKBA  investigation.
    Mr Walker states that at  no  time  did  UKBA  representatives  witness
    returnees being mistreated during the removal process. Mr Walker stated
    that  the UNHCR spokesman's  statement  that  it  had  seen  6  of  the
    returnees with fresh bruising  that they  assert  was  from  when  they
    disembarked in Baghdad, did not accord with accounts received from  G45
    and UKBA staff on the plane who did not witness any maltreatment.

         "It is therefore the SSHD's position that the  9th  June  and  16th
         June charter flights  to  Baghdad  were  operated  efficiently  and
         effectively; that the use of force was necessary;  that  the  force
         used was reasonable and for the minimum period necessary;  and  the
         operation of the flights does not raise any protection issues".

182. The SSHD's view was also that it  was  for  the  Iraqi  authorities  to
    adopt the procedure they had requiring attendance  before  a  judge.  A
    short period of detention while the necessary investigations took place
    was reasonable; however, in order to minimise the time future returnees
    can be detained, UKBA would review the timing  of  future  flights  and
    work with the Iraqi authorities to try and find ways to streamline  the
    process so that such periods of detention are minimised.

183. Concerned  to  know  the  UNHCR  response  to  Mr  Walker's  statement,
    particularly in view of his reference to the existence of camcorder and
    CCTV footage, the Tribunal issued further directions  requesting  UNHCR
    to respond. UNHCR replied  saying  that  it  was  not  currently  in  a
    position to add anything further  to  its  previous  response  although
    colleagues in Baghdad were currently making  further  inquiries.  UNHCR
    did not ask for further time to obtain these.

Internal travel

184. The COIR December 2009 at 30.04 notes that a  report  by  International
    News Safety Institute (INSI), published on 4 September 2009, states:


             "All of Iraq's roads remain potentially dangerous. There is an
        increased risk while in the vicinity  of  vehicle  checkpoints  and
        security forces where there is a  higher  likelihood  of  terrorist
        attacks or clashes between militants  and  the  authorities.  Areas
        where vehicles are overlooked  (such  as  around  bridges)  or  are
        forced to slow down (for example at  traffic  control  measures  or
        even just bends in the road) are also potentially hazardous."


Kirkuk/Tameem, Diyala, Baghdad, Mosul/Ninewah

185. The appellants' circumstances require us to examine in more detail  the
    background   evidence   relating   to   three   areas,   Tameem/Kirkuk,
    Diyala/Baqubah and Baghdad.  For  reasons  which  will  be  made  clear
    shortly, we also consider the position in Ninewah and  in  its  largest
    city, Mosul.

Kirkuk/Tameem

186. The home area of the M brothers  is  Kirkuk  which  is  in  the  Tameem
    governorate (which has  a  population  of  approx.  9000,000).  Various
    reports describe most violence in the governorate as  being  linked  to
    the yet unresolved administrative status of Kirkuk  and  related  power
    struggles  between  the  various  Arab,  Kurdish  and  Turkmen  actors,
    accentuated by the fact that Kirkuk has huge  oil  reserves.   Security
    conditions in the governorate and in particular in Kirkuk city tend  to
    worsen during political events related to the status of Kirkuk as armed
    groups aim at influencing political decisions. An example is given from
    the summer of 2008 of a suicide attack  on  demonstrating  Kurds  which
    resulted in an outbreak  of  inter-communal  violence  leading  to  the
    deaths of more than 25 people and  over  200  injuries  at  a  time  of
    intense negotiations over provincial elections law. Conversely,  it  is
    said, tensions and  sporadic  violence  can  complicate  future  status
    negotiations.  Concern  has  been  expressed  by  some  observers  that
    tensions among ethnic groups in this regard  could  turn  into  another
    civil war.  Insurgent groups such as AQI  aim  to  stir  inter-communal
    violence by attacking proponents of  ethnic/religious  groups.   It  is
    also said that there are reports of community groups in  Kirkuk  arming
    themselves in preparation for future clashes.

187. The CSIS report of 17 February 2010  entitled  The  Uncertain  Security
    Situation in Iraq, subheading "Trends in Violence, Casualties and Iraqi
    Perceptions", refers to insurgent groups like AQI  seeking  to  exploit
    tensions between  Arabs  and  Kurds  in  northern  provinces  including
    Tameem.  It is said that in that province crime, corruption and  ethnic
    disputes also contribute to daily reports  of  violence.   As  we  have
    seen, the report then goes on to quote from the Measuring Stability and
    Security in Iraq report by the US Department of Defence in  respect  of
    the various regions of Iraq.

188. In the IOM Report on IDP and Returnee Assessment of February  2010,  it
    is  said  that  the  disputed  governorate  of  Tameem/Kirkuk   remains
    unstable, combining  continued  fears  of  violence  with  the  already
    difficult living conditions faced by IDPs and returning families there.
     While those who feel safe enough to return had begun to do so,  Kirkuk
    is one of the  few  governorates  where  displacement  flows  continue,
    though in comparatively small numbers. Many IDPs are still  waiting  to
    return.  Displacement has been a gradual flow from  2006,  the  numbers
    increasing in late 2007 and  early  2008  before  dropping  lower  once
    again.  It seems that most families displaced in Kirkuk  fled  in  fear
    after being targeted for religion, sect, ethnicity or political opinion
    and over a third reported fleeing after  receiving  direct  threats  to
    their lives.   It  is  reiterated  that  new  displacements  are  still
    occurring as violence and political disputes  still  create  insecurity
    and danger.  The total of post-February 2006 IDPs is  stated  as  being
    8,798 families which is estimated as 52,788  individuals.   There  have
    been  some  4,766  returnee  families  which  is  estimated  at  28,596
    individuals.  Around a half therefore have returned,  bearing  in  mind
    there were some 7,500 individuals from 1,252  families  who  were  IDPs
    before February 2006.  It seems that many families have been  displaced
    from one part of Kirkuk to another in search  of  more  ethnically  and
    religiously homogenous areas where they feel  more  comfortable.   More
    than a third of  interviewed  families  told  IOM  monitors  that  they
    decided to return home because of the slight improvement in security in
    Kirkuk and the offer of the 1 million Iraqi dinar returnee grant. It is
    said that of IOM-assessed IDP families displaced in Kirkuk, 36% overall
    would like to return, and 47% of those displaced  in  another  part  of
    Kirkuk would like to return  home,  although  40%  of  those  currently
    displaced in another part of Kirkuk  wished  to  integrate  into  their
    current places of displacement, thus reflecting the  redistribution  in
    Kirkuk from one part to another after the ethnic and sectarian  related
    violence of recent years.  Of IDPs in Kirkuk, 51% wished to  return  to
    their places of origin, of which  26%  would  go  to  other  places  in
    Kirkuk.  The UNHCR figures on returnees to Kirkuk  show  970  returnees
    between April 2009 and March 2010 (this is the  collective  figure  for
    refugees and IDPs.)

189. In the CSIS report of February 2010 it is said that levels of  violence
    fell by 48% in Tameem. In the CSIS document of 10  March  2010,  it  is
    said under the heading, "Iraq: National Unity in late 2009",  that  the
    future status of Tameem province remains a major challenge to  national
    unity. Evidently the three main ethno-religious groups refuse  to  make
    concessions  on  issues  such  as  elections  out  of  fear  that   any
    compromises could harm their future territorial claims in the  province
    and that the  presence  of  security  forces  controlled  by  political
    parties remains a major  concern.  In  respect  of  the  average  daily
    executed attacks by province between 1 December 2008 and February 2009,
    the figure for Tameem is one per day: the figure for 1 June 2009 to  31
    August 2009 is however close to two a day.

190. The July 2010 UNHCR Note states that there was now in place an  interim
    joint security plan for Kirkuk and other internally disputed  areas  by
    the USF-I (Kirkuk is one of the few areas where US troops  continue  to
    be involved). It involves joint action and coordination  by  the  Iraqi
    Army and Police as well as the KRG Peshmerga. This plan has resulted in
    the establishment of a network of checkpoints and joint patrols  around
    major cities and the  training  of  security  personnel.  Recent  press
    reports give October 24 as the date set for a  census  of  the  Kurdish
    areas.

Diyala

191. Mr ASA is from Baqubah, which is the capital of the Diyala  governorate
    (which has a population of approx. 1,  560,000).   In  the  section  on
    Diyala in the April 2009  UNHCR  Guidelines  it  is  said  that  Diyala
    remains volatile and continues to see car bombs and  suicide  bombings.
    This often involves the targeting of members of the ISF/MNF-I  and  the
    SoI and also civilians.  Although overall violence in Diyala  decreased
    significantly as of mid-2007 (70% between  June  2007  and  May  2008),
    nevertheless AQI maintained its ability to conduct  attacks  throughout
    the governorate including in the populated urban  areas  while  keeping
    strict control of rural areas, terrorising the  local  population  with
    intimidation,  detention,   torture   and   extrajudicial   executions.
    Civilians  were  also  targeted  by  mortar  and   small   arms   fire,
    assassinations and kidnappings. However,  as  a  result  of  successive
    military operations against it between June 2007 and May 2008, AQI  was
    largely pushed out of Diyala's main urban  centres,  although  it  kept
    hold of the more rural areas of the Balad Ruz District, and other areas
    where it regrouped and reconstituted itself.

192. In the CSIS report of 17 February 2010 entitled The Uncertain  Security
    Situation in Iraq: Trends in violence, casualties and Iraqi perceptions
    it is stated there had been a 77%  reduction  in  violence  in  Diyala.
    There is reference to insurgent groups  like  AQI  seeking  to  exploit
    tensions between Arabs and Kurds in northern provinces including Diyala
    by deliberately targeting ethnic  minorities  to  spark  some  type  of
    sectarian violence.

193. The US Department of Defence Report to Congress of March 2010  entitled
    Measuring Stability and Security in Iraq, in reference to Diyala  gives
    a similar account.

194. In the HAP 2010 report there is reference at page 5  to  Diyala,  which
    is said to have the second highest number of IDPs after Baghdad, slowly
    seeing improvement of the security situation and thousands of displaced
    families returning to their homes.  According  to  the  United  Nations
    Integrated Regional Network (IRIN) reporting what was said by officials
    in the Ministry of Displacement and Migration,  although  the  security
    situation in some parts of the province is  described  as  being  still
    violent, a  senior  official  in  the  Ministry  reported  some  12,800
    displaced families (roughly  77,000  individuals)  returning  to  their
    homes between late 2008 and the end of 2009.  However  39,000  families
    remain displaced, with 13,000 within the province and 26,000  in  other
    provinces.

195. The report by IOM on Diyala, dated February  2010  notes,  among  other
    things,  the fact  that  the  security  situation  has  improved  since
    returnees to Diyala were first displaced, although IOM monitors  report
    that local security forces are often suspicious of IDP families and are
    quick to blame  them  when  violence  occurs.  There  were  reports  of
    sporadic violence targeting returnees in Diyala,  particularly  in  Al-
    Khalis.  84.9% of returnees to Diyala cited security in their  area  of
    origin as their reason for returning. The report says that  there  have
    been some 11,821  families  (estimated  70,926  individuals)  who  have
    returned to Diyala.  It is said that continues to be one  of  the  most
    volatile and unstable governorates  in  Iraq.  The  security  situation
    sometimes limited IOM monitors' access to IDP and returnee families.

196. In the CSIS  report  of  10  March  2010  entitled  Iraq:  Meeting  the
    Challenges of 2010 the figures given for average daily executed attacks
    by province between 1 December 2008 and 28 February 2009 show that  the
    figures for Diyala were slightly over one attack per day, although  the
    figure for average daily executed attacks by provinces between  1  June
    2009 and 31 August 2009 appears to  be  closer  to  two  a  day.   Both
    figures reflect executed  enemy  attacks  targeted  against  coalition,
    IASF, civilians, Iraqi infrastructure and government organisations.

197. The UNHCR figures for internal displacement  and  return  between  2003
    and 2010 are set out elsewhere in the bundle.  They  show  a  total  of
    17,080 returning to Diyala between April 2009 and  March  2010.   These
    are refugee and IDP returns.

198. The IDMC, 4 March 2010 report from the Norwegian Refugee Council  notes
    that in mid-2008 the  MoDM  opened  two  centres  in  Baghdad  to  help
    returnees register, receive assistance and resolve property  issues.  A
    third centre was  established  in  Diyala  in  mid-2009.  As  of  2008,
    returnees could receive around $850 after returning to their  place  of
    origin and formally  renouncing  their  IDP  status.   In  Baghdad  and
    Diyala, returnees are also reportedly provided additional protection by
    local authorities.

199. The UNSG  Report   8  Feb  2010  records  at  para  42  that  UNHCR  is
    undertaking a number of joint initiatives in Diyala with other  members
    of the UN country team to improve livelihoods  so  as  to  help  anchor
    returnees in  the  communities  and  ensure  that  their  reintegration
    process is sustainable.

Baghdad

200. Nothing was found to be credible in the claim of Mr AA other than  that
    he is from Iraq and is a male of around 30 years of age.  He  would  be
    returned to Baghdad and therefore it is  appropriate  to  consider  the
    situation there that would face him on  return.  Baghdad  is  also,  of
    course, the first point of return for all Iraqis being returned to Iraq
    from the UK.

201. The governorate of Baghdad is said to have a population of between  6.5
    and 7 million. According to  the  July  2009  IOM  Baghdad  governorate
    Profile, the IOM consider that the  Baghdad  governorate  is  currently
    receiving and will likely to continue to receive the largest number  of
    returnees of all Iraq governorates.  The majority of current  returnees
    in Iraq are from  Baghdad,  with  particularly  large  numbers  in  the
    districts of Karkh and al-Resafa. IOM expresses the view  that  in  the
    face of uncertain  security  improvements,  the  future  of  return  is
    unsure, and many IDP families continue to say that they are waiting for
    security to improve in order to return.

202. In the Human Rights Watch report on Iraq of January  2010  there  is  a
    general statement that civilians remained the targets of attacks across
    the country, and examples are given of coordinated truck bombs  outside
    the Foreign and Finance Ministries in Baghdad on 19 August 2008 killing
    nearly 100 people and wounding more than 600, and on  25  October  2008
    two vehicle bombs driven by  suicide  bombers  destroying  three  major
    government buildings, including the Ministry of  Justice,  causing  the
    deaths of more than 155 people and wounding over 500.   These  appeared
    to be the responsibility of Sunni Arab insurgents and  they  were  also
    responsible for earlier attacks in January and April on  the  Kadhmiyya
    Mosque, a major Shi'a place of worship, killing more than  100  people,
    and targeting of groups of Shi'a refugees  waiting  for  food  rations,
    children, religious pilgrimages and other gatherings.

203. In the CSIS report  of  17  February  2010,  it  is  said  that  recent
    bombings show  that  AQI  remains  a  viable  and  capable  group.   It
    continues to pursue its campaign to undermine the ISF in an  effort  to
    create  uncertainty  in  the  government  of  Iraq's  overall  security
    capability and incite sectarian violence.  Most violent activity within
    the Baghdad security districts is the responsibility of AQI  and  Shi'a
    extremist  elements.   Other  militant  groups   continue   low   level
    operations exhibiting the residual will and capability  to  operate  in
    Baghdad.  Overall, attacks by  such  groups  occur  intermittently  and
    mostly target US forces  in  Baghdad.   Sunni  resistance  activity  in
    Baghdad has steadily declined since early  2008  though  AQI  maintains
    cells in and around Baghdad with the  intent  to  remain  relevant  and
    undermine the GoI and with the  residual  capability  to  conduct  high
    profile attacks.  AQI's ability to operate is significantly constrained
    by GoI security initiatives.  While AQI's presence has declined  inside
    the  capital,  it  seeks  to  re-establish  itself  there  and  in  the
    surrounding areas and maintains the ability and  desire  to  carry  out
    periodic  high  profile  attacks  designed  to  cause  high  levels  of
    casualties.  It is also said in more general terms that  the  level  of
    violence in Iraq is sharply lower than the level at which it peaked  in
    2007 and most of the violence related to the Sunni  insurgents  is  now
    concentrated in Baghdad.  Security incidents in Baghdad  are  noted  as
    having  decreased  by  78%,  indicating  a  decline  in   Sunni-Shi'ite
    violence.  From tables provided it can be seen that there  was  a  very
    significant decrease in average monthly security incidents  in  Baghdad
    from some 1,700 in 2007 to some  200  in  2009.   This  improvement  is
    broadly reflected, as we have seen,  in  the  figures  for  Tameem  and
    Diyala.

204. The IDMC, 4 March 2010 report from the Norwegian Refugee Council  notes
    that in mid-2008 the  MoDM  opened  two  centres  in  Baghdad  to  help
    returnees register, receive assistance and resolve property issues.  As
    we have seen, as of 2008, returnees could  receive  around  $850  after
    returning to their place of origin and formally  renouncing  their  IDP
    status.  In Baghdad (as  in  Diyala),  returnees  are  also  reportedly
    provided additional protection by local authorities.

205. In the CSIS document Iraq: Meeting the Challenges  of  2010,  dated  10
    March 2010, there is a  chart  showing  Iraqi  casualties  by  type  in
    Baghdad in 2009.  This shows deaths per month at somewhere between  100
    and 200 and numbers of wounded ranging from  fewer  than  300  to  over
    1,000 a month.  There is another graph for attacks per month by type in
    Baghdad in 2009 identifying in  particular  regular  use  of  IEDs  and
    mortars.  The average daily executed  attacks  by  province  between  1
    December 2008 and 28 February 2009 shows an average of just under  four
    attacks in Baghdad province per day, the figure for 1 June 2009  to  31
    August 2009 being slightly over six per day.  The IBC  report  of  2008
    reported the most noticeable reduction in violence as being in  Baghdad
    and mirroring the point we have noted earlier that for the  first  time
    since the occupation by the Coalition fewer deaths were reported in the
    capital than in the rest of the country (from  54%  of  all  deaths  in
    2006/2007 to 32% in 2008).

206. In the UNHCR figures on returns dated March 2010, it can be  seen  that
    returns of refugees and IDPs to Baghdad between April  2009  and  March
    2010 totalled 123,970.  These figures are  broken  down  in  a  further
    table, which showed particularly significant numbers  of  returnees  to
    Karkh and to the Kadhmiyah, Adhamiya and Mahmoudiya  districts  of  the
    Baghdad governorate.

207. Reference to the insurgent attacks in Baghdad  is  made  in  the  SIGIR
    report of 30 April 2010.  For example it is said that insurgent attacks
    killed more than 100 Iraqis in a series of bombings and mass murders in
    and around Baghdad in the first week of April, and there  were  further
    bombings targeting mosques and an outdoor market on 23  April.   Dozens
    of people were killed and more than 180 were injured.  In general it is
    said that the post-election transition  period  may  be  marked  by  an
    increase in violence as extremists seek to take advantage of  political
    uncertainty and undermine the state.

Mosul /Ninewah

208. A number of sources state that on current figures the  deadliest  place
    in Iraq is Mosul. That being so it may be helpful for us to  note  some
    key materials relating to the governorate of which it is part:  Ninewah
    (Ninewah is said to have a population of approx.  2,800,000  and  Mosul
    approx 1,800,000). According to the CSIS report, March 2010, drawing on
    SIGACTSIII database, the number of daily executed attacks in Ninewah in
    the period June 1, 2009  -  August  31,  2009  was  between  5  and  6.
    According to the Measuring Stability and Security in Iraq report, March
    2010 (drawing on  the  same  database)  the  average  number  of  daily
    executed attacks in Ninewah was between 2 and 3 for the  period  Dec  1
    2009 to Feb 28, 2010. In the Iraq Body Count (IBC) analysis of civilian
    deaths from violence in 2009, which talks (as we have seen) of a number
    of significant improvements in  levels  of  armed  non-state  terrorist
    violence in Iraq, it is said that on a per capita basis Mosul with  756
    recorded deaths and an estimated population  of  1.8  million  in  2009
    became significantly more deadly than Baghdad (estimated population 6.5
    million, 1,545 deaths).  Also Mosul's absolute number of violent deaths
    of civilians in 2009 (556) far exceeded Baghdad's total of 301.

209. In the April 2009 UNHCR Guidelines it  is  said  that  the  demographic
    make up of the Ninewah governorate  (a  mixture  of  Arabs,  Kurds  and
    Turkmen as well as religious and ethnic minority groups) together  with
    the fact that large parts of the governorate are contested between  the
    KRG and the central government make it a breeding ground for  extremist
    groups seeking to destabilise the country. Mosul City  has  become  the
    last urban stronghold of AQI.  There is only a limited presence of some
    2,700 SoI in the southern parts of Ninewah in contrast to its  stronger
    presence  elsewhere.   It  is  reported  that  insurgent  groups   have
    infiltrated the local ISF.  The strategic position of Ninewah near  the
    border with  Syria  and  its  remote  mountainous  and  desert  terrain
    represents another challenge  to  secure  it.   The  relative  security
    improvements in many parts of the country have not yet  taken  hold  in
    Mosul, despite a wide scale military operation launched in May 2008  to
    root out AQI and other insurgent groups.  Despite the deployment  of  a
    massive ISF presence into Mosul City after  the  displacement  of  over
    10,000 of Mosul's  Christians  in  September  and  October  2008,  mass
    casualty attacks, kidnappings and targeted assassinations  continue  to
    occur on an almost daily basis. Civilians are  targeted  on  a  regular
    basis also in Ninewah's second city Tal Afar, mostly in  public  places
    such as mosques,  restaurants  and  markets  and  many  attacks  target
    Shi'ite Turkmen with the aim of reigniting sectarian violence.

210.  A further complication is the fact that Ninewah contains some  of  the
    so-called "disputed areas" that the KRG seeks to incorporate  into  the
    Kurdistan region.  Though the majority of the governorate is Sunni Arab
    (approximately 60%) the Kurds have dominated the local security  forces
    and the Provincial Council.  There are concerns  that  ethnic-political
    tensions may spill out violently.  Many of  the  "disputed  areas"  are
    inhabited by religious and ethnic minority  groups  and  as  such  have
    become vulnerable to political pressure and manipulation, and extremist
    groups such as AQI are further  exploiting  the  ethnic  and  religious
    fault lines.  This is in general confirmed by the UNSC in his report of
    8 February 2010 and  by  the  Centre  of  Strategic  and  International
    Studies, though the latter notes a reduction of 56% in 2009 of security
    incidents in Ninewah.

Part 4: Submission on the facts


211.  For  reasons  noted  earlier  there  were  no  submissions  from   the
    appellants' representatives.

UNHCR's submissions

212. UNHCR's written submissions as to the facts essentially state that  its
    current position on the security situation in Iraq remains as  set  out
    in its April 2009 Guidelines (which were also before the CA in QD).  It
    is appropriate that we summarise these in more detail  and  also  cover
    updates given by UNHCR in June and July 2010.

UNHCR materials

UNHCR Eligibility Guidelines April 2009

213. When in early 2008 the Tribunal in KH  examined in detail the  evidence
    relating to violence in Iraq the position taken by UNHCR at that time -
    as expressed in August 2007 Guidelines and a December 2007  Addendum  -
    was that all asylum-seekers from the Central and Southern parts of Iraq
    were in need  of  international  protection  and  (i)  should  thus  be
    considered as refugees under the 1951  Convention  criteria;  and  (ii)
    failing that,  should  be  considered  as  eligible  for  complementary
    (including subsidiary) protection. In April 2009, however, UNHCR issued
    new guidelines.

214. At [2] and[3] these  April  2009   Guidelines  note  that  in  view  of
    changes since December 2007,  important  improvements  in  the  overall
    security situation require UNHCR to revise and update its position.  It
    is accepted that there has been "significant stabilisation  since  late
    2007 and in 2008" ([6]) and "quite meaningful significant  improvements
    in the  overall  security  environment"  ([11])  in  the  country.  The
    Guidelines caution nevertheless that such improvements have to be  seen
    in the context that changes can be unpredictable, can suffer set-backs,
    and that major uncertainties and  risks  remain.  Armed  groups  remain
    lethal. There is a continuing occurrence on a regular basis of  suicide
    attacks and car bombs directed  against  the  MNF-I/ISF  and  Awakening
    Movements as well as civilians (often in areas attracting  crowds  such
    as markets, bus stations, restaurants, places and  areas  of  religious
    significance or worship, police stations, and recruitment  centres)  in
    addition to targeted assassinations and kidnappings. These claim  lives
    and cause new displacement. Overall levels of violence are  lower,  but
    fluctuate and vary significantly from governorate to  governorate,  and
    even within governorates, districts and neighbourhoods:

         "This means that, on the whole, Iraqis will continue to leave their
         country  or  remain  outside  it  in  the  search  for  safety  and
         protection which cannot be found at home.  At  the  same  time,  in
         those instances  where  the  security  conditions  have  undeniably
         changed, the relevant claims for asylum and  protection  by  Iraqis
         can be dealt with differently..." ([11]).


215. The Guidelines note  that  in  March  2009,  there  was  a  "remarkable
    increase in car and suicide bombings, which could indicate an assertion
    of strength by militant groups since the US announced its intentions to
    withdraw all its combat troops from Iraq by August 2010."   Citing  the
    US Department of Defence statement  of  15  March  2009  that  security
    achievements remained fragile in some places, most notably  in  Ninewah
    and Diyala governorates as well  as  in  some  parts  of  Baghdad,  the
    Guidelines note that "...observers widely agree that  there  are  still
    serious concerns with regard to  the  sustainability  of  the  security
    improvements...." ([10]).

216. At [239] the Guidelines refer to figures concerning levels of  violence
    given by such bodies as the IBC and the Iraqi Ministries  of  Interior,
    Health and Defence showing a substantial drop in  comparison  with  the
    preceding two years, with 2008 seeing the  lowest  number  of  civilian
    deaths since the fall of the former regime in 2003. They  further  note
    that as a result of the sharp decline in sectarian violence  there  has
    been a notable reduction of violence in Baghdad. The  conclusion  drawn
    is that, notwithstanding these  developments,  "there  remains  a  high
    level of violence in parts of the country and, in the words of  the  UN
    Secretary-General  [in  his  UNSC,  July  2008  Report],   "...civilian
    casualties as a result  of  violence  remain  unacceptably  high".  The
    Guidelines state:

         "As a result of  various  factors,  extremist  groups  have  either
         changed their alliances, have  been  weakened  or  are  lying  low.
         Sectarian violence between the Shi'ite and Sunni communities, which
         accounted for a majority of the civilian casualties and was a  main
         factor leading to the large-scale displacement of Iraqis in  mainly
         2006 and parts of 2007, has virtually  halted,  although  extremist
         groups continue to aim at reigniting the violence. ... Armed groups
         are still capable of launching  attacks  aimed  at  disrupting  the
         security environment, but the  intensity  of  hostilities  and  the
         impact on the civilian population has decreased in  many  parts  of
         Iraq."


217. At [12] and [13] the Guidelines summarise UNHCR's position in  relation
    to refugee protection and subsidiary (humanitarian) protection:

         "12. In view of the serious human  rights  violations  and  ongoing
         security incidents  which  are  continuing  in  the  country,  most
         predominantly in the five Central governorates of Baghdad,  Diyala,
         Kirkuk, Ninewah and Salah Al-Din, UNHCR continues to  consider  all
         Iraqi asylum seekers from these five Central governorates to be  in
         need of international protection.


         13. In  those  countries  in  which  such  asylum-seekers  are  not
         recognised under  the  1951  Convention  because  of  the  way  the
         Convention  criteria  are  interpreted,  international   protection
         should be afforded through the application of an  extended  refugee
         definition,  where  this  is  available,  or  otherwise  through  a
         complementary form of protection. In such  cases,  UNHCR  considers
         that asylum-seekers originating from the five Central  governorates
         who are found not eligible for refugee status should be  considered
         to be at risk of serious harm in the situation  of  armed  conflict
         which is ongoing in Iraq and should, therefore, be accorded a  form
         of complementary protection."

218. In a footnote to this passage it is stated:

         "In the European Union, where the term "subsidiary  protection"  is
         used, UNHCR considers  that  asylum-seekers  originating  from  the
         Central governorates of Baghdad, Diyala, Kirkuk, Ninewah and  Salah
         Al-Din who are not found to be refugees should  receive  subsidiary
         protection under Article 15(c) of  the  [Qualification  Directive].
         Applying the reasoning of the ECJ in Elgafaji...UNHCR considers the
         degree of violence which characterises the ongoing  armed  conflict
         in those  areas  to  be  of  such  a  high  level  that  there  are
         substantial grounds for believing that a civilian, if  returned  to
         those areas, would, solely because of  his/her  presence  in  those
         areas, face  a  real  risk  of  being  subject  to  a  serious  and
         individual threat to his/her life or person."

219. As regards internal relocation, the Guidelines state:

         "87. In the context of Iraq, UNHCR's analysis distinguishes between
         the  situation  in   the   Central   governorates,   the   Southern
         governorates, and the three Northern governorates. The availability
         of an IFA/IRA [internal  flight  alternative,  internal  relocation
         alternative] in the latter area would also depend  on  whether  the
         individual concerned is from the Central or Southern  governorates,
         or from within the three governorates themselves.


         88. With respect to refugee claims of Iraqi asylum-seekers from the
         Central and Southern governorates of Iraq, it is UNHCR's assessment
         that an internal flight  alternative  is  not  viable  for  persons
         fleeing State persecution, as the agent  of  persecution  would  be
         able to pursue the individual throughout the territory.


         89. When assessing whether an individual fleeing  persecution  from
         non-state actor(s) is able to find an internal  flight  alternative
         elsewhere  in   the   Central   or   Southern   governorates,   key
         considerations include  whether  the  individual  can  practically,
         safely and legally access the area of internal  flight  alternative
         (the "relevance analysis"), and whether the individual could live a
         relatively normal life in that area without facing  undue  hardship
         ("the reasonableness analysis").


         90. Generally, no internal flight  alternative  will  be  available
         because of (i) the ability of non-State agents  of  persecution  to
         perpetrate acts of violence with impunity, (ii) the ongoing  levels
         of violence in mainly the Central governorates of Baghdad,  Diyala,
         Kirkuk, Ninewah and Salah-Al-Din giving rise  to  new  persecution,
         (iii) access and residency  restrictions,  and  (iv)  the  hardship
         faced in ensuring even the basic survival in areas  of  relocation.
         When, however, the availability of an internal flight or relocation
         alternative must be assessed in a  national  asylum  procedure,  it
         should be examined cautiously and in the context of the  individual
         claim...


         91. As also indicated in  these  guidelines,  persecution  emanates
         mainly from a range of non-State actors. Generally,  protection  by
         national authorities will be not available given that the  national
         authorities have yet limited capacity to enforce law and order, the
         ISF may be infiltrated by radical elements  and  the  judiciary  is
         prone to intimidation and corruption.


         ...


         93. Persons seeking to relocate to other areas may be  at  risk  of
         facing renewed violence. UNHCR Protection  Monitoring  showed  that
         IDPs  suffered  from  general  violence,   inter   ethnic/religious
         violence,  general  criminality,  targeted   attacks,   detentions,
         kidnappings and military operations.....in the governorates of  Al-
         Anbar, Baghdad, Diyala, Najek and Salah Al-Din, IDPs reported abuse
         and harassment.  IDPs in Diyala are reported to have been  targeted
         specifically by armed groups. ...In Kirkuk IDP  families  displaced
         from Diyala to Al-Multaqa sub-District were attacked.


         94. Quasi-security forces such as the SoI, which exercise de  facto
         control  over  certain  areas,  should  not  be  considered  to  be
         operating as effective  authorities  as  they  themselves  are  the
         targets of attacks in those areas and their legal  status  has  not
         yet been clarified.


         95. Common ethnic or religious backgrounds and existing tribal  and
         family ties in the area of relocation are  crucial  when  assessing
         the availability of an IFA/IRA as these generally ensure a  certain
         level of community protection and access to services. ...In Kirkuk,
         which has a very diverse ethno-sectarian make-up, tensions and even
         harassment and persecution have been reported in  areas  where  the
         host community and the IDPs do not share the same background.


         ...


         97. The high levels of ethno-religious  violence  in  the  formerly
         "Arabised"  areas,  the  highly  sensitive  political,  ethnic  and
         economic  nature  of  these  areas  and   the   risk   of   further
         destabilising  the   situation   through   significant   population
         movements need to be considered when assessing the availability  of
         an IFA/IRA in these governorates (i.e. Kirkuk,  Ninewah,  parts  of
         Diyala and Salah Al-Din governorates)."


220.  Subsequent  paragraphs  detail  the  serious  difficulties  faced   in
    accessing basic services and ensuring economic survival in a  situation
    of displacement.

221. At [111-135] IFA/IRA in  the  three  Northern  governorates  of  Dahuk,
    Erbil and Sulaymaniyah is  analysed.  UNHCR  states  that  despite  the
    hospitable view taken by the KRG towards a considerable number of IDPs,
    the availability of an IFA/IRA must be carefully assessed on a case-by-
    case basis. Difficulties noted include the  risk  of  travel  to  these
    areas along routes that see daily roadside bombings. In [136-137] there
    is treatment of IFA/IRA within  the  three  Northern  governorates  for
    Iraqis who originate from those governorates.

222. At  [98] the  Guidelines  address  the  issue  of  safety  of  internal
    travel:

         "Travel by road within the Central and  Southern  governorates  has
         become fairly safe in many areas, but all roads remain  potentially
         dangerous. Roadside bombings, robbery and carjacking remain a daily
         occurrence mainly in the population centres. The main  routes  from
         Baghdad to the North, i.e. the Baghdad  Western  North  route  from
         Baghdad through the governorates of Salah Al-Din  and  Ninewah  and
         further North to Dahuk as well as the Baghdad Eastern  North  route
         from Baghdad through the governorate of Diyala up  to  Kirkuk,  see
         daily roadside bombings. In the South, there  is  a  high  risk  of
         attacks on most routes in the governorates  of  Babel  and  Wassit,
         especially in the districts lying closest  to  Baghdad.  Travelling
         prior or during religious festivities also  involves  a  heightened
         risk as armed groups aim at  launching  mass  casualty  attacks  on
         Shi'ite pilgrims. Military operations among armed  groups  and  the
         ISF/MINF-I continue mainly in the Central governorates.  Travelling
         is often delayed by ISF/MNF-I checkpoints and convoys,  which  also
         increase the risk of being targeted by armed groups or criminals or
         being caught in armed  clashes.  Moving  near  official  government
         convoys is particularly dangerous as they are a frequent target  of
         armed groups,  including  by  roadside  bombs  and  "sticky  bombs"
         attached under vehicles. Reportedly there has been a  rise  in  the
         deployment of false vehicle checkpoints from which violent  attacks
         have been mounted. "

UNHCR Briefing Note, 8 June 2010

223. In an 8 June Briefing Note, reiterating the position  set  out  in  its
    April 2009 Guidelines, UNHCR cautions against removals from the  EU  to
    Iraq. It also notes that UNHCR's position is that:

         "no internal flight alternative  exists  in  Iraq  because  of  the
         ongoing levels of violence in Baghdad, Diyala, Kirkuk, Ninewah  and
         Salah Al-Din, and in view of access and residency  restrictions  in
         various governorates as well as the hardship faced by returnees  in
         ensuring even survival in areas of relocation."

 UNHCR Note, July 2010

224. In July 2010 UNHCR issued an interim advisory "to affirm the  continued
    validity of the April 2009 UNHCR Guidelines and to inform that issuance
    of revised guidance is pending further developments in Iraq." This Note
    refers to the ongoing uncertainty due to the delay in the formation  of
    a new  government  following  the  elections  of  March  2010  and  the
    unpredictable security situation. The Note refers to IBC  data  showing
    that some 2,000 Iraqis were killed and some 5,000 others  were  injured
    during the first five months of 2010 with other sources identifying  an
    increase in casualty statistics for the months of April and  May  2010.
    Most incidents were noted as taking place in the  central  governorates
    of Baghdad, Diyala, Kirkuk, Ninewah and Salah Al-Din.

225. Finally UNHCR refers to its position on internal  flight  possibilities
    in Iraq as set out in the same Guidelines at [88-110].

Respondent's submission on the situation in Iraq

226. Mr Staker said that the critical question as set out by  the  Court  of
    Appeal in [40] of QD, was whether there was in Iraq or a material  part
    of Iraq such a high level of indiscriminate violence  that  substantial
    grounds existed for believing that appellants  such  as  those  in  the
    instant case would, solely by being present there,  face  a  real  risk
    threatening their life or person. The respondent's view was that  there
    was not. In the alternative it was argued that the  relevant  level  of
    indiscriminate violence was not to be found  in  the  appellants'  home
    areas and even if it was, then they  could  relocate.  As  regards  the
    question of safety of route of return (a question whose  relevance  had
    been reaffirmed by HH and Others), the appellants could be returned  to
    Baghdad Airport and could get home from there.  The  burden  of  proof,
    which fell on the appellants, had not been met. It  was  also  relevant
    that assistance can be obtained from the IOM and  other  organisations,
    including the Iraqi government.

227. A propos the levels of indiscriminate violence, Mr Staker  argued  that
    the evidence spoke for itself and he referred us to a number of  pieces
    of evidence in the bundles.  Taken together, he  argued,  these  showed
    that the level of threat  was  decreasing.   There  was  also  evidence
    showing a move away from indiscriminate violence to  targeted  attacks.
    That was clearly of relevance in assessing the level  of  risk  in  the
    instant cases.  The level of deaths and, more widely, of  incidents  of
    violence had fallen significantly.  Such  matters  as  the  numbers  of
    people returning and the statistics on current  social  attitudes  were
    also indicative of the general level of improvement.

228. Another important indicator in assessing the safety of Iraq in  Article
    15(c) terms was,  he  said,  the  position  on  voluntary  returns.  As
    recorded  by  IOM  in  its  document  entitled  IOM   Emergency   Needs
    Assessments 16 April 2010, "there are few new incidents of displacement
    in Iraq". Tables contained in their  report  showed  that  the  average
    number of displaced families per month has fallen from a peak of 14,865
    in July to December 2006, to only 35 per  month  in  July  to  December
    2009. It was  estimated  that  there  were  62,361  returnee  families,
    consisting of 374,166 individuals. The Brookings Institution figures in
    its Iraq Index were lower but still identified a very  high  figure  of
    voluntary returnees from January 2009 to March 2010, at 240,580. Survey
    answers indicate that 50% of those remaining displaced wish to return.

229. In respect of forced returns of  failed  asylum-seekers  to  Iraq,  the
    respondent's position was that the UK  was  far  from  being  alone  in
    conducting them and UKBA  was  satisfied  those  concerned  were  being
    returned in safety.

230.  The respondent noted that UNHCR had reiterated that  it  continued  to
    stand by its April 2009 Guidelines, but these were now over a year old.
     It was clear from [12] and [13] of these that UNHCR had  thought  that
    there was an  Article  15(c)  issue  risk  only  in  the  five  central
    provinces. Reference was also made to [59] of the UNHCR submissions  in
    QD to similar effect. The UNHCR had also said that if a person was from
    the five central provinces then they could not be expected to  relocate
    elsewhere in Iraq, but this was also now a matter the Tribunal  had  to
    decide as of today. The Guidelines at [10]  identified  the  number  of
    IDPs as nearly 1.6 million people.  It was accepted by the  UNHCR  that
    the position was more relaxed now.

231. As regards the UNHCR April  2009 Guidelines, even if  it  were  assumed
    that there  had been no significant improvement since then,  this   did
    not mean that what was said by  the  UNHCR  had  to  be  followed.  The
    Tribunal might have had a different view from that expressed  by  UNHCR
    in 2009 and in any event it was not necessary to  say  that  they  were
    wrong to conclude that matters were different  today.  As  regards  the
    issue of what bodies were capable of offering protection  in  Iraq,  it
    was argued that that was not  relevant  to  Article  15(c)  as  it  was
    concerned with indiscriminate violence, but insofar as it was relevant,
    there was not sufficient level of risk in any event.  The case was  put
    on the basis of return of all the appellants to Baghdad.

Part 5: Existing country guidance

232. As already noted KH has been found to be wrong in  law.  Since  KH  the
    Tribunal  has  issued  several  further  country  guidance  cases,   NA
    (Palestinians - risk) Iraq CG [2008] UKAIT 00046, SI (expert evidence -
    Kurd-  SM  confirmed)  Iraq  CG  [2008]  UKAIT  00094,  SR  (Iraqi/Arab
    Christian: relocation to  KRG)  Iraq  CG  [2009]  UKAIT  00038  and  ZQ
    (serving  soldier)  Iraq  CG  [2009]  UKAIT  00048.   None  essentially
    concerned Article 15(c) although those promulgated before QD did  refer
    to KH approvingly. As regards GS (Afghanistan), whilst we would observe
    that in one respect its approach to  indiscriminate  violence  was  too
    narrow (see [71] above), we cannot see that this  had  any  significant
    impact on its assessment of levels of violence in  Afghanistan  at  the
    relevant time and we thus regard its country guidance as undisturbed by
    anything said in this case.

Part 6: Our Assessment: general

233. Although we did not have the benefit  of  argument  and  production  of
    background evidence from the appellants, we consider that the materials
    produced by the respondent and UNHCR cover all  the  important  reports
    and other sources of information relevant to the assessment we have  to
    make. We would  also  observe  that  whilst  we  would  no  doubt  have
    benefited from sight of the expert report originally planned for  these
    appeals (from Dr Herring), the situation in  Iraq  is  clearly  one  in
    respect of which any country expert would be bound to draw very heavily
    upon the major country reports and studies in  the  public  realm  (and
    indeed we note that in the  report  produced  by  Dr  Herring  for  the
    Tribunal  in  KH,  he  based  himself  almost  entirely  on  background
    materials in the public realm).

234. In deciding this case we have of course taken into account all  of  the
    evidence before us, which is set out in Appendix A.

235. So far as concerns existing Tribunal country guidance on Iraq, we  have
    already noted that KH was found wrong in law. Whilst we see  no  reason
    why it does not remain a valid summary  of  the  evidence  relating  to
    violence in Iraq up to early 2008, the effect of QD is that KH must  be
    considered as never having given  valid  guidance.  The  other  country
    guidance cases on  Iraq  post  -  KH,  however,  were  not  essentially
    concerned with Article 15(c) and in our view the guidance they  contain
    remains unaffected save to the (minor) extent that they seek to rely on
    KH.

236. Article 15(c) is only  one  form  of  protection  available  to  asylum
    applicants and it is important to note that Iraqis remain  the  largest
    group of persons granted refugee protection. In  2008/9  Iraq  was  the
    country of origin of most asylum applicants worldwide  for  the  fourth
    consecutive year. (UNHCR, 21.10.2009). Where a national of Iraq is able
    to show some specific risk characteristic(s) over  and  above  being  a
    mere civilian, he or she  will  potentially  be  able  to  qualify  for
    refugee status under the Refugee Convention  and,  if  not,  then  both
    Article 15(b) and 15(c) may well assist. In respect  of  Article  15(c)
    for such persons it will not be necessary  to  show  the  existence  of
    indiscriminate violence at  a  high  level:  see  Elgafaji  [39];  also
    [65(f)] above.

An inclusive approach



 237. The respondent has argued that when analysing figures relating to Iraq
      we should regard the IBC figures as overstated  because  they  include
      regular   local   police   forces   and   members   of   military   or
      paramilitary/militia forces in  the  numbers  of  civilian  dead.  The
      respondent also considers notable that the IBC justifies the inclusion
      of executed military and paramilitary/militia forces  on  the  grounds
      that they acquire "protected person" status under IHL, whereas QD  has
      determined authoritatively that Article 15(c) cannot be viewed through
      the lens of IHL.



 238. The respondent proffers a further reason why the  IBC  (and  Brookings
      Institution) figures must be seen as including  a  greater  number  of
      individuals than those who are truly  the  victims  of  indiscriminate
      violence. The figures are expressed to  include  all  those  civilians
      killed violently in Iraq.   Figures  produced  cover  all  deaths  and
      figures for murders - which are not limited to those  associated  with
      indiscriminate violence from the armed conflict:-



         "This means that the figures include not only  those  who  are  the
         victims of indiscriminate violence  within  the  scope  of  Article
         15(c) but also those who are victims  of  targeted  violence.  Such
         targeted violence could stem from allegiances relating to the armed
         conflict or it could simply be the result of criminal action common
         to all societies and states. Neither of these scenarios would  fall
         within the scope of Article 15(c).  To  the  extent  that  the  IBC
         figures include both categories, they present an  elevated  picture
         of the true risk to ordinary civilians in Iraq."




 239. We have already explained why we disagree with this approach  and  why
      we consider that Article 15(c) ordinarily requires decision-makers  to
      adopt an inclusive approach when seeking to determine the  levels  and
      extent of indiscriminate violence,  subject  only  to  there  being  a
      sufficient  causal  nexus:  see  [77]  above.  We  make  five  general
      observations relating to the Iraq evidence.



 240. First, we agree with the observation of Hannah Fischer  ([235]  above)
      that none of the figures can be treated as airtight  or  having  great
      precision  and  they  have  been   derived   by   use   of   differing
      methodologies. (As regards the ongoing debates about whether  some  of
      the organisations producing figures over  report  or  underreport,  we
      would recall that it was the view of one of the experts who  furnished
      reports in the   KH case - Dr Herring -  that  there  was  significant
      underreporting of violence in Iraq (see KH, [160])).



 241.  Secondly,  it  would  be  wrong  to  equate  civilian   "victims   of
      indiscriminate violence" with those killed: see  [71-91]  above.  Even
      many attacks that are targeted seem to be carried out in circumstances
      that inevitably result in collateral damage, not just in the  form  of
      killings but also of injuries, kidnappings etc. On the  basis  of  the
      figures we have already analysed it would appear  that  the  ratio  of
      "wounded" to "killed" can be from between 2-5 times higher.

242. Thirdly, as noted earlier ([74]), we are concerned in  the  context  of
    Article 15(c) not just with threats to life  but  also  to  person  and
    these must encompass significant physical injuries and also to  serious
    mental traumas. In that regard, it is salient to recall that  according
    to the 2010 Humanitarian Action Plan, [3.1]:

         "Six years of violence have visibly affected the  fabric  of  Iraqi
         society. Casualties among civilians have had a direct and long-term
         effect on families through loss  of  livelihoods,  particularly  in
         conservative parts of the country where  women's  participation  in
         the workforce may be low in some areas. Loss of parents and  family
         members has had a devastating effect on the lives of  thousands  of
         children and the subsiding conflicts continue to  harm  the  mental
         health of the population in conflict-affected  areas.  Almost  half
         (48%) of the population has experienced a war-related trauma."


243.  Fourthly,  as  regards  the  interrelationship  between  criminal  and
    military violence in the context of Iraq, it is clear that there  is  a
    very significant overlap. As acknowledged by the UNAMI report for 1 Jan-
    30 June 2009 at [15]:

         "With regard to the motivations behind these attacks, it  is  often
         difficult to draw a line  between  ideologically-driven  insurgents
         operations and criminal acts committed by organised gangs as  there
         is frequently overlap between the two".


 244. We would accept of course that even if  Iraq  were  entirely  peaceful
      there would be a significant number of intentional homicides and other
      acts  of  violence  that  are  a  far  remove  from  the  violence  in
      contemplation in Article 15(c). At the same time, given that  in  fact
      many areas of Iraq continue to be  affected by armed conflict it is in
      practice hugely difficult for observers  safely to demarcate  the  two
      types  of  violence,  particularly  given  that  the  tactics  of  the
      insurgents can mirror criminal methods  (e.g.  kidnappings)  and  vice
      versa.



 245. Fifthly, when regard is had to the different strategies being  pursued
      by various actors in the current conflict, it is clear that  a  number
      of the insurgent groups deliberately seek to exploit  fault-lines  and
      can from time to time intend that the resultant violence they  provoke
      (e.g. along ethnic or tribal lines) will cause death  and  injury  not
      just to those particular groups but  to  the  civilian  population  at
      large.  Put another way, the current "drivers"  of  conflict  such  as
      sectarian divisions have the capacity,  in  the  hands  of  insurgents
      ready to use terrorist methods, to result in further higher levels  of
      violence significantly affecting civilians generally.

246. In view of the above considerations we  consider  it  is  simplest  and
    fairest to adopt an inclusive approach that takes into account all  the
    different types of violence in Iraq without subtracting any. We  accept
    of course that the category of civilian deaths cannot strictly be taken
    to include combatant deaths, but it seems to us  that  since  in  other
    respects the number of deaths  recorded by IBC and some  other  sources
    is likely  to  be  lower  than  they  actually  are  (e.g.  because  of
    underreporting), we should take them as they stand.


Levels and extent of violence

247. We need to say a little more about the significance of  the  fact  that
    the various surveys of violence in Iraq do not all  come  up  with  the
    same  figures  and  several  employ   differing   methodologies.   Even
    discounting the  much-criticised  Lancet  study  and  the  dubious  ORB
    survey, there are significant disparities between some of  the  surveys
    for example, in  relation  to  the  number  of  civilian  deaths.   The
    methodological difficulties are various. The  Iraq  Ministry  of  Human
    Rights report of October 2009, for example,  gives figures of  civilian
    deaths that do not include those that may have been  due  to  coalition
    occupation or fighting between militias. IBC figures are based on media
    reports and so do not include deaths  that  have  gone  unreported.  It
    would appear that IBC's definition of civilian is extremely  broad.  At
    section 3.3 of its "Methods" it states that:

         "The range given in the IBC count refers to civilian deaths. Use of
         the term "civilian" by definition  involves  making  a  distinction
         between some people and others. We determine this distinction on  a
         case-by-case basis through careful and systematic scrutiny  of  the
         data sources we consult.

         [...]

         Excluded from IBC are those aged 18 and over who, at the  point  of
         death, were reported as initiating deadly violence or being  active
         members of a military or paramilitary organisation. We also exclude
         overseas  'contractors'  providing  security  and   other   private
         services related to the occupation of Iraq.

         Included are all others killed violently, including  regular  local
         police forces.




         As every society, at war or at peace, has police  forces  who  live
         and work among the civilian population,  we  consider  such  police
         forces to be a customary  part  of  civil  society,  and  therefore
         include them in our civilian  count.  However  we  do  not  include
         police 'commando' units who work under the  Interior  Ministry  and
         are best described as paramilitary.




         Under one special circumstance we also  include  members  of  Iraqi
         military or paramilitary / militia forces in our  database,  namely
         when they are killed - i.e. summarily  executed  -  after  capture.
         Under  those  conditions  even  military  personnel   automatically
         acquire  'protected  person'  (effectively,   POW)   status   under
         International Humanitarian Law, and this distinction  is  respected
         by IBC."

248. According to Hannah Fischer in her February 25, 2010 report at  pp.4-5,
    when referring to the MNF-I SIGACTS III Database (Coalition  and  Iraqi
    Reports) of security incidents, statistics by the Iraqi  Ministries  of
    Interior, Health and Defence have  been  consistently  somewhat  higher
    than those given  by  several  other  surveys.  We  are  aware  from  a
    Brookings  Institution  note  of  recent  differences  between  the  US
    military and the GoI as to the number killed in July  2010  as  between
    some 250 and 550. On the other  hand,  we  are  also  aware  that  some
    commentators  have   suggested   that   Iraqi   government   statistics
    significantly downplay civilian casualty figures. Sharp differences  of
    this kind illustrate that in wars  and  armed  conflicts  we  must  not
    exclude the possibility that one or more of those involved in giving or
    drawing up figures concerning deaths  and  injuries  may  sometimes  be
    influenced by political or military considerations.

249. In the Brookings Institution studies "security incidents"  are  defined
    as incidents involving the death of  more  than  one  person.  Civilian
    deaths do not include deaths due to accidents unrelated to friendly  or
    enemy actions.

250. The Wikipedia entry containing a  list  of  countries  by  "intentional
    homicide rate" [accessed 8  June  2010]  to  which  we  made  reference
    earlier (showing   Iraq's rates per hundred thousand as  being  101  in
    2006, 89 in 2007, 21 in 2008 and "most recent" 9.99), is a  significant
    piece of evidence, but it does not furnish enough information about the
    methodologies involved in arriving at the figures given and we bear  in
    mind that Wikipedia is far from being an authoritative source.

 251. It is also clear that when looking at trends shown by different graphs
      it is important to avoid oversimplification. For  example,  the  SIGIR
      report reminds us that whilst in Iraq as a whole the average number of
      security attacks has gone down, in some  provinces  they  have  risen:
      according to the IISS report, whilst the level of casualties  in  Iraq
      has  gone  down,  2009  saw  a  36%  increase  in  "violent  actions"(
      kidnappings, robberies, homicides).



 252. Further, it cannot be assumed that  because  the  trends  measured  in
      terms of civilian deaths, security incidents and  the  like  are  down
      that they will necessarily continue  to  fall.   The  CSIS  report  of
      February 2010 considers  that  violence  is  unlikely  to  fall  below
      current levels.  The US Department of Defence assessment of March 2010
      Measuring Stability and Security in Iraq  refers  to  violence  having
      come near to reaching an "irreducible  minimum"  for  the  foreseeable
      future. In terms of the insurgent strategies, various groups are noted
      to shift their targets and methods depending on where they think  they
      can best exploit existing or developing fault-lines.



 253. In view of these difficulties, we consider that  as  far  as  possible
      (leaving out of consideration the heavily  criticised  Lancet  figures
      and the dubious ORB figures)  we  should  not  seek  to  rely  on  any
      particular set of figures but rather  to  have  regard  to  them  all.
      Figures of deaths and injuries are in  any  event  only  part  of  the
      picture; our overall assessment of Article 15(c)  risk  has  to  be  a
      holistic  one  looking  at  a  range  of  variables,  including  those
      mentioned by Lambert and Farrell. At the same time, having  regard  to
      all these figures, we should take particular note of the highest ones.
      To illustrate what we mean in more concrete terms, from three  of  the
      most commonly cited sets of figures dealing with Iraq, those published
      by IISS, IBC and Brookings (we have not covered the Wikipedia  figures
      but note that they are broadly similar), we are able to construct  the
      following graphs (by casualties is meant deaths):






    Figure 1

    Table of Civilian Casualties in Iraq

|  |              |Year                                |
|  |              |2007       |2008       |2009       |
|So|IISS          |-          |5886       |2800       |
|ur|              |           |           |           |
|ce|              |           |           |           |
|  |IBC           |24295      |9219       |4644       |
|  |Brookings     |23600      |6400       |3000       |


    IISS - International Institute for Strategic Studies
    IBC - Iraqbodycount.org














    Figure 2
    [pic]
    IISS - International Institute for Strategic Studies
    IBC - Iraqbodycount.org




    Figure 3
    [pic]
    IISS - International Institute for Strategic Studies
    IBC - Iraqbodycount.org



254. If taking the highest (IBC) figures (and having  considered  the  wider
    picture) the answer to the general Article 15(c) question is that there
    is no real risk of serious harm to civilians as such, then that is  the
    end of the matter.  If however such figures disclose such a real  risk,
    then it may be necessary to  scrutinise  them  more  closely,  but  not
    otherwise.

Iraq as a whole

255. It is not our task here to re-evaluate what the Tribunal in  KH  should
    have concluded as to the level of risk to civilians in  Iraq  in  early
    2008, if it had not made an error of  law  and  had  applied  the  same
    analysis as we have done. Nevertheless the levels of  violence  in  the
    peak years of 2006 and 2007 were very high, and  suggest  that  Article
    15(c) was engaged in those parts of Iraq where this level  of  violence
    (or  a  higher  level)  was  occurring.  However,  we  agree  with  the
    respondent that the contrast between 2006/2007 and 2009/2010  in  terms
    of the level of violence  is  substantial.  The  figures  for  civilian
    deaths for 2009 range between 3,000 and 4,644 (the latter being the IBC
    figure), compared with figures for 2007 of over 20,000.

256. The respondent also sought to argue that current levels of violence  in
    Iraq are similar to those existing in Afghanistan at the time when  the
    Tribunal decided the case of GS  (Afghanistan).  The  respondent  notes
    that the case presented in the Secretary of State's  skeleton  argument
    in GS (Afghanistan) relied on the following figures:



         |Figures for 2007        |Figures for 2008        |Figures for January-May|
|                        |                        |2009                   |
|1,523                   |2,118                   |800                    |
|Caused by  |Caused by  |Caused by  |Caused by  |Caused by  |Caused by  |
|Anti-Govern|Pro-Governm|Anti-Govern|Pro-Governm|Anti-Govern|Pro-Governm|
|ment       |ent Forces |ment       |ent Forces |ment       |ent Forces |
|Elements   |           |Elements   |           |Elements   |           |
|700        |629        |1,160      |828        |440 (55%)  |264 (33%)  |

    [Source: United Nations, Report  of  the  Secretary-General,  10  March
    2009,  [66-67];  United  Nations  Assistance  Mission  to   Afghanistan
    ("UNAMA"), Annual Report on Protection of Civilians in  Armed  Conflict
    2008, 17 February 2009, [4-5]; UN Secretary-General's Report of 23 June
    2009, [48]].

 257. The respondent concludes from this that the figure of  3,000  in  2009
      and 2,360 annualised for  2010  are  close  to  the  2,118  deaths  in
      Afghanistan in 2008. That is said to be  significant  because  of  the
      fact that the  estimated  populations  for  both  countries  are  very
      similar: The US Department of State Human Rights Report  of  11  March
      2010 for Afghanistan estimates the population as  between  24  and  33
      million, whilst the report for Iraq estimates the population as around
      29 million. Thus, says the  Secretary  of  State  "the  similarity  in
      relation to levels of civilian deaths is nonetheless striking".



 258. Although we would agree that in principle it  should  be  possible  to
      achieve objective indicators of violence that  can  be  applied  in  a
      comparative fashion across different countries, we  have  some  doubts
      that current studies/surveys have yet resolved problems  of  different
      methodologies. Figures in any event only furnish a part of the overall
      evidence needed to assess Article 15(c) risk.  So  at  best  we  would
      regard this particular comparison (which of course is only valid if at
      all in relation to the levels of violence in Afghanistan at  the  time
      GS was heard, not now) as a very rough guide and not one to  which  we
      should attach any significant weight).



 259. According to the respondent, two recent developments in  the  patterns
      of  violence  -   a  shift  in  the  focus  of   attacks   away   from
      indiscriminate violence against civilians  to   isolated  high-profile
      attacks aimed at the state, either through large-scale car bombings or
      assassinations or other types of political violence; and a significant
      reduction  in  the  use  of  inherently   indiscriminate   methods   -
      demonstrate  that  there  is  less  potential  as   well   as   actual
      indiscriminate violence.



 260. Like UNHCR we are wary of assuming that various insurgent groups  will
      not, once again, when it suits, revert to tactics such as the  bombing
      of market places that maximise civilian casualties and deploy  methods
      suited to achieving that.  However, we do think that it  can  properly
      be said that in August/early  September  2010  the  various  insurgent
      groups, AQI included, are weaker organisationally and  militarily  and
      that the evidence does not  suggest  that  this  will  change  in  the
      foreseeable future. To that extent we do think it is correct to regard
      the  levels  of  indiscriminate  violence  as  being  not  only  lower
      presently but likely not to revert to anything like  the  levels  they
      reached in 2006/2007. Whilst the US  is  committed  to  a  responsible
      "draw-down" it is clear that there continues to be a great deal of  US
      and  international  involvement  in,  and  support  for,   the   Iraqi
      government. The main Sunni and Shi'a parties and organisations  appear
      increasingly committed to distributing power through civil rather than
      military means.



 261. The respondent considers significant  the  fact  that  concerns  about
      violent disruption to the Iraqi  elections  -  an  exceptionally  high
      profile event - proved to be largely unfounded.  The  respondent  also
      notes that the latest figures as set  out  by  the  IBC's   Documented
      civilian deaths from violence  for  April  2010,  and  Iraq  Coalition
      Casualties Count, figures for May 2010 (up to  and  including  15  May
      2010)  for deaths in April and May 2010 do not suggest any  particular
      spike in the death rate following the elections. That may  be  so  but
      from recent reports in established media it would  appear  that  there
      has been a spike in the levels of violence in July  and   August.  For
      example, the IBC under a heading recent news" (accessed  14  September
      2010) records 379 deaths for June, 421 deaths for July and 412  deaths
      for August. The Brookings Institution states that there were 535 Iraqi
      civilian deaths in July, albeit  also  noting  that  the  US  military
      disputed that and considered the true number to be 222.  At  the  same
      time (and even  allowing  for  variations)  these  figures  are  still
      broadly comparable to 2008-2009 levels. In any event, it seems  to  us
      that it would be wrong to focus on spikes (upwards or downwards)  over
      a short time period. The main test yet to come relates to whether  the
      ISF can maintain roughly the same or improved levels  of  security  in
      the post-31 August 2010 era - in which  less  than  50,000  US  troops
      remain in Iraq - and further on when final withdrawal  occurs  at  the
      end of 2011. On the current evidence it seems to us that the ISF  will
      be able to maintain something near to the same levels of  security  as
      before, but this is obviously a matter that the Tribunal will need  to
      keep under close review.



Mosul/ Ninewah



 262. Although none of the appellants is from the city Mosul or Ninewah, the
      governorate, we set out earlier relevant evidence in this regard since
      this region is identified as being the most problematic  in  Iraq  and
      may be of value by way of comparison in  respect  of  the  areas  from
      which the appellants come.

263. As can be seen, the above evidence shows that the  Ninewah  governorate
    and the city of Mosul are experiencing especial  problems,  perhaps  in
    particular due to a combination of the ethnic mix of  the  region,  its
    geographical  position  and  AQI's  base  there.   We  do  not  make  a
    definitive  finding  on  whether  the  levels  of  violence  there  are
    currently high enough to engage Article 15(c), as it is not a  specific
    issue in these appeals. On the one hand the CSIS figures given for  the
    number of daily executed attacks in Ninewah has gone down from  between
    5 and 6 in the period June 1, 2009 - August 31, 2009 to between 2 and 3
    for the period Dec 1 2009 to Feb 28, 2010; and the recent figures cited
    for Mosul (756 recorded deaths for 2009, 556 of these being  civilians)
    are still very  significantly  below  the  high  rates  experienced  in
    Baghdad during 2006/2007. On the other hand, the figures for that still-
    recent period of June-August 2009 figures relating  to  the  number  of
    daily executed attacks per day in Ninewah (of between 5 and  6  a  day)
    are troubling. So are those showing the numbers of deaths in Mosul  per
    head  of  population  of  approx  2,300  for  2009  (Mosul,  we  remind
    ourselves, has a population of  approx.  1,800,000),  albeit  both  the
    attacks and casualty figures appear to include a significant number  of
    Christians targeted by AQI. Claims by Christians from Ninewah or  Mosul
    would be a prime example of civilians who would be  able  to  point  to
    additional risk characteristics and so would not be  required  to  show
    the same  levels  of  indiscriminate  violence  in  the  area  as  mere
    civilians: see Elgafaji [39].

264. In respect of Kirkuk/Tameem, Diyala, Baghdad it  is  convenient  if  we
    set out our conclusions on these areas in the context of  dealing  with
    the appellants' particular cases: see below Part 7.

Documentation

265. We do not find it at all easy to reconcile the conflicting evidence  we
    have  regarding  ongoing  difficulties  faced  by  IDPs  and   returnee
    families. On the one hand several  sources  describe  very  significant
    numbers of such persons as effectively left undocumented  and  cut  off
    from basic services for some time  as  a  result.  On  the  other  hand
    several sources (sometimes the same ones) describe such difficulties as
    in the process of being resolved, emphasising that there are sources of
    help which IDPs  and  returnee  families  can  turn  to  if  they  face
    problems,  including  the  Iraqi  MoDM  and  several  UNHCR  Protection
    Assistance Centres and Returnee Centres, as are mentioned, for example,
    in Mr Walker's evidence.  According to the US Embassy, Baghdad, by  the
    end of 2009, roughly half of some 64,000 registered  returnee  families
    had received a promised lump-sum payment of roughly $850 from  the  GoI
    (SIGIR, April 30, 2010 report). The paper  dated  June  2009  from  the
    Brookings Institution entitled  "Internal  Displacement  in  Iraq:  the
    Process of Working Toward Durable Solutions", notes that about  60%  of
    IDPs and returnees stated  that  they  resided  in  governorates  where
    registration was required and around 78% of those required to  register
    had done so.  Thus, although there are the concerns we have referred to
    earlier about the obstacles to  registration,  it  seems  that  a  very
    significant percentage of those required to register had done  so,  and
    if the main need of a birth certificate  is  to  obtain  a  nationality
    certificate, it would seem that for example in the Baghdad Ninewah  and
    Basra figures quoted above, a very high  percentage  indeed  of  people
    have national (we take it that this  means  nationality)  certificates.
    However, even if the former rather than the latter  view  is  taken  of
    documentation difficulties, we do not consider that this  entails  that
    any UK returnees would face serious  harm  for  three  reasons:  first,
    enforced returnees from the UK are given some financial assistance  (in
    addition to travel costs), second, UKBA undertakes to grant  assistance
    with accommodation for  up  to  a  month   for  those  likely  to  face
    accommodation problems; and third, it is clear that  UK  returnees  are
    signposted  to  relevant  agencies  that  assist   with   documentation
    problems. (It would also appear possible - although we do not  rely  on
    it here - that returnees from wherever  they  come  would  qualify  for
    Iraqi government grants).

266. Bringing this evidence together, whilst we do not reach any  definitive
    conclusion on the position with returnees in general,  we  consider  it
    has not been shown that UK returnees in particular would be  unable  to
    obtain the necessary documentation or access to  various  services  and
    facilities that that documentation requires.  We  have  not  been  made
    aware of any particular documentation-related difficulties  experienced
    by the appellants in this case and it seems to  us  that  the  evidence
    does not show a reasonable degree of likelihood  of  difficulty  for  a
    returnee to Iraq in this regard.

The June 2010 charter flights

267. We have not  found  the  evidence  concerning  the  June  2010  charter
    flights entirely satisfactory, not least because it is  incomplete.  It
    would appear that investigations within UKBA and inquiries by UNHCR are
    ongoing. As things stand before us there has still not been any  formal
    complaint lodged with UKBA or the FCO (or, in relation to the voluntary
    returnees involved, IOM). UNHCR has confirmed that it is not conducting
    its own investigation although it continues to  make  inquiries.  There
    are clearly polarised accounts: those  we  have  indirectly  from  some
    individuals who were said to be on the June 9th or  June  16th  charter
    flights who  allege  mistreatment  by  either  or  both  UK  and  Iraqi
    officials and that indirectly from Mr Walker which maintains there  was
    no mistreatment by UK officials and none observed by  UK  officials  on
    the part of Iraqi officials  during  the  handover  process  on  either
    occasion. We bear in mind UNHCR's explanation for  why  they  were  not
    able to follow their normal procedure in taking details  and  obtaining
    statements from the 5 or so individuals they  interviewed  involved  in
    the 16th June charter. Equally we bear in mind, as has  been  noted  by
    the Tribunal in other cases in which there is evidence adduced relating
    to the experiences of failed asylum seekers on return (see  BK  (Failed
    asylum seekers) DRC [2007] UKAIT 00098, [191-243], [334-389] that  some
    if not most of the returnees are persons who may have  been  found  not
    credible in their asylum claims. Also of significance is the fact  that
    as far as we are aware, neither UNHCR, the Red Crescent  nor any  other
    international  body involved with returnees  has  sought  to  view  the
    camcorder and CCTV footage held by  UKBA,  evidence  which  potentially
    would go a long way to clarifying whether the allegations  relating  to
    UK officials' conduct had any credence. Certainly so  far  as  concerns
    the involvement of  UKBA  and  G45  officials  with  the  two  sets  of
    returnees,  we  consider  that  the  allegations  made  have  not  been
    substantiated.

268. The state of the evidence is virtually  the  same  in  respect  of  the
    treatment of the two sets of returnees by  Iraqi  officials.  There  is
    considerable correlation between the anonymous  returnees'  and  UKBA's
    accounts in terms of the dates and times concerned and  the  fact  that
    the  Iraqi  procedures  for  checking  identity  and  nationality   are
    cumbersome. For those who do not have  a  passport  or  another  secure
    Iraqi identity documentation, checks entail  at  least  one  period  of
    detention (whilst waiting to come before a judge) and, in the  case  of
    persons from the KRG or whose home area is in the vicinity of the  KRG,
    a further period of detention whilst arrangements are made to fly  them
    to Erbil. As regards the allegations of mistreatment  (whether  in  the
    form of beatings and threats), we consider that these too must stand as
    equally unsubstantiated.

269. In respect of the  allegations  made  by  the  individuals  interviewed
    about the conditions   of detention for returnees in Iraq, however,  we
    note that there has been  no  statement  by  Mr  Walker  to  rebut  the
    descriptions of overcrowding and inadequate facilities. And whilst  his
    statement explains the unusual circumstances behind the periods of time
    during which those concerned were detained he  does  not  dispute  that
    they were of the length described.  At the same time we note that  UKBA
    has commenced an investigation of the events and makes clear that steps
    are in hand to improve all aspects of the process.

270. In light of the above, whilst we have some concerns  about  the  events
    surrounding these two charter flight returns, centred on the length  of
    detention that can be involved and  the  conditions  in  the  detention
    facilities, we certainly do not consider that  these  demonstrate  that
    enforced Iraqi returnees are likely to experience ill treatment in  the
    course of the returns process.  We  note  that  UKBA  is  committed  to
    further streamlining the process. In  our  view  to  do  so  is  highly
    desirable, since it is curious  that  nationality  clearance  by  Iraqi
    officials visiting London seemingly counts for nothing when it comes to
    checks made of returnees upon return and it must be possible to shorten
    considerably the periods of detention deemed necessary while checks are
    being made.

Conclusions

 271. We should now draw  together  our  main  reasons  for  differing  from
      UNHCR's position as set out in its April 2009 Guidelines and then seek
      to summarise our own conclusions.

 272. Since more than 16 months have elapsed  since  these  Guidelines  were
      finalised, the assessment they contain does not necessarily answer the
      question for us as to the current situation,  although  we  know  from
      UNHCR's written submissions and July 2010 interim advisory  Note  that
      it continues to regard them as viable.  We believe  we  should  attach
      considerable weight to these Guidelines, particularly bearing in  mind
      that UNHCR has a strong presence inside Iraq and hence its  assessment
      is able to draw on front-line sources. That said, we consider we  must
      also have regard to the fact that UNHCR's concerns in respect of  Iraq
      go far wider than the issue of risk on return for  asylum-seekers  but
      also embrace the giving of  assistance to  broader UN-related  efforts
      to help Iraq, as evidenced for example by  its  involvement  with  the
      ICAP 2010.  From the ICAP 2010 document (at n.3) we learn  that  UNHCR
      has a comprehensive 2010 country  programme  for  Iraq  with  a  total
      budget of  $264.3  million,  comprising  $87.7  million  for  refugees
      (inside Iraq) and returned refugees, $1 million for stateless  people,
      $311  million  for  reintegration  and  $144.5   million   for   IDPs.
      Additionally, as a result  of  its  multiple  levels  of  involvement,
      UNHCR's assessment of risk on return must inevitably be influenced  by
      its own strategic concerns about the viability  of  returning  refugee
      flows. (We note its concerns about Syrian and Jordanian  reactions  to
      the increase in voluntary returns).

 273. In our judgment (subject only to what we say below about Ninewah)  the
      situation in Iraq currently is not one in which it can  be  said  that
      failed asylum-seekers from the five central  provinces  (governorates)
      would face a real risk if returned of serious harm contrary to Article
      15(c).  One main reason UNHCR gives for  its  contrary  view  is  that
      inside these five provinces levels of violence are/remain sufficiently
      high to result in a situation where all civilians can be said to  face
      a real risk of serious harm.  It cites in support various  statements,
      including the UNSC July 2008 statement that civilian casualties  as  a
      result of violence "remain unacceptably high". We do not see, however,
      that such statements easily translate to a statement about  thresholds
      of violence for the purposes  of  Article  15(c)  where  the  test  as
      formulated by Elgafaji is  to  consider  whether  simply  by  being  a
      civilian a person is exposed to a real risk of serious harm.

 274. Another main reason UNHCR gives is that so far as trends in levels  of
      violence are concerned, there have been various setbacks and there are
      likely to be more. That is no doubt true  (and  indeed  between  April
      2009 and August 2010 there have been), but it remains that all studies
      agree the trends relating to levels of violence  are  generally  down,
      albeit with some local variations.  There  is  no  unilinear  downward
      trend and indeed there are some  signs  of  a  levelling  off  but  it
      remains that even the spikes in the various charts  (and  also  taking
      into  account  the  latest  IBC  figures  for  July/August  2010)  are
      dramatically below what the levels were  in  2006/2007.  Further,  the
      preponderance of the evidence indicates that one of the main insurgent
      groups causing significant levels of indiscriminate violence -  AQI  -
      has been significantly degraded from its previous levels  of  strength
      in terms of its infrastructure and in terms of the number of its bases
      in the country. Despite  ongoing  uncertainties  arising  out  of  the
      recent elections and with the further drawdown of US troop levels, now
      just below 50,000, it does seem that most of the main Sunni and  Shi'a
      parties continue to have a strong investment in government  through  a
      civil rather than a military process. Whilst there is every reason  to
      expect significant numbers of attacks to continue, such evidence as is
      presently to hand does not indicate that it will  lead  to  levels  of
      violence reverting to anything like previous levels.

 275. Another reason given by UNHCR is that the levels of  violence  in  the
      five provinces are significantly higher than  elsewhere.  However,  in
      Tameem the average number of attacks a day is two  a  day  whereas  in
      Diyala they are one a day. As a point of comparison, in rough terms it
      would appear that the average number of  daily  executed  attacks  per
      province is slightly over two a day (adding up  the  number  of  daily
      executed attacks in each province gives 28;  dividing  the  number  of
      provinces/governorates  (18)  by  the  population  of  Iraq   (approx.
      30,077,000) the figure then comes to 2.14).  We  have  already  noted,
      however, that the situation in Ninewah and Mosul appears to  call  for
      closer scrutiny.

 276. A further main reason given by UNHCR is  that  there  continue  to  be
      displacements of Iraqi nationals caused by ongoing violence.  However,
      such continuing displacements as there are appear largely  to  consist
      now of persons who fall into particular risk categories by  virtue  of
      their ethnic, religious or tribal origins. They do not  appear  to  be
      movements undertaken by members of the civilian population  generally.
      Additionally the continuing displacements are clearly  at  much  lower
      levels than they were and appear to be  significantly  less  than  the
      number of returns being made by IDPs and refugees.

 277. There is another consideration relating to these returns; it  is  also
      one that arose in the case of KH. In the context of our assessment  we
      cannot exclude as a relevant consideration  the  significance  of  the
      fact  that  UNHCR  itself  has  been  involved  in  voluntary   return
      programmes for Iraq. We  acknowledge  that  in  2009  UNHCR  expressed
      reluctance to  encourage  enforced  returns  because  of  the  fragile
      security situation. At the same time, UNHCR continues to  assist  with
      voluntary returns and, whilst not all returns to Iraq can  be  assumed
      to be wholly voluntary (e.g. because of pressures placed by the Syrian
      authorities on Iraqis who have fled to that country), there  has  been
      no UNHCR statement suggesting or declaring that voluntary returnees in
      general should be considered as having returned to face persecution or
      serious harm. UNHCR has documented incidents of  persecution  to  some
      returnees (see e.g. [93] of the April 2009 Guidelines, but it  is  not
      suggested anywhere that this is what is generally happening  to  IDPs.
      (Indeed it would be most  surprising  that  UNHCR  would  continue  to
      involve itself in voluntary return programmes if  its  experience  was
      that in general returnees were facing persecution on return. As stated
      by the Tribunal in KH: "If such persons  were  facing  persecution  or
      serious harm on return we would have expected that  UNHCR  would  have
      been the very first body to have said so, for otherwise they would  be
      acting contrary to their own mandate and contrary to their supervisory
      responsibilities  both  under  their  own  Statute  and  the   Refugee
      Convention"  ([211]).  In  addition,  the  latest  evidence  indicates
      improvements in the lot of IDPs since March 2009.

 278. We have already addressed the  concerns  of  UNHCR  and  others  about
      problems of access and residency: see [283-291] and [263]-[264] above.
      As we have seen, various paragraphs of the UNHCR Guidelines also  deal
      with internal travel and internal relocation. It is convenient  if  we
      deal with their relevance when looking  at  these  matters  separately
      below. Our principal conclusions, therefore, are as follows:

   i. Although Iraq is still a "weak state" afflicted by many problems,  the
      GoI armed forces  have  demonstrated  the  capacity  to  maintain  the
      improved levels of security that have been present since 2008 and  the
      present evidence does not suggest that that capacity will collapse now
      there has been withdrawal of all but around 50,000  US  troops  on  31
      August 2010 (the latter principally concerned with training).

  ii.  We  do  not  find  that  the  degree   of   indiscriminate   violence
      characterising the current armed conflict taking place in Iraq reaches
      such a high level that substantial grounds  are  shown  for  believing
      that any civilian returned there, would,  solely  on  account  of  his
      presence there face a real risk  of  being  subject  to  that  threat.
      However, we do not rule out that if in certain areas the figures  rise
      to unacceptable levels (relative to the size of the population in that
      area) that Article 15(c) might be engaged, at least in respect of  the
      issue of risk in the home area, although we would emphasise  that  any
      assessment would be one that was both quantitative and qualitative and
      took into account a wide range  of  variables,  not  just  numbers  of
      attacks or deaths. For example, it is necessary to bear in  mind  that
      both in Ninewah (which is the second largest governorate by population
      (approx. 2,800,000) and in Mosul (which has a  population  of  approx.
      1,800,000) the population is  experiencing  particular  problems:  see
      [261] above.

 iii. But even if there were certain areas where the violence reached levels
      sufficient in our judgment to engage Article 15(c)  we  consider  that
      there is likely to be considerable scope for internal relocation  that
      achieves both safety and reasonableness in all the  circumstances.  We
      consider UNHCR's submissions on internal relocation are tied  in  with
      general policy  considerations  (e.g.  about  managing  the  rates  of
      return) deriving from their general and Iraq-specific remit; we do not
      consider that in the light of the evidence taken as a whole that their
      submissions establish for mere  civilian  returnees  a  real  risk  of
      persecution under the Refugee Convention  or  of  serious  harm  under
      either the Qualification Directive or Article 3 ECHR currently.

  iv. The current levels of violence in Iraq are unacceptably high  but  the
      consensus of the evidence is that a very significant proportion of the
      violence is targeted against  persons  with  specific  characteristics
      over and above being mere civilians:  government  officials,  security
      personnel, civil servants, religious and political leaders, members of
      professional groups such as journalists, educators,  medical  doctors,
      judges and lawyers and attacks also are directed against persons based
      on their perceived sexual orientation, with violence against women and
      "honour" -related homicides (at least in certain parts of Iraq)  being
      a serious concern: see  above  [97].  Whilst  civilians  as  such  are
      adversely affected by such targeted violence, that is clearly not  the
      same as being the actual targets. Such persons - persons  who  are  at
      greater risk - are very likely  to  be  eligible  for  either  refugee
      protection  or  subsidiary  (humanitarian)  protection  under  Article
      15(b), as well as under Article 15(c) of the  Qualification  Directive
      under the sliding scale set out in Elgafaji at [39].

   v. The assessment is not purely quantitative but if every increased  risk
      factor (linked to  one  or  more  of  the  above  characteristics)  is
      stripped out of the equation, that means that the  risk  facing  those
      who are mere civilians are considerably less.

  vi. The evidence relating to UK returnees to Iraq in June  2010  does  not
      demonstrate that the returns process will involve serious harm. It  is
      significant that UKBA is already taking steps to improve procedures in
      the light of concerns expressed by  UNHCR  and  others  over  the  two
      charter flights in that month.

 vii. So far as concerns UK enforced returns, we  are  satisfied  that  such
      problems would not result in serious harm.

viii. In short,  the  risk  for  mere  civilians  of  being  the  victim  of
      indiscriminate harm is not so substantial, the ability of the  GoI  to
      protect is not so negligible and  the  willingness  of  the  displaced
      populations of Iraq is not so compromised that return to that  country
      would require international protection.


Part 7: Our assessment: the appellants



Risk in home areas

The M brothers (RM and HM) and Kirkuk

279. Clearly problems remain in Tameem  governorate/province.   However,  we
    consider that there has been a level of improvement there, perhaps  not
    as marked as that in Diyala but nevertheless one of clear  significance
    by comparison with the recent past, and  that  again  it  reflects  the
    general situation of improvement in the security situation in Iraq.  We
    note that there is now in place an  interim  joint  security  plan  for
    Kirkuk and other internally disputed areas by the USF-I involving joint
    action and coordination by the Iraqi Army and Police as well as the KRG
    Peshmerga. This plan has resulted in the establishment of a network  of
    checkpoints and joint patrols around major cities and the  training  of
    security personnel, including in Kirkuk.

280. We consider that the M brothers have not shown that they  face  a  real
    risk of serious harm as defined in Article 15(c) of  the  Qualification
    Directive in the light of our assessment of the evidence above and  its
    application to  them  as  returnees  to  Iraq  without  any  particular
    profile.

ASA and Diyala

281. We consider that the Diyala governorate in general shows  a  continuing
    improvement in the security situation. Clearly  AQI  have  been  pushed
    back to the mountains essentially, and the improved security  situation
    is reflected in the significant number  of  returnees.  Problems  still
    exist,  but  the  situation  in  Diyala  broadly  reflects   the   very
    significant fall in  security  incidents  that  we  have  seen  in  the
    evidence concerning Iraq as a whole.   This has clear significance  for
    Mr ASA. Quite apart from what we have had  to  say  about  the  current
    situation in Iraq generally, we consider he has not shown that he faces
    a real risk of  serious  harm  as  defined  in  Article  15(c)  of  the
    Qualification Directive.

AA and Baghdad

282. We have seen that even though the figures for  security  incidents  and
    civilian casualties in Baghdad are higher there than elsewhere in Iraq,
    there has been a significant fall in  levels  of  violence,  and  AQI's
    presence in the capital has declined somewhat.  There have  been  quite
    large numbers of returnees, though post-election political  uncertainty
    has led to an increase in violence.   There  is  assistance  from  MoDM
    there, as elsewhere, for returnees. Taken  overall,  we  do  not  think
    Baghdad is currently experiencing sufficiently high levels of  violence
    to engage Article 15(c)  for  those,  like  AA  and  indeed  the  other
    appellants involved in these appeals, who are mere civilians.

283. Taking this evidence as a whole, we  consider  that  the  situation  on
    return for any of the appellants is not such as to show a real risk  of
    serious harm coming within the definition in  Article  15(c).   Plainly
    there is some level of risk  on  return,  civilians  can  sometimes  be
    targeted or find themselves in the  vicinity  of  an  attack  which  is
    targeted on  some  other  entity.  But  we  consider  there  have  been
    significant improvements in recent years, including between the time of
    the UNHCR April 2009 Guidelines and the more recent period,  and  as  a
    consequence we conclude that none of the appellants has  made  out  his
    claim to be at risk of serious  harm  under  Article  15(c)  purely  by
    virtue of being a civilian.   The fact that all are young  male  Iraqis
    who  hail  from  Kirkuk,  Diyala  and  Baghdad  respectively  are   not
    additional characteristics that add anything to the issue  of  risk  on
    return.

Internal travel

284. Even assuming we are correct that none of the appellants faces  a  real
    risk of serious harm in their  home  areas,  there  still  remains  the
    question of whether they can safely access those areas, the routes from
    Baghdad-Kirkuk, Baghdad-Diyala in particular.

285. It is clear that Iraq has a developed road network. According to IOM:

         "During the Iran-Iraq war a major network of roads was  constructed
         throughout Iraq to facilitate the movement of troops and  supplies.
         Tarmac roads connect most main towns, with  the  network  spreading
         from Baghdad, at the centre of  the  country.  The  most  important
         roads extend  from  Baghdad  to  Iraq's  various  borders:  Kotchuk
         (521km) and Rurba (555km) on the Syrian border;  Zakho  (544km)  on
         the Turkish border; Basra (586km)  near  the  Kuwaiti  border;  and
         Khanaqin (about 150km) on the Iranian border. By  June  1990,  most
         sections had been completed on the six-lane  1,264km  international
         Express Highway linking Safwan  on  the  Kuwaiti  border  with  the
         Syrian and Turkish borders. All these roads  take  in  major  towns
         along their routes."

286. We note that in her skeleton argument it was confirmed that it was  the
    Secretary of State's position that once returned to Baghdad,  it  would
    be for the appellants to make their own way back to  their  home  areas
    (namely, Kirkuk for the M brothers; Baquabah, Diyala for  Mr  ASA;  and
    Baghdad for Mr AA) or to an area of relocation. In point  of  fact,  so
    far as concerns the M brothers,  it would  appear  from  the  statement
    produced by Mr Walker  subsequent  to  the  hearing  that  the  current
    practice is that persons returned by the UK who  are  from  Kirkuk  are
    flown from Baghdad International airport to Erbil and travel from there
    by road to Kirkuk, a relatively short distance.  That  reduces  further
    the likelihood that those from Kirkuk will  encounter  difficulties  en
    route. However, we shall assume that the position remains the  same  as
    Mr Staker described it in his submissions.

 287. Having considered the evidence as  a  whole  our  assessment  is  that
      internal travel along the routes concerned in these appeals cannot  be
      said to reach the threshold  of  Article  15(c)  risk.  Our  principal
      reasons for arriving at this conclusion are  as  follows.  First,  the
      figures for roadside bombs and  security  incidents  along  the  roads
      concerned are significantly down on  what  they  were  previously  and
      appear to be below the figures that UNHCR April 2009  Guidelines  were
      examining in April 2009. SE

 288. Second, albeit the April 2009  Guidelines  state  that  "...all  roads
      remain potentially dangerous", they also accept in the  same  sentence
      that nonetheless "[t]ravel by road within  the  Central  and  Southern
      governorates has become fairly safe in many areas..." ([40], [98]).

 289. Third, it is clear from the SIGIR reports of 30 January  2010  and  30
      April 2010 (pp.61-75) that, the government with  assistance  from  the
      international  community  has  been  able  to  carry  out  significant
      improvements in the transport infrastructure in Iraq in  recent  years
      notwithstanding  roadside  attacks  and  the  like,  specifically   in
      relation to roads and bridges, railways and aviation.

 290. There are no reports of any violence having been successfully directed
      towards air or rail services.  As regards civil aviation, the evidence
      is that there are now a number of  civilian  flights  running  between
      major Iraqi cities. Details of the  five  international  airports  are
      provided in Jane's Sentinel Security Assessment of 22 May 2009 as well
      as on the website of the Iraqi Civil Aviation Authority. As posted  on
      19 May 2010, the Ministry of Transport provides recent statistics  for
      the use of the airport:


         "The state establishment of Civil Aviation - one of the Ministry of
         Transport formations issued a report on the  movement  of  aircraft
         and passengers at Iraqi civilian airports for the  period  from  1-
         5/7/2010 the number of flights coming  into  Baghdad  International
         Airport were 134 flights arrived on its board 13,078 passengers and
         departing flights were 134 journey left on board 10,896 passengers.
         While the number of flights coming to Basra  International  Airport
         were 28 flights arrived on its board 1161 passengers and 28 left on
         its board 1,390 passengers. While [sic] Mosul International Airport
         has reached flights arrived on  its  board  751  passengers  and  6
         departure flight left on board 6,186 passengers. It  is  noteworthy
         that the number of flights mentioned  above  include  all  airlines
         operating."




 291. In its April 2009 Guidelines at [98] UNHCR confirmed that:

         "Travel  by  air  from  Baghdad  International  Airport  has   also
         relatively improved. Though there have been no  recent  attacks  on
         civilian aircraft, the potential threat still exists."




 292. These sources indicate that there are transport options available  for
      internal  travel  within  Iraq.  The  available  evidence   does   not
      demonstrate anything  approaching  an  Article  15(c)  level  of  risk
      associated with any of these modes of transport.


Part 8: Internal Relocation

293. From the above it will be clear that we have not found that any of  the
    appellants faces a real risk of serious harm  (or  persecution  or  ill
    treatment contrary to Article 3) in their  respective  home  areas.  As
    such we  are  not  strictly  speaking  required  to  consider  internal
    relocation but we shall go on to consider this in  the  alternative  as
    the general level of our Article 15(c) examination necessitates that we
    map out the main possibilities for civilian returnees generally.

294. We cannot accept UNHCR's analysis of the issue of  internal  relocation
    material to the present appeals. At [90] they state that  with  respect
    to refugee claims of Iraqi asylum-seekers from the Central and Southern
    governorates who are fleeing  persecution  from  non-state  actors,  no
    internal  relocation  alternative  within  these  five   provinces   is
    available generally because of "(i) the ability of non-State agents  of
    persecution to perpetrate acts of violence with impunity...". In brief,
    we cannot see how targeted pursuit to otherwise safe areas is  relevant
    to fear of indiscriminate violence in unsafe areas.

295. So far as concerns internal relocation from persons who originate  from
    the five central provinces to other areas of Iraq other than the  three
    northern governorates, it follows from our earlier analysis that except
    possibly in the region currently considered the most dangerous in Iraq,
    Ninewah/Mosul,  that the rest of Iraq can be  considered  as  safe  for
    such relocation.

296. As regards relocation to the KRG, the  UNHCR  Guidelines  when  dealing
    with the three northern governorates consider that (in addition to  the
    difficulties in travelling to them) strict security measures have  been
    introduced by the Kurdish authorities at their checkpoints.   Reference
    is made to the need to have an acquaintance  in  order  to  legalise  a
    person's stay and the need either to establish political links  to  the
    region or provide  evidence  that  the  person  in  question  has  fled
    violence or persecution.  The need for a sponsor is also referred to.

297. We note at this point that in earlier decisions the Tribunal made  very
    similar observations -  for  example  in  LM  [2006]  UKAIT  00060  the
    Tribunal noted the need for sponsorship for those wishing to enter  the
    governorates of Kirkuk, Sulaymaniyah and Dohuk or for people to have  a
    proven link  to  the  territories.   Similar  difficulties  were  noted
    subsequently in NS [2007] UKAIT 00046 and SR [2009] UKAIT 00038.  These
    essentially mirror UNHCR's position in UNHCR guidelines in force at the
    relevant times.

298. However, we now have a report of the Danish Immigration  Service  dated
    April 2010.  This  is  entitled:  Entry  Procedures  and  Residence  in
    Kurdistan Region of  Iraq  (KRG)  for  Iraqi  Nationals.  It  was  made
    following a fact-finding mission to Erbil, Sulaymaniyah, Dohuk, KRG and
    Amman in Jordan.  It is clear from the report that any  Iraqi  national
    with an Iraqi ID is free to enter the KRG  and  free  to  reside  there
    after registration at a local Asayish office in the KRG.  There  is  no
    demand for a sponsor or guarantor to be present at KRG  checkpoints  in
    order for an Iraqi national to be allowed entry into  the  KRG.   There
    are no accounts of Iraqi nationals, irrespective of religious or ethnic
    background, or place of origin in Iraq, being discriminated against  at
    KRG checkpoints or in the KRG, nor  of  any  such  people  having  been
    deported from the KRG to  the  GoI  area  or  to  the  disputed  areas.
    However, Iraqi nationals who are registered on the  so-called  list  of
    suspects which is also called the  blacklist,  will  not  be  permitted
    entry to the KRG.  The  entry  and  identification  procedures  at  KRG
    checkpoints are solely for security purposes.  Iraqi nationals who wish
    to stay for an extended period of time in the KRG have to register at a
    local Asayish police office after entering the  KRG  and  if  an  Iraqi
    national wishes to stay for an extended period of time in the KRG  they
    need a sponsor or guarantor.

299. There are no accounts of Iraqi nationals having been deported from  the
    KRG to the GoI  area  or  to  the  disputed  areas  for  not  having  a
    sponsor/guarantor and although such a person is legally responsible for
    the person he or she is  sponsoring,  there  are  no  accounts  of  any
    sponsor/guarantor having been arrested or detained by KRG  authorities.
    Iraqi nationals, including IDPs, in the KRG have access to housing  and
    employment, free public health and  schooling  and  are  free  to  move
    throughout the KRG if they have registered with the  Asayish.  The  KRG
    entry procedures are uniform in all the governorates of the KRG. It was
    said by the Head of Political Department, Security  Services,  Asayish,
    KRG Erbil, that it was very unlikely that an Iraqi  could  not  find  a
    sponsor/guarantor and he had never heard of cases where  this  had  not
    been possible.  He said that  every  Iraqi  knew  someone  and  it  was
    impossible to think of an Iraqi arriving in the KRG  without  having  a
    relative, a friend or acquaintance in the region.   If  this  were  the
    case, and the person was unable to find a sponsor/guarantor, their case
    would be filed at the Asayish anyway, and he said that the person would
    eventually  find  a  sponsor/guarantor  either  in  Erbil,   Dohuk   or
    Sulaymaniyah.

300. We have not had the benefit of any expert evidence  commenting  on  the
    recent Danish Immigration Service report, but if  its  conclusions  are
    right, then the need to have a sponsor to enable a person  to  stay  in
    the KRG (identified in existing Tribunal  country  guidance)  seems  to
    have become somewhat nominal, albeit it remains a formal requirement.

301. We have already addressed UNHCR's concerns about access  and  residency
    restrictions in [283-291]  and  [263-264]  above.  As  regards  UNHCR's
    concerns about  the hardship faced in ensuring even basic  survival  in
    areas of relocation (we shall call the latter the  "economic  hardship"
    question), it is relevant to note the points made in the  Secretary  of
    State's skeleton argument as to the range of  assistance  available  to
    returnees generally.  The GoI currently offers a 1 million Iraqi  dinar
    grant to eligible returnee families, and the  IOM  provides  assistance
    through its  Voluntary  Assisted  Return  and  Reintegration  Programme
    (VARRP) under which  financial  support  towards  vocational  training,
    education for adults  and  children,  small  business  set  up  or  job
    placements is  provided  in  order  to  ensure  that  their  return  is
    sustainable.  In respect of irregular migrants in the UK without  legal
    documentation, support is provided from the  IOM's  Assisted  Voluntary
    Return  for  Irregular  Migrants  Programme   (AVRIM)   which   enables
    assistance to be provided for obtaining  travel  documentation,  paying
    for flights home and assisting each returnee at the airport on  arrival
    and departure, as well as providing all necessary support  with  onward
    transportation to a returnee's home town if necessary.  The IOM  has  a
    number of programmes which are designed to assist returnee families  in
    Iraq, including the Programme  for  Human  Security  and  Stabilisation
    (PHSS) which provides income  generation  assistance  through  business
    start-up tools and training.   Between  January  and  March  2009  PHSS
    provided income grants to help 200 returnee families  start  their  own
    businesses, and between July and September of that year PHSS helped  an
    additional 300 returnee families in Baghdad and  Diyala  with  in  kind
    grants for businesses.  In addition IOM Iraq targets returnee  families
    for assistance with emergency food and non-food item distributions  and
    Community Assistance projects (CAPs).  There is evidence from  the  IOM
    concerning assistance towards returnees to Diyala, in which a number of
    international organisations, including the IOM,  UNHCR  and  the  World
    Food  Programme  (WFP).   Assistance  provided  includes  water,  food,
    health, education and housing.

302. We would add that we do not consider we should  attach  any  weight  to
    the fact that in July 2010 UNHCR sent information to the Tribunal which
    described some of the person interviewed who had returned on  the  June
    charter flights as not having access to health or education. When  they
    were interviewed they had only been back in Iraq a short while  and  as
    such their experiences do not assist as to what happens to returnees in
    the longer term.

Internal relocation: the appellants

303. Looking in turn at how the appellants in this case  would  fare  if  we
    had accepted they faced a real risk of  serious  harm  in  their  homes
    areas.

304.  As  to  the  general  evidence  relating  to  internal  relocation  to
    Tameem/Kirkuk (which is of relevance to Mr ASA and Mr  AA),  to  Diyala
    (of potential relevance to all but ASA), and to Baghdad (which would be
    of relevance to Mr AA and the M brothers) we simply refer  to  what  we
    have stated at [277]-[281] above, adding only that we take into account
    as well that each of the appellants is male, relatively young and  does
    not have any particular health difficulties.

KRG

305. In any event, even if internal relocation within central  and  southern
    Iraq were problematic, we consider each of the appellants would be able
    to relocate in safety and without undue hardship to  the  KRG.   It  is
    clear from  our  earlier  assessment  at  [296]-[305]  above  that  the
    security situation in the KRG is better than anywhere else in Iraq, for
    example it is said in the USSD report, Measuring Stability and Security
    in Iraq, of March 2010 that the KRG remains the safest and most  stable
    region of Iraq, although isolated acts of terrorism occasionally occur.
     On the strength of the recent Danish  Immigration  Service  report  it
    seems to us that the requirement for a sponsor has become  increasingly
    nominal. We do not think it can properly be argued that  relocation  to
    the KRG would be unduly harsh bearing in mind the test set out  by  the
    House of Lords in Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  v  AH
    (Sudan) &  Others  [2007]  UKHL  49.   We  consider  that  any  of  the
    appellants (who, we repeat, are male, relatively young and do not  have
    any health difficulties) would be able to live a relatively normal life
    in the KRG judging by the standards prevailing in Iraq  generally,  and
    also that the evidence shows that  it  can  be  reached  without  undue
    hardship.  The evidence shows that there are now a number  of  civilian
    flights running between major Iraqi cities leading from Baghdad to  the
    northern governorates, and that, as was said by UNHCR, travel  by  road
    within the central and southern governorates has become fairly safe  in
    many areas, albeit that  all  roads  are  said  to  remain  potentially
    dangerous.  Accordingly we conclude that even if we had found there was
    a risk on their home areas, there is an internal flight alternative for
    each  of  these  appellants  and  it  would  not  be  unduly  harsh  or
    unreasonable for them should it be necessary to do so, to  relocate  to
    one of the three northern governorates.

306. For the above reasons,  in  all  four  appeals  the  immigration  judge
    materially erred in law. However, the decision we re-make in respect of
    each appellant is to dismiss his appeal.


Signed                                             Date

  [pic]

Mr Justice Blake
President of the Upper Tribunal,
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)







                 APPENDIX: LIST OF DOCUMENTATION CONSIDERED



|     |                                               |                |
|Item |Document                                       |Date            |
|     |                                               |                |
|1    |                                               |Accessed 15     |
|     |Iraqbodycount.org/database website             |September 2010  |
|     |                                               |                |
|2    |                                               |Accessed 15     |
|     |www.brookings.edu website                      |September 2010  |
|3    |UNHCR "Note on the Continued Applicability of  |July 2010       |
|     |the April 2009 UNHCR Eligibility Guidelines for|                |
|     |Assessing the International Protection Needs of|                |
|     |Iraqi Asylum Seekers"                          |                |
|4    |Uruknet.info report                            |19 June 2010    |
|5    |WFP: "WFP launches cash for work programme in  |19 May 2010     |
|     |Iraq"                                          |                |
|     |                                               |                |
|6    |Ministry of Transportation: "Aircraft and      |19 May 2010     |
|     |passengers movement activities at the Iraqi    |                |
|     |civilian airports"                             |                |
|     |                                               |                |
|7    |Ministry of Transportation, Iraq "Minister of  |12 May 2010     |
|     |Transport travels from Baghdad to Basra on a   |                |
|     |passenger train"                               |                |
|     |                                               |                |
|8    |United Nations and Iraq Sign Historic Agreement|11 May 2010     |
|     |to Boost Development and Restore Services and  |                |
|     |Economic Growth                                |                |
|     |                                               |                |
|9    |Amnesty International: "Killings of civilians  |11 May 2010     |
|     |in Iraq condemned as war crimes"               |                |
|10   |Bureau of Near East Affairs, USSD, Iraq Status |5 May 2010      |
|     |Report                                         |                |
|     |                                               |                |
|11   |Iraq Body Count: 'Exaggerated claims,          |5 May 2010      |
|     |substandard research, and a disservice to      |                |
|     |truth'                                         |                |
|     |                                               |                |
|12   |Home Office (RDS) statistics Asylum            |May 2010        |
|     |Applications for 2008 - 2009                   |                |
|     |                                               |                |
|13   |Home Office (RDS)  statistics on returns -     |May 2010        |
|     |voluntary and enforced 2004 - 2009             |                |
|     |                                               |                |
|14   |Special Inspector General for Iraq             |30 April 2010   |
|     |Reconstruction, Quarterly Report to the US     |                |
|     |Congress                                       |                |
|     |                                               |                |
|15   |Amnesty International, Civilians Under Fire    |27 April 2010   |
|     |                                               |                |
|16   |                                               |27 April 2010   |
|     |Brookings Institute Iraq Index, 27 April 2010  |                |
|     |                                               |                |
|17   |US Central Command: "Iraqis make security      |21 April 2010   |
|     |progress as war winds down"                    |                |
|     |                                               |                |
|18   |Centre for Strategic & International Studies:  |19 April 2010   |
|     |"Q&A, Iraq after the death of Al-Qaeda in      |                |
|     |Iraq's Leadership"                             |                |
|     |                                               |                |
|     |                                               |                |
|19   |IOM emergency needs assessments four years of  |16 April 2010   |
|     |post-Samarra displacement in Iraq              |(based on news  |
|     |                                               |brief for       |
|     |                                               |report, as      |
|     |                                               |report itself is|
|     |                                               |undated).       |
|20   |FCO Travel advice: Iraq                        |15 April 2010   |
|     |                                               |                |
|21   |Brookings Institute, April 2010 Index Update: A|5 April 2010    |
|     |look into Afghanistan, Pakistan and Iraq Index |                |
|22   |IRIN, State food aid package slashed           |1 April 2010    |
|23   |Economist Intelligence Unit, EIU, Iraq         |April 2010      |
|24   |Danish Immigration Service: "Entry Procedures  |April 2010      |
|     |and Residence in Kurdistan Region of Iraq for  |                |
|     |Iraqi Nationals"                               |                |
|     |                                               |                |
|25   |IOM "UK's Reintegration Assistance to Returnees|April 2010      |
|     |under VARRP's New Approach (2007 - 2009)"      |                |
|     |                                               |                |
|26   |UNHCR "Diyala Initiative"                      |April 2010      |
|     |                                               |                |
|27   |IRIN, "Leading Politician Allawi promises to   |30 March 2010   |
|     |help refugees, IDPs"                           |                |
|28   |Refugee International, Field Report, 17 March  |17 March 2010   |
|     |2010                                           |                |
|     |                                               |11 March 2010   |
|29   |USSD: "Human Rights Report 2009"               |                |
|     |                                               |10 March 2010   |
|30   |Center for Excellence, Iraq Humanitarian       |                |
|     |Assistance Report                              |                |
|     |                                               |9 March 2010    |
|31   |Iraq: IDPs returning to Diyala Province in     |                |
|     |increasing numbers                             |                |
|     |                                               |4 March 2010    |
|32   |IDMC, Iraq: Little New Displacement but in the |                |
|     |region of 2.8 million Iraqis remain internally |                |
|     |displaced                                      |                |
|     |                                               |2 March 2010    |
|33   |ICRC, Iraq Making the Best of a bad situation  |                |
|     |                                               |                |
|34   |USF website: "Prism Interview with USF-I       |2 March 2010    |
|     |Commanding General, Gen. Ray Odierno"          |                |
|     |                                               |                |
|35   |Amnesty International: "Iraq Human Rights      |1 March 2010    |
|     |Briefing"                                      |                |
|     |                                               |                |
|36   |UNHCR, Monthly statistical return update       |March 2010      |
|     |                                               |                |
|37   |Centre For Strategic & International Studies,  |March 2010      |
|     |"Iraq: Meeting the Challenges of 2010"         |                |
|     |                                               |                |
|38   |UNHCR, Iraq Fact Sheet                         |March 2010      |
|     |                                               |                |
|39   |US Department of Defence, "Measuring Stability |March 2010      |
|     |and Security in Iraq, March 2010"              |                |
|40   |Danish Refugee Council, "Quarterly Report Jan -|March 2010      |
|     |March 2010"                                    |                |
|     |                                               |                |
|41   |Council on Foreign Relations, "No place like   |26 February 2010|
|     |home: Iraq's Refugee Crisis Threatens Iraq"    |                |
|     |                                               |                |
|42   |Congressional Research Service, "Iraq          |25 February 2010|
|     |Casualties: US Military Forces and Iraqi       |                |
|     |Civilians, Police and Security Forces"         |                |
|     |                                               |25 February 2010|
|43   |US State Department, Travel Advice             |                |
|     |                                               |                |
|44   |Returnees and IDPs face difficulties in        |25 February 2010|
|     |registration and obtaining documentation       |                |
|     |required (2005-2009)                           |                |
|     |                                               |17 February 2010|
|45   |Centre For Strategic & International Studies,  |                |
|     |"The uncertain security situation in Iraq:     |                |
|     |Trends in Violence, casualties, and Iraqi      |                |
|     |Perceptions"                                   |                |
|46   |Report of the UN Secretary General to the      |8 February 2010 |
|     |Security Council                               |                |
|47   |IOM Governorate Profile, Diyala                |February 2010   |
|48   |IOM Governorate Profile, Kirkuk                |February 2010   |
|49   |IOM Governorate Profile, Salah al Din          |February 2010   |
|50   |UNHCR, "Returns to Iraq March 2009 - February  |February 2010   |
|     |2010"                                          |                |
|51   |UNHCR, "Returns to Baghdad March 2009 -        |February 2010   |
|     |February 2010"                                 |                |
|     |                                               |                |
|52   |Special Inspector General for Iraq             |30 January 2010 |
|     |Reconstruction, "Quarterly and Semi-annual     |                |
|     |report to the US Congress"                     |                |
|53   |UK Home Office Country of Origin Information   |12 January 2009 |
|     |Service, Iraq COI Report, January 2009         |                |
|     |                                               |                |
|54   |IRIN, "Squatters moved out of nearly two thirds|10 January 2010 |
|     |of returnees' homes"                           |                |
|     |                                               |                |
|55   |IRIN, "Iraqis welcome WFP in state food aid    |6 January 2010  |
|     |system"                                        |                |
|     |                                               |                |
|56   |Human Rights Watch, "Annual Report covering    |January 2010    |
|     |events in 2009"                                |                |
|57   |IOM Newsletter 2010                            |Jan - March 2010|
|58   |UNHCR, "Protection and Assistance Centres in   |Jan - March 2010|
|     |Iraq Jan - March 2010"                         |                |
|59   |Armed Conflict Database (IISS)                 |January -       |
|     |                                               |February 2010   |
|60   |UNHCR "Significant achievements in 2009"       |Undated, 2010   |
|     |                                               |                |
|61   |Iraq Body Count, "Civilian deaths from violence|31 December 2009|
|     |in 2009: Analysis of the year's toll from the  |                |
|     |Iraq Body Count Project"                       |                |
|     |                                               |                |
|62   |Council on Foreign Relations, "Iraq Bombings:  |12 December 2009|
|     |Manipulating the Political Scene"              |                |
|     |                                               |                |
|63   |OCHA, "Iraq 2010 Humanitarian Action Plan"     |December 2009   |
|     |                                               |                |
|64   |IDMC, "Resolving Iraqi Displacement:           |18-19 November  |
|     |Humanitarian and Development perspectives"     |2009            |
|65   |IOM Assessment of Returns to Iraq              |3 November 2009 |
|66   |IRRICO Country Sheet for Iraq                  |November 2009   |
|     |                                               |                |
|67   |UNHCR, "Protection Monitoring Assessments      |October 2009    |
|     |Summary Jan - October 2009"                    |                |
|     |                                               |                |
|68   |IZDIHAR, "Iraq Private sector growth and       |10 August 2009  |
|     |Employment Generation"                         |                |
|     |                                               |                |
|69   |UNAMI "Human Rights Report"                    |June 2009       |
|     |                                               |                |
|70   |Brookings Institute Paper, "Internal           |June 2009       |
|     |Displacement in Iraq: The process of Working   |                |
|     |toward durable solutions"                      |                |
|     |                                               |22 May 2009     |
|71   |Jane's Sentinel Country Risk Assessments       |[last updated]  |
|72   |                                               |                |
|     |UNHCR: Eligibility guidelines for assessing the|April 2009      |
|     |International protection needs of Iraqi Asylum-|                |
|     |seekers                                        |                |
|     |                                               |                |
|73   |Iraq Body Count, "Civilian deaths from violence|28 December 2008|
|     |in 2008: Analysis of the year's toll from the  |                |
|     |Iraq Body Count Project"                       |                |
|74   |Country of Origin Information Service, Report  |10 December 2009|
|     |on Iraq                                        |                |
|     |                                               |                |
|75   |United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq     |2 December 2008 |
|     |(UNAMI), "Human Rights Report: 1 January - 30  |                |
|     |June 2008"                                     |                |
|     |                                               |                |
|76   |UK Home Office Border Agency, "Operational     |29 October 2008 |
|     |Guidance Note: Iraq"                           |                |
|     |                                               |October 2008    |
|77   |European Legal Network on Asylum: "The Impact  |                |
|     |of the EU Qualification Directive on           |                |
|     |International Protection"                      |                |
|     |                                               |                |
|78   |Country Assessment Documents for Iraq          |15 August 2008  |
|     |                                               |                |
|79   |Amnesty International, "Iraq: Rhetoric and     |15 June 2008    |
|     |Reality: The Iraqi Refugee Crisis"             |                |
|80   |UNHCR briefing Notes "UNHCR cautious against   |8 June 2008     |
|     |European deportees to Iraq"                    |                |
|     |                                               |                |
|81   |Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada,       |2 May 2008      |
|     |"Response to Information Request (RIR),        |                |
|     |Issuance and format of Iraqi ID documents"     |                |
|     |                                               |                |
|82   |US Department of State, "Country Reports on    |30 April 2008   |
|     |Terrorism 2007: Iraq"                          |                |
|83   |Iraq Updates 'Kirkuk attack Casualties up to   |1 March 2008    |
|     |fourteen'                                      |                |
|     |                                               |                |
|84   |Iraq Updates 'Parliament rapporteur blames army|1 March 2008    |
|     |for Kirkuk attack                              |                |
|85   |BBC News 'Iraq violence jumps in February'     |1 March 2008    |
|     |                                               |                |
|86   |Report from Dr. Rebwar Fatah Associates- Middle|29 February 2008|
|     |East Experts                                   |                |
|     |                                               |                |
|87   |Iraq Updates 'Unknown gunmen kidnap two        |28 February 2008|
|     |workers, trucker in Kirkuk'                    |                |
|88   |Iraq Updates "Police Chief escapes attempt on  |28 February 2008|
|     |his life"                                      |                |
|89   |Iraq Updates "Civilian wounded in explosion in |25 February 2008|
|     |Kirkuk"                                        |                |
|90   |BBC News "Assault looms in Iraq's 'worst       |7 February 2008 |
|     |place'"                                        |                |
|91   |The Independent "Sunni vs Shia: The real bloody|5 February 2008 |
|     |Baghdad"                                       |                |
|92   |IRIN "'Iraq': More relief aid needed in Mosul  |28 January 2008 |
|     |after blast"                                   |                |
|     |                                               |                |
|93   |UNAMI-UN Assistance Mission for Iraq- Human    |Jan - Mar 2008  |
|     |Rights Report- Iraq                            |                |
|     |                                               |                |
|94   |Brookings Institution Index of State Weakness  |2008            |
|     |in Developing World for 2008                   |                |
|     |                                               |                |
|95   |UNHCR "Addendum to UNHCR's Eligibility         |17 December 2007|
|     |Guidelines for Assessing the International     |                |
|     |Protection needs of Iraqi Asylum-Seekers"      |                |
|     |                                               |                |
|96   |UNHCR: "Eligibility Guidelines for Assessing   |August 2007     |
|     |the International Protection needs of Iraqi    |                |
|     |asylum-seekers"                                |                |
|     |                                               |                |
|97   |Human Rights Watch: "Caught in the Whirlwind,  |July 2007       |
|     |Torture and Denial of Due Process by the       |                |
|     |Kurdish Security"                              |                |
|     |                                               |                |
|98   |US Department of State Report, "Iraq, Country  |6 March 2007    |
|     |Reports on Human Rights Practices - 2006"      |                |
|     |                                               |                |
|99   |Operational Guidance Note: "Iraq"              |12 February 2007|
|     |                                               |                |
|100  |IOM UK: "Stories of Return"                    |February 2007   |
|     |                                               |                |
|101  |Pre-trial chamber in Prosecutor v Lubanga (ICC |January 2007    |
|     |- 01/04-01/06-803                              |                |
|     |                                               |                |
|102  |The New York Times: "To stay alive, Iraqi's    |5 September 2006|
|     |change their names"                            |                |
|     |                                               |                |
|103  |Letter from ECO, Jordan: Applications by Iraqi |16 June 2005    |
|     |nationals in Jordan                            |                |
|     |                                               |                |
|104  |Letter from Iraq Directorate, Foreign and      |20 March 2005   |
|     |Commonwealth Office, Iraqi Visa applications   |                |
|     |from Jordan                                    |                |
|     |                                               |                |
|105  |Kurdistan Observer 'Independent Kurdistan will |24 February 2005|
|     |benefit everyone' by Sardar Pishdare           |                |
|     |                                               |                |
|106  |Letter from Iraq Directorate, Foreign and      |10 March 2004   |
|     |Commonwealth Office                            |                |
|107  |Iraq Bulletin                                  |July 2003       |
|108  |Extract from one CIPU militia in Iraq          |October 2002    |
|     |                                               |                |
|109  |Letter from JA Keller, Secretary of good       |3 May 1992      |
|     |offices group of European lawmakers to Mr      |                |
|     |Talabani                                       |                |
|     |                                               |                |
|110  |Letter from Henrik Olesen, United Nations to   |19 November 1991|
|     |Sardar Pishdare                                |                |
|     |                                               |                |
|111  |UNHCR: General Assembly Resolution 428(v),     |1950            |
|     |Annex UN Doc A/1775                            |                |
|112  |IBC, Database                                  |Ongoing         |
|113  |ICasualties.org                                |Ongoing         |
|114  |IAU Attacks and Casualties online database     |Updated daily   |
|115  |IOM, UK activities                             |Undated         |
|116  |IOM Iraq, The Story of Zahra'a                 |Undated         |
|117  |IBC, Methods                                   |Undated         |
|118  |UNHCR, Iraq country operations profile         |Undated         |
|119  |USA Today "U.S Scrambles to keep Kirkuk from   |Undated         |
|     |Igniting"                                      |                |
|120  |Wikipedia extract "List of Countries by        |Undated         |
|     |International homicide rate"                   |                |
|     |                                               |                |
|121  |Project backdoor - Editors Introduction 'on    |Undated         |
|     |some loose ends of the gulf conflict'          |                |
|122  |International Relief Fund for Iraq website     |Undated         |
|123  |Kurdistan regional government website:         |Undated         |
|     |Travelling to Kurdistan                        |                |
|124  |Iraqi Railways, Railway map                    |Undated         |
|125  |Iraqi Railways, Projects                       |Undated         |
|126  |Europa Online, Iraq                            |Undated         |
|127  |Iraqi civil aviation authority                 |Undated         |
|128  |USF website, press briefing with Major general |Undated         |
|129  |Brookings Institute, Iraq Index                |Undated, webpage|
|     |                                               |Undated, website|
|130  |CHF International, Revitalising Iraq through   |article         |
|     |Microfinance                                   |                |
|     |                                               |                |
|131  |US AID: "Success story: Entrepreneur tastes    |Undated, website|
|     |sweet success"                                 |article         |
|132  |US AID: "Success story, Improving Communities  |Undated, website|
|     |and Livelihoods"                               |article         |
|     |                                               |                |
|133  |Foreignpolicy.com                              |Undated         |



-----------------------
[1]  See Information Note Paragraphs 11 and 12.

[2] Information Note paragraph 19 "a decision to seek a preliminary ruling
should be taken when the national proceedings have reached a stage when the
national court is able to define the factual and legal context of the
question".


