
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

        Thakrar (Cart JR; Art 8: value to community) [2018] UKUT 00336 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 July 2018                                |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT

                                   Between

                   sardabai mansukhlal girdharlal thakrar
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Dixon, instructed by KTS Legal Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

(1) The fact that an application  for  permission  to  appeal  involves  the
assertion that a person's removal from the United Kingdom would violate  his
or her human rights does not, without more, engage that part of  the  second
appeal criteria, which allows permission to  appeal  (or  permission  for  a
'Cart'  judicial  review)  to  be  granted,  on  the  basis   that   removal
constitutes a 'compelling reason'  for  the  appeal  to  be  heard.  If  the
position were  otherwise,  the  second  appeal  criteria  would  lose  their
function as a restriction on the power to  grant  permission  to  appeal  in
immigration cases.

(2) Before concluding that submissions regarding the  positive  contribution
made by an individual fall to be taken into account,  for  the  purposes  of
Article 8(2) of the ECHR, as diminishing  the  importance  to  be  given  to
immigration controls, a judge must be satisfied  that  the  contribution  is
very significant. In practice, this  is  likely  to  arise  only  where  the
matter is one over which there can be no real disagreement.  One  touchstone
for determining this is to ask whether the removal of the  person  concerned
would lead to an irreplaceable loss to the community of the  United  Kingdom
or to a significant element of it.

 (3) The fact that a person makes a substantial contribution to  the  United
Kingdom economy cannot, without more, constitute a  factor  that  diminishes
the importance to be given to immigration  controls,  when  determining  the
Article 8 position of that person or a member of his or her family.

 (4) If judicial restraint is not properly maintained in  this  area,  there
is a danger that the  public's  perception  of  human  rights  law  will  be
significantly damaged.




                            DECISION AND REASONS

A. Introduction

 1. The appellant, a citizen of Kenya born in July 1948,  appealed  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal against  the  decision  of  the  respondent  on  23
    October 2015 to refuse the appellant's human rights claim.

 2. The appellant entered the United Kingdom as a visitor from  Nairobi  on
    two occasions in 1999 and once in each of 2005 and 2007.

 3. In 2008, the appellant obtained from the  British  High  Commission  in
    Mumbai, India further entry clearance as  a  visitor.   She  used  this
    entry clearance to enter the United Kingdom on 13 July  2008,  until  9
    January 2009.

 4.  On  7  January  2009,  the  appellant  submitted  an  application  for
    indefinite leave to remain  as  a  dependent  relative  (mother)  of  a
    settled person in the United  Kingdom.   The  respondent  refused  that
    application and the appellant's resulting  appeal  to  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration Tribunal was dismissed on 18 August 2009.

 5. The appellant appears to have become  appeal  rights  exhausted  on  22
    March 2010.  Since that time, she  has  lived  in  the  United  Kingdom
    unlawfully.



B. Refusal and appeal

 6. On 15 October 2015, the appellant submitted an application for leave to
    remain on Article 8 grounds.  This  was  refused  without  a  right  of
    appeal  on  26  November  2013.  She  then  made  an  application   for
    settlement, together with a human rights claim which was refused  in  a
    letter of decision dated 5 April 2016.

 7. In the letter of decision, the respondent noted  the  submissions  that
    had been made by the appellant. This included the  assertion  that  she
    had established strong family connections and family ties in the United
    Kingdom "notably with your son  and  his  wife  resident  with  you  at
    [address] In your representations dated 26/10/2015, you also  claim  to
    have a daughter residing in the United Kingdom and  that  you  have  18
    siblings all resident in this country.  You claim  to  have  no  family
    members in Kenya."

 8. The decision letter continued by noting that the appellant had provided
    letters from her United Kingdom  doctor,  written  in  2008  and  2013,
    stating that she suffered from depression, high  blood  pressure,  high
    cholesterol, long term insomnia and vitamin D deficiency.

 9. The respondent concluded that the appellant's application did not  fall
    within the scope of the Immigration Rules.  Accordingly, the respondent
    gave consideration to whether the appellant's removal from  the  United
    Kingdom would breach her Article 8 rights, or those of her family.  The
    clear thrust of the letter was that the  respondent  did  not  consider
    Article 8 could avail the appellant.

10. In her grounds of appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  appellant
    referred to the death of her husband, during a family holiday in  India
    in 2008.  She said that she was "brought by her children to the  United
    Kingdom on 7/7/2008 as a family visitor".  The grounds stated that  the
    appellant "then left the UK accompanying her son  and  made  a  genuine
    attempt to resettle back in Kenya.  Unfortunately things  were  not  in
    her favour and all turn futile as she could not stay longer as she  was
    unable to bear the deceased husband's absence in Kenya.  The  appellant
    therefore with her son returned to the UK in November 2008."

11. The grounds then made reference to the asserted  vulnerability  of  the
    appellant; her dependency on her  son  and  daughter;  the  absence  of
    relatives in Kenya and  India;  a  "genuine  attempt"  being  made  "to
    resettle back in Kenya" which "proved futile"; and  all  close/extended
    family members were in the United Kingdom.

12. A further explanation of why the appellant could not  return  to  Kenya
    was given as follows:-

         "8.  The appellant cannot return back  to  Kenya  as  Kenya  is  no
             longer her  home.   She  is  maintaining  that  her  home  was
             wherever her husband were to be and now  that  he  has  passed
             away and there  is  nothing  left  for  her  there  in  Kenya.
             Similarly, although she is an Indian origin she has no life in
             India to return  too  as  she  has  been  residing  in  Kenya,
             alongside her husband, for the last 39 years (sic)."

13. Further reference was then made to the appellant's  asserted  need  for
    long term care, to be provided by her son and daughter  in  the  United
    Kingdom.



C. The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Eldridge

14. The appellant's appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Eldridge,
    sitting at Hatton Cross in February 2017.  In a decision promulgated on
    6 March 2017, Judge Eldridge dismissed the appellant's appeal.

15. The judge noted that he had before him a bundle, which extended to  190
    pages.  He also heard oral evidence from  the  appellant,  her  son  Mr
    Thakrar, her daughter, Mrs Madhvani, two of the appellant's sisters and
    the appellant's then 16� year old granddaughter.  It is  common  ground
    that the judge also  heard  evidence  from  the  appellant's  grandson,
    although the judge did not refer to this in the decision.   Before  me,
    Mr Dixon rightly did not seek to make anything of this omission.  As we
    shall see, Mr Dixon's attack  on  the  judge's  decision  was  somewhat
    broader.

16. At paragraph 12 of his decision, the judge said this:-

         "12. Although I had a great deal  of  evidence  and  the  Appellant
             relied upon 190  pages  of  documents,  essentially  there  is
             comparatively little that is  factually  in  dispute  in  this
             appeal.  On that basis I find the following facts:

         ?    the Appellant is a 68-year old national of Kenya;

         ?    in June 2008 her husband died whilst they were  in  India  and
             she returned to Kenya;

         ?    she came to this  country  on  a  family  visit  in  2008  and
             returned to Kenya with her son with a  view  to  her  settling
             back into the country and his return to this country;

         ?    she found it difficult to cope on her own and she came back to
             the United Kingdom, still on the  valid  visa  for  a  further
             visit in late 2008;

         ?    she has remained in this country thereafter and without  leave
             since January 2009;

         ?    she has her son and daughter living in this country;

         ?    she lives with her son but every other week speds  (sic)  most
             of the week living with her daughter and her two children, who
             are aged 12 and 16;

         ?    she has health problems but helps look after her son's house -
             he has no partner or child;

         ?    on the week  she  is  with  the  daughter  she  helps  her  by
             assisting with  the  children  and  cooking  in  particular  -
             including fetching children from school when she can;

         ?    she has sisters and brothers living in this country  and  many
             other relatives (including, of course, grandchildren) and none
             now lives in Kenya;

         ?    this includes relatives through her late husband's side of the
             family;

         ?    for many years she and her husband rented a house  in  Kericho
             in Kenya but she has had nothing to do (sic) that property for
             the last 8 years;

         ?    the great majority of her friends  from  Kenya  are  also  now
             living in the United Kingdom;

         ?    all her relatives are British citizens or certainly settled in
             this country for immigration purposes."

17. At paragraph 13, the judge rejected the contention,  contained  in  the
    statement of the appellant's son, that she required long term  care  to
    do everyday personal household tasks.  The judge said that  this  "does
    not accord with the evidence I received in court.  I  accept  that  the
    appellant does struggle to undertake some tasks but she is  clearly  of
    great assistance to both her son and her daughter and grandchildren and
    she is able to care for herself and her personal needs, as she told  me
    in cross-examination.  She cooks but finds cleaning the house now to be
    difficult but she can look after the children."

18. At paragraph 14, the judge noted that  there  was  only  "very  limited
    documentary evidence concerning her health".  All the judge had was the
    two doctor's letters of 2008 and 2013, written by Dr Kansagra who,  the
    judge noted, "is part of the extended family living in this country".

19. Although the judge had found that the appellant's son  exaggerated  the
    appellant's health issues, he otherwise found  him  to  be  a  credible
    witness.  The judge accepted that the appellant  would  be  financially
    supported, if allowed to remain in the United Kingdom.

20. The judge was in no doubt that the  appellant  could  not  satisfy  the
    requirements of the  Immigration  Rules  relating  to  adult  dependent
    relatives.  He did not accept that there was no one in Kenya left  whom
    the appellant knew.  She could  return  to  the  temple  at  which  she
    worshipped  in  Kenya.   The  family  had  the  means  to  support  her
    financially in another country.

21. Given his findings regarding the exaggeration of the appellant's health
    issues, the judge was not satisfied that the appellant needed to be  in
    the  United  Kingdom  in  order  for  those  issues  to  be  adequately
    addressed.

22. Turning to  paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  the  judge
    examined whether there would be "very  significant  obstacles"  to  the
    appellant's integration in Kenya.  In so doing, the judge had regard to
    the judgment of the Court of Appeal in SSHD v Kamara  [2016]  EWCA  Civ
    813.  At paragraph 23, the judge found that the appellant had lived for
    a very long period in Kenya and had a home in the same place there  for
    at least twenty years.  Although she had not been back for  over  eight
    years, she had been living within an expatriate  family;  as  a  Kenyan
    national of Indian origins she still spoke  the  language  which  "must
    have served her well over her life with her husband in Kenya"; and  she
    would be able to understand how society in Kenya worked.  Although  "as
    a single woman in her late 60s life would not be as easy  as  when  she
    was married and younger  ...  with  the  assistance  of  the  financial
    support and encouragement from the family in the United  Kingdom,  over
    time she has an ability to  participate  once  more  in  life  in  that
    country and to re-establish or build up relationships".

23. At paragraph 24, the judge noted that the concept of "very  significant
    obstacles" had been examined by the Upper Tribunal in  MK  [2015]  UKUT
    00223.  That case had also considered the relevance of  the  expression
    "unduly harsh".  The judge concluded at paragraph 24 by saying:-

         "Return to Kenya after so long a period and leaving her  family  is
         undesirable from the point of view of the family and the  Appellant
         and will, as I have said, present difficulties.  I do not consider,
         however, that the obstacles to integration are  "very  significant"
         within the terms of the Rule."

24. The judge then turned to Article 8.  His findings were as follows:-

         "27. The Appellant's two grandchildren are both under  18  and  are
             British citizens and living in the United Kingdom.  Section 55
             of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009  requires
             the Secretary of State taking an immigration  decision  and  a
             judge  determining  an  immigration  appeal  against  such   a
             decision, to  have  regard  to  the  need  to  safeguard  such
             children and promote their welfare.

         28.  I see no evidence to suggest that the Appellant's removal from
             the United Kingdom  would  lead  to  any  safeguarding  issues
             regard either child.  The evidence available  to  me  suggests
             they are living within a loving family unit and would continue
             to do so.  They must do so in the weeks their grandmother does
             not visit.  Emotionally, I fully accept  that  they  are  very
             attached to their grandmother, who plays [an]  important  part
             in their lives.  Her removal would be a source of great regret
             to them I am sure but with a large and loving family, I do not
             consider that it would  be  significantly  damaging  to  their
             longer term welfare.

         29.  In any assessment of issues of private or family life  I  must
             have regard to the considerations set out in Part  VA  of  the
             2002 Act.  Section 117B establishes that  the  maintenance  of
             effective immigration controls  is  in  the  public  interest.
             This is an Appellant who has  abused  immigration  control  by
             overstaying the entry clearance given to her by about 8 years.
               Immigration  control  is  primarily  expressed  through  the
             Immigration Rules and she cannot meet the requirements of  the
             Rules.

         30.  I have accepted that she is  financially  dependent,  although
             that is with the assistance of her family.  On the other hand,
             I have no evidence before me to assess her level of ability in
             the English language.  At best, however, these are but neutral
             factors.

         31.  Importantly, in my judgement section 117B(4) establishes  that
             little weight should be given to a private life established by
             a person when that person is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.
              Of course, her private life with her family and  friends  was
             established significantly before she came to this country  but
             if it has developed further it has been by living here without
             leave since early 2009.  I consider that this is  relevant  in
             the assessment of the nature of her relationships and life  in
             this country.

         32.  Return to Kenya of a lady in her late  60s  with  some  health
             problems and all her family (and assuredly  an  attentive  and
             loving family) living in the United Kingdom is not comfortable
             to contemplate.  The fact remains, however, that I have  found
             there are not very significant obstacles  to  her  integration
             into the country of her nationality.  I have also  found  that
             she does not require the degree of personal care suggested and
             that the needs that she does have should be capable  of  being
             met with the financial support of the family here.  This  will
             not be through family members directly but by paying for  such
             services as are needed.

         33.  Viewed from the point of view of the Appellant and her  family
             the consequences are harsh but the State has a  right  to  set
             immigration controls in the public interest.  Those  interests
             are not merely economic but also in terms of good  regulation.
             These are strong interests.  Viewed economically it should  be
             stated, that even although I was satisfied that at the  moment
             the  Appellant's  health  needs  are  met  privately,  in  the
             reasonably settled order of these things, that may well not be
             the case in the future.

         34.  In weighing the strong public interests of the  State  against
             the private interests of the  Appellant,  notwithstanding  the
             fact that she will face some difficulties on return  and  that
             my decision will be  a  sadness  to  many  family  members,  I
             conclude that the Respondent's decision was proportionate  and
             not a breach of the duty owed to the Appellant or  her  family
             under Article 8 of the European Convention."



D. The grounds of application for permission to appeal

25. The  appellant's  grounds  of  application  for  permission  to  appeal
    submitted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had failed to have  regard
    to  the  best  interests   of   the   grandchildren   as   a   "primary
    consideration", contrary to ZH (Tanzania) [2011] 2 AC 166.  So  far  as
    financial independence was concerned, the grounds contended that  being
    financially independent was not the sole issue in the circumstances  of
    the present case:-

         "10. The Appellant's son's  business  employs  40  persons  with  a
             turnover of around �950,000.  Arguably, therefore  the  public
             interest is even further diminished: if financial independence
             (not being a burden  is  relevant)  then  so  should  being  a
             financial net contributor and arguably all the more so.

         ...

         11.  It is submitted that the fact that the Appellant's family  are
             clear and overwhelming net contributors to the UK economy is a
             relevant factor to be taken into account in Article  8  terms.
             It is trite law that Article 8 encompasses the rights  of  all
             family members.  There is  no  reason  in  principle  why  the
             contribution made by the family to society and to the  economy
             should not be factored into the balancing exercise in terms of
             proportionality ...  It constitutes a very distinct  value  to
             the community.  The FtT Judge has  erred  in  leaving  out  of
             account  the  net  contribution  of  the  Appellant's  family.
             Further and in any event, this is an issue  which  constitutes
             arguably an important  and  novel  point  of  law  upon  which
             guidance is required."

26. The third and final  ground  contended  that  the  judge  had  made  no
    findings on the issue of whether the appellant "had been the victim  of
    crime in Kenya on two occasions.  The FtT judge said that he found  the
    Appellant's son to be essentially credible and yet made no findings  on
    this issue.  The appellant herself confirmed this".

27. The grounds submitted that being the victim  of  crime  was  plainly  a
    relevant factor to take into account, whether under the Rules or  under
    Article 8.



E. Refusal of permission to appeal

28. First-tier Tribunal Judge Mark Davies refused permission to appeal,  in
    a decision dated 18 September 2017.  He considered that the grounds  to
    which I have referred  amounted  simply  to  a  disagreement  with  the
    judge's findings.

29. The appellant then applied to the  Upper  Tribunal  for  permission  to
    appeal.  In a detailed decision dated 22 November 2017, Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Smith refused permission to appeal.

30. Upper Tribunal Judge Smith was not persuaded that the criticism of  the
    way in which the First-tier Tribunal Judge  had  dealt  with  the  best
    interests of the children disclosed an arguable error  of  law  on  his
    part.  She observed that the judge's reference at paragraph 27  of  his
    decision to "safeguarding"  simply  repeated  the  wording  of  section
    55(1)(a) of  the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  1999,  concerning  the
    respondent's obligations in respect of  children,  in  the  immigration
    context.  Furthermore, the point at which the judge had undertaken  his
    "best interests" assessment was unarguably correct.   He  had  done  so
    "after considering whether the appellant can meet the Rules and  before
    turning to look at Article 8 outside the Rules".

31. Upper Tribunal Judge Smith then  considered  the  significance  of  the
    contribution which the appellant's son  makes  to  the  United  Kingdom
    economy:-

         "As the grounds rightly indicate,  there  is  no  question  of  the
         Appellant's family going to live with her in Kenya.  As  such,  the
         contribution which her son makes to the UK is not relevant  to  the
         public interest: it will  continue.   The  question  of  whether  a
         sponsor is a benefit to the  UK  economy  is  not  a  factor  which
         figures in the public interest matters to which regard is to be had
         in Section 117.  The Appellant may prefer that it  was  but  it  is
         not.  Nor can I see how the Appellant's  family's  contribution  to
         the UK economy has any relevance to the Article 8 claim.  The Judge
         has considered the impact on the family ...  but  the  interference
         with the [appellant's] family and private life is in the context of
         the removal of the Appellant from the UK;  their  earning  capacity
         has no relevance to their own Article 8 rights in that context  ...
         ".

32. Finally, Upper Tribunal Judge Smith pointed out that  paragraph  12  of
    the appellant's grounds was incorrect,  in  suggesting  that  financial
    independence was at best a neutral factor.  Although the Upper Tribunal
    Judge did not identify the relevant passage in  the  judgments  of  the
    Court of  Appeal  in  Rhuppiah  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2016] EWCA Civ 803, where the point is made  plain,  it  is
    helpful for me to do so:

         "62. The same reasoning applies in  relation  to  section  117B(3).
             Contrary to the appellant's argument, it does not provide that
             if you were  financially  independent  it  is  in  the  public
             interest that  she  be  granted  leave  to  remain.   It  only
             indicates that it is a negative factor, potentially capable of
             justifying her removal from the UK compatibly with Article  8,
             if she is  not  financially  independent.   Again,  under  the
             scheme of Part 5A, the  fact  that  a  person  is  financially
             independent is a neutral factor."  (Sales LJ)

33. Upper Tribunal Judge Smith recorded that Judge Eldridge had "unarguably
    properly considered the issue whether there would be  very  significant
    obstacles to the appellant's integration in Kenya" and  that  ground  3
    was "merely a disagreement with the judge's conclusion".



F. Judicial review of Upper Tribunal Judge Smith's refusal of permission  to
appeal

34. The appellant sought a judicial review of Upper Tribunal Judge  Smith's
    refusal of permission to appeal.  The grounds of application run to  67
    paragraphs.  The following features of these grounds are of  particular
    note:-

      a) Emphasis was placed on the appellant having been a victim of crime:
         "It was primarily as a result of the experience of being  a  victim
         of crime which led to a material  loss  of  morale  and  confidence
         which then necessitated her being brought back to the UK ... ";

      b) The financial contribution made by the appellant's  family  to  the
         United Kingdom was said to be a feature that  engaged  the  "second
         appeals" test (see paragraph 38 below):

             "55. It is submitted that the fact that the Appellant's family
                  are clear and overwhelming  net  contributors  to  the  UK
                  economy is a relevant factor to be taken into  account  in
                  Article  8  terms.   It  is  trite  law  that  Article   8
                  encompasses the rights of all family members.  There is no
                  reason in principle  why  the  contribution  made  by  the
                  family to  society  and  to  the  economy  should  not  be
                  factored  in  to  the  balancing  exercise  in  terms   of
                  proportionality: the degree to which other family  members
                  contribute is as relevant as the  degree  to  which  their
                  rights are impacted.   Indeed,  in  light  of  the  public
                  interest factor in protecting the public purse,  there  is
                  every reason why the family's net contribution  should  be
                  factored in.  It constitutes a very distinct value to  the
                  community.  The FTT Judge has  erred  in  leaving  out  of
                  account the net contribution of  the  Appellant's  family.
                  Further  and  in  any  event,  this  is  an  issue   which
                  constitutes arguably an important and novel point  of  law
                  upon which guidance is required.";

      c)  The  grounds  raised  an  issue  that  had  not  featured  in  the
         applications for permission to appeal; namely, whether  the  First-
         tier Tribunal Judge should have  treated  the  appellant's  private
         life as  a  matter  of  little  weight,  given  that  it  had  been
         established  in  the  United  Kingdom  while  she  had  been   here
         unlawfully.  Extensive reference was made to the judgment of  Sales
         LJ in Rhuppiah;

      d) Conversely, the grounds completely  ignored  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
         Smith's  response,  based  on  Rhuppiah,  to  the  submission  that
         financial independence could amount to more than a neutral  factor,
         in terms of section 117B(3).

35. Permission to bring judicial review was granted by a High  Court  Judge
    on 16 February 2018.  He said  it  was  arguable  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's:-

         "evaluation was so wrong as to amount to  an  error  of  law.   One
         might ask: how  much  more  claimant  (sic)  would  the  claimant's
         circumstances have to be to tip the balance?  It  could  be  argued
         that a decision such as this drains the balancing exercise  of  any
         meaningful content.

         The consequences of removal would be so momentous for the  claimant
         that I can safely say that there is  a  compelling  reason  for  an
         appeal to be heard."

36. The High Court's characterisation of the appellant's  case  as  the  ne
    plus ultra of adult dependent  relative  claims  went  far  beyond  the
    grounds of challenge to  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision.   Wide-
    ranging though they were, those grounds had not  attempted  to  advance
    the argument that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had erred  in  law,  in
    that only one outcome of the appeal was possible; namely, to allow  it.



37. As Walker J held in R (G & H) v Upper Tribunal [2016] EWHC 239  (Admin)
    and as the Upper Tribunal has more recently pointed out in Shah ("Cart"
    Judicial Review: Nature and Consequences) [2018] UKUT 51 (IAC);  [2018]
    Imm AR 707, a "Cart" judicial review involves determining  whether  the
    Upper Tribunal arguably erred in law in  rejecting  the  grounds  which
    accompanied the application for permission to appeal to it against  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision and, if so, whether  the  second  appeal
    criteria are met.

38. So far as the second appeal criteria[1] are concerned,  there  are  two
    points to observe regarding the High Court's view that the consequences
    of removing the appellant would be "so momentous ... that I can  safely
    say there is a compelling reason for an appeal to be heard".

39. First, all appeals to the First-tier Tribunal against the  respondent's
    refusal of a human rights or a protection claim involve the prospect of
    removal: see section 82(2)(a) and  (b)(i),  84(1)  and  113(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  The prospect  of  forced
    removal from the United Kingdom is an inherently  serious  matter;  but
    all the more so if, as will almost always be  the  case,  it  is  being
    contended that removal would violate the United  Kingdom's  obligations
    under the Refugee Convention or the ECHR.

40. It therefore cannot be correct that the so-called second  limb  of  the
    second appeal criteria is always engaged in these circumstances.  If it
    were, then those criteria would lose their function, as  a  restriction
    on the power to grant permission to appeal in immigration cases.

41. Secondly, on this issue also, the High Court judge went beyond what the
    appellant was seeking to argue. The grounds accompanying  the  judicial
    review application did not attempt to categorise  the  consequences  of
    removal as a reason why the second limb of the second  appeal  criteria
    was engaged.  Rather, the grounds concentrated on the first limb, which
    is that the proposed  appeal  "would  raise  some  important  point  of
    principle or practice".

42. Insofar as the High Court Judge who granted permission did  so  on  the
    basis that there were particular features of the appellant's case  that
    made it engage the second limb, he proceeded from his own view  of  the
    inability of the respondent to resist the Article 8 case of a widow who
    had for eight years been embedded with her British  family,  whilst  in
    breach of immigration law.



G. The appeal in the Upper Tribunal

43. In the light of the grant of permission to appeal, which  followed  the
    grant of judicial review and  the  quashing  of  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Smith's refusal, I have to decide whether there are errors  of  law  in
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge, such that  his  decision
    requires to be set aside.



(a) The appellant as the victim of crime in Kenya

44. The First-tier Tribunal Judge was criticised for not taking account  of
    the fact that the appellant had twice been the victim of crime,  whilst
    in  Kenya  during  2008.   I  have  no  hesitation  in  rejecting  this
    criticism.  Indeed, I find it not only spurious but also indicative  of
    a lack of candour on the part of the appellant and her family.

45. As I have  already  observed,  this  issue  does  not  appear  to  have
    featured, at least to any material extent, in the submissions  made  to
    the respondent, which resulted in the refusal of the human rights claim
    that is under appeal.  It certainly did not feature in the  grounds  of
    appeal against that decision.

46. At the hearing before me, Mr  Dixon  said  that  one  of  the  criminal
    incidents had been perpetrated by  the  appellant's  carers.   He  was,
    however, unable to point me to anything  in  the  evidence  to  confirm
    this.  I note that it does not feature in the witness statement of  the
    appellant.

47. More importantly, the First-tier Tribunal Judge was not told about  the
    previous appeal hearings, involving  the  appellant.   The  immigration
    history set out earlier records that an  appeal  was  heard  in  August
    2009.  Following a High Court review, granted  to  the  appellant,  the
    Article 8 aspect of that appeal was reconsidered.

48. As a result of my asking the parties about these proceedings, Mr Duffy,
    for the respondent, produced a copy  of  the  decision  of  Immigration
    Judge Doran, promulgated on 8 January 2010.  This  decision  is  highly
    revealing.  It sets out paragraphs 4 to  11  of  the  determination  of
    Immigration Judge Lingard, promulgated in  August  2009.   Despite  the
    reconsideration of Judge Lingard's decision, her findings in paragraphs
    4 to 11 had "not been disputed", according to Immigration Judge  Doran.
    He also reproduced Judge Lingard's findings and  conclusions,  recorded
    at paragraphs 31 to 41, which he said "have also not been challenged".

49. At paragraph 41 of Judge Lingard's unchallenged findings, we  find  the
    following:-

         "41. I note that in the grounds  of  appeal  it  was  asserted  the
             appellant  had  unfortunately  experienced  two  incidents  of
             burglary whilst in Kenya during November 2008,  although  this
             is not referred to in her detailed appeal statement.  It would
             not be unsurprising to think the appellant would  be,  to  say
             the least, upset by such experiences  but  I  regard  them  as
             sporadic acts of criminal activity it is reasonable to presume
             could occur in any city environment."

50. The submissions made by Mr Davison, Counsel for  the  appellant  before
    Judge Doran, are recorded at paragraphs  43  to  46  of  Judge  Doran's
    determination.  There is no  reference  in  those  submissions  to  the
    burglaries that occurred in 2008.  It is plain that they were not being
    relied upon, on the basis that their significance for  the  appellant's
    Article 8 case had been addressed by Judge Lingard in 2009.

51. In these circumstances, I find that  the  emphasis  now  sought  to  be
    placed on the burglaries, in the  various  sets  of  applications  that
    followed  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  decision,   is   entirely
    inappropriate.




(b) The appellant's grandchildren

52. The First-tier Tribunal Judge is  criticised  for  failing  to  make  a
    finding about  what  is  said  to  have  been  the  evidence  regarding
    significant religious and cultural inputs made by the appellant to  the
    lives of her two grandchildren.

53. Granddaughter R was  16  at  the  date  of  the  hearing  before  Judge
    Eldridge.   Her  brother,  S,  was  12.   R's   handwritten   statement
    concentrated upon what it would be like for the appellant if the latter
    were to have to leave the United Kingdom.  So  far  as  R  herself  was
    concerned, her statement said that the appellant "does so much  for  me
    and my family she is always looking after me and my  brother,  although
    we may be a handful, she always finds a way to control us  and  educate
    us on what family means".

54. S's statement said that the appellant was "the best nani in the  world.
    She cooks the best food, gives the best  hugs  and  kisses,  what  more
    could you want".  If she were  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom,  S  was
    concerned over "who else was going to cook the best food and  who  else
    would give the best hugs and kisses in the world".  Sometimes, when S's
    parents "go to the films, ... we have no worries as nani's always there
    comforting us and taking care of us".

55. Some drawings and photographs were exhibited with the statements of the
    grandchildren.

56. In her statement, the appellant said:-

         "I spend a big part of my life together with my grandchildren, such
         as taking part in family events, having  treats,  imparting  family
         history, playing games, going on holidays, shopping, watching TV or
         videos, babysitting, giving personal advice, joining  in  religious
         activity."

57. The appellant's daughter (the mother of R and S) said:-

         "My children have forged a close bond with my mother over the years
         while she spends time with them she forgets her problems,  if  only
         for a short time.  My mother's continued presence has  also  helped
         my  children  in  learning  from  her  wisdom,  loving  nature  and
         improving their Gujarati (mother  tongue).   My  daughter  has  now
         started to learn traditional Indian cooking from my mother  who  is
         an expert.  My son has a happy nature and this reminds my mother of
         my dad who was of a similar disposition."

58. The attempt to characterise this evidence as significant, in Article  8
    terms, is doomed to failure.  At paragraph 28 of  his  decision,  Judge
    Eldridge  was,  I  find,  entirely  justified   in   categorising   the
    relationship between the appellant and her grandchildren in the way  he
    did.  The judge noted that the appellant stayed with the mother and the
    children only in alternate weeks.  Nevertheless, he accepted  that  the
    grandchildren  were  very  attached  to  the  appellant  who  plays  an
    important part in their lives and that her removal would be a source of
    great regret to them.

59. Many children, of all backgrounds, learn  valuable  things  from  their
    grandparents. As a general matter, the relationship between grandparent
    and grandchild, beneficial though it  may  be,  is  unlikely  to  carry
    material weight in terms of  Article  8,  unless  the  grandparent  has
    stepped into the shoes of a parent.  In the present case, there was  no
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal Judge to begin to show that the
    grandchildren  would  be  deprived  of  access  to  relevant  religious
    instruction or that they would suffer any material degradation in their
    sense of cultural identity, were the appellant to return to Kenya.

60. This brings me to the  critique  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    approach to the best interests of children in section 55  of  the  2009
    Act.  The various grounds of challenge contend that the judge was wrong
    to look at best interests in terms of the welfare of the grandchildren.



61. The concept of welfare, however, lies at the heart of  the  obligation.
    That this is so emerges clearly from the judgment of Lady  Hale  in  ZH
    (Tanzania):-

         "24. Miss Carss-Frisk acknowledges that this duty [to make the best
             interests of children a primary  consideration]  applies,  not
             only to how children are looked after in  this  country  while
             decisions about immigration, asylum,  deportation  or  removal
             are being made, but also to the  decisions  themselves.   This
             means that any decision which is taken without  having  regard
             to the need to  safeguard  and  promote  the  welfare  of  any
             children involved will not be "in accordance with the law" for
             the purpose of article 8(2).  Both the Secretary of State  and
             the tribunal will therefore have  to  address  this  in  their
             decisions.

         25.  Further, it is clear from the recent  jurisprudence  that  the
             Strasbourg Court will expect  national  authorities  to  apply
             article 3(1) of UNCRC and treat the best interests of a  child
             as  "a  primary  consideration".   Of  course,   despite   the
             looseness with  which  these  terms  are  sometimes  used,  "a
             primary  consideration"  is  not  the  same  as  "the  primary
             consideration", still less as "the  paramount  consideration".
             Miss  Joanna  Dodson  QC,  to  whom  we   are   grateful   for
             representing the separate interests of the  children  in  this
             case, boldly argued that  immigration  and  removal  decisions
             might be covered by section 1(1) of the Children Act 1989:

                  "When a court determines any question with respect to -

                   a) The upbringing of a child; or

                   b) The administration  of  a  child's  property  or  the
                      application  of  any  income  arising  from  it,  the
                      child's  welfare  shall  be  the  court's   paramount
                      consideration."

             However, questions with respect to the upbringing of  a  child
             must be distinguished from other decisions  which  may  affect
             them.  The UNHCR, in its Guidelines on  Determining  the  Best
             Interests of the Child (May 2008), explains the matter neatly,

                  "The terms 'best interests' broadly  describes  the  well-
                  being of a child.  ... The CRC neither  offers  a  precise
                  definition, nor explicitly outlines common factors of  the
                  best interests of the child, but stipulates that:

                    . the best interests must be the determining factor for
                      specific actions, notably adoption (Article  21)  and
                      separation of a child from parents against their will
                      (Article 9);

                    . the best interests must be a  primary  (but  not  the
                      sole) consideration for all other  actions  affecting
                      children, whether undertaken  by  public  or  private
                      social   welfare   institutions,   courts   of   law,
                      administrative  authorities  or  legislative   bodies
                      (Article 3)." (emphasis in original)

             This seems to me accurately to distinguish  between  decisions
             which directly affect the  child's  upbringing,  such  as  the
             parent or other person with whom she is to live, and decisions
             which may affect her more indirectly, such as decisions  about
             where one or both of her parents are to live.   Article  9  of
             UNCRC, for example, draws a distinction between the compulsory
             separation  of  a  child  from  her  parents,  which  must  be
             necessary in her best  interests,  and  the  separation  of  a
             parent  from   his   child,   for   example,   by   detention,
             imprisonment, exile, deportation or even death."

62. The First-tier Tribunal Judge rightly noted that the grandchildren live
    with their parents.  The appellant stays in the house only on alternate
    weeks.  If the appellant were  removed  to  Kenya,  the  children  will
    continue to live with their parents.

63. Once the relationship between the appellant and  the  grandchildren  is
    stripped of the hyperbole which those acting for the appellant  put  on
    it, these findings of the First-tier Tribunal Judge were  determinative
    of the "best interests" issue.



(c) Obstacles to integration

64. Turning to the position of the appellant herself,  Judge  Eldridge  was
    entitled to find that there would not be very significant obstacles  to
    the appellant's integration in Kenya.  The judge gave adequate  reasons
    for that finding.  He did not overlook any material  evidence  in  this
    regard.  Properly read, paragraph 24 of his decision does not show that
    he was imposing a test of whether it would be "unduly  harsh"  for  the
    appellant to return.  As I have already noted, his  reference  to  that
    test arose because he was examining  the  issue  of  "very  significant
    obstacles" by reference to the case law of Kamara and MK.



(d) Precariousness

65. I have already noted that the grounds of application to the High  Court
    for judicial review of the Upper Tribunal's refusal  of  permission  to
    appeal advanced a ground concerning the judgment of the Court of Appeal
    in Kamara that had not been put to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   In  Kamara,
    Sales LJ expressed doubt as to whether a  person's  immigration  status
    was necessarily "precarious" in terms of section  117B(5),  where  that
    person does not have indefinite leave to remain in the United  Kingdom.



66. This ground should not have featured in the  application  for  judicial
    review.  Leaving aside the issue of  "Robinson"  obvious  points  (with
    which we are not concerned),  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Smith  cannot  be
    criticised for not dealing with a ground of challenge that was not  put
    to her.

67. In any event, there are two reasons why this ground is  without  merit.
    First, Sales LJ's doubts were confined to  a  person  who  has  limited
    leave to enter or remain.   There  is  nothing  in  his  judgment  that
    suggests he was thinking a person's immigration  status  might  not  be
    "precarious", notwithstanding that the person is in the United  Kingdom
    unlawfully.  On the current state of the law,  the  only  situation  in
    which weight  could  be  given  to  a  private  life  developed  by  an
    overstayer or illegal entrant would be in the  circumstances  described
    by the House of Lords in EB (Kosovo)  [2008]  UKHL  41;  namely,  where
    there has been a delay by the respondent in relevant  decision  making.
    No issue of delay is taken in the present case.

68. Secondly, whatever section  117B(5)  might  say  about  the  issue  is,
    frankly, irrelevant.  Section 117B(4)(a) states in  terms  that  little
    weight should be given to a private life established by a person  at  a
    time when that person is in  the  United  Kingdom  unlawfully.   It  is
    therefore in my view impossible  for  the  appellant  to  pray  section
    117B(5) in aid.



(e) The appellant's health

69. The issue of very significant obstacles  to  integration  in  Kenya  is
    closely entwined with that  of  the  appellant's  physical  and  mental
    health.  So far as her physical health was  concerned,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge rejected the claims being made on the appellant's behalf
    by her and the other witnesses.  So far as I  am  aware,  there  is  no
    criticism made of his conclusions on this  issue  which  were,  in  any
    event, open to him on the evidence.

70. The evidence put  forward  regarding  the  appellant's  alleged  mental
    health difficulties was entirely historic in nature.  As long ago as  4
    October  2013,  Dr  Kansagra  had  recorded  (bundle,  P161)  that  the
    appellant was "recovering well from her depression".   That  fits  with
    the evidence regarding the appellant's private health insurance,  dated
    from January 2018, which records her as stating that, in the past  five
    years, she had not had  or  received  treatment  for  "mental  illness,
    including depression, that has required referral to a specialist".  She
    also answered "no" to the question  whether  in  that  period  she  had
    received treatment for a heart condition or a heart problem.



(f) Recourse to the NHS

71. The final area of criticism regarding the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    decision relates to the financial position of the appellant and that of
    her family.  The appellant criticises the judge's finding, at paragraph
    33 of the decision, that "even although I was  satisfied  that  at  the
    moment  the  appellant's  health  needs  are  met  privately,  in   the
    reasonably settled order of these things, that may well not be the case
    in the future".

72. The appellant contends that this point was never  put  to  her  by  the
    judge and that, in the circumstances, his finding is irrational.

73. I do not agree.  Given  the  credibility  issues  that  the  judge  had
    identified, and in the light of the concerns I have expressed regarding
    the lack of candour regarding the significance  of  the  burglaries  in
    Kenya, it was not at all speculative for the judge to conclude that, if
    the appellant were to be granted leave to remain in the United  Kingdom
    on Article 8 grounds and became entitled to receive NHS treatment,  she
    might well decide to do so.

74. In any event, I do not consider that this criticism of the judge,  even
    if made out, can be said in any  way  to  be  material.   It  is  quite
    evident from his decision that the outcome would have  been  the  same,
    even on the basis that the appellant would  continue  to  seek  private
    medical attention, should this be necessary.



(g) The significance of the family's financial means

75. The second challenge to  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  Judge's  decision
    regarding the financial means of the appellant and, more  particularly,
    her son is  articulated  above;  most  markedly  in  the  grounds  that
    accompanied the application for judicial review.

76.  In  summary,  the  argument  is   as   follows.    In   striking   the
    proportionality balance under Article  8(2),  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge should have had regard to the fact that the  appellant's  son  is
    running a substantial business, employing 40 people, with a turnover of
    �950,000 a year, and is, as such, an overwhelming  net  contributor  to
    the UK economy.  As Mr Dixon puts it in his written submissions for the
    hearing on 2 July:-

         "49. It is submitted that the fact that the appellant's family  are
             clear and overwhelming net contributors to the UK economy is a
             relevant factor to be taken into account in Article  8  terms.
             It is trite law that  Article  8  encompasses  the  rights  of
             family members.  There is  no  reason  in  principle  why  the
             contribution made by the family to society and to the  economy
             should not be factored into the balancing exercise in terms of
             proportionality: the degree  to  which  other  family  members
             contribute is as relevant as the degree to which their  rights
             are impacted ...  It constitutes a very distinct value to  the
             community.  The FtT Judge has erred in leaving out of  account
             the net contribution of the appellant's family."

77. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Dixon sought to rely on the judgments of
    the Court of Appeal in UE (Nigeria) and Others v Secretary of State for
    the Home Department [2010] EWCA Civ 975.   That  case,  however,  makes
    reference to a number of earlier decisions.  Two of these require  some
    analysis, in order to understand the judgments in UE.

78. In R v Immigration Appeal Tribunal ex parte Bakhtaur Singh  [1986]  Imm
    AR 352, the House of Lords considered a challenge to the refusal by the
    Immigration Appeal Tribunal to grant permission to appeal  against  the
    decision of an adjudicator.  The adjudicator had dismissed  the  appeal
    of the applicant against the Secretary of State's  decision  to  deport
    him as an overstayer, pursuant to section 3(5)(a)  of  the  Immigration
    Act 1971.

79. The applicant had been  part  of  an  Indian  folk  music  group.   The
    adjudicator held that, in deciding whether to exercise differently  the
    Secretary of State's discretion under paragraph 154 of the  Immigration
    Rules (as then in force), he could not have regard to the effect of the
    applicant's deportation upon the Sikh community, who benefited from his
    playing "at festivals and the like", where the applicant was  "a  major
    attraction ... capable of attracting audiences of several thousands".

80. The House of Lords held that, on a proper  construction  of  paragraphs
    154, 156 and 158 of the Immigration Rules, such a consideration as just
    described was within the range of  matters  to  be  considered  by  the
    Secretary of State and, by extension, the adjudicator.

81. The House of Lords rejected the proposition, advanced on behalf of  the
    Secretary of State, that the effect of deportation on third parties was
    a  matter  which  the  Secretary  of  State  alone,  rather  than   the
    Immigration Appellate Authorities, could consider.  This was because of
    the combined effect of paragraphs 154 and 156 to 158 of the Immigration
    Rules.  In giving the only reasoned opinion, Lord Bridge said this:-

         "The question of what weight is to be  attributed  to  third  party
         interests of the  kind  I  have  been  discussing  which  would  be
         adversely affected by a decision to deport is entirely a matter for
         the Secretary of State  or  the  Appellate  Authorities  exercising
         discretion under the statute and must depend  upon  all  the  other
         relevant circumstances in the context of which the  decision  falls
         to be made.  It may well be difficult to  attach  any  considerable
         weight to the third party interest affected if the person liable to
         deportation has established his reputation and proved the value  of
         his services from which the third party interest  arises  during  a
         period when his presence in this country was  in  contravention  of
         the immigration laws.  However, that is not for your  Lordships  to
         decide."

82. We now move forward by over two decades to 2008 and the case of RU (Sri
    Lanka) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2008]  EWCA  Civ
    753.  This was primarily concerned with the significance  or  otherwise
    of the Secretary of State's delay in  making  an  immigration  decision
    regarding the appellant.  During his time in the  United  Kingdom,  the
    appellant had established a business here.

83. The lead judgment was given by Scott Baker LJ.  For our  purposes,  the
    relevant passage is as follows:-

         "40. It not infrequently happens in Article 8 cases, and this is an
             example, that arguments are advanced that the claimant has  in
             some way contributed to the community during the time  he  has
             been in the United Kingdom.  In the present case the appellant
             has set up a business that employs a number of people.  In  my
             judgment contribution to the community is not  a  freestanding
             factor falling to be taken  into  account  when  weighing  the
             proportionality test in Article 8.  It may, however, have some
             relevance if it forms part, for example, of the  private  life
             forged by the appellant whilst here."

84. Richards LJ agreed with the judgment of Scott Baker  LJ.   So  too  did
    Pill LJ, who also said this:-

         "I agree with the finding that there was interference,  subject  to
         Article 8(2) with the right to respect for the appellant's  private
         life (Article 8(1)).  I wish to express  agreement,  however,  with
         Scott Baker LJ's finding, at paragraph  40,  that  the  appellant's
         contribution to the community is not a freestanding factor  when  a
         breach of Article 8 is alleged.  It may throw light on the  private
         life of an applicant, and  be  relevant  in  other  ways,  but  the
         respect due under Article 8 is not to be judged by reference to the
         success, or lack  of  success,  of  the  applicant  in  the  United
         Kingdom."

85. I now turn to UE.  This case involved six  appellants:  a  husband  and
    wife and their four children.  In determining their Article  8  rights,
    Immigration Judge Dean "took account of the effect of removal  on  each
    of the appellants in terms of their individual activities: in one  case
    as a writer, a poet and performer; in other cases on their  educational
    progress and their work and cultural activities" (paragraph 6).

86. Judge Dean was  not,  however,  prepared  to  put  into  the  balancing
    exercise mandated by Article 8(2) the value of the appellant's  various
    activities to the community in the United Kingdom.  In reliance upon MA
    (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006]  EWCA
    Civ 1440, the judge held that those activities were only relevant  when
    considering the impact of removal on the appellants themselves.

87. At paragraph 8 of his judgment, Sir David Keene put the question to  be
    decided as follows:-

         "When the decision-maker is carrying  out  the  balancing  exercise
         required to  determine  whether  removal  is  proportionate  in  an
         Article 8 case, is it relevant on any  basis  that  the  person  in
         question is of value to the community  in  the  United  Kingdom,  a
         value of which that community will be deprived if he were removed?"

88. For the appellants, Mr Knafler relied upon the decision of the House of
    Lords in Bakhtaur Singh "where it was held that  in  deportation  cases
    the effect on third parties of the deportation, including any  loss  of
    value to parts of  the  community  in  this  country,  was  a  relevant
    consideration to the  exercise  of  discretion  under  the  Immigration
    Rules" (paragraph 10).

89. By contrast, Mr Auburn, for the Secretary of State, submitted that  the
    "rights conferred on individuals under the European Convention ...  are
    not a reward for good behaviour or for their  contribution  to  society
    but are intrinsic" (paragraph 11).

90. At paragraph 18, Sir David Keene  said  that,  although  value  to  the
    community could only be taken into account, so far as relevant  to  the
    exercise of immigration control, the retention in the United Kingdom of
    someone who is of considerable value to the community could properly be
    seen as relevant to such control (paragraph 18).  It was a matter going
    "to the weight to be attached  to  that  side  of  the  scales  in  the
    proportionality exercise".  Moreover:-

         "18. ... the weight to  be  attached  to  the  public  interest  in
             removal of the person in question is not some fixed  immutable
             amount.  It may vary from case to case, and where  someone  is
             of great value to the community in this country, there  exists
             a factor which reduces  the  importance  of  maintaining  firm
             immigration control in his individual case.  The weight to  be
             given to that aim is correspondingly less.

         19.  None of this means that the individual is being  rewarded  for
             good behaviour.  It goes instead to the strength of the public
             interest in his removal and how much weight should be attached
             to the need to maintain effective immigration control  in  his
             particular case."

91. On Bakhtaur Singh, Sir David Keene had this to say:-

         "22. That of course was not an Article 8  case,  but  it  would  be
             surprising, to my mind, if  the  balancing  exercise  required
             under Article 8 to determine the issue of proportionality were
             to be seen as narrower in scope  than  that  involved  in  the
             exercise of the statutory discretion and,  in  particular,  if
             the  concept  of  the  "public  interest"  of   relevance   to
             immigration control were to be more  tightly  defined  in  the
             former than the latter."

92. Sir David then turned to the issue of whether a finding to that  effect
    was open to the Court of Appeal, in the light of the  judgments  in  RU
    (Sri Lanka).  In summary, he did not consider  that  the  statement  of
    Scott Baker LJ at paragraph 40 of  the  latter's  judgment  constituted
    part of the ratio in RU and so it was, accordingly, open to  the  court
    "to find that the loss of such public benefit is  capable  of  being  a
    relevant consideration when  assessing  the  public  interest  side  of
    proportionality under Article 8 and as a matter of principle  I  do  so
    find" (paragraph 35).

93. Having done so, Sir David immediately sounded  the  following  note  of
    caution:-

         "36. I would, however, before  concluding,  emphasise  that,  while
             this factor of public value can be relevant in the way which I
             have described, I would expect it to make a difference to  the
             outcome  of  immigration  cases  only  in  a  relatively   few
             instances where the positive contribution to this  country  is
             very significant, perhaps of the  kind  referred  to  by  Lord
             Bridge in Bakhtaur Singh.  The  main  element  in  the  public
             interest will normally consist of the need to maintain a  firm
             policy of immigration control, and little will go to undermine
             that.  It will be unusual for  the  loss  of  benefit  to  the
             community to tip the scales in an applicant's favour,  but  of
             course all will depend upon the detailed facts which exist  in
             the individual case and in particular on  the  extent  of  the
             interference with his private and/or family life.

         37.  In the present case I would be surprised if a consideration of
             these matters excluded by the second  immigration  judge  were
             ultimately  to  make  a  difference   to   the   judgment   on
             proportionality, but it might.  I cannot be confident that  it
             would not, and that being so, I would allow  this  appeal  and
             remit the case to the Upper Tribunal."

94. In referring to Lord Bridge's examples, it seems that Sir  David  Keene
    had in mind the following passage from the opinion in Bakhtaur Singh:-

         "In the argument before your Lordships it was not disputed that the
         effect of deporting a particular individual or a third party  other
         than his family and persons intimately connected with him may  well
         be a factor which is relevant to the discretionary decision whether
         he should be deported or not.  A number of examples will make  this
         clear.  (1) A person liable to deportation  has  been  carrying  on
         business in partnership.  His deportation will ruin the partnership
         business.  (2) A person liable to deportation is an  essential  and
         irreplaceable worker for a company engaged in a  successful  export
         business.  His deportation will seriously impair the business.  (3)
         A person liable to deportation is  a  social  worker  upon  whom  a
         particular local community has come  to  depend.   His  deportation
         will deprive the local community of  his  services  which  will  be
         difficult to replace.  (4) A person liable  to  deportation  is  an
         indispensable member of a team engaged in  scientific  research  of
         public importance.  His deportation will put at  risk  the  benefit
         which the public will enjoy if the research were successful."

95. Richards LJ agreed that the appeal in UE should be allowed.  He did not
    consider that the Court of Appeal was precluded from so finding by  the
    judgments in RU (Sri Lanka).

96. However, Richards LJ did not take the same  view  of  the  relationship
    between Bakhtaur Singh and Article 8 as Sir David Keene had done:-

         39.  The Article 8 balance exercise is not necessarily co-extensive
             with the exercise  of  the  discretion  to  remove  under  the
             immigration statutes and Immigration Rules.  In practice  they
             will often involve the same considerations, but they need  not
             do so.  One cannot say that, because a factor is  relevant  to
             the extremely broad discretion under the statute or  rules  as
             vouchsafed by the decision in ex parte Bakhtaur Singh  ...  it
             must also form part of the  Article  8  exercise.   The  issue
             under Article 8 is the specific issue of whether  interference
             with private life  is  proportionate  to  the  legitimate  aim
             pursued.  I refer to "private life" because that  is  what  we
             are concerned with in this case.  A broad  balancing  exercise
             is required, but one needs to identify with some care what  is
             being balanced against what.  On one side of  the  balance  is
             the legitimate aim in  pursuit  of  which  removal  is  to  be
             effected.  ...  In the  present  case,  as  the  Secretary  of
             State's decision letters make clear, the aim relied on is  the
             maintenance of effective immigration control.   That  is  what
             goes into the balance as weighing in favour  of  removal.   On
             the other side of the balance, weighing  against  removal,  is
             the individual's right to respect for private life.

         40.  Factors are relevant  to  the  assessment  of  proportionality
             under Article 8 in such a case only in so far as  they  impact
             either on the  weight  to  be  given  to  the  maintenance  of
             effective immigration control or on the weight to be given  to
             the individual's private  life.   It  is  not  a  question  of
             dropping into the scales all aspects of  the  public  interest
             for or against removal or anything that might be  relevant  to
             the exercise of a discretion under the statute or  Immigration
             Rules.  It is a more specific and targeted exercise.

         41.   For  those  reasons  I  consider  that  contribution  to  the
             community is not a freestanding or stand-alone  factor  to  be
             put into the Article 8 balance as an independent consideration
             in its own right.  It can affect the balance only in so far as
             it is relevant to the  legitimate  aim  or  the  private  life
             claim."

97. Like Sir David Keene, Richards LJ was doubtful whether, if it had  been
    properly taken into account, the contribution of the appellant  to  the
    community would have  made  any  difference  to  the  judge's  ultimate
    conclusion; but he could not say that  the  judge  would  clearly  have
    reached the same conclusion in any event.

98.  Ward LJ, the third member of the court, was alive to the difference in
    views of Sir David Keene and Richards LJ regarding Bakhtaur Singh:-

         "Insofar as a  difference  of  emphasis  can  be  detected  in  the
         judgments of my Lords, their dicta seem to me with  respect  to  be
         obiter and I prefer therefore to say no more about it."

99. Mr Dixon also relied upon the judgment of HHJ  Worster,  sitting  as  a
    Deputy High Court Judge, in R (Zermani) v Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2015] EWHC 1226 (Admin).  It  seems  from  the  Deputy
    Judge's judgment that he was concerned with a decision made pursuant to
    paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules, in which the Secretary of State
    refused to treat submissions that  followed  the  refusal  of  a  human
    rights claim, as a "fresh claim" giving rise to a right  of  appeal  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.

100. The applicant was said to  be  of  value  to  the  local  community  in
    Wrexham, in connection with his  work  for  the  Wrexham  Refugees  and
    Asylum Seekers Support Group,  and  other  organisations,  as  well  as
    organising a community  football  tournament  for  young  people.   The
    applicant helped the Welsh Refugee Council and was said by the chairman
    of the local mosque to be a highly valued member  of  "our  community".
    The local police diversity officer also  referred  to  the  applicant's
    "assistance and guidance whilst helping the Muslim community".

101. The Deputy Judge's attention was drawn to  the  passage  in  Sir  David
    Keene's judgment in UE, in which he gave his views as to the  scope  of
    the analysis required, on the one hand,  under  the  Immigration  Rules
    and, on the other, in connection  with  the  proportionality  balancing
    exercise inherent in Article 8(2) of the ECHR.  It does not appear that
    the Deputy Judge's  attention  was  drawn  to  the  somewhat  different
    analysis contained in the judgment of Richards LJ.

102. Having noted a number of Scottish cases, which  followed  the  approach
    in UE, the Deputy Judge held that, on the facts of the case before him,
    the Secretary of State had not had proper  regard  to  the  letters  of
    support, attesting to the applicant's value to the community.

103. According to the Deputy Judge:-

         "... the letters of support speak not only  of  his  value  to  the
         community, but some of them also refer to how difficult it would be
         to replace him.  ... The letters of support come from people  whose
         views (potentially at least) must count for something.   These  are
         people with responsibilities in the community who, on the  face  of
         it, might be expected to write these sort of letters only when they
         are moved to do so  by  their  genuine  concerns.   These  are  not
         friends or relations or even employers, these are people  who  have
         seen this man do something quite out of the ordinary.  It may  well
         be that a decision-maker will have reached the same conclusion  had
         this case been considered outside the Rules, from the facts of this
         case I cannot say that it would be inevitable."

104. The Deputy Judge's reference to taking a  decision  outside  the  Rules
    leaves it unclear whether this was, in fact, a fresh  claim  case.   In
    any event, the Deputy Judge made it plain that his  decision  to  grant
    judicial review was not to be taken as indicating what the Secretary of
    State might conclude, following an analysis of the letters of  support.



105. It is now necessary to take stock of the position.

106. It  is,  of  course,  the  case  that  the  balancing  exercise  to  be
    undertaken in Article 8(2) situations is a wide-ranging one.   So  much
    is plain not just from UE but, more particularly,  from  the  House  of
    Lords' opinions in Razgar v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    [2007] UKHL 27 and Huang v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
    [2007] UKHL 11.

107. That does not, however, mean there is no  difference  between,  on  the
    one hand, the factors which the respondent may consider in deciding how
    to exercise discretion under the Immigration Rules or other  statements
    of immigration policy and, on the other hand, the factors to be decided
    in determining the weight  to  be  given  to  the  public  interest  in
    maintaining  immigration  control.   On  this  issue,  I   respectfully
    consider that Richards LJ was right to say what he did in paragraphs 39
    and 40 of UE.

108.  In  1986,  the  appellate  regime  was  such  that   an   adjudicator,
    determining a deportation appeal of  the  kind  described  in  Bakhtaur
    Singh,  was  required  to  decide  whether  the  Secretary  of  State's
    discretion under the Immigration Rules should be exercised differently.
     In a real sense, therefore, the adjudicator was an  extension  of  the
    decision-making process and so had to take  his  or  her  own  view  of
    matters of immigration policy, albeit giving appropriate weight to  the
    view of the Secretary of State.

109. The present  appellate  regime  is  radically  different.   Appeals  no
    longer  lie  against  decisions  taken  under  the  Immigration  Rules.
    Leaving aside  revocation  of  protection  status  and  deprivation  of
    citizenship, immigration appeals  now  lie  only  against  refusals  of
    protection and human rights claims. First-tier Tribunal judges  are  no
    longer empowered by Parliament to decide  how  a  discretionary  policy
    expressed in the Immigration Rules should be exercised in a  particular
    case.

110. Even before the radical changes effected to the appeal  regime  by  the
    Immigration Act 2014, there had been, over the years, a marked  decline
    in the instances of discretionary decision-making under the Rules.   In
    particular, the adoption of the "points-based" system removed  much  of
    the discretion for which the Rules had previously provided.

111. The fact that the respondent has  to  operate  his  immigration  policy
    compatibly with Article 8 does not mean that each and every decision he
    makes, pursuant to the Immigration Rules and his other policies, as  to
    who should and should not be allowed to enter and remain in the  United
    Kingdom, must be based on considerations which are necessarily the same
    as those relevant to a proportionality balancing exercise under Article
    8.

112. Accordingly, the warnings contained  in  the  judgments  of  Sir  David
    Keene and Richards LJ are important.  Before coming to  the  conclusion
    that submissions regarding the positive contribution made to the United
    Kingdom by an individual fall to be taken into account, as  diminishing
    the importance to be given to immigration controls, a  judge  must  not
    only be satisfied that the contribution in question directly relates to
    those controls.  He or she must also be satisfied that the contribution
    is "very significant". In practice, this is likely to arise only  where
    the matter is one over which there can be no real disagreement.

113. I am not sure that the  list  of  examples  given  by  Lord  Bridge  in
    Bakhtaur Singh are all of this kind.  It must be remembered that  those
    examples were given against the  background  of  the  former  appellate
    regime which, as I have said,  gave  adjudicators  a  foothold  in  the
    policy realm that is not shared by their successors.

114. Without in any way intending to be prescriptive, it is likely that  one
    touchstone for distinguishing between instances that lie, respectively,
    exclusively in the policy realm and  in  the  area  of  Article  8,  is
    whether  the  removal  of  the  person  concerned  will  lead   to   an
    irreplaceable loss to the community of  the  United  Kingdom  or  to  a
    significant element of it.

115. If judicial restraint is not properly maintained in  this  area,  there
    is a danger that the public's perception of human rights  law  will  be
    adversely affected.

116. The following example is, perhaps, useful. Let us  assume  a  judge  is
    faced with two human rights appeals in  respect  of  individuals  whose
    situations are entirely the same, save for the fact that one is  a  bus
    driver and the other a brain surgeon. The judge might have his  or  her
    own view as to which occupation is of more value to the United Kingdom.
    But that  view,  alone,  should  not  lead  the  judge  to  treat  them
    differently under Article 8.  Were the judge to do so, he or she  would
    be seriously trespassing upon the respondent's policy realm.

117. It must be  emphasised  that  UE  is  binding  authority  that,  in  an
    appropriate  case,  the  weight  to  be  given  to  the  importance  of
    maintaining immigration control can be  diminished  by  reason  of  the
    effect that the removal of the appellant from the United Kingdom  would
    have upon the community. I have tried to identify what are the  correct
    criteria for determining if the case is, in fact, an appropriate one.

118. In Lama (video recorded evidence - weight  -  Article  8  ECHR)  [2017]
    UKUT 00016  (IAC),  the  Upper  Tribunal  (McCloskey  J)  extended  the
    principle in UE to a case where the appellant's removal from the United
    Kingdom would prevent a third party, who would  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom, from continuing to  make  a  contribution  to  United  Kingdom
    society.  In Lama, the person  in  question  was  "Mr  R,  who  made  a
    significant contribution through his acting to the community in general
    and to the cohort  of  disabled  people  in  society"  (paragraph  43).
    Although McCloskey J held  that  someone  else  could,  in  theory,  be
    substituted  for  the  appellant  in  Mr  R's  life,  nevertheless  "in
    qualitative and emotional terms, [the appellant] is irreplaceable".

119. Given what I have just said, Lama has in my  view  to  be  seen  as  in
    effect deciding that Mr R's contribution  to  the  community  would  be
    materially impaired if he had to be cared for by anyone other than  the
    appellant. Otherwise, it seems to me that Lama comes  close  to  saying
    that immigration controls counted for less, because of Mr R's status.

120. How does the appellant's submission on this issue fit within  the  case
    law?  The blunt answer is that it does not. There is no prospect of the
    appellant's son abandoning his business, and the employees who work  in
    it, if the appellant were to be removed to Kenya. What the Tribunal  is
    being asked to do can be distilled into the  proposition  that  someone
    whose family makes a substantial contribution to this country's economy
    ought thereby to be subject to a  less  stringent  set  of  immigration
    controls than a person whose family does not make such a contribution.

121. Not  only  is  this,  in  its  own  terms,  an  extremely  unattractive
    proposition.  It is one which, if allowed  to  succeed,  would  inflict
    grave damage on human rights  law.   It  would  introduce  an  entirely
    unjustified distinction between the rich, and everyone else.  It  would
    also lead to calls for other forms of contribution to be so recognised.
    As can be seen from Lama, that danger is real.

122. It is, of course, the case that wealth is a factor  that  can  directly
    impact on a person's ability to secure leave to enter or  remain  under
    the Immigration Rules. Obvious examples are to be found  in  the  rules
    relating to entrepreneurs, investors and retired persons of independent
    means.

123.  In MM  (Lebanon)  and  others  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2017] UKSC 10, the Supreme Court rejected  a  challenge  to
    the lawfulness of the rules that impose a  minimum  income  requirement
    (MIR) on non-EEA family members seeking entry  to  join  their  settled
    partners in the United Kingdom. A person who cannot meet  the  MIR  can
    demand to be given entry clearance if he or she has a case  of  such  a
    nature as, exceptionally, to succeed under Article 8 of the ECHR.

124. The appellant  can  find  no  support  for  her  proposition  from  the
    existence of rules  of  this  kind.  The  fact  that  the  respondent's
    immigration policies in some respects favour those who will  not  be  a
    burden on public funds, if admitted to or  allowed  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom, or might encourage the wealthy to come to this country,
    does not mean a person's wealth thereby becomes a factor which, in  the
    context of Article 8, generally diminishes the importance to  be  given
    to be given to the system of rules that the respondent  has  chosen  to
    frame, pursuant to his functions under the Immigration Acts.

125. I wish to emphasise that nothing I have just said is intended to  be  a
    criticism of the appellant's son.  On  the  contrary,  his  energy  and
    success are to be commended.  Human rights, however, are  not,  without
    more, to be dispensed by reference to such matters.

126. With all of this in mind, it is relevant to turn to the rules on  adult
    dependent  relatives.   In  the   introduction   to   the   Immigration
    Directorate Instruction  Family  Migration:  Appendix  FM  Section  6.0
    (August 2017) we find the following:-

         "The purpose of this route is to allow a non-European Economic Area
         (non-EEA) national adult dependent relative (ADR) of:

          - a British citizen in the UK;

          - a person settled in the UK; or

          -  a  person  in  the  UK  with  refugee  leave  or   humanitarian
            protection;

         to settle here, if they can demonstrate that, as a result  of  age,
         illness or disability, they require a level of  long-term  personal
         care that can only be provided in the UK by their relative here and
         without recourse to public funds.

         The policy intention behind the ADR Rules is,  firstly,  to  reduce
         the burden on the taxpayer for  the  provision  of  NHS  and  local
         authority social care services to ADRs whose needs  can  reasonably
         and adequately be met in their home country; and secondly to ensure
         that those ADRs whose needs can only be reasonably  and  adequately
         met in the UK are granted immediate settled status  (whether  their
         sponsor has this or is a British citizen) and full  access  to  the
         NHS and local authority social care services.

         This is  intended  to  avoid  creating  a  disparity  between  ADRs
         depending on their wealth and that of their sponsor,  and  to  give
         those ADRs who qualify certainty about their  long-term  status  in
         the UK."  (My emphasis)

127. The important  point  is  that  the  respondent's  policy  specifically
    requires everyone, rich and poor alike, to show that the requisite care
    can only be provided in the United Kingdom by a relative  here.  It  is
    not enough that there will be no recourse to public funds.

128. In the present case, the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  findings  were
    that  the  appellant,  if  returned  to  Kenya,  could  be  financially
    supported by her United Kingdom family.  It is clear  that  the  family
    would have the requisite financial means to buy care services  for  the
    appellant in Kenya.



(h) Conclusions

129. It is time to stand back and see where we have reached.   None  of  the
    criticisms advanced by  the  appellant  of  Judge  Eldridge's  decision
    disclose an error of law on his part.  The judge was entitled  to  find
    that the appellant did not meet the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  In terms of paragraph 276ADE, he  was  entitled  to  find  that
    there  were  not  "very  significant  obstacles"  to  the   appellant's
    integration into Kenya, where she had lived much of her life.

130.  So far as Article 8 was concerned, the judge made valid  and  entirely
    sustainable  findings  regarding  the  position  of   the   appellant's
    grandchildren, properly applying section 55 of the 2009 Act.

131. The judge correctly concluded that little weight could be given to  the
    appellant's private life, established whilst the appellant had been  in
    the United Kingdom unlawfully.  The appellant  had  abused  immigration
    controls by overstaying the period of entry  clearance  given  to  her.
    After becoming appeal rights exhausted in respect  of  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration Tribunal's decision of January 2010, the appellant ought to
    have embarked.  Instead, she and her family have  done  their  best  to
    defy immigration controls.

132. In all the circumstances, the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  was  entitled
    to conclude that removal of the appellant from the United Kingdom would
    not violate the United Kingdom's responsibilities under  Article  8  of
    the ECHR, whether to the appellant or anybody else.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



                               Signed                     Date






                               The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                               President of the Upper Tribunal
                               Immigration and Asylum Chamber



-----------------------
[1]    (a) that the proposed appeal would raise some important point of
principle or practice, or
      (b) that there is some other compelling reason for the Upper Tribunal
to hear the appeal.


