
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                      Mohamed (role of interpreter) Somalia [2011] UKUT
00337(IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 5 May 2011                                 |                             |
|                                              |21 July 2011                 |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE GRUBB
                          IMMIGRATION JUDGE HOLMES

                                   Between

                          hamida abdulkarim mohamed

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Selway of Halliday Reeves, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms R Petterson, Home Office Presenting Officer


1. The function of a court appointed interpreter is to interpret  on  behalf
of the Tribunal what is said  at  the  hearing,  including  the  appellant's
evidence. It is no part of the interpreter's function to  be  drawn  into  a
position where he or she has to give "evidence" at a  hearing  of  anything,
including the language being spoken by a witness.  The AIT's decision in  AA
(Language  diagnosis;  use  of  interpreters)  Somalia  [2008]  UKAIT  00029
approved and applied.

2. Consequently, in a case where the language spoken  by  an  appellant  was
relevant to establish his origins (and so to the claim), the judge  had  not
erred in law when  he  had  declined,  when  requested  by  the  appellant's
representative, to ask the interpreter at  the  hearing  what  language  the
appellant was speaking.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against a decision of  Immigration  Judge  Zucker
    dismissing her appeal against a decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State
    taken on 7 May 2009 to refuse to grant her asylum under  paragraph  336
    of the Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended) and to remove  her  as  an
    illegal entrant from the United Kingdom to Somalia by way of directions
    pursuant to paragraphs 8-10A of Schedule 2 to the Immigration Act 1971.



 2. Before the First-tier Tribunal, the appellant claimed to be at risk  on
    return to Somalia  as  a  member  of  the  minority  Bajuni  clan.  The
    respondent disputed her clan membership. Immigration Judge Zucker found
    that she had not established it and accordingly dismissed  her  appeal.
    The Appellant had been interviewed by the respondent in Swahili, but in
    addition she had been  interviewed  on  behalf  of  the  respondent  by
    Sprakab on 22 November 2008.  The judge considered the evidence  before
    him in detail, including the Sprakab report. That report considered the
    appellant's knowledge both of Somalia in general and  Kismayo  and  the
    island of Fumayo in particular. The report assessed that the  appellant
    was speaking Swahili, but not a variety of Swahili spoken  in  Somalia.
    The report stated  that  her  accent  and  intonation  was  typical  of
    Tanzanian and Kenyan Swahili as opposed to that spoken in Somalia.   In
    addition, the report drew attention to  a  number  of  aspects  of  the
    appellant's knowledge about Somalia which was described  as  "limited".
    On the basis of this evidence, taken together with other unsatisfactory
    aspects of her evidence, such as her claim that she  would  send  money
    home to her family in Somalia despite the fact that she had no  contact
    with them and did not know where they lived, the judge found her not to
    be a truthful witness.

 3.  On  22  July  2009,  Senior   Immigration   Judge   Waumsley   ordered
    reconsideration of that decision.  On 15 February 2010 that order  took
    effect as a grant of permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  by
    virtue of Schedule 2 to the Transfer of Functions  of  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration Tribunal Order 2010 (SI  2010/21).  Thus  the  appeal  came
    before us.

 4. The grounds upon which reconsideration was sought raise  two  principal
    issues that Mr Selway pursued before us in his submissions on behalf of
    the appellant.





Ground 1

 5. First, Mr Selway submitted that the judge had erred in law when he  had
    declined, when requested by the appellant's representative, to ask  the
    interpreter at the hearing what language the  appellant  was  speaking.
    The appellant in her evidence claimed that she was  speaking  Kibajuni.
    The  judge  refused  on  the  basis  that  it  was  not  part  of   the
    interpreter's  role  to  do  so  and  which   would   "compromise   his
    independence and impartiality" (para  41  of  the  determination).   At
    paras 40 and 41, the judge reasoned that the interpreter's duty was  to
    interpret and to tell the Tribunal if there were language  difficulties
    if he could not understand the appellant.  As the  determination  makes
    clear there were no interpretation difficulties at the hearing.

 6. Mr Selway submitted that the judge erred in law because he should  have
    taken into account as a "statement of fact" what the interpreter  would
    have said which, Mr Selway's submission pre-supposes, would  have  been
    that that the appellant was speaking Kibajuni.  In our judgment,  there
    is no basis in law for Mr Selway's submission.

 7. First, it is based upon a wholly erroneous premise.  As  we  understood
    it, Mr Selway's submission was that  the  interpreter's  "statement  of
    fact" would be relevant to the judge's assessment  of  the  appellant's
    appeal despite the fact that what he said would not be evidence in  the
    case.  That cannot be right.  A judge may  only  act  on  the  evidence
    before him in determining the outcome of an appeal.  That will  include
    the oral and documentary evidence properly admissible on the  basis  of
    relevancy and any other matter of which the  judge  may  properly  take
    judicial notice.  A judge simply cannot take  into  account  any  other
    material not before him or which, on Mr  Selway's  submission,  is  not
    evidence in the case.  If  what  the  interpreter  would  say  was  not
    evidence, then it was irrelevant to the judge's  determination  of  the
    appeal.

 8.  Secondly,  in  any  event  the  interpreter  was  a  court   appointed
    interpreter.  His function was to interpret on behalf of  the  Tribunal
    what was said at the hearing, including the appellant's  evidence.   Of
    course, as part of his duty to the court, the  interpreter  had  to  be
    satisfied that he understood the appellant  and,  if  he  did  not,  to
    indicate that to the judge. In some  circumstances  all  that  will  be
    required is for a question to be rephrased or for a witness to be asked
    to rephrase their answer. In other, more extreme,  circumstances  there
    may then need to be some enquiry as to what dialect the witness  claims
    to be speaking so that appropriate arrangements can be made  to  ensure
    that  at  the  hearing  (or  a  future  hearing)   the   interpretative
    difficulties  are  removed.   To  that  extent,  an  interpreter  might
    indicate that an appellant is speaking a language  different  from  the
    one that the interpreter is competent and authorised to interpret.

 9. It is however, no part of the function of a  court  interpreter  to  be
    drawn into a position where he or she  has  to  give  "evidence"  at  a
    hearing of anything, including the language being spoken by a  witness.
    It is within the collective knowledge of the members of this panel that
    interpreters frequently do indicate what language is being spoken by  a
    witness at  the  beginning  of  his  or  her  evidence.  Some  find  it
    necessary, later, to indicate that a witness has  changed  language  or
    dialect. We are reluctant to suggest  that  they  should  never  do  so
    because it may be that such an indication will alert the judge  to  the
    possibility that there is a problem that requires his intervention.  On
    the other hand, in cases where the appellant's fluency in a language is
    in dispute or the  ability  to  speak  a  particular  language  may  be
    relevant to the appellant's claim,  there  needs  to  be  a  degree  of
    caution because it might (wrongly) be thought to be evidence, and as  a
    result something that is relevant to the judge's function  of  deciding
    the case upon the evidence before him, which it is not.

10. Also, if the course proposed by Mr Selway were correct,  it  could,  in
    our judgment, create considerable (perhaps insuperable)  practical  and
    fairness difficulties during the course of  any  hearing.   Suppose  an
    interpreter were to 'give evidence' about what language  the  appellant
    was speaking.  Who should interpret that exchange with  the  judge  for
    the benefit of the appellant?  Which of the parties should be  seen  to
    be calling  the  interpreter  to  give  that  evidence  and  would  the
    interpreter be subject to cross-examination and by whom if he  did  so?
    These, amongst other difficulties, show how undesirable it would be for
    an interpreter to give "evidence" of the kind proposed by Mr Selway  at
    a hearing.

11. There is a straight-forward solution where an appellant wishes to  rely
    upon the language he speaks to assist in making good his claim.   Where
    an appellant wishes to challenge expert or  other  evidence  concerning
    the language spoken by the appellant that is a matter that can properly
    be dealt with by direct evidence called on behalf of the appellant from
    one expert or another.  We were told  by  Mr  Selway  that  there  were
    difficulties in this case of finding an expert to counter  the  Sprakab
    Report (see, for example, para 9 of the grounds).  We have no reason to
    doubt what is said in  this  case  but  it  is  within  the  collective
    experience of the  members  of  this  panel  that  expert  evidence  of
    precisely this type is available, and frequently relied upon before the
    Tribunal. In any event, the ability of an appellant  to  obtain  expert
    evidence in relation to a particular issue by a particular date  cannot
    undermine the principle.

12. In this case it was  at  least  open  to  the  appellant  to  call  any
    interpreter used by the appellant's representatives to give evidence of
    the language used by the appellant (in the opinion of the  interpreter)
    outside court, although we observe that, of course, it  should  not  be
    assumed that an interpreter is an expert in linguistic analysis  or  in
    the subtleties of accent and dialect and, as  such,  his  evidence  may
    carry little weight in a case like this one.  In this appeal, Mr Selway
    acknowledged that he was not in a position to call any interpreter used
    by his firm  when  dealing  with  the  appellant.   Indeed,  Mr  Selway
    acknowledged that he did not know how his firm  had  communicated  with
    the appellant:  this  was  despite  the  fact  that  he  had  been  the
    appellant's representative at the hearing before the  judge.   He  also
    accepted that he had no idea what was on the CD which had been sent  to
    Sprakab for analysis.

13. As we have said, we see no basis upon which it could be said  that  the
    judge erred in law in refusing to ask (or allow) the court  interpreter
    to indicate what language he believed the appellant to be  speaking  at
    the hearing.  The correct approach, which we have  endeavoured  to  set
    out above, was  in  fact  identified  by  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    Tribunal in AA (Language diagnosis; use of interpreters) Somalia [2008]
    UKAIT 00029.  For reasons of which we were not apprised, Mr Selway  did
    not refer us to  this  decision  despite  its  obvious  relevance.   Ms
    Petterson, who represented the respondent,  did  refer  us  to  AA  and
    relied upon it.

14. In AA, which also concerned a claim by an individual to be at risk as a
    minority clan member from Somalia, the judge had refused to require the
    court interpreter to  indicate  the  dialect  that  the  appellant  was
    speaking when giving evidence.  It was argued on behalf of the claimant
    in that case that the judge had thereby erred in law.  The AIT rejected
    the challenge on the basis that what was being asked of the interpreter
    was not consistent with his function and expertise  as  an  interpreter
    and further his role as a court official was limited to interpreting on
    behalf of the court.  At paragraphs [7]-[11] the Tribunal set  out  its
    reasoning as follows:

         "7.      ... we are ... certain that  nobody  should  have  assumed
             that it was part of the function of the Court  Interpreter  to
             resolve an issue of this sort.  We come to that conclusion for
             two separate reasons.  The first relates to the  function  and
             expertise of an interpreter.  An interpreter's function is  to
             comprehend and communicate,  not  to  assess  or  analyse.   A
             person's skills  in  interpretation  lie  in  his  ability  to
             understand what is being said  to  him  in  one  language  (or
             dialect) and communicate it accurately in another language (or
             dialect).  It is simply wrong to say that the abilities of  an
             interpreter  necessarily  import  an  ability  to  distinguish
             accurately between  different  dialects  and  to  be  able  to
             attribute dialects to different sources.  A person whose first
             language is French may attain standards of near perfection  in
             English  interpretation,  without  being  able  to  say   with
             accuracy whether he is dealing with a person from  Ipswich  or
             Indiana, or even with a person whose own  first  language  was
             not English.  As an interpreter he may  widen  his  vocabulary
             base and his understanding of different accents  and  dialects
             so that he can cope with whatever version of English  is  used
             by the person for whom he is interpreting, without needing  or
             wanting or being required to consider or  work  out  what  the
             dialect is, but merely to do his own job of understanding  and
             communicating.  Of course an interpreter may know (or think he
             knows) something about the type of  language  or  dialect  the
             person for whom he is interpreting is using: but that is quite
             a different matter.   It  is  not  part  of  his  function  as
             interpreter.

         8. An interpreter may find that he  cannot  interpret,  because  he
             cannot understand what is being said  to  him.   That  may  be
             because it is a language that he does not understand,  or  may
             be because it is a dialect that he does not understand.   But,
             so far as his function as an  interpreter  is  concerned,  the
             only thing one can say is that  in  present  circumstances  he
             cannot interpret.  It is still not part of his function as  an
             interpreter to identify the  language  (or  dialect)  that  he
             cannot understand.  It is sufficient that he cannot understand
             it.  An interpreter who speaks and understands more  than  one
             language or dialect may be able to say with precision which he
             is working in, or he may not.  No doubt he is more  likely  to
             be able to distinguish between two languages than between  two
             dialects, but the boundary between the  notions  of  different
             languages and different dialects is a rather fluid one.  In KS
             ((Minority Clans - Bajuni - Ability to speak Kibajuni) Somalia
             CG [2004] UKAIT 00271) it appears that the  interpreters  used
             were able to distinguish clearly between Swahili and  Kibajuni
             and did so.  It does not follow from that, and  it  could  not
             [properly]  be  taken  to  follow  from   that,   that   every
             interpreter ought to be able to distinguish every language  or
             dialect.

         9. That leads us to the second reason.  It is in our  view  in  the
             highest degree undesirable for  the  interpreter  as  a  Court
             official  to  be  asked  to  contribute  in  any  way  to  the
             determination  of  a  contested  issue.   In   his   task   of
             comprehension and communication, the interpreter needs to have
             and maintain the confidence of all those with whom  he  deals,
             including the witness [whose evidence] is  being  interpreted,
             the representatives of both parties and the judge.  He  cannot
             maintain that confidence if there is the  slightest  suspicion
             that he is, in addition, taking some  part  in  assessing  the
             evidence, on which he will in due course report to the  Court.
             .... The Court Interpreter is a vital part of the  immigration
             appellate  process.    It   is   very   important   that   the
             interpreter's position should not be compromised in  any  way.
             The interpreter is not himself a witness  and  should  not  be
             invited to become one.  If it  happens  that  the  interpreter
             cannot understand the language or dialect being used, he  will
             of course have to say so.  At that point it may  be  necessary
             to check that the  language  requested  by  the  person  whose
             evidence is to be interpreted is indeed a language that  falls
             within the interpreter's portfolio.  But it is  unlikely  that
             any more  detailed  information  from  the  interpreter  could
             properly form the basis of the Tribunal's findings of fact.

         10.       We  see  no  reason  to  dissent  from   the   Tribunal's
             observation in SA and others  that  an  expert  who  speaks  a
             particular language or dialect is more likely to  be  able  to
             provide  evidence  of  whether  another  person  speaks   that
             language or dialect than is a person who does  not  have  that
             linguistic competence.  But it does not follow from that  (and
             we venture to suggest that nobody could think it followed from
             that) that every person who speaks a  particular  language  or
             dialect is to be regarded as an expert, able to assess whether
             some other person that language or dialect, or, if  not,  what
             dialect is being spoken.

         11.      For these reasons we reject [counsel for the  appellant's]
             submissions that the interpreter ought to have  been  regarded
             as an expert, able to give evidence as an expert, and ought to
             have been required to give his view on the language or dialect
             being spoken by the appellant.  We also reject his  submission
             that what occurred at the hearing was  unexpected  or  unfair.
             There as no proper reason to assume that the Court Interpreter
             would become an expert witness in the case."

15. We see no reason to differ from the AIT.  The Tribunal's  views  accord
    entirely with our own as set out above.

16. There is one final point on this issue.  We  referred  earlier  to  the
    possibility that an appellant may wish to call as  a  witness  his  own
    interpreter.  That is, of course, a matter entirely for  the  appellant
    and his representatives in any appeal.  At paragraph [12] the  Tribunal
    in AA acknowledged this possibility but also recognised  that  such  an
    interpreter would not necessarily be properly  regarded  as  an  expert
    because "there is  no  reason  at  all  to  suppose  that  he  has  the
    additional expertise necessary to identify accurately the  language  or
    dialect being used".   Of  course,  the  credentials  of  a  particular
    interpreter may be otherwise.  The point being made by the Tribunal  in
    AA, with which we agree, is that in the usual case an interpreter  will
    not have the relevant expertise and most certainly cannot be assumed to
    have such expertise merely because  he  is  an  interpreter.   That  is
    properly a matter to be taken into account by a  judge  in  determining
    what weight to give to  any  such  evidence  called  on  behalf  of  an
    appellant.

17. In this appeal, the judge had before him a  Sprakab  report  which  was
    unchallenged by any  expert  evidence.  This  report  stated  that  the
    appellant spoke Swahili and not Kibajuni at the interview.  The  report
    further stated that the appellant spoke with the intonation of  someone
    typically from Tanzania and Kenya when the appellant's account  of  her
    life offered no obvious explanation as to how  she  could  have  learnt
    such an intonation.   The  judge  took  into  account  the  appellant's
    evidence that she was speaking Kibajuni (see paragraphs 22, 28  and  39
    et seq of the determination) and found that  she  had  not  established
    that she was speaking that language.  We see no basis upon which it can
    be said that the judge erred in law in reaching his finding that on the
    evidence that was before him the appellant had failed to show that  she
    was a Kibajuni speaker.  Indeed, we venture to say that on the evidence
    the judge's finding was inevitable.  For these reasons,  we  reject  Mr
    Selway's first ground upon which he challenged the judge's decision.

Ground 2

18. We now turn to consider the second ground upon which he relied both  in
    the grounds for reconsideration and  before  us  in  Mr  Selway's  oral
    submissions.  He relied upon the case of KS (Minority clans - Bajuni  -
    ability to speak  Kibajuni)  Somalia  CG  [2004]  UKAIT  00271  and  in
    particular paragraph [43] of the  Tribunal's  decision  in  that  case.
    There, the Tribunal adopted what had been said in the earlier  decision
    of the Immigration Appeal Tribunal in AJH  (Minority  group  -  Swahili
    speakers) Somalia CG [2003] UKIAT 00094.  The Tribunal said this:

         "43.     In AJH when  dealing  with  an  assessment  of  whether  a
             Claimant is Bajuni, the Tribunal  wrote  in  paragraph  33  as
             follows:

                  'What is needed therefore in cases in which claims  to  be
                  Somali nationals and Bajuni  clan  identity  are  made  is
                  first of all:

                  (i)    an  assessment  which  examines  at  least   three
                  different factors:

                 (a)   knowledge of Kibajuni;

                 (b)    knowledge  of  Somali  depending  on  the  person's
                  personal history;

                 (c)   knowledge of matters to do with life in  Somali  for
                  Bajuni (geography, customs, occupations, etc.).

                       But what is also needed is

                 (ii)  an assessment which does not treat any one of  these
                  three factors as decisive: as the Tribunal noted  in  Omar
                  ...It is even possible albeit unusual that  a  person  who
                  does not speak Kibajuni or Somali could be a Bajuni.'"

19. As this makes clear, and Mr Selway  relied  upon  this,  it  is  not  a
    necessary condition for an individual to establish that he  or  she  is
    Bajuni that  they  should  speak  Kibajuni.   It  is  possible,  albeit
    unusual, that a person who does not speak Kibajuni is in  fact  Bajuni.
    The Tribunal in KS makes clear that a judge should make  an  assessment
    in the round having regard at least to the  individual's  knowledge  of
    Kibajuni, knowledge of Somalia and knowledge  of  matters  relating  to
    life as a Bajuni in Somalia.  Mr Selway submitted that  the  judge  had
    failed to undertake an assessment of the evidence in the round on  this
    basis.  He submitted that the judge had failed  to  apply  the  country
    guidance case of KS and had thereby erred in law.

20. In our judgment, there are two insurmountable problems which prevent Mr
    Selway making good his submission.

21. First, the way in which Mr Selway now seeks to  criticise  the  judge's
    approach to the appeal  was  not  the  basis  on  which  the  appellant
    (through Mr Selway) put her claim before the judge.  Her claim was that
    she spoke Kibajuni and was Bajuni.  She did not say, 'I  do  not  speak
    Kibajuni', or, 'If you disbelieve  me  that  I  speak  Kibajuni,  I  am
    nevertheless Bajuni'.  We do not see how the judge could have erred  in
    law if he had failed to approach the evidence on a basis that  was  not
    relied upon by the appellant at the hearing given her evidence that she
    spoke Kibajuni.

22. Secondly, in any event, although the judge did not  directly  refer  to
    the decision in KS, he clearly did consider all the evidence  presented
    to him in the round.  He did not focus exclusively  upon  the  language
    spoken by the appellant.  He identified a  number  of  aspects  of  the
    evidence that led him at paragraph 36 to  conclude  that  he  "did  not
    believe the appellant was a truthful witness".  The judge  referred  to
    the appellant's limited  knowledge  of  Somalia  including  matters  in
    relation to currency and clans (see  paragraph  38).   The  judge  also
    found it difficult to understand how the appellant had claimed  in  her
    interview that she had attended her brother's  funeral  when  she  also
    claimed she was in hiding (see paragraph 30).  There was also confusion
    over when she had left Fumayo, giving two dates in 2008  one  of  which
    was after she claimed her brother had been killed and she had  attended
    the funeral (see paragraph 39).  In addition, the judge noted that  the
    appellant's evidence was that she did not know where  her  husband  was
    and was not able to contact him (see paragraph 34).   The  judge  noted
    that the appellant was unable, in her evidence-in-chief, to explain how
    she could send money back to her relatives when she did not know  where
    they were (see paragraph 36).

23. Mr Selway did not challenge the judge's assessment  of  this  evidence.
    When we enquired, he indicated that if we were  minded  to  remake  the
    decision he had no further evidence to rely upon.  In our judgment,  it
    is clear that the judge did consider all the evidence.  He  simply  did
    not believe the appellant for the detailed reasons he gave and which we
    have summarised.  He considered all the evidence consistently with  KS.
    We have no doubt that the judge was entitled to reach the adverse  view
    of the appellant's evidence that he did and to find that  she  had  not
    established that she was Bajuni and as a consequence that she would not
    be at risk on return to Somalia.

Decision

24. For these reasons, the judge did not  err  in  law  in  dismissing  the
    appeal and his decision stands.

25. This appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.



    Signed


      Senior Immigration Judge Grubb
      Judge of the Upper Tribunal

