
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

AA (Art 1F(a) - complicity - Arts 7 and 25 ICC Statute) Iran [2011] UKUT
00339(IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 4 May 2011                                 |                             |
|                                              |29 July 2011                 |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE GRUBB
                           IMMIGRATION JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                               AKBAR AZIMI-RAD
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M Plimmer, instructed by Jackson & Canter
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Marsh, Home Office Presenting Officer

1. In establishing for the purposes of Art 1F(a) of the  Refugee  Convention
that an individual was complicit under Art 25(3)(d) of the Rome  Statute  of
the International Criminal Court ("ICC Statute") in crimes against  humanity
perpetrated by others in an organisation, it was necessary to  consider  all
the circumstances of the appellant's involvement  in  that  organisation  in
order to determine  whether  what  the  appellant  did  made  a  significant
contribution to the organisation's  ability  to  carry  out  crimes  against
humanity: R (on the application of JS) (Sri Lanka) v SSHD  [2010]  UKSC  15.
(See also Joined Cases C-57/09 and C-101/09 Bundesrepublik Deutschland  v  B
and D [2011] Imm AR 190).

2. However, in establishing this (wider) form of complicity liability  under
international criminal law it  was  not  necessary  to  establish  that  the
appellant's acts formed 'part of" a  crime  against  humanity  committed  by
others in the sense that the appellant's acts were of such a  character  as,
in themselves, to fall within one or more of the categories  of  acts  which
if committed as part of a widespread or systematic attack  directed  against
any civilian population  were  capable  of  amounting  to  a  crime  against
humanity under Art 7 of the ICC Statute.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iran who was born on 9 January 1984.   He
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 3 April 2007 and  claimed  asylum  the
    following day.  On 22 June 2010, the  Secretary  of  State  refused  to
    grant the appellant asylum under para 336 of the Immigration  Rules  HC
    395 (as amended) and on 28 June 2010 made a decision to remove  him  as
    an illegal entrant to Iran by way of directions under  paras  8-10A  of
    Schedule 2 to the Immigration Act 1971.  The appellant appealed against
    that latter decision to the First-tier Tribunal.   In  a  determination
    sent  on  20  August  2010,  Immigration  Judge  Lambert  allowed   the
    appellant's appeal under Art 3 of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights but dismissed his appeal on asylum and  humanitarian  protection
    grounds.  The judge found that the  appellant  was  excluded  from  the
    protection of the Refugee Convention by virtue of  Art  1F(a)  in  that
    there were serious reasons for considering that he had  been  complicit
    in crimes against humanity as a member of the Basij (Nirouye Moqavemate
    Basij) which is a volunteer  paramilitary  force  founded  in  1979  by
    Ayatollah Khomeini whose mission is to maintain law and  order  and  to
    enforce ideological and Islamic values in Iran.

 2. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the basis that  the  judge
    had erred in law in finding that the appellant was  excluded  from  the
    protection of the Refugee Convention  by  virtue  of  Art  1F.   On  14
    September 2010, Senior Immigration Judge Freeman granted the  appellant
    permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.   Thus,  the  matter  came
    before us.

Background

 3. The judge accepted much of the appellant's account and  the  underlying
    facts are no longer in dispute.  The appellant  was  a  member  of  the
    Basij in Iran which he had joined at the age of 12 in 1995.  In  2003-4
    he performed his military  service  with  the  Revolutionary  Guard  in
    Teheran.  He was a committed and respected member of the Basij of  some
    local rank.  In fact, he was the commander in his village.  In 2004  he
    received a "Basij of the year" award.  The appellant had not personally
    been involved in acts of violence against Iranian civilians.   However,
    he had witnessed such acts  of  violence  when  he  and  his  men  were
    seconded to patrol or man checkpoints in the nearby  town  of  Miyaneh.
    There, however, he was not in command of his Basij colleagues.

 4. The appellant is a Shia Muslim of Azeri ethnicity.  He provided helpful
    information to an  Azeri  friend,  with  whose  politics  he  had  some
    sympathy.  The appellant gave his friend advance warning of the  nights
    that he would be  on  duty  so  that  his  friend,  in  furthering  his
    political activities, could avoid checkpoints manned by  the  appellant
    on behalf of the Revolutionary Guard.  The appellant also identified to
    his friend a number of plain clothes Basij operating in Miyaneh so that
    he would know not to mention his activities to them.   In  March  2007,
    whilst at his uncle's home, the appellant received a phone call from  a
    friend in his village telling him that the Etelaat were looking for him
    and had searched his house and the Basij base.   He  later  heard  that
    they had also searched the coffee shop that he  owned.   The  appellant
    concluded that it must be because his friend had been arrested.

 5. Although  the  judge  identified  a  number  of  discrepancies  in  the
    appellant's evidence, she nevertheless accepted the  core  elements  of
    his account to be true.  As a consequence,  the  judge  found  that  he
    would return to Iran, which he had illegally left, without  a  passport
    and as a former member of the Basij who  had  departed  suddenly  after
    being suspected of having actively assisted dissident Aziris  in  their
    illegal activities.  On the basis of that, the judge found  that  there
    was a real risk that the appellant would suffer  serious  ill-treatment
    by the Iranian authorities on his arrival at Tehran Airport  in  breach
    of Art 3 of the ECHR.  Those factual findings were  not  challenged  by
    the respondent in response to the grounds of appeal made under rule  24
    of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  (SI  2008/2698).
    Ms Marsh, who represented the respondent before us, also did  not  seek
    to challenge those factual findings and the judge's decision  to  allow
    the appeal under Art 3.

 6. Before us, the sole issue raised by the parties was whether  the  judge
    had erred in law in finding that the appellant was excluded  under  Art
    1F of the Refugee Convention.

The Appellant's Grounds

 7. Before us, Ms Plimmer  advanced  three  arguments  in  support  of  her
    submission that the judge had erred in law in applying Art  1F  to  the
    appellant.

 8. First, she submitted that the judge had erred in law in finding on  the
    evidence before her that the  Basij  were  committing  "crimes  against
    humanity" falling within Art 7 of the Rome Statute of the International
    Criminal Court 2008 ("the ICC Statute").   In  particular,  Ms  Plimmer
    submitted that the  judge  had  been  wrong  to  find  that  the  Basij
    committed acts "as part of a widespread or systematic  attack  directed
    against any civilian population" that fell within the terms of Art 7 of
    the ICC Statute.  We will refer to this as "Ground 1(a)".

 9. In her grounds of appeal, Ms Plimmer also argued  that  the  judge  had
    erred in applying Art 7 of the ICC Statute to the Basij  on  the  basis
    that  any  attacks  were  directed  only  against  civilians  "seen  to
    transgress the ideological and Islamic views laid down in Iranian  law"
    and not against the population generally.  Before  us,  Ms  Plimmer  no
    longer relied upon this argument.  She accepted that it was  sufficient
    that any such widespread  or  systematic  attacks  by  the  Basij  were
    directed at this particular section of the Iranian population.  We need
    say no more about this other than to note, in our view, Ms Plimmer  was
    right not to pursue this argument which could not  be  sustained  as  a
    proper legal interpretation of Art 7 of the ICC Statute.

10. Secondly, Ms Plimmer  submitted  that  the  appellant's  activities  on
    behalf of the Basij must be linked to acts amounting to crimes  against
    humanity falling within Art 7 of the ICC Statute.  In particular, these
    acts must be "part of" those crimes.  On the evidence accepted  by  the
    judge, Ms Plimmer submitted that the appellant had never been  involved
    in any acts that fell within Art 7 of the  ICC  Statute  and  thus  his
    actions could not amount to a "crime against humanity" within Art 1F(a)
    of the Refugee Convention. We will refer to this as "Ground 1(b)".

11. Thirdly, Ms Plimmer submitted that  the  judge  had  erred  in  law  in
    assessing the appellant's "personal responsibility" within  Art  25  of
    the ICC Statute for the acts committed by the  Basij  which  -  if  the
    judge were correct in making this finding - amounted to "crimes against
    humanity" within Art 7 of the ICC Statute.  Ms Plimmer  submitted  that
    in assessing the appellant's "personal responsibility"  the  judge  had
    failed  to  carry  out  a  proper   assessment   of   the   appellant's
    circumstances  (his  actions  and  involvement  with  the   Basij)   in
    accordance with the approach set out in the Supreme Court decision of R
    (on the  application  of  JS)  (Sri  Lanka)  v  SSHD  [2010]  UKSC  15,
    especially as set out by Lord Brown at para [30].   We  will  refer  to
    this as "Ground 2".

The Law

12. We begin  with  the  relevant  legal  provisions  in  (1)  the  Refugee
    Convention and so far as relevant, the Qualification Directive (Council
    Directive 2004/83/EC); (2) the ICC Statute; and (3) the  relevant  case
    law, in particular the Supreme Court decision in JS.

    1. Art 1F

13. The starting point is Art 1F of the Refugee Convention which  sets  out
    the circumstances in which an individual  will  be  excluded  from  the
    protection of the Refugee Convention.  Art 1F(a) provides,  so  far  as
    relevant to this appeal, as follows:

         "The provisions of this Convention shall not apply  to  any  person
         with respect to whom there  are  serious  reasons  for  considering
         that:

         (a)      he has committed ... a crime against humanity, as  defined
             in the international instruments drawn up to make provision in
             respect of such crimes; ..."

14. That provision is reflected in Art 12(2)(a)  of  the  EU  Qualification
    Directive.

    2. The ICC Statute

15. It is common ground in this  appeal  that  the  burden  lies  upon  the
    Secretary of State to establish that Art 1F applies, namely that  there
    are "serious reasons for considering" that the appellant has  committed
    a crime against humanity (see Al-Sirri v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ  222  per
    Sedley LJ at para [27]).  That burden applies regardless of whether the
    Secretary  of  State  issues  a  certificate  under  s.55(1)   of   the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality  Act  2006,  as  she  did  in  this
    appeal, or not.  The s.55 certificate  merely  requires  the  judge  to
    determine whether Art 1F applies before considering any  other  aspects
    of the case and to dismiss the appeal on  asylum  grounds  if  it  does
    (ss.55(3) and (4)).

16. In determining what amounts to a "crime against humanity"  the  Supreme
    Court in JS accepted that the ICC Statute was the "starting point" (per
    Lord Brown at para [8].   See  also  SK  (Article  1F(a)  -  exclusion)
    Zimbabwe [2010] UKUT 327 (IAC)).  That was common  ground  between  the
    parties before us and, as a result, the parties'  submissions  focussed
    on the relevant provisions in the ICC Statute, namely  Articles  7,  25
    and 30.  Those  Articles  deal  respectively  with  the  definition  of
    "crimes against humanity" (Art 7), "individual responsibility" (Art 25)
    and "mental element" (Art 30).

17. Before we set out the relevant part of those provisions, we should also
    refer to Art 28 which is headed "responsibility of commanders and other
    superiors".  This provision deals with the responsibility of a military
    commander or person effectively acting as such for any  crimes  falling
    within the ICC Statute committed by forces under his or her command and
    control or effective authority and control.  It was  not  part  of  the
    Secretary of State's case before the judge  that  the  appellant  as  a
    commander of the Basij in his village was responsible for any  acts  of
    those under his command by virtue of Art  28.   As  will  become  clear
    shortly, the Secretary of State's  case  was  that  the  appellant  was
    complicit by  virtue  of  his  own  acts  in  crimes  against  humanity
    committed by the Basij though not specifically by any  members  of  the
    Basij whilst under his command.

    "Crimes against humanity" (Art 7)

18. Article 7 of the ICC Statute defines a "crime against humanity" in  the
    following terms:

         "Article 7

         Crimes against humanity

         1. For the purpose of this Statute 'crime against  humanity'  means
             any of  the  following  acts  when  committed  as  part  of  a
             widespread or systematic attack directed against any  civilian
             population, with knowledge of the attack:

             (a) Murder;
             (b) Extermination;
             (c) Enslavement;
             (d) Deportation or forcible transfer of population;
             (e) Imprisonment  or  other  severe  deprivation  of  physical
                  liberty in violation of fundamental rules of international
                  law;
             (f) Torture
             (g)  Rape,  sexual  slavery,  enforced  prostitution,   forced
                  pregnancy, enforced sterilization, or any  other  form  of
                  sexual violence of comparable gravity;
             (h) Persecution against any identifiable group or collectivity
                  on  political,   racial,   national,   ethnic,   cultural,
                  religious, gender as defined  in  paragraph  3,  on  other
                  grounds that are universally recognized  as  impermissible
                  under  international  law,  in  connection  with  any  act
                  referred to in this paragraph  or  any  crime  within  the
                  jurisdiction of the Court;
             (i) Enforced disappearance of persons;
             (j) The crime of apartheid;
             (k) Other inhumane acts of a similar  character  intentionally
                  causing great suffering, or serious injury to body  or  to
                  mental or physical health.

         2. For the purpose of paragraph 1:

             (a) 'Attack directed against any civilian population' means  a
                  course of conduct involving  the  multiple  commission  of
                  acts referred to  in  paragraph  1  against  any  civilian
                  population, pursuant to or in furtherance of  a  State  or
                  organizational policy to commit such attack; ...
             (e) 'Torture' means the intentional infliction of severe  pain
                  or suffering, whether physical or mental, upon a person in
                  the custody or under the control of  the  accused;  except
                  that torture shall not include pain or  suffering  arising
                  only from, inherent in or incidental to, lawful sanctions;
                  ...
             (g) 'Persecution' means the intentional and severe deprivation
                  of fundamental rights contrary  to  international  law  by
                  reason of the identity of the group or collectivity ..."

19.  Consequently,  a  crime  against  humanity  requires   the   "multiple
    commission  of  acts"  falling  within  Art  7(1)(a)-(k)  committed  in
    furtherance  of  a  state  or  organisational  policy  as  "part  of  a
    widespread  or  systematic  attack  directed   against   any   civilian
    population" with knowledge of that attack.

20. The Secretary of State's case, accepted by  the  judge,  was  that  the
    Basij are, as part of or acting on behalf of  the  Iranian  government,
    engaged in such a "widespread or systematic attack"  against  religious
    or ideological dissidents  in  Iran  in  that  they  murder,  imprison,
    torture or engage in other inhumane acts  intentionally  causing  great
    suffering or serious injury to the body or to the  mental  or  physical
    health of civilians.

    "Criminal responsibility" (Art 25)

21. Article 25 sets out the circumstances in which  an  individual  may  be
    "criminally responsible" for a crime against  humanity  falling  within
    Art 7.  It provides as follows:

         Article 25

         Individual criminal responsibility

         1. The Court shall have jurisdiction over natural persons  pursuant
             to this Statute:

         2. A person who commits a crime  within  the  jurisdiction  of  the
             Court  shall  be  individually  responsible  and  liable   for
             punishment in accordance with this Statute.

         3. In accordance with this Statute, a person  shall  be  criminally
             responsible and liable for punishment for a crime  within  the
             jurisdiction of the Court if that person:

             (a) Commits such a crime, whether as  an  individual,  jointly
                  with another or  through  another  person,  regardless  of
                  whether that other person is criminally responsible;
             (b) Orders, solicits or induces the commission of such a crime
                  which in fact occurs or is attempted;
             (c) For the purpose of facilitating the commission of  such  a
                  crime, aids, abets or otherwise assists in its  commission
                  or its attempted commission, including providing the means
                  for its commission;
             (d)  In  any  other  way  contributes  to  the  commission  or
                  attempted commission of such a crime by a group of persons
                  acting with a common purpose.  Such contribution shall  be
                  intentional and shall either:

                  (i)  Be made with  the  aim  of  furthering  the  criminal
                      activity or criminal purpose of the group, where such
                      activity or purpose  involves  the  commission  of  a
                      crime within the jurisdiction of the Court; or
                  (ii) Be made in the knowledge  of  the  intention  of  the
                      group to commit the crime ..."

22. The meaning and application of Art 25 is at the heart of this appeal.

23. In setting out in Art 25(3) the circumstances in  which  an  individual
    may  be  criminally  responsible  for,  inter  alia,  a  crime  against
    humanity, Art 25(3)(a)-(d) lay down, in effect, in descending order the
    level of involvement that an individual  must  have  to  be  criminally
    responsible.   Art  25(3)  begins  with  an  individual  who   actually
    "commits" the crime whether by himself or  jointly  with  another  (Art
    25(3)(a)) and ends with an individual who merely  "contributes  to  the
    commission" of the crime by a group of persons  acting  with  a  common
    purpose (Art 25(3)(d)).

24. In addition  to  the  ICC  Statute,  Art  12(3)  of  the  Qualification
    Directive provides that, inter alia, Article 1F(a) applies not only  to
    those who personally commit crimes against humanity but also those "who
    instigate or otherwise participate in the commission of [crimes against
    humanity]".  In JS, the  Supreme  Court   regarded  Art  12(3)  of  the
    Qualification Directive as offering no more than a shortened version of
    the provisions found in Art 25(3) of the ICC Statute  (see,  especially
    per Lord Brown at [33] set out below).

    "Mental Element" (Art 30)

25. Before  turning  to  the  proper  interpretation  of  these  provisions
    following the Supreme Court's decision in JS, we set out Art 30 dealing
    with the "mental element" required for criminal responsibility.  It  is
    in the following terms:

         "Article 30

         Mental element

         1.  Unless  otherwise  provided,  a  person  shall  be   criminally
             responsible and liable for punishment for a crime  within  the
             jurisdiction of the Court only if the  material  elements  are
             committed with intent and knowledge.

         2. For the purposes of this article, a person has intent where:

             (a) In relation to conduct, that person means to engage in the
                  conduct;
             (b) In relation to a consequence, that person means  to  cause
                  that consequence or is aware that it  will  occur  in  the
                  ordinary course of events.

         3. For the purposes of this article,  'knowledge'  means  awareness
         that a circumstance exists or  a  consequence  will  occur  in  the
         ordinary  course  of  events.  'Know'  and  'knowingly'  shall   be
         construed accordingly."

26. It is not disputed in this appeal that the appellant had  the  required
    mental element for complicity in a crime against humanity.

    3. JS

27. In JS, the Supreme Court offered authoritative guidance on the  meaning
    of Art 25 of the  ICC  Statute  and  Art  12(3)  of  the  Qualification
    Directive.  Having set out the terms of Art 12(3) of the  Qualification
    Directive, Lord Brown JSC set out the scope of that provision  and  Art
    25(3) of the ICC Statute in the following terms:

         "33.     .... Article  12(3)  does  not,  of  course,  enlarge  the
             application of article IF; it merely gives expression to  what
             is already well understood in international law.  This is true
             too of paragraphs (b), (c) and (d) of article 25(3) of the ICC
             Statute, each of which recognises that criminal responsibility
             is  engaged  by  persons  other  than  the   person   actually
             committing the crime (by pulling  the  trigger,  planting  the
             bomb or whatever) who himself, of course, falls within article
             25(3)(a).  Paragraph (b) encompasses those who order,  solicit
             or induce (in the language of article 12(3) of the  Directive,
             'instigate') the commission of the crime; paragraph (c)  those
             who  aid,  abet,  or  otherwise  assist  in   its   commission
             (including providing the means for this); paragraph (d)  those
             who  in  any  other  way  intentionally  contribute   to   its
             commission (paras  (c)  and  (d)  together  equating,  in  the
             language of article 12(3)  of  the  Directive,  to  'otherwise
             participat[ing]' in the commission of the crime)."

28. Lord Brown concluded that  the  Court  of  Appeal  had  been  wrong  to
    restrict the scope of Art 25(3) only to those who would  be  criminally
    liable (whether as perpetrators or accessories) under domestic criminal
    law.  At para [38] of his judgment he said, referring to  the  judgment
    of Toulson LJ in the Court of Appeal at para [119], that:

         "38.     .... I have to say that paragraph 119 does seem to me  too
             narrowly drawn, appearing  to  confine  article  1F  liability
             essentially  to  just  the  same  sort   of   joint   criminal
             enterprises as would result in convictions under domestic law.
              Certainly para 119 is all too easily read as  being  directed
             to specific identifiable crimes rather than, as to my mind  it
             should be, wider  concepts  of  common  design,  such  as  the
             accomplishment of an organisation's purpose by whatever  means
             are necessary including the commission  of  war  crimes.   Put
             simply, I would hold an accused disqualified under article  1F
             if there are serious reasons for considering  him  voluntarily
             to have contributed in a significant way to the organisation's
             ability to pursue its purpose of committing war crimes,  aware
             that his assistance will in fact further that purpose."

29. As Lord Brown acknowledged at para [36] of his judgment,  to  establish
    complicity in a crime covered by Art 7, and which act fell  within  Art
    25, would nevertheless require proof of the  necessary  mental  element
    under Art 30 of the ICC Statute, namely intent and knowledge.  And,  as
    he made plain at para [36]:

         "36. ...if a person is aware that in the ordinary course of  events
             a particular consequence will follow from his actions,  he  is
             taken to have acted with both knowledge and intent."

30. At para [35] of his judgment, Lord Brown acknowledged that Art 1F:

         "Disqualifies those who make 'a substantial  contribution  to'  the
         crime, knowing that their acts or omissions will facilitate it."

31. Lord Brown went on to accept  that  this  would  include  a  person  in
    control of the funds of an organisation, "dedicated  to  achieving  its
    aims through ... violent crimes" and  to  anyone  contributing  to  the
    commission of such crimes "by substantially assisting the  organisation
    to continue to function effectively in the pursuance of its aims".

32. At para [30] of his judgment, which was relied upon by Ms Plimmer, Lord
    Brown set out a series of factors to be taken into account in assessing
    whether,  on  the  basis  of  the  appellant's  involvement   with   an
    organisation engaged in crimes against humanity, that individual  could
    be said to be complicit and criminally responsible in those crimes.  He
    said this:

         "30.     .... it is surely preferable to focus from the  outset  on
             what ultimately must prove to be the  determining  factors  in
             any case, principally (in no particular order) (i) the  nature
             and  (potentially  of  some  importance)  the  size   of   the
             organisation and particularly that part of it with  which  the
             asylum-seeker  was  himself  most  directly  concerned,   (ii)
             whether and, if so, by whom the organisation  was  proscribed,
             (iii) how the asylum-seeker came to  be  recruited,  (iv)  the
             length of time he remained in the organisation  and  what,  if
             any, opportunities he had to leave it, (v) his position, rank,
             standing and influence in the organisation, (vi) his knowledge
             of the organisation's war crimes activities, and (vii) his own
             personal involvement and role in  the  organisation  including
             particularly  whatever  contribution  he  made   towards   the
             commission of war crimes."

33. Lord Brown rejected the approach of the IAT in Gurung v SSHD [2003] Imm
    AR 115 that organisations could be divided into  those  that  were,  in
    effect, terrorist in nature, and those which were not,  in  determining
    an individual's criminal responsibility because of his  involvement  in
    the organisation in question.  Rather, Lord Brown  concluded  that  the
    relevant factors he set out in paragraph  [30]  allowed  the  decision-
    maker  to  assess  properly  whether  an  individual's  membership  and
    activities  within  an  organisation  that  committed  crimes   against
    humanity resulted in his criminal responsibility on the  basis  of  his
    complicity in those crimes (see  para  [29]).   It  was  common  ground
    before the Supreme Court that  "mere  membership"  of  an  organisation
    would not be sufficient to bring an  individual  within  the  exclusion
    provisions (see paras [1] and [2]).

34.  Lord  Hope  DP  agreed  with  Lord  Brown.   Mere  membership  of   an
    organisation committed to the use of violence  would  not,  in  itself,
    necessarily exclude an individual from the protection  of  the  Refugee
    Convention (see paras [43] and  [49]).   Like  Lord  Brown,  Lord  Hope
    concluded that the Court of Appeal had drawn too narrowly the scope  of
    criminal responsibility for international crimes falling within  Art  7
    of the ICC Statute which was wider than those  applicable  in  domestic
    criminal law (see paras [47] and [48]).  Lord  Hope  agreed  with  Lord
    Brown's test for complicity stated at para [38] of his  judgment  which
    we set out above.  At para [49] Lord Hope said this in relation to Lord
    Brown's test:

         "49.     .... The words 'serious reasons for considering'  are,  of
             course, taken  from  article  1F  itself.   The  words  'in  a
             significant way' and  'will  in  fact  further  that  purpose'
             provide the key to the  exercise.   Those  are  the  essential
             elements that must be satisfied  to  fix  the  applicant  with
             personal  responsibility.   The  words  'made  a   substantial
             contribution' were used by the  German  Administrative  Court,
             and they are to the same effect.  The focus is on the facts of
             each case and not on any presumption that may  be  invited  by
             mere membership."

35. Lord Kerr JSC similarly agreed with Lord Brown and the factors set  out
    by Lord Brown at para [30] of his judgment in assessing an individual's
    complicity in a crime falling within Art 7.  However, at para [55] Lord
    Kerr cautioned against that list becoming prescriptive.  He said this:

         "55.     I would be reluctant to accept that this list  of  factors
             provides the invariable and infallible prescription  by  which
             what I have described  as  the  critical  question  is  to  be
             answered.  What must be shown is that the person concerned was
             a knowing participant or accomplice in the commission  of  war
             crimes etc.  The evaluation of his role  in  the  organisation
             has as its purpose either the identification of  a  sufficient
             level of participation on the part of the  individual  to  fix
             him with the relevant liability or a determination  that  this
             is not present.  While the six factors that Counsel identified
             will frequently be relevant to that evaluation, it seems to me
             that they are not necessarily exhaustive of the matters to  be
             taken into account, nor will each of the factors be inevitably
             significant  in  every  case.   One  needs,  I   believe,   to
             concentrate on  the  actual  role  played  by  the  particular
             person, taking all material aspects of that role into  account
             so as to decide whether the required degree  of  participation
             is established."

36. At paras [57]  and  [58]  Lord  Kerr  emphasised  that  the  assessment
    required an examination of the individual's actual involvement  in  the
    organisation which committed crimes against humanity.

37. Lords Roger JSC and Walker JSC expressed agreement with the judgment of
    Lords Brown, Hope and Kerr.

38. With this legal framework in mind, we now turn to the specific  grounds
    upon which Ms Plimmer relied in her  submissions  that  the  judge  had
    erred in law in applying Art 1F to the appellant.

Ground 1(a)

39. As we have indicated, the Secretary of State's case  before  the  judge
    was not that the appellant had personally committed acts within  Art  7
    of the ICC Statute amounting to crimes against humanity but rather  was
    criminally responsible (complicit) in crimes against humanity committed
    by the Basij in Iran.  In order to establish  that,  the  Secretary  of
    State had to show that the Basij were engaged in  acts  falling  within
    Art 7(1)(a) to (k) as  part  of  "a  widespread  or  systematic  attack
    directed against any civilian  population".   That  attack  had  to  be
    "pursuant to or in furtherance of a State or organisational policy"  to
    commit such attack.

40. Ms Plimmer's submission is that the judge was not entitled  to  make  a
    factual finding that the Basij were committing crimes against  humanity
    in Iran on the basis of the background evidence submitted to the judge.



41. The judge's reasoning can be found at paras 9.3-9.5  of  her  judgment.
    At para 9.3, the judge noted that the respondent relied heavily upon  a
    33-page report and analysis prepared in respect of the appellant by the
    Home Office War Crimes Unit dated March 2009.  The judge noted that the
    report was "cogent, detailed and  well-resourced".   At  para  9.4  the
    judge observed that:

         "Ms Plimmer accepted on behalf of the appellant that the WCU report
         correctly identified the Basij generally as  carrying  out  violent
         activities.  However she argued that the Basij could not be said in
         terms of Article 7 of Rome Statute to be part of  a  widespread  or
         systematic attack directed at the civilian population."

42. The judge then went on in four bullet points in para 9.4 to  deal  with
    the background evidence as follows:

         ". The fact that the Basij are  'not  one  and  the  same  as'  the
             Revolutionary Guard (E4) is immaterial because, as the  report
             and an abundance of background material makes clear, the Basij
             forms an essential part of  the  Iranian  security  system  of
             control of the civilian population and (E17) comes  under  the
             IRGC land unit command.

         .  The instances of independent acts by elements  of  the  security
             forces referred to at E5 of the report do not  mean  that  the
             Basij is not as an organisation essentially acting  under  the
             direction of the government and implementing a system of often
             violent control.

         .  It is well known that the Basij are involved in  detentions  and
             arrests without order or warrant from  the  authorities  (E9).
             However it is equally well known (cf. eg US  State  Department
             Report F6; Human Rights Watch report  'Parallel  Institutions'
             K2) that this forms part of the way in which in  practice  the
             Iranian regime operates  its  'parallel'  system  of  control.
             Arbitrary arrest and detention are  common  and  the  civilian
             authorities do not fully maintain  effective  control  of  the
             security forces.  This does not mean that the  Basij  are  not
             part  of   the   system   -   indeed   quite   the   opposite.
             Unpredictability and  lack  of  accountability  are  essential
             elements of control by fear.

         .  The Appellant's own description of the Basij as  'in  principle'
             being a body whose role is to enforce the law  may  accurately
             represent his personal view and may even be correct, but  this
             does not mean that this is what happens in  practice  or  that
             they act with restraint.  As he himself  makes  clear  in  his
             statement (paragraphs 18-21) he had been  reported  for  being
             'soft' on several occasions, had been  told  by  his  superior
             officer to 'become harder' in his approach and  he  knew  that
             his colleagues engaged in violence and ill treatment  as  part
             of their duties.  Moreover he says  that  he  was  aware  that
             civilian people generally were in fear of the Basij - he could
             see it in their demeanour towards him when he was on  duty  in
             the city."

43. At para  9.5,  on  the  basis  of  the  appellant's  evidence  and  the
    background material, the judge reached the following conclusion.

         "9.5     Thus the Appellant's own evidence in addition to  all  the
             other background material before me leads me to conclude  that
             the violent activities  of  the  Basij  in  carrying  out  its
             perceived duties do form part of what can  be  regarded  as  a
             widespread or systematic attack designed to  maintain  control
             over the Iranian civilian population generally."

44. Both in her grounds of  appeal  and  submissions,  Ms  Plimmer  offered
    little by way of direct challenge to the judge's finding  in  para  9.5
    based upon the evidence which she had set out at para 9.4.  At  para  4
    of her grounds, Ms Plimmer simply stated that there is

         "considerable evidence within the respondent's own analysis at  E1-
         E35 that individual members of the Basij have acted outside of  the
         limited  mandate  and  they  acted  independently   of   government
         authority and not necessarily as part of systematic attack directed
         against the civilian population." (emphasis in original)

45. In her oral submissions, Ms Plimmer repeated her generalised  challenge
    to the judge's finding.  Having done so, she frankly accepted that this
    was  perhaps  not  her  strongest  point  in  challenging  the  judge's
    decision.  We entirely agree.

46. The judge had before her a detailed report from  the  Home  Office  War
    Crimes Unit (at Appendix E1-E35 of the  respondent's  bundle).   As  we
    have already set out, at para 9.4 the judge considered in  some  detail
    the terms of that report, setting out as it does the role played by the
    Basij in

         "helping to maintain  law  and  order;  enforcing  ideological  and
         Islamic values and  combating  the  'western  cultural  onslaught';
         assisting the [Iranian Revolutionary Guard Corps] in defending  the
         country against foreign threats".

47. The report identifies the Basij's important and  embedded  role  within
    the Iranian state.  It highlights their involvement in the control  and
    suppression  of  dissidents  and   those   involved   in   anti-Iranian
    demonstrations which have resulted in deaths, injuries  and  detentions
    and arrests without any order or warrant.  Although there is  reference
    to some members of the Basij acting "as vigilantes",  the  report  also
    notes that the civilian authorities do not  "fully  maintain  effective
    control of the security forces".  The report is replete with references
    from other sources such as Human Rights  Watch,  Amnesty  International
    and Freedom House, which deal in detail with the  role  played  by  the
    Basij and its activities directed against those who  are  perceived  as
    dissidents or anti-Iranian.  It also notes the link  between  the  IRGC
    (the Iranian Revolutionary  Guard  Corps),  which  is  described  as  a
    "leading instrument of the repression and dissent  in  Iran",  and  the
    Basij militia.

48. In addition, the appellant's  own  evidence  (at  question  44  of  his
    interview at B14-15) was that he  witnessed  "lashings,  beatings  with
    batons and sticks" by the Basij.  He stated that "whoever  is  arrested
    by the Basij before going to court has to be beaten up".  He went on to
    state that,

         "If someone is reported, house would be raided, arrested by  force.
         Taken to base and beaten up.  Had to hand people over who would  be
         beaten.  I told my men I didn't beat people but my men  did  in  my
         village - some of them."

49. In other words, it was the appellant's own evidence that the Basij were
    engaged in unlawful acts of serious  violence  and  unlawful  detention
    against those whom they arrested (see also his answers at questions  40
    and 41 of his interview).  At question 47 he was asked whether  he  had
    seen anyone die.  He replied, "I haven't seen anyone die but seen  many
    unconscious after beatings and torture - some people not many".

50. Ms Plimmer's task, as she frankly acknowledged, is a difficult  one  in
    establishing ground 1(a).  She has to show that, on the evidence before
    the judge, the judge could not lawfully conclude that  the  Basij  were
    engaged in acts falling within Art 7 of the  ICC  Statute:  that  is  a
    perversity or irrationality challenge.  The issue is not whether we, as
    a panel, would have reached the same  conclusion  as  the  judge.   The
    issue is whether the judge  could  reasonably,  on  the  basis  of  the
    evidence before her, reach the conclusion that she did.  We are  in  no
    doubt that she could reasonably reach that conclusion  based  upon  the
    background evidence and the appellant's  evidence  about  his  personal
    knowledge of the Basij in his own area.

51. For these reasons, we reject ground 1(a) relied  upon  by  Ms  Plimmer.
    The judge did not err in law in  concluding  that  the  Basij  in  Iran
    commit crimes against humanity falling within Art 7 of the ICC Statute.



Ground 1(b)

52. This ground seeks to establish that the judge erred in law because  the
    acts committed by the appellant (which are not  disputed)  did  not  in
    themselves form "part of" the "widespread or systematic attack directed
    against any  civilian  population".   As  we  understood  Ms  Plimmer's
    submission, identified not in her grounds but in her oral  submissions,
    the appellant's acts were not "part" of any crime against humanity  but
    were distinct and discrete from them.  As a matter of law,  those  acts
    could not therefore result in his  complicity  in  the  Basij's  crimes
    against humanity which, at this point in her submissions, must be taken
    to have been properly established on the evidence by the judge.

53.  Ms  Plimmer's  submission  in  our  judgment  obfuscates  the   proper
    relationship between Art 7 and Art 25 of the ICC Statute.  In  essence,
    her argument amounts to an assertion  that,  based  upon  the  specific
    wording of Art 7, the appellant can only be responsible for the Basij's
    crimes against humanity if in fact his acts were of a character falling
    within Art 7(1).

54. Clearly, if an individual is said  to  have  personally  perpetrated  a
    crime against humanity or to have been involved in a  joint  enterprise
    that amounts to a crime against humanity, his acts will  be  "part  of"
    that crime.  Indeed, in the former instance, his  acts  will  be  those
    that amount to the crime itself.  Likewise, it might  be  said  that  a
    person's complicity lies as a secondary party (an aider or  abetter  or
    other participant), his acts will be  "part  of"  the  ultimate  crime.
    However, they need not be.  For example the individual who provides the
    means (such as explosives or otherwise) to  commit  the  crime  may  be
    complicit under Art 25 but it is difficult to see why the character  of
    his act can be said to be "part of" the crime against humanity  in  the
    sense argued for by Ms Plimmer.  Clearly, his act does not fall  within
    the specific offences set out in Art 7(1) such as  "murder"  etc.   His
    act is different in character from that of the perpetrator of the crime
    against  humanity  but  he  is  nevertheless  complicit   (subject   to
    establishing the required mental element under Art 30)  under  Art  25.
    Likewise, the person who "bankrolls" a terrorist  organisation  knowing
    its activities could well be complicit under Art  25  in  their  crimes
    against humanity (see, for example, Lord Brown at  para  [35]  in  JS).
    Yet, the character of his acts which give rise to his complicity in the
    resulting crime is different to those acts set out in Art 7(1)  of  the
    ICC Statute.

55. What these examples go to show, in our judgment, is that  Ms  Plimmer's
    submission confuses what must be proved when  complicity  liability  is
    alleged:  first,  that  crimes  against  humanity  are  perpetrated  or
    committed by others (that is that Art  7  applies);  and  secondly  but
    distinctly, that the individual concerned has a sufficient  involvement
    to give rise to complicity liability under Art 25(3)(d).

56.  In  establishing  that  complicity  liability,  as  we  have   already
    indicated, the Supreme Court in JS requires that all the  circumstances
    of the individual's involvement  in  the  organisation  be  taken  into
    account.  Mere membership alone will  not  suffice.   However,  if  his
    involvement is such that (again, subject to establishing the  requisite
    mental element under Art 30) he has, in  the  terms  of  Art  25(3)(d),
    "contribute[d] to the commission ... of such a  crime  by  a  group  or
    persons acting with a common purpose", then  that  individual  will  be
    criminally responsible.  In that sense, and in that  sense  alone,  his
    involvement is "part of" the crime against humanity.  However, his acts
    do not, and there is no suggestion to the contrary in JS, have to be in
    themselves of a character falling within Art  7.   They  must,  as  was
    recognised in JS, of course make  a  significant  contribution  to  the
    organisation's ability to carry out crimes against humanity  (see  also
    SK (Article 1F(a) - exclusion) Zimbabwe [2010] UKUT 327  (IAC)).   But,
    in respect of the lowest level of the descending ladder of  involvement
    in Art 25(3)(a)-(d), that contribution is very unlikely to  be  to  any
    specific crime against humanity or in itself to have the  character  of
    one of the offences falling within Art 7 and so,  as  we  apprehend  Ms
    Plimmer's submissions, could not be said to be a "part of" that  crime.
    But, it is this very situation which the Supreme Court in JS  envisaged
    as  falling  within  Art  25(3)(d)  as  a  form  of  complicity   under
    international law in respect of a  crime  against  humanity  that  went
    beyond accomplice liability under the domestic criminal law.

57. In support of her submission that the appellant's act must be "part of"
    a crime against humanity, Ms Plimmer referred us to the decision of the
    Canadian Supreme Court in Mugesera v Canada  (Minister  of  Citizenship
    and Immigration) [2005] SCC 40.

58. In that case, Mr Mugesera was an active  member  of  a  hard-line  Hutu
    political party in Rwanda.  In 1992 he spoke at a meeting of that party
    in Rwanda.  In his speech the Canadian Government alleged that  he  had
    incited murder, genocide and hatred and had committed a  crime  against
    humanity because he had encouraged killing  and  violence  against  the
    Tutsi population in Rwanda.  As a consequence, the Canadian  government
    sought to deport the appellant, inter alia, on the basis  that  he  was
    excluded from the protection of the Refugee Convention because  he  had
    committed a crime against humanity.  The Supreme Court of Canada upheld
    the decision of the Immigration and  Refugee  Board  (Appeal  Division)
    which itself upheld an Adjudicator's decision that  the  appellant  had
    been guilty of crimes against humanity.  We restrict our  consideration
    of the court's decision to that issue although other bases were  relied
    upon under the Canadian domestic legislation as a basis for  permitting
    his deportation. The Supreme Court also  found  that  Mr  Mugesera  had
    committed the crimes of incitement to murder, genocide and hatred under
    the Criminal Code RSC 1985.

59. The Supreme Court in a single judgment dealt at some  length  with  the
    issue of whether the appellant had committed a crime  against  humanity
    at paras [112]-[179].  As we understand Ms Plimmer's  submissions,  she
    relied upon that part  of  the  judgment  at  paras  [164]-[171]  which
    addressed the question of "what does it mean for an act  to  occur  'as
    part of' a systematic attack?"

60. In that case, mirroring Ms  Plimmer's  submission  in  this  case,  the
    appellant argued that Mr Mugesera's speech was  not  a  "part  of"  the
    systematic attack occurring against  Tutsis  in  Rwanda  in  the  early
    1990s.  At para [164], the court observed that "purely personal crimes"
    did not fall within the scope of crimes against humanity.  Even  if  "a
    widespread  or  systematic  attack"  on  a   civilian   population   is
    established, the court noted that "a link must be  established  between
    the act and the attack which compels international scrutiny"  (at  para
    [164]).  To this extent, the court said (at para [166])  that  "an  act
    must be part of a pattern of abuse  or  must  objectively  further  the
    attack".  And, at para [167], the  court  stated  that  "the  act  must
    further the attack or clearly fit the pattern of attack,  but  it  need
    not comprise an essential or officially sanctioned part of it".  On the
    facts, the court found (at para [169]) that, given the circumstances in
    Rwanda  at  the  time,  Mr  Mugesera's  speech  "not  only  objectively
    furthered the attack, but also fitted  into  a  pattern  of  the  abuse
    prevailing at that time".

61. We accept, of course, that decisions of the  highest  courts  in  other
    jurisdictions relevant to our decision are  entitled  to  due  respect.
    We, however, approach the decision of the Supreme Court  of  Canada  in
    Mugesera with some caution in helping us resolve the  issue  raised  by
    Ground 1(b).

62. First, it was the only decision of a foreign jurisdiction to  which  we
    were referred by Ms Plimmer.  She was not able to provide us  with  the
    jurisprudential context of this  case  decided  in  2005.   It  is,  of
    course, a decision of the highest court in Canada.  However, Ms Plimmer
    was not able to tell us whether there were any other relevant decisions
    of the Supreme Court or, indeed, of other courts  within  the  Canadian
    system such as the Federal Court of  Appeal  which  impacted  upon  her
    submission and, possibly, which might  explain  or  gloss  the  Supreme
    Court's decision.

63. Secondly, the Canadian Supreme Court was undoubtedly  interpreting  its
    own domestic legislation.  Certainly, a definition of a "crime  against
    humanity" is set out in ss.7(3.76) and (3.77) of the Criminal Code.  In
    addition, at least on one reading of the case, the  Supreme  Court  was
    enquiring into the liability of Mr Mugesera as an accomplice to a crime
    against humanity.  However,  although  the  court  cited  a  number  of
    decisions from international tribunals (particularly the  International
    Criminal Tribunal on  Yugoslavia),  complicity  liability  in  Canadian
    domestic criminal law which, on the face of it the  Supreme  Court  was
    seeking to apply, is derived from s.21 of the Criminal Code, which  may
    well not reflect the "wider" complicity liability in  Art  25(3)(d)  of
    the ICC Statute considered by the UK Supreme Court in JS.

64. Thirdly, it is, however, at least  arguable  that  in  considering  the
    issue of whether Mr Mugesera's act was as "part of" a systematic attack
    being perpetrated against the Tutsi population in Rwanda, the  Canadian
    Supreme Court may in truth have been dealing with his liability  as  if
    he were a perpetrator of a crime against humanity which, in our  terms,
    fell within Art 7 of the ICC Statute.  We are far from  clear  why  the
    court  considered  this  to  be  relevant  if  Mr  Mugesera's  criminal
    responsibility was being asserted by the  Canadian  Government  on  the
    basis of his complicity in  the  criminal  acts  of  others.   We  are,
    however, as we  have  said,  not  entirely  clear  as  to  the  precise
    jurisprudential basis on which the Supreme  Court  determined  that  Mr
    Mugesera was guilty of a crime against humanity.

65. In any event, it does not  seem  to  us  that  the  case  provides  any
    material support to Ms Plimmer's submissions.  As  is  clear  from  the
    parts of the judgment we have already quoted, the court  required  that
    the appellant's act (namely his 'hate  speech')  either  furthered  the
    'widespread or systematic attack' or fitted  'the  pattern'  of  [that]
    attack" (see para [167] of the  judgment).   Principally,  the  court's
    approach  was  designed  to  ensure  that  "purely  personal   crimes",
    potentially falling within the category of  acts  amounting  to  crimes
    against humanity, were not included within that  category  unless  they
    were connected with ("part of") a widespread or systematic attack  (see
    para [164]). In our view, the court's decision is  entirely  consistent
    with the approach that we have set out above  as  the  correct  one  in
    determining whether an individual  is  criminally  responsible  on  the
    basis of his complicity by virtue of Art  25(3)  of  the  ICC  Statute.
    Taken overall, Mr Mugesera's actions were such as to show  (subject  to
    establishing mens rea) that he had contributed in a significant way  to
    the  crimes  against  humanity  being  committed  against   the   Tutsi
    population in Rwanda.

66. For these reasons, nothing we have read in  the  decision  in  Mugesera
    leads us to conclude that there is any foundation in ground 1(b) relied
    upon by Ms Plimmer.

67. For these reason, we reject ground 1(b) relied upon by  Ms  Plimmer  in
    the way that it was argued.  Unless Ms Plimmer can make good ground  2,
    there is no basis upon which she can succeed in establishing  that  the
    judge erred in finding that the appellant's acts made him complicit  in
    crimes falling within Art 7 of the ICC Statute.

Ground 2

68. We turn then to ground 2.  Put in stark  terms,  Ms  Plimmer  submitted
    that the judge had failed explicitly to set out the  factors  found  in
    para [30] of  Lord  Brown's  judgment  in  JS.   While  she  ultimately
    accepted that this was not a checklist, it was a helpful starting point
    and she submitted that it was unclear from  the  determination  whether
    the judge had considered all  relevant  matters  in  finding  that  the
    appellant was complicit in the crimes against humanity committed by the
    Basij.  She further relied upon the judgments of Lords  Hope  and  Kerr
    which  emphasised  the  need  for  a  careful  consideration  of   each
    individual's circumstances  in  assessing  whether  or  not  they  were
    excluded under Art 1F.

69. We set out earlier the seven factors set  out  by  Lord  Brown  in  his
    judgment at para [30].  As he accepted, those factors were "principally
    (in no particular order)" to be taken  into  account  in  assessing  an
    individual's criminal responsibility  for  another's  commission  of  a
    crime falling within Art 7 of the ICC Statute.  He gave  no  indication
    that these are intended to be exhaustive or that they  are  necessarily
    relevant in every instance.  Patently, the  latter  could  not  be  the
    case.  Indeed, that was the express view of Lord Kerr who, although  he
    accepted the list of factors, noted that they could  not  provide  "the
    invariable and infallible prescription" to determine the answer to  the
    question whether a person was a knowing participant  or  accomplice  in
    the commission of a crime falling within Art 7 (see para  [55]  of  his
    judgment).  There is no indication in the judgment of Lord Hope that he
    regarded the factors as prescriptive.  As we have seen, Lords Roger and
    Walker agreed with Lords Brown, Hope and Kerr.

70. In our judgment, the factors set out in Lord Brown's judgment  at  para
    [30] when relevant should be considered by  a  judge  in  assessing  an
    individual's complicity in another's crime falling within Art 7.  Those
    factors are, however, neither prescriptive  nor  necessarily  complete.
    As all the Justices noted, it  is  crucial  in  determining  whether  a
    person is excluded under Art 1F from  the  protection  of  the  Refugee
    Convention on the ground of his complicity in an  international  crime,
    that all the individual circumstances are considered: no  more  and  no
    less.  Thus, Ms Plimmer can only succeed in ground 2 if  she  can  show
    that the judge  materially  failed  to  consider  all  the  appellant's
    individual circumstances.

71. Dealing with ground 1(a) above, we set out  para  9.4  of  the  judge's
    determination in which she considered the nature and activities of  the
    Basij.  At paras 7.2  and  7.3,  the  judge  set  out  the  appellant's
    evidence concerning his recruitment and membership of  the  Basij.   At
    para 7.3 she noted his involvement in the following terms:

         "7.3     His case is that he was promoted within the Basij  because
             of  his  positive  religious  and  personal   influence.    He
             describes his motivation as being primarily religious and  the
             desire to be closely involved in the Islamic activities of his
             local community.  The bulk of his  work  was  within  his  own
             village where he was known and respected  and  where  violence
             would not have occurred or been condoned.  He was aware of and
             witnessed, but avoided participating in, serious ill-treatment
             perpetrated  by  the  Basij  against  civilians  outside   the
             village."

72. At para 9.6, drawing the evidence together,  the  judge  dealt  further
    with the appellant's involvement  in  the  Basij  before  reaching  her
    finding that he had contributed "in a significant way  to  the  Basij's
    ability to operate and therefore to pursue its  purpose  of  committing
    crimes against humanity as defined by the  Rome  Statute".   The  judge
    said this:

         "9.6     Ms Plimmer fairly acknowledged that the Appellant  was  in
             difficulty so far as the mental element required under Article
             1F was concerned.  The Appellant was on  his  own  evidence  a
             committed and respected member of  the  Basij  of  some  local
             rank.  He accepts that his participation was  on  a  voluntary
             basis.   He  cannot  escape  the  definitions  of   complicity
             identified in paragraph 9.2 above by stating that he  did  not
             agree with or actively take part in acts of violence.  This is
             because he nevertheless continued to turn up for work, to turn
             a blind eye to violence and ill treatment that  occurred  when
             he was on duty and to command others in his group whom he knew
             used violence.  In doing so I find that he did contribute in a
             significant  way  to  the  Basij's  ability  to  operate   and
             therefore to pursue its purpose of committing  crimes  against
             humanity as defined by the Rome Statute.  I also find that  he
             must  have  been  well  aware  that  his  assistance  in   the
             functioning of the Basij would further that purpose.   He  has
             admitted as much, in saying as a part  of  his  case  that  he
             began after 2006 to 'question the choices he had made'."

73. As the latter part of that paragraph makes clear, the  judge  correctly
    directed herself on the basis of the test to be applied as set  out  by
    Lord Brown in para [38] of his judgment in JS.  Indeed, in para 9.2 she
    sets that test out in full.  There can  be  no  doubt  that  the  judge
    correctly directed herself in law.

74. We are  in  no  doubt  that  the  judge  had  fully  in  mind  all  the
    circumstances of the appellant.  She  took  into  account  how  he  had
    joined the Basij and the basis upon which  he  remained  a  member  for
    eleven years, including three as  a  commander  in  his  village.   The
    evidence of the appellant before the judge was unequivocal in regard to
    his involvement.  Although he  did  not  himself  carry  out  beatings,
    lashings or unlawful detention of civilians, he accepted that  his  men
    did so whilst under the command of the IRGC and  that  he  handed  over
    individuals whom he knew would be subject to serious ill-treatment when
    detained and, to use his own words at interview, subject to  "torture".
    The judge no doubt had in mind that the appellant remonstrated with his
    men when they returned to his village after they had committed acts  of
    serious ill-treatment.  The appellant  admitted  that  he  "closed  his
    eyes" to abuses by others (see question 38 of his interview).

75. The  evidence  before  the  judge  was  plainly  that  the  appellant's
    complicity, if any, was based not  merely  on  his  membership  of  the
    Basij.  He was a local commander and although he had not committed  any
    acts of serious ill-treatment  himself,  his  own  evidence  was  -  in
    reality - that he had been directly  complicit  in  them  when  he  had
    handed individuals over, knowing that  they  would  be  seriously  ill-
    treated.  He clearly, on his own evidence, had full  knowledge  of  the
    Basij's activities.  Given  this  evidence,  it  was  in  our  judgment
    properly open to the judge to find that the appellant was complicit  in
    crimes against humanity by the Basij by virtue of Art 25(3)(d) in  that
    there were serious reasons for  considering  that  he  had  voluntarily
    contributed in a significant way  to  the  Basij's  ability  to  commit
    crimes against humanity.

76. It was not suggested before the judge, nor was it before us,  that  the
    appellant lacked the required mental element.

77. Accordingly, the judge did not err in law in making  the  finding  that
    the appellant was complicit in crimes against humanity  and  we  reject
    ground 2 relied upon by Ms Plimmer.

Decision

78. For all these reasons, the judge did not err in law in finding that the
    appellant was excluded from the protection of the Refugee Convention by
    virtue of Art 1F(a) of that Convention.  The decision  to  dismiss  the
    appeal on asylum grounds stands.

79. Further, the decision to allow the appeal under Art 3 also stands.

80. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

















                                             Signed



                                                Senior   Immigration   Judge
    Grubb
                                                    Judge   of   the   Upper
    Tribunal








