
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)



MST and others (Disclosure - restrictions  -  implied  undertaking)  Eritrea
[2016] UKUT 00337 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Interlocutory Hearing at Field House          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 April 2016                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |
|                                              |                              |
|BETWEEN                                       |                              |


                                     MST
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent



                                     MYK
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

                                     AA
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

                                   - and -

              The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
                                                                  Intervener



        Interlocutory Hearing at Field House, London on 26 April 2016

         Date of Promulgation of this decision: ........... May 2016



  Before The Honourable Mr Justice McCloskey, President and Dr H H Storey,

                         Judge of the Upper Tribunal




   i)  In  some  cases  the  overriding  objective  will  dictate  that  the
      respondent's skeleton argument is served in advance  of  that  of  the
      appellant.


  ii) The test for disclosure is whether receipt of the material in question
      is necessary for the just and fair disposal of the appeal.


 iii) Where  uncorroborated  and/or  anonymous  evidence  is  received,  the
      Tribunal's task is to scrutinise it with caution and to attribute such
      weight as is considered appropriate.


  iv) Documents obtained by a party pursuant  to  disclosure  or  production
      orders or directions are produced under coercion and, in  consequence,
      are received subject to certain  restrictions.   In  particular,  they
      must not be deployed by the receiving  party  for  any  collateral  or
      ulterior purpose not reasonably necessary for the  proper  conduct  of
      the proceedings.


   v) The so-called implied undertaking, reflected in [iv] above, applies in
      Tribunal proceedings.  However, it may be subject to  modification  to
      reflect (a) that the primacy of protecting a party's private documents
      and invading a party's privacy does not apply with full force in  such
      proceedings, particularly where the  custodian  is  the  Secretary  of
      State, (b) the duty of candour  owed  to  the  Tribunal  and  (c)  the
      inquisitorial dimension of Tribunal proceedings.


  vi) In matters of disclosure and the provision and exchange  of  evidence,
      all parties are subordinated to the authority of the  Tribunal,  which
      is the ultimate arbiter of all procedural and substantive issues.


Representation

Appellants: Mr S Knafler QC, with Mr T Hussain and Ms A  Benfield,  both  of
                 counsel,  instructed  by  IAS   Solicitors   and   Fountain
                 Solicitors on behalf of the Appellants.

Respondent: Mr B Rawat and Ms S Idelbi, both of counsel, instructed  by  the
                 Government Legal Department on behalf of the Respondent.



          ________________________________________________________

                           Interlocutory Decision
          ________________________________________________________


   1. We begin by (reluctantly) drawing attention to the unhappy  procedural
      history of these proceedings, as this has a bearing on the  resolution
      of this interlocutory matter.  The troubled history  is  reflected  in
      the Tribunal's ruling dated 21 January 2016. This turbulent history is
      further reflected in  the  unprecedented  number  of  case  management
      directions which have been given (13 in total), the great majority  of
      which belong to the period of the last four months.  Furthermore,  the
      dates for the substantive hearing of these appeals have  altered  four
      times and a further, fifth adjustment has materialised during the past
      few days.  The appeals are now scheduled to be heard on 02, 03, 06 and
      07 June 2016, with 09 June held in contingency reserve.  We  emphasise
      that these dates are unalterable: they are truly set in stone.

   2.  Against  this  background,  an  interlocutory  application  of   some
      substance has developed.  Having regard to the hearing timetable,  its
      timing is unfortunate.  The timing  is  directly  connected  with  the
      egregious default of the Appellants' expert witness documented in  the
      ruling appended.  There is no adverse reflection  on  the  Appellants'
      legal representatives.

   3. By this interlocutory application, the Appellants seek  the  following
      measures:

        i) A direction requiring the Respondent (hereinafter the "Secretary
           of State") to state in  writing  "what  she  considers  warrants
           change in the current CG propositions and why".


       ii) Disclosure of certain documentary materials, believed or assumed
           to exist, underlying and pertaining to the report  generated  by
           the recent  so-called  "Fact  Finding  Mission"  of  the  United
           Kingdom Government to Eritrea undertaken on behalf of the United
           Kingdom (hereinafter the "FFM report"  and  the  "FFM  material"
           respectively).

      iii)  An   order   authorising   publication   by   the   Appellants'
           representatives of the FFM Report and the FFM material.

      The First Application


   4. This application falls to be determined mainly  by  reference  to  the
      overriding objective  and  the  Tribunal's  evaluation  of  procedural
      fairness and the interests of justice.  This evaluation is    informed
      by the Upper Tribunal Immigration and  Asylum  Chamber  Guidance  Note
      2011 No 2, [11] whereof  states  that  "credible  fresh  evidence"  is
      required in order to vary an extant decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
      bearing the "Country Guidance"  kitemark.   Further  guidance  on  the
      resolution of  this  discrete  issue  is  found  in  Hoxha  v  Special
      Adjudicator [2005] UKHL 19, where it was held that:

           "... the asylum authorities ... bear the burden  of  proof  that
           such changes are indeed fundamental and durable."

      (At [63])

      We have also taken into account the statements in MY (Country Guidance
      Cases - No Fresh Evidence) Eritrea [2005] UKAIT 00158, at [25].

   5. Having regard to the above, we are satisfied that there  is  merit  in
      the Appellants' application for the first of the measures  sought.  We
      consider it appropriate to effect a modest adjustment  of  the  extant
      case management  directions  relating  to  the  exchange  of  skeleton
      arguments.  The fair and expeditious disposal of these appeals will be
      enhanced, without  any  unfairness  to  the  Secretary  of  State,  by
      requiring the Secretary of State's skeleton argument, addressing  what
      she considers warrants change in the current CG  propositions,  to  be
      submitted in advance of that of the Appellants.  Accordingly:

      (i)   The Secretary of State's skeleton argument will be  provided  by
           18 May 2016.

      (ii)  The Appellants' skeleton argument will be  provided  by  25  May
           2016.

      (iii) Any rejoinder on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State  to  the
           Appellants' skeleton argument will be provided by 31  May  2016,
           in the form of a  supplement,  or  addendum,  to  the  principal
           skeleton argument.

The Second Application

   6. The focus of this application is certain material  underlying  the  UK
      FFM report which was generated during the course of these  proceedings
      and has been served by the Secretary of State in her response  to  the
      Appellants' evidence, in compliance with the Tribunal's directions.

   7. The materials which the Appellants' representatives seek to obtain  by
      this  discrete  application  consist  of,  in  summary,  planning  and
      methodology documents, correspondence with  the  Eritrean  Government,
      any  correspondence  with   interviewees/interlocutors   or   the   UK
      Ambassador to Eritrea, hand written  notes  and  audio  recordings  of
      interviews, correspondence with interviewees, unredacted  versions  of
      all  interview  transcripts,  the  identities  of  all   sources   and
      interviewees and documents bearing on the anonymity  of  interviewees.
      The extensive "shopping list" is contained in [17] of the  Appellants'
      skeleton argument.

   8. We consider that the test to be applied is whether the  disclosure  of
      this material to the Appellants' representatives is necessary for  the
      just and fair disposal of these appeals.  We  do  not  understand  the
      arguments on either side to have espoused  any  different  test.   The
      application of this test clearly  involves  questions  of  degree  and
      evaluative judgment on the part of the Tribunal.  We bear in mind what
      was stated in O  v  M [1996] 2 Lloyds Rep.347:

           "....  The document or class of documents [sought] must be shown
           by the applicant to  offer  a  real  probability  of  evidential
           materiality in the sense that it must be a document or class  of
           which in the ordinary way can be expected to  yield  information
           of substantial evidential materiality to the pleaded  claim  and
           the defence ...."

      The test which we have formulated mirrors closely that which has  been
      contained in successive editions of the Rules  of  the  Supreme  Court
      (Order 24), as explained in decisions such as R  v  Chief Constable of
      West Midlands Police, ex parte Wiley [1995]  1  AC  274,  at  305  and
      Taylor v Anderton [1995] 2 All ER 420,  at  432  F-I.   In  Disclosure
      (Third Edition), the authors comment at paragraph 1.03:

           "Disclosure is not without its disadvantages.  The principal one
           is that disclosure can be an expensive and  burdensome  process.
           The Courts are generally  alert  to  the  danger  of  oppressive
           disclosure  and  inappropriate   requests   for   wide   ranging
           disclosure  are  not  infrequently  dismissed  for   being   not
           necessary for the fair disposal of litigation.  The  burden  can
           not only fall on the party giving disclosure,  but  also  on  an
           opposing  party  presented  with  a  mass  of  documentation  of
           marginal relevance.  In such a case  disclosure  can,  far  from
           clarifying the issues, operate as a cloud."

      Within this passage one can readily  identify  the  operation  of  the
      principle  of  proportionality,  now  enshrined  in   the   overriding
      objective, in contemporary litigation.  This  passage  has  a  further
      resonance in Tribunal proceedings, given the panel's familiarity  with
      the phenomenon of the accumulation of  vast  quantities  of  documents
      upon which no party relies, particularly in country guidance appeals.

   9. Finally in this context we turn  to  the  decision  in  CM  (Zimbabwe)
      [2013] EWCA Civ 1303 in which one of the grounds of appeal  was  based
      on a complaint about anonymous evidence generated, as in  the  present
      case, by a fact finding mission. Giving the judgment of the  Court  of
      Appeal,  Laws  LJ  quoted  the  following  passages  from  the   Upper
      Tribunal's decision under appeal, EM and Others  (Returnees)  Zimbabwe
      CG [2011] UKUT 98 (IAC):

           "[156]      ......  In asylum  determinations  there  are  sound
                 reasons why sources who may have  valuable  information  to
                 give to diplomatic  missions,  international  organisations
                 like UNHCR or non-governmental organisations  like  Amnesty
                 International would wish  to  do  so  under  conditions  of
                 anonymity .....


                 Providing information to an appellant or his legal team on
                 a confidential basis  may  thus  provide  the  source  with
                 satisfactory protection.


           [157] Anonymous  material  is  not  infrequently  relied  on  by
                 appellants as indicative  of  deteriorating  conditions  or
                 general risk.  The Tribunal should be free to  accept  such
                 material but will do its best to evaluate by  reference  to
                 what,  if  anything,  is  known  about  the   source,   the
                 circumstances  in  which  information  was  given  and  the
                 overall context of the issues it relates to and the rest of
                 the evidence available.


           [158] The problem is not one of admissibility of  such  material
                 as forming part of the  background  data  from  which  risk
                 assessments are made, but the weight to be attached to such
                 data.  It is common sense and common justice that the  less
                 that is known about a source and  its  means  of  acquiring
                 information, the more hesitant should a Tribunal  judge  be
                 to  afford  anonymous  supported   assessment   substantial
                 weight, particularly where  it  conflicts  with  assessment
                 from sources known to be reliable ...


           [159] The report of the FFM ......   was not  a  model  of  best
                 practice in a number of respects ....


                 We were, however,  satisfied  that  informants  with  whom
                 contact was made were selected in good faith by the Mission
                 with the assistance of locally  based  diplomats.  We  were
                 also satisfied that ultimately the interlocutors  ...  were
                 content with the final version of the  summaries  of  their
                 information and knew the context  in  which  it  was  being
                 gathered ...."

      Having reproduced these passages in extenso, Laws LJ stated, at  [16]:


            "I regard that reasoning as irreproachable."

      He continued at [17]:

           "There is no general rule at  common  law  or  inspired  by  the
           European  Convention  on  Human   Rights   that   uncorroborated
           anonymous material can never be relied on in a country  guidance
           case or any other case. ....


           Generally of course the effect  of  anonymity  will  go  to  the
           weight to be attached to the material in question and care  must
           always be taken in assessing the weight of such material."

      Thus there is nothing intrinsically unlawful or  unfair  in  receiving
      evidence of this kind in cases of this  nature.   A  fair  balance  is
      struck by the  duty  imposed  upon  the  Tribunal  to  scrutinise  the
      evidence with caution and, taking  into  account  any  characteristics
      such as anonymity, to attribute to it such  weight  as  is  considered
      appropriate.

  10. Skilful though the submissions of Mr  Knafler  QC  on  behalf  of  the
      Appellants were, we consider that this application  suffers  from  the
      conspicuous frailty of having no solid foundation.  The essence of the
      application, rejected to its core,  is  that  most  of  the  materials
      sought are likely to exist and  have  some  connection  with  the  FFM
      Report and, therefore, must be disclosed at this  stage.  The  obvious
      weakness, in our judgment, is that this  contention  fails  to  engage
      meaningfully with the test to be applied. This shortcoming is not less
      than fundamental. Furthermore, this discrete application bears all the
      hallmarks of a fishing expedition or, as it has sometimes been called,
      a "Micawber" excursion viz an application driven in the  main  by  the
      purely speculative hope that something of interest might  turn  up  in
      the material if disclosure is ordered.

  11. Finally, the Appellants do not attempt any convincing critique of  the
      witness statement of the Secretary of  State's  official,  Mr  Stares,
      which addresses, inter alia, the planning of the recent FFM mission to
      Eritrea,  its  terms  of  reference  and  the  methodology   employed,
      including the modus operandi  of  interviews  and  the  mechanism  for
      finalising interview notes. To this we add  that  if  the  Appellant's
      representatives wish to cross  examine  the  author  of  this  witness
      statement it will be open to them to give notice to  this  effect.  If
      this eventuates and further procedural issues  arise  in  consequence,
      the Tribunal  will  deal  with  these.  For  the  reasons  given  this
      application must fail.

  12. We consider that this application falls to be refused on  the  further
      ground that to order disclosure at this stage risks  jeopardising  the
      hearing timetable. If disclosure is ordered it will inevitably  result
      in further enquiries on behalf  of  the  Appellants,  involving  their
      expert witness and perhaps others, including NGO's, and may result  in
      the belated production of still further evidence.  Elementary fairness
      would entitle the Secretary of State to respond to such evidence  and,
      doubtless, UNHCR (the intervening party) would  also  wish  to  pursue
      further enquiries and,  quite  probably,  extend  its  extant  written
      submission.  The  prospects  of  the  hearing  timetable  withstanding
      developments of this nature are minute at best.

  13. We emphasise  that  to  refuse  this  application  will  not  occasion
      unfairness. Irremediable or otherwise, to any of the Appellants.   Any
      unexpected or unpredictable issues arising  at  the  hearing  will  be
      handled by appropriate case management measures and directions on  the
      part of the  Tribunal.  Furthermore,  the  Appellants  will  have  the
      facility of  recourse  to  their  expert  witness  if  information  or
      materials not currently available should emerge. It will also be  open
      to the Appellants, if so advised, to address arguments to the Tribunal
      based on the non-disclosure or unavailability of  certain  information
      or materials.  As in Sufi and Elmi [2012] 54 EHRR 9, where  the  ECtHR
      was critical of the  adequacy  of  certain  country  evidence,  issues
      concerning the weight to be given to the FFM Report could  conceivably
      arise.  Lacking a crystal ball, beyond this one does  not  venture  at
      present.

The Third Application

  14. The Appellants' third application seeks an  order  from  the  Tribunal
      permitting the publication of the FFM report.  While  the  Appellants'
      written formulation seeks the facility of unlimited  and  unrestrained
      publication viz "publication to the whole world",  this  was  sensibly
      refined by Mr Knafler.  In its reduced terms, the facility pursued  is
      an order of the Tribunal permitting the Appellants to disclose the  UK
      FFM report to  specified  NGO's,  which  will  include  in  particular
      Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch.

  15. The issue of principle  which  this  discrete  application  raises  is
      whether  the  well  known  implied  undertaking  is  engaged.   It  is
      abundantly clear from the authorities that in all forms of  litigation
      documents obtained by disclosure (formerly discovery) or production or
      any other coercive means are subject  to  certain  restrictions.   The
      issue was formulated by Lord Diplock in Harman v Home Office [1983]  1
      AC 280, at 302 B-F, in these terms:

           "...  Whether it is the duty of the solicitor of  one  party  to
           civil  litigation  who  in  the  course  of  discovery  in  that
           litigation  has  obtained  possession  of  copies  of  documents
           belonging to the other party to the litigation to  refrain  from
           using the advantage enjoyed by virtue  of  such  possession  for
           some collateral or ulterior purpose of his  own  not  reasonably
           necessary for the proper conduct of the action on  his  client's
           behalf."

      Their Lordships answered this question affirmatively.  The duty  which
      is triggered is owed to the court (or tribunal): per Lord Keith at 308
      G.


  16. The values promoted by the implied  undertaking  are  confidentiality,
      candour and co-operation with the court. As emphasised  in  Riddick  v
      Thames Board Mills [1977] 1 QB 881,  at  986,  the  interests  of  the
      proper administration of justice  require  that  there  should  be  no
      disincentive to full and frank disclosure.  It is also well recognised
      that the implied undertaking has the function of  protecting  privacy.
      As observed in Home Office  v Harman at 300,  312  and  321  discovery
      (disclosure) is an invasion of the right of the individual to keep his
      own  documents  to  himself.   In  summary,  the  implied  undertaking
      furthers the interests of justice.

  17. It is accepted, correctly in our view, that  the  implied  undertaking
      applies as fully to Tribunal proceedings as to other  forms  of  civil
      proceedings.   While the  procedural  regime  of  Tribunals  does  not
      contain any provision comparable to CPR 31.22 (in the High Court),  we
      consider this lacuna to be of no moment since the implied  undertaking
      has emerged and evolved  by the formulation of principles  which  have
      not been abrogated by statute or otherwise. We refer  particularly  in
      this context to the decision in Alterskye v Scott [1948] 1 All ER 469.
       We can think of no good reason in principle or otherwise for  holding
      that the implied undertaking does  not  apply  to  the  disclosure  of
      documents in Tribunal  proceedings  and  neither  side  suggested  the
      contrary.  Furthermore, the very limited extant jurisprudence supports
      this view: see Birdseye Walls v Harrison [1985] ICR 278,  at  289  and
      McBride v The Body Shop International Plc [2007] EWHC 1658.

  18. Given that the implied undertaking has developed  in  the  context  of
      private law proceedings, we consider that some caution is required  in
      adapting it to the proceedings of this Chamber.   In  particular,  the
      primacy of protecting a  party's  private  documents  and  invading  a
      party's privacy clearly does not apply with full force to documents in
      the possession, custody or power  of  the  Secretary  of  State  in  a
      litigation context which has two particular features.   The  first  is
      the Secretary of State's duty of candour to the Tribunal.  The  second
      is the quasi - inquisitorial nature of the proceedings, noted recently
      by Lord Carnwath in Secretary of State for the Home Department v MN  &
      KY [2014] UKSC 30 at [25].  An alertness to these distinctive features
      will ensure that a Tribunal's adjudication of  contentious  issues  of
      this kind will be designed to vindicate the right of all parties to  a
      fair hearing and, ultimately, to further the interests of justice.


  19. Next, we turn to analyse the Secretary of State's act of providing the
      UK FFM report to the Appellants and the Tribunal.  If these  had  been
      private law proceedings between the parties, the Secretary of  State's
      act of providing the report would, absent an order requiring her to do
      so, have been properly analysed as voluntary.  We are  satisfied  that
      this analysis does not apply to the present context, for at least four
      reasons.  First, this Tribunal, by its  earlier  directions,  required
      the Secretary of State to respond to the Appellants' evidence  and  to
      do so by a specified date.  Second, in thus acting, the  Secretary  of
      State was under a duty not  to  knowingly  mislead  the  Tribunal:  CM
      (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2013]  EWCA
      Civ 1303 at [20] - [25].  Third, the Secretary  of  State  was  acting
      under the rigours of the duty of candour recognised in this Tribunal's
      decision in  Miah  (Interviewer's  Comments:  Disclosure  -  Fairness)
      [2014] UKUT 00515 (IAC), where it is stated at [21]:

           "Asylum, immigration and kindred appeals are a species of public
           law proceedings, in which the parties are the  citizen  (on  the
           one hand) and the State (on the other).  I consider  that  these
           duties apply with full force in the context of such appeals.  To
           suggest otherwise would be inimical  to  the  administration  of
           justice,"

            [Emphasis added.]

  20. The close association with judicial review proceedings, where the duty
      of candour is deeply rooted, is unmistakable: see,  most  recently,  R
      (on the application of Mohamed Shahzad Khan) v Secretary of State  for
      the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 416.  The final  element  in  this
      analysis concerns the relationship between the parties to this  appeal
      and the Tribunal. Given the nature of appeal proceedings,  it  is  the
      Tribunal, and not  the  parties,  which  dictates  the  provision  and
      exchange of evidence.  None of the parties is acting out  of  whim  or
      desire. Rather, all are subordinated to the authority of the  Tribunal
      and are complying with what is required of them by the Tribunal, which
      is  the  ultimate  arbiter  and  adjudicator  of  all  procedural  and
      substantive issues.

  21. It follows from the above analysis that  the  Appellants  are  not  at
      liberty to disclose the UK FFM report to any person or  agency,  other
      than their clients and expert witness, in the absence of an  order  of
      the Tribunal permitting them to do  so.   We  detect  nothing  in  the
      arguments of counsel to suggest that the test to be applied differs in
      substance from that governing the second limb of  these  applications,
      formulated above. The ambition which the  Appellants'  representatives
      seek to fulfil is to disclose the report to  certain  NGOs.  It  is  a
      feature of the Appellants' application that they  do  not  know  where
      this might lead. Unavoidably, in our estimation, they have adduced  no
      evidence  to  suggest  otherwise.  The  reason   for   this   is   the
      quintessentially simple one that no one can lay claim to possession of
      a crystal ball.

  22. We consider that,  in  common  with  the  second  of  the  Appellants'
      applications, this discrete application is infused with a  mixture  of
      speculative wish and hope.  The speculative wish is that one  or  more
      of the NGOs will criticise the Secretary of State's report.  The  hope
      is that this criticism can be laid in proper  evidential  form  before
      the Tribunal.  The further hope is that the Tribunal will find this to
      be of some probative value.  As this brief analysis makes  clear,  the
      application to the Tribunal is steeped in speculation.  This being so,
      the governing test is manifestly not satisfied  and  this  application
      must be refused for essentially the same reasons  for  which  we  have
      refused the second application.

  23. Our second reason for refusing this  application  mirrors  our  second
      reason for refusing the second  application.   We  repeat  [10]  above
      mutatis mutandis.  Both the second and the third applications  seek  a
      form of relief which would be inimical to  the  overriding  objective.
      Furthermore, we repeat that  it  will  be  open  to  the  Tribunal  to
      evaluate any unexpected developments as the evidence  unfolds  at  the
      hearing and to give consideration to case  management  measures  which
      will ensure fairness to all  parties  and  promote  the  interests  of
      justice.

Conclusion

  24. For the reasons elaborated above:

      (i)   The Appellants' first application succeeds.   To  reflect  this,
           Secretary of State's skeleton argument will be  provided  by  18
           May 2016.  The Appellants' skeleton argument will be provided by
           25 May 2016 and any rejoinder on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of
           State will be provided by 31 May 2016.

      (ii)  The Appellant's application  for  disclosure  of  the  materials
           summarised in [5] above is refused.

      (iii) The Appellants'  application  for  permission  to  disclose  the
           Secretary of State's FFM report to non-parties is also refused.

  25. We take this opportunity to  remind  the  parties  of  the  sacrosanct
      nature of all extant case  management  directions  applicable  to  the
      forthcoming pre-hearing phase.






   Signed:                Bernard McCloskey


           THE HON. MR JUSTICE McCLOSKEY
           PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
           IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


   Dated:   01 May 2016
