
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

EA (Sunni/Shi'a mixed marriages) Iraq CG [2011] UKUT 00342(IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 16 May 2011                                |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE ALLEN
                      SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE PERKINS
                      MR G F SANDALL (Non Legal Member)

                                   Between

                                     eA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Hashimi of Pinnacle Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms M Tanner, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


(1)   In  general  there  is  not  a  real  risk  of  persecution  or  other
    significant harm to parties to a Sunni/Shi'a marriage in Iraq.

(2)   It may, however, be shown that there are enhanced risks, crossing  the
    relevant risk thresholds, in rural and tribal areas, and in areas where
    though a Sunni man may marry a Shi'a woman without risk,  the  converse
    may not pertain.

(3)   Even if an appellant is able  to  demonstrate  risk  in  his/her  home
    area, in general it will be feasible for  relocation  to  be  effected,
    either to an area in a city such a Baghdad, where mixed Sunni and Shi'a
    families live together, or to the Kurdistan region.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant is a national of Iraq.  He appealed  to  an  Immigration
    Judge against the Secretary of State's decision of 19  August  2009  to
    remove him  as  an  illegal  entrant  from  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    Immigration Judge found significant aspects of the appellant's claim to
    lack credibility.  It was accepted that  the  appellant  is  a  Shi'ite
    Muslim and his wife is a Sunni  Muslim.   However  the  judge  did  not
    accept that they faced a real risk on  return  on  that  account.   The
    appeal was dismissed.  The appellant  sought  reconsideration  of  this
    decision, and reconsideration was ordered  on  the  grounds  submitted.
    Subsequently at a hearing before a  Senior  Immigration  Judge  it  was
    concluded that the judge had materially erred  in  law  in  respect  of
    failure to take into account properly the  risk  to  the  appellant  on
    account of his religion, specifically in the context of   him  being  a
    party to a mixed  marriage.   It  was  concluded  that  the  judge  had
    materially erred in law in failing adequately to consider the issue  of
    the mixed marriage in the context of humanitarian protection and asylum
    grounds.  The findings of fact of the judge were to stand.

2.    In her submissions Ms Tanner relied on and  developed  points  in  her
    skeleton argument and also in the refusal letter. It was  necessary  to
    assess whether the appellant faced  a  real  risk  in  the  context  of
    Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive in his home area or an  in
    area of relocation.  It should be recalled that the appellant had  been
    found to lack credibility in  various  respects.   He  was  only  found
    credible in respect of the death of his brother in a  terrorist  attack
    in 2007 and this was found not to be evidence of targeting.  The  point
    was made at paragraph 15 of the refusal letter that the  appellant  and
    his wife had never had problems in Iraq.

3.    The Tribunal was referred to  country  material  on  mixed  marriages.
    First there was the Associated Press report of 7 August 2009  where  it
    was said that mixed marriages were common. The sponsorship that existed
    for a while was no longer provided.  It was clear that from an  Iraqi's
    name it would  be  known  from  what  sect  they  were.   The  evidence
    indicated a lack of  clear  statistics  as  to  the  numbers  of  mixed
    marriages.  2006 had been a year of high violence where there had  been
    bombing of a mosque in Samarra.

4.    In the Operation Iraqi Freedom document was  evidence  again  relating
    to 2007 and this gave a historical context.  The fall of Saddam Hussein
    had triggered the sectarian violence.  It was argued that the appellant
    was not a refugee but an  economic  migrant.   He  had  a  professional
    status.  It was reasonable to assume that he might have a house or  the
    means to find accommodation.  He was  from  Baghdad  and  could  return
    there.  He still had a brother. This item concerned general risk rather
    than  specific  risks  to  parties  to  mixed  marriages  and  forcible
    displacement which should be contrasted with the appellant's situation.
      There were no particular references to mixed sect problems  at  pages
    13 and 14 in bundle 2.  It was significant as providing a very detailed
    analysis of ethnic and other violence.

5.     The  Internal  Displacement  Monitoring  Centre  (IDMC)  was  a  very
    detailed report  with  no  mention  of  problems  for  those  in  mixed
    marriages. With regard to the issue of the appellant  going  to  Basra,
    reference was made to the refusal letter.   There  were  mainly  Shi'as
    from Baghdad who  might  prefer  to  integrate  in  Basra  rather  than
    returning.  Page 4 was of relevance to the appellant at paragraph 2.

6.    The UNHCR eligibility guidelines of April 2009 did not  refer  to  the
    most recent situation but the fact of its source  was  a  consideration
    and there was no mention of mixed sect marriages.  Again it was a  very
    detailed report and the same was true  of  the  US  Defence  Department
    Report of June 2010.  Again there was no reference to mixed  marriages.
    Given the general lack of statistics, any risk on account  of  being  a
    party to a mixed marriage on return in an Article 15(c) sense had to be
    seen in the context of the general  violence  and  general  insecurity.
    There was an important point at page 32 concerning the  immeasurability
    of violence against those in mixed marriages. General violence was hard
    to quantify.  The paper entitled "Islam: Sunnis  and  Shi'as"  (January
    28, 2009) provided useful background information at page 1 at paragraph
    5 and page 2.  The Inspector General for  Iraq  Reconstruction  (SIGIR)
    report of January 30.2011 was very detailed.  The violence recorded  in
    the Brookings Institute report of 26 April 2011  did  not  specifically
    relate to mixed marriages and it was hard to get statistics on that and
    it had to be weighed against the general situation.   The  guidance  in
    HM and Others (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2010] UKUT 331 (IAC) applied.

7.    With regard to the Minority Rights Group Report of  2010,  there  were
    very few references to Shi'a/Sunni problems. Page 25 was  of  relevance
    to attempts to correct the bad relationship between them.

8.    Reference was made to the FCO letters  of  9  May  and  7  June.   The
    appellant had the documents.  The Washington Post article  of  4  March
    2007and the Telegraph article of 12 November concerned the situation in
    2006 and 2007 but that should be contrasted with the situation today.

9.    Bundle 7 contained the COIR.  There  was  no  reference  at  paragraph
    7.01 to statutes or the idea that  mixed  marriages  were  a  category.
    Paragraph 8.06 referred to the general ethnic and  political  divisions
    leading to attacks against anyone opposed to a political group but  did
    not speak of mixed marriages.  Paragraph 8.10  referred  to  links  and
    difficulties in identifying causes and  these  were  complex  problems.
    Paragraph 8.13 referred to diminished levels of violence including  the
    lowest violence in a year since the invasion. There was no reference to
    mixed marriage attacks at paragraph 10.64 which if they were  occurring
    would be  expected  to  be  mentioned.   There  was  a  lack  of  clear
    information to be noted at paragraph 12.03 where there was emphasis  on
    the general nature of the attacks.  At bundle 8 pages 88 and  92  there
    was no reference to mixed marriage  problems.   The  Economist  article
    dated 17 June 2010 was helpful.  Inter-sect violence was best  analysed
    in the general context of security and this supported that argument  at
    page 5.  There were no references specifically to  mixed  marriages  in
    the IDMC paper of 4 March 2010.  There were examples  of  targeting  of
    Sh'ias in the SIGIR report of April 30, 2011 page 7 but it did not  say
    by whom.  Page 70 referred to Shi'a/Sunni cooperation in the  State  of
    Law party.  Page 72 was relevant to risk to the  appellant  on  return.
    The Amnesty International Report of April 2010 at page 13  was  plainly
    dealing with other minorities.  The CSIS report of February 17  page  4
    reiterated the findings in HM.  Again there was no reference  to  mixed
    marriages at pages 13, 19 and 20.

10.   The Danish Immigration Service Report of September 2010 at page 6  was
    referred to, in particular the final paragraph.  This  applied  to  the
    appellant at page 7 and page 11 where it should be borne in  mind  that
    he was not displaced. There was no mention of mixed marriages  at  page
    14.

11.   Ms  Tanner  then  referred  specifically  to  the  skeleton  argument.
    Weight should be placed on the references to the COIR issues.   It  was
    hard to separate criminal activity from general  violence.   There  was
    also the issue of internal relocation. The appellant  could  return  to
    Baghdad or relocate to Basra.  In this regard what was said in  HM  was
    of relevance.

12.   With regard to the appellant's skeleton argument and  bundle,  and  in
    particular page 2 item 2 of the skeleton, the judge had  not  concluded
    as was contended  there.   It  was  true  that  no  one  knew  why  the
    appellant's brother was killed, except  that  it  was  in  a  terrorist
    attack, but it did not mean the appellant could say it would have  been
    him had he been there.  4(e) did not show that HM  should  be  departed
    from but was just  a  reference  to  the  possibility  of  a  worsening
    security situation.  On behalf of the Secretary of State it was  argued
    that there was a climate of improvement.  The point at  4(f)  indicated
    an  improvement  and  it  was  speculative  as  to  what  would  happen
    thereafter.  It did not show a real risk.  It did not show that parties
    to mixed marriages were ever at risk let  alone  as  of  today's  date.
    Individuals might be at risk for a variety of reasons.  With regard  to
    the point at 4(h) there was no evidence of the sectarian point nor  was
    there from the material that Ms Tanner had put forward.  It was clearly
    true of some areas but there were mixed areas also and she had referred
    to these and the appellant could live in such an area, for  example  in
    Baghdad.  The appeal should be dismissed.

13.   In his submissions Mr Hashimi referred to and relied on  his  skeleton
    argument.  The main  difficulty,  he  said,  was  the  lack  of  direct
    evidence of targeting of parties to mixed marriages but it was  not  to
    say it had not happened in the past, for  example  in  2006  after  the
    Samara bombings.  The burden of proof was a light one.  The  Presenting
    Officer had referred to the evidence  more  on  a  higher  basis.   The
    Tribunal could take account of  the  appellant's  history  on  a  lower
    basis.  There was the point in respect of the bundle at  page  7  being
    evidence from 2006 but it was direct evidence  of  violence  and  mixed
    couples being forced to divorce in Iraq.  It was immediately post-2006.
     Page 21 was concerned with 2005, but was again direct evidence.   Page
    19 was from 2007. Other reports from the bundle were in connection with
    the issue of looming violence as the deadline for US troops'  departure
    drew closer. It was argued that the violence levels had only come  down
    because of the surge  of  US  troops  entering  the  country.   It  was
    accepted  that  violence  had  decreased,  but  violent  attacks  would
    continue in Iraq.  There was a historical perspective to mixed marriage
    persecution.  It would be reasonable  to  conclude  that  when  the  US
    troops left there was every possibility that there would be a return to
    the violence. That indicated that the appellant would be  under  direct
    threat, from this historical perspective. It could  not  be  said  that
    such a threat currently existed however.  With reference  to  the  IRIN
    article at tab 61 of the Home Office  bundle,  that  could  occur  over
    again.  Likewise in respect of tab 58, which was evidence also  in  the
    appellant's bundle.  Bundle 8  tab  64  page  88  showed  a  continuing
    Shi'a/Sunni hostility in Iraq  and  there  was  a  tribal  element.  As
    regards the indication that a third of marriages  in  Iraq  were  mixed
    Sunni/Shi'a, when hostilities broke out in 2006 many couples  did  face
    difficulties.  It was hard to say how  many,  as  there  were  no  real
    statistics.  On  behalf  of  the  appellant  it  was  argued  that  the
    historical perspective cast light on the future in Iraq.  Reference was
    made to pages 1, 2 and 5  of  the  bundle  which  referred  to  a  deep
    resentment between the two sects, and the  USA  had  helped  the  Iraqi
    government to keep the peace but there were risks for the future. There
    was no indication of attacks on mixed couples but the Tribunal  had  an
    insight from a historical perspective so one could see a return to  the
    events of 2006 to 2007.  The appeal should be allowed.

14.   We reserved our determination.

15.   We think it is best to consider first of all the general situation  in
    Iraq, then  to  move  on  to  consider  the  more  specified  issue  of
    Sunni/Shi'a sectarian  violence,  and  then  finally  to  consider  the
    evidence relating specifically to risk on account of being a party to a
    mixed Sunni/Shia marriage.

16.   In the most recent country guidance on  Iraq,  HM  &  Others  (Article
    15(c)) Iraq CG [2010] UKUT 331 (IAC), the Tribunal concluded  that  the
    degree of indiscriminate  violence  characterising  the  current  armed
    conflict taking place in  Iraq  is  not  at  such  a  high  level  that
    substantial grounds had been shown  for  believing  that  any  civilian
    returned there would, solely on account of his presence there,  face  a
    real risk of being subject to that threat.

17.   At paragraph 253 of the determination  in  HM,  the  Tribunal  decided
    that, rather than relying on any particular set of figures it was  best
    to have regard to them all. It was noted  at  paragraph  255  that  the
    levels of violence in the peak years of 2006 and 2007  were  very  high
    and suggested that Article 15(c) was engaged in  those  parts  of  Iraq
    where that level of violence (or a higher level)  was  occurring.   The
    Tribunal agreed however with counsel for the  Secretary  of  State  who
    argued that the contrast between 2006/2007 and 2009/2010  in  terms  of
    the level of violence was substantial.   By  way  of  illustration  the
    figures for civilian deaths for 2009 ranged between  3,000  and  4,644,
    compared with figures for 2007 of over 20,000.  Further,  at  paragraph
    260, the Tribunal was wary of assuming that  various  insurgent  groups
    would not, once again, when it suited them, revert to tactics  such  as
    the bombing of market places that  maximise  civilian  casualties,  and
    deploy methods best suited to achieving that, but thought that it could
    properly be said  that  in  August/early  September  2010  the  various
    insurgent   groups,   including   Al-Qaeda   in   Iraq,   were   weaker
    organisationally and militarily and that the evidence did  not  suggest
    that that would change in the foreseeable future.  To that  extent  the
    Tribunal thought it was correct to regard the levels of  indiscriminate
    violence as being not only lower presently but likely not to revert  to
    anything like the levels they reached in 2006/2007.   Although  the  US
    was committed to a responsible "draw down", it  was  clear  that  there
    continued to be a great deal of US and  international  involvement  in,
    and support for the Iraqi government. The Tribunal noted that the  main
    Sunni  and  Shi'a  parties  and  organisations  appeared   increasingly
    committed to distributing power  through  civil  rather  than  military
    means.  The Tribunal went on to say at paragraph 278(iii) that even  if
    there were certain areas where the violence reached  levels  sufficient
    to engage Article 15(c), it considered that  there  was  likely  to  be
    considerable scope for internal relocation to achieve both  safety  and
    reasonableness in all the circumstances.  Although the  current  levels
    of violence in Iraq  were  unacceptably  high,  the  consensus  of  the
    evidence was that a very significant proportion  of  the  violence  was
    targeted against people with specific characteristics  over  and  above
    being mere civilians, such as  government  officials,  civil  servants,
    religious and political leaders and security personnel.

18.   We turn to more recent evidence since the  country  guidance  decision
    was promulgated.  The Country of Origin Information Report for 25 March
    2011 quotes, at paragraph 8.01, Jane's Sentinel Country Risk Assessment
    of Iraq of 19 January 2011.  This says the following in  the  executive
    summary:

         "The government of Prime Minister Nuri al-Maliki has faced  serious
         internal violence through its term and this violence is  likely  to
         persist for the foreseeable future as troop-contributing  countries
         withdraw in  2009  to  2010  and  the  government  assumes  greater
         responsibility for security.  However, since the  US  launched  its
         'surge' policy in mid-2007, bringing an  additional  20,000  troops
         into Baghdad  and  al-Anbar  province  [to  the  west  of  Baghdad]
         violence has been at a less intensive level than in 2006 and  2007.
         Political violence in Iraq is being driven by a  complex   mesh  of
         sectarian  and  factional  drivers  with  both  Sunni   and   Shi'a
         insurgents posing a security challenge to the government.  ...  The
         key problem since 2006 has instead been Iraqi  on  Iraqi  violence.
         Initially this  primarily  comprised  sectarian  attacks  aimed  at
         civilians,  but  increasingly  attacks  have  taken  the  form   of
         factional  resistance  to  government  security  forces.    Certain
         sections  of  the  Sunni  Arab  community  remain   highly   active
         insurgents, with attacks most prevalent in areas where a hard  core
         of irreconcilable former regime elements and Islamic militants  pay
         networks of unemployed  Iraqis  to  perform  attacks.   Sunni  Arab
         resistance is particularly prevalent in  areas  where  Sunnis  fear
         Kurdish or Shi'a dominance. Since the withdrawal of MNF troops from
         Iraqi cities in June 2009, and in the weeks after  the  March  2010
         elections, violence in Baghdad did not exceed expected  levels  and
         remained sporadic.  October 2010 saw  the  least  number  of  Iraqi
         civilians casualties since the outbreak of the war in  March  2003,
         according to government figures."

19.   The report also refers to  the  fact  that  the  Iraqi  government  is
    recovering the monopoly over the legitimate use of force as  the  Iraqi
    army (backed by multi-national forces) increasingly asserts itself as a
    leading military force in most locations, and also that terrorists  and
    insurgent groups have been whittled down to a hard core with many  less
    committed elements pared away, although further reducing this remaining
    cadre will  be  very  slow  and  difficult  and  Iraq  has  significant
    potential to become a regional hub for organised criminal elements.

20.   In the Special  Inspector  General  for  Iraq  Reconstruction  (SIBIR)
    quarterly report and semi-annual report to the United States  Congress,
    dated 30 January 2011, at page 10, it is noted  that  more  than  3,600
    civilians and ISF personnel were killed  in  violent  incidents  during
    2010.  For the third consecutive month, December set a 2010 record  for
    the fewest number of people  killed  in  attacks,  down  151  from  the
    previous month 2010, a record low of  171.   There  are  references  to
    violence against Christians where a Syrian Catholic Church  in  Baghdad
    was stormed on 31 October 2010 killing more than 50 people, attacks  on
    judges and attacks on Government of  Iraq  officials.  The  Centre  for
    Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) paper entitled Iraq's Coming
    National Challenges: The Course of the Fighting and Continuing Security
    Threats, dated 5  January  2011,  says  that  casualties  in  Iraq  are
    dropping, noting diminishing figures  in  October  and  November  2010,
    although mentioning  also  attacks  against  Christian  Iraqis  and  an
    increase in the number of foreign fighters in Iraq.

21.   It is in our  view  reasonable  to  conclude  the  situation  has  not
    changed materially since the publication of the country guidance in  HM
    as regards the general levels of violence in Iraq.  Clearly  there  has
    been an improvement since 2006/2007, but equally  significant  problems
    remain and there are particularly categories of people, which  we  have
    set out above, who are at especial risk.

22.   We move on to consider the evidence concerning the  general  situation
    of Sunni/Shi'a sectarian violence and risk on that account.

23.   There is a very helpful paper at tab 49 of bundle 4  provided  by  the
    respondent which is  a  paper  entitled:  Islam:  Sunnis  and  Shi'ites
    written by Christopher  M  Blanchard,  an  analyst  in  Middle  Eastern
    affairs, provided by the Congressional Research Service.  It  sets  out
    the historical background and the  difference  between  the  Sunni  and
    Shi'ite Islamic sects and indicates not only  the  differences  between
    the two sects but also the core beliefs and shared practices that  they
    have.  The point is made at page 1 of the paper that  Islamic  theology
    and sectarian considerations  are  rarely  sufficient  explanation  for
    instances of terrorism  and  political  violence  in  the  contemporary
    Muslim world.  Political, social and economic factors  often  determine
    whether a given dispute reflects  sectarian  identities  or  transcends
    them.  It is said that Sunni and Shi'ite organisations and  governments
    are known to  collaborate  when  they  perceive  that  their  interests
    overlap and in other instances  theological  differences  can  directly
    fuel sectarian hatred and violence. In  Iraq,  Sunni/Shi'ite  relations
    have been complicated by  the  dramatic  shift  in  power  dynamics  to
    accompany the removal of the  Sunni-dominated  Saddam  Hussein  regime,
    which ended centuries of Sunni political dominance.  Lingering  Shi'ite
    resentment and Sunni  fears  associated  with  this  shift  had  helped
    transform local and individual  political  or  economic  disputes  into
    broader sectarian confrontations in some cases. Both Sunni and  Shi'ite
    insurgent groups and militias have conducted attacks on  coalition  and
    Iraqi government forces and civilians since  2003.   It  is  said  that
    although major Shi'ite political  factions  largely  abandoned  violent
    tactics in favour of political  participation  during  2005  and  2006,
    intra-Shi'ite political rivalries have led to  outbreaks  of  violence,
    particularly in southern Iraq, again, from 2006 to 2008 Sunni Iraqis in
    Baghdad and the  al-Anbar  province  and  other  areas  fought  against
    predominantly Sunni insurgent groups,  foreign  fighters  and  Al-Qaeda
    operators whom they held responsible  for  ongoing  violence  in  their
    communities.

24.   A document from the Minority Rights Group  entitled  "Still  Targeted:
    Continued Persecution of Iraq's Minorities" dated 2010, states at  page
    10 that last year has actually seen a  marked  decline  in  Sunni/Shi'a
    violence  in  Iraq  and  the  formation  of  more  pluralist  political
    groupings in the 2010 elections  to  the  country's  parliament.  There
    remain, however, problems for Iraq's diverse minorities, who  continued
    to be targeted on the basis of religion and ethnicity during  2009  and
    early 2010.  Reference is made to tensions between Kurds and Arabs, and
    violence against minorities such as Christians,  Yazidis,  Shabaqs  and
    Turkmen.

25.   There is also  an  article  from  The  Economist  entitled  "Sectarian
    Animosity still prevails" dated 17 June 2010.  It is said that although
    a party strongly backed by the Sunni Arab  minority  narrowly  won  the
    most seats and votes in the March  election,  the  two  biggest  mainly
    Shi'a alliances, which came second and third, have agreed to gang up in
    a wider front to form a ruling coalition in which the  Sunnis  may  not
    play much of a part.  The incumbent caretaker prime minster,  Nuri  al-
    Maliki, is said to be reviled as sectarian by Iraq's Sunni minority and
    by  the  leaders  of  influential  neighbouring  Sunni-led   countries,
    especially Saudi Arabia. It is thought that Shi'a Arabs  make  up  more
    than half the population, Sunni Arabs less than a quarter, Kurds  (most
    of whom are Sunni) around one-fifth and Turkmens, Christians and others
    make up the rest.  There is  reference  to  a  visit  to  the  city  of
    Fallujah which is said to confirm the  intensity  of  Sunni  provincial
    hostility to Iraq's new Shi'a-led establishment.   Councillors  in  the
    city insisted that life was much better under Saddam Hussein, a refrain
    which is often said it be heard among Sunnis across Iraq.  On the other
    hand the Shi'as tend  to  see  Saddam's  old  Ba'athists  around  every
    corner, deviously preparing for a comeback.  Many Shi'as are said to be
    irked by the frequent visits of Mr Allawi, a secular Shi'a whose  Sunni
    backed Iraqiya Alliance won 91 seats out of parliament's  325,  to  the
    capitals of Arab countries, all governed by Sunnis,  to  rally  support
    for his prime ministerial bid.

26.   With regard to the insurgents, it  is  said  that  they  now  seem  to
    concentrate on spectacular bombings and  landmarked  targets,  such  as
    ministries and hotels and that since last August  there  have  been  at
    least five big waves of  coordinated  acts,  hitting  the  finance  and
    foreign ministries, among  others,  three  of  the  city's  best  known
    hotels, plus softer targets such as mosques and market places in  Shi'a
    districts.   The insurgents also kill fellow Sunnis,  especially  those
    who have signed up to the "awakening councils"  who  have  accommodated
    themselves, however reluctantly, with the  new  Shi'a  led  order.   An
    example of this is a bombing that occurred in the Sunni province of al-
    Anbar, west Baghdad on 7 June.  The targets were policemen  and  tribal
    leaders who had turned against Al-Qaeda.  It is said that against  this
    backdrop it is vital that the new parliament and the government that it
    evidently endorses  build  as  wide  a  cross  sectarian  consensus  as
    possible.

27.   The  Special  Inspector  General  for  Iraq  Reconstruction  (SIGIR)'s
    quarterly report for the United  States  Congress  of  30  April  2011,
    refers at page 7 to suicide bombers targeting Shi'a religious  pilgrims
    in a series of large attacks earlier during the quarter. It is relevant
    also to note the various parties in the government of Iraq as  set  out
    on 21 April 2011 in that report. The point is made  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of  State  that  a  number  of  significant  figures  in  the
    government are members of  the  State  of  Law  coalition  which  is  a
    Shi'a/Sunni political block led by the Prime  Minister,  Mr  al-Maliki.
    These include the Prime Minister himself of course who was at that date
    acting Minster of Interior and Minister  of  Defence  and  Minister  of
    National Security, but also includes the Minister of Human Rights,  the
    Minister of Youth and Sport, and the  Minister  of  State  for  Women's
    Affairs.

28.   A UPI report in the appellant's bundle dated 7 April  2010  refers  to
    explosions over three days in and around  Baghdad  killing  nearly  150
    people, which has caused  some  people  to  worry  that  the  sectarian
    violence of 2006 and 2007 might return.  A report of 6  April  2010  in
    the New York Times, at page 2 of the bundle, refers to the same bombing
    incidents.  There are references to the killing of  25  members  of  an
    extended family of Sunni Arab men and women and the killing of a family
    of six Shi'ite Arabs. The violence is said to  have  come  against  the
    background of  continuing  political  instability  after  the  7  March
    parliamentary elections left no single groups able to form a government
    forcing a scramble to form coalitions,  and  reference  is  made  to  a
    similar political void after the 2005 parliamentary vote which preceded
    Iraq's bloody sectarian warfare  of  2006  and  2007,  from  which  the
    country has only begun to emerge.  It is said that there are  also  new
    concerns that Iraq's army and police may drift back into  sectarianism.
    A Washington Post report of 17 February 2010 concerns the killing of  a
    Sunni man in a mostly Shi'ite neighbourhood of north west Baghdad.   It
    is said that the death  and  the  aftermath  were  reminiscent  of  the
    prelude to the sectarian war which began in late 2005 which began  with
    a smattering of killings and threats and culminated in 100 bodies a day
    being dumped  in  the  streets  of  the  capital.   With  the  imminent
    departure of American forces and the fierce competition for power ahead
    of general elections on 7 March, many  say  that  sectarian  strife  is
    reigniting.  There is reference to the killing of a man on  23  January
    2010 whose family had no doubt that he was killed because he was Sunni.
     There is anecdotal evidence of hostility between  the  two  sects  and
    fears on the part of Sunni Arabs that the Shi'ite-led  government  will
    marginalise them.

29.   There is reference in an item from Global Issues.org  dated  20  April
    2010, to the assassination of a prominent Sunni imam in  Baghdad  which
    raised fears of renewed sectarian violence in the wake of the  7  March
    elections.  A further article from the Los Angeles Times, dated 3 April
    2010, makes another reference to the killing of 25 people  referred  to
    above.  It is said that it appeared to be designed  to  intimidate  the
    Sunni population.  There are concerns about  Al-Qaeda  in  Iraq  taking
    advantage of the situation.  An Iraqi officer  warned  that  the  group
    would seek to exploit the absence of key Sunni leaders caught up in the
    government sweeps and considered that if such situations  continued  he
    would not exclude civil war,  as  trust  between  the  people  and  the
    security forces disappeared.

30.   We consider that the most up-to-date evidence, which  shows  that  the
    government has now been formed, puts in context earlier  concerns  that
    we have set out above. There were understandable and very real concerns
    of a return to the levels of violence of  2006  and  2007  between  the
    sects, and clearly problems remain.  However, the passage of  time  has
    not shown a descent into the earlier problems  or  anything  like  that
    extent of violence.  Clearly tensions remain, and are likely to do  so,
    but equally they have to be seen in the context of the complexities  of
    life in Iraq and the different factors that may come into play  at  any
    given time as further  risk  factors  which  may  be  connected  to  or
    entirely separate from Sunni/Shi'a tensions.

31.   We move on now to consider the evidence concerning the specific  issue
    in this case of mixed Sunni/Shi'a marriages. In the appellant's  bundle
    at page 7 there is an item from IRIN of 8 November  2006  concerning  a
    Shi'a wife and Sunni husband. They had been forced to  divorce  because
    of pressures on them from the wife's  family  who  said  the  husband's
    family were insurgents. It is said that hundreds of such mixed  couples
    have been forced to divorce due to pressure from  insurgents,  militias
    or families who feared that they could be singled out. It is said  that
    prior to 2003, doctrinal differences were  never  a  problem  in  Iraq.
    Mixed marriages between Sunnis and Shi'ites and between Sunni Kurds and
    Arabs of both  sects  were  common  in  the  days  of  Saddam  Hussein.
    However, following the US led  invasion  of  Iraq  in  2003,  sectarian
    divides began to emerge as the majority Shi'ite  population  which  had
    been heavily discriminated against under Hussein's government, began to
    reassert itself as the dominant  political  power.  Sectarian  violence
    escalated considerably after the  bombing  by  Sunnis  of  the  revered
    Shi'ite shrine in Samarra in February 2006. The Iraqi court responsible
    for carrying out divorces said that over the past four months there had
    been a significant increase in the number  of  divorces  occurring  and
    most of them were between mixed couples.  The court could not, however,
    confirm whether they were forced or not.  Some religious  leaders  were
    calling on mixed couples to divorce for their own safety whereas others
    said they should not divorce if they  were  living  in  harmony.    The
    government of Iraq estimated  that  2,000,000  of  Iraq's  6.5  million
    marriages were  unions  between  Arab  Sunnis  and  Arab  Shi'ites.  An
    association that had been formed by  mixed  couples  called  Union  for
    Peace in Iraq aiming to protect such marriages from sectarian  violence
    had been  forced  to  dissolve  after  three  mixed  couples  including
    founding members of the organisation were killed.  A former  member  of
    the association said there were two choices  left,  stay  in  Iraq  and
    divorce your partner or flee to a neighbouring country.

32.   There is a further item in the appellant's bundle at page 19, dated  8
    March 2007 relating specifically to a Shi'ite husband and  Sunni  wife,
    who lived in a mostly  Sunni  neighbourhood,  and  where  threats  were
    addressed to the husband.  A UN human rights worker, herself a  product
    of a mixed marriage, said that in the absence of security, Iraqis  were
    protecting themselves by turning to their sects and their  tribes,  and
    that it was becoming normal to hear about mixed families breaking down.
     One sees again here the reference to there being  nearly  a  third  of
    Iraqi marriages being unions between members of different sectarian  or
    ethnic communities, although this is an estimate by sociologists in the
    absence of official statistics.   It  was  again  said  that  sectarian
    strife had risen sharply since the bombing of  the  Shi'ite  shrine  in
    Samarra.  Since then more than 500,000 Iraqis had fled their homes, the
    number growing by 50,000 every month according to the  United  Nations.
    The vast majority were said to have left  mixed  marriages,  which  are
    described as being the main battlefields of the sectarian war.  It  was
    said that nowadays, even in a climate  of  deep  suspicion,  Iraqis  of
    different sects mix when they can,  but  anecdotal  evidence  suggested
    that strife was breeding mistrust within mixed families.

33.   In a Telegraph article of 18 September 2005 there is reference to  the
    mixed weddings  which  helped  to  bind  Iraq's  religious  communities
    together having all but stopped.  Previously  for  every  50  marriages
    there were twenty between Shi'a men and Sunni girls, said a Shi'a  Imam
    who had officiated over weddings for more than  twenty  years,  but  he
    said that perhaps now only one marriage in fifty  was  mixed.   It  was
    said to be a sign that the sectarian terror campaign spearheaded by the
    Jordanian militant  Abu  Musab  Al-Zarqawi  was  gradually  having  its
    desired effect of isolating the two communities.  Al- Zarqawi  exhorted
    Sunni insurgent groups to declare  war  against  Shi'as.   Intelligence
    officials were said to be divided over  whether  many  would  heed  the
    call, because a lot of Sunni  insurgent  groups  remained  secular  and
    nationalist in nature and had no interest in killing fellow Iraqis.  It
    was said that both Sunnis and Shi'as were gradually moving out of  each
    other's neighbourhoods for fear of being targeted.

34.   Several of these items are also  to  be  found  in  the  Secretary  of
    State's bundle.  It is clear that there were  significant  problems  in
    2006 and 2007 for mixed couples.  However it is  clearly  important  to
    consider the more up-to-date evidence.  For example, an item from Islam
    on Line.net entitled  "Mixed  Sunni/Shi'a  marriages  are  increasingly
    common in Iraq", dated 25 August 2009, states that though  it  is  true
    that Baghdad is  divided between the two main sects, Sunni and Shi'ite,
    and that one  will  find  one  neighbourhood   predominantly  Sunni  or
    predominantly Shi'a, there  were  also  areas  where  Sunni  and  Shi'a
    intermingle, though there were  militias  defending  the  major  sects,
    namely trying to obstruct the  presence  of  families  from  the  other
    sects. It is said however that these militias never  prevent  marriages
    between the young men and  women  who  belong  to  differing  sects  or
    ethnicities.  It is said that  the  main  reason  is  that  many  Iraqi
    families are originally  mixed  families  and  there  are  areas  where
    sectarian and ethnic exclusivity is non-existent,  and  that  helps  to
    bind all constituents of Iraqi society together.   Moreover,  religious
    authorities, both Sunni and Shi'ite, do not  ban  mixed  marriages.   A
    Sunni teacher, married to a  Shi'a  colleague,  said  that  most  Iraqi
    citizens from all  sects  did  not  accept  the  acts  of  killing  and
    displacement that  had  taken  place  in  some  regions  and  even  her
    husband's family embraced their neighbouring Sunni  family  for  a  few
    days when some militants chased them with the intention of killing them
    or forcing them to migrate, but they  were  safely  smuggled  from  the
    area.  She said that most educated people were dissatisfied with  these
    acts.  A judge at the Personal Status Court in  the  Al-Karkh  area  of
    Baghdad said that among every seventeen marriages that he signed  on  a
    daily basis, eight to ten were  mixed  marriages.   He  said  that  the
    families and relatives of the newlyweds were mostly educated people who
    did not see the sectarian or national differences as an obstacle to the
     happiness of their children.  He said that he did not recall that  the
    security incidents negatively affected the large number of  people  who
    applied for marriage certificates.  A female member  of  parliament,  a
    Shi'ite, denied any significant  effect  of  the  sectarian  strife  on
    Shi'ite Sunni marriages. Another Iraqi MP said that his daughters  were
    married to Shi'ites and he was about to marry one  of  his  sons  to  a
    Shi'a.  It is said that after a peak of sixteen  [percent]  during  the
    time of the toppled regime, the percentage of  Sunni/Shi'ite  marriages
    might slightly decrease due to fears of failing to build a stable Iraqi
    family structure, but it is said that  Iraqi  societal  fabric  remains
    well knitted even in the darkest of times.

35.   An item from the Associated Press from  7  August  2009  refers  to  a
    period during which Iraq offered $2,000 for  mixed  sect  marriages.  A
    Shi'ite cleric said that there was a time when families were  reluctant
    to consider such marriages because of concerns  from  both  sects.   He
    said that that was now over and things were getting back to normal.  He
    said that in the past two months  he  had  married  40  to  50  Sunnis,
    including 20 mixed weddings.   Another  cleric  said  that  hatred  had
    eventually faded with the passage of time.   Marriage  in  general  was
    coming back into strong favour.  A Sunni cleric and  marriage  official
    said he was marrying four to five couples a month, two or three of whom
    were mixed sect.  Two judges in Baghdad  said  that  more  people  were
    getting married and mixed marriages were now as  common  as  same  sect
    ones.  It is said that violence between Shi'ite and Sunnis has  dropped
    sharply and the inter-sect marriage programme is going strong.

36.   It is also relevant to note the item at tab 15 of the first bundle  of
    the Secretary of State's evidence, which is a paper from  the  Internal
    Displacement  Monitoring  Centre  (IDMC)  entitled   "Iraq:   Political
    wrangling leaves around 2.8 million displaced Iraqis  with  no  durable
    solutions in sight".  It is dated 14 December 2010.  It  is  said  that
    the overall rate of displacement in Iraq has decreased since 2007  when
    a US military "surge" coincided with  the  realignment  of  some  Sunni
    insurgent  groups  and  the  emergence  of  pro-government   "awakening
    councils".  The Shi'a militia of Muqtada Al-Sadr declared  a  ceasefire
    in March 2007.  It is said that in 2010 relatively few people had  been
    newly displaced in Iraq.

37.   There is a letter from the British Embassy in  Baghdad,  dated  9  May
    2011, concerned with mixed  Sunni/Shi'a  marriages.   It  is  from  the
    Second Secretary Migration at the embassy  and  it  is  said  that  the
    Embassy consulted a senior advisor  to  the  UK  Police  Advisory  team
    currently serving in Baghdad, an intelligence analyst from a commercial
    company  working  in  Baghdad  and  an  Iraqi  representative   of   an
    international NGO with offices  across  Iraq.   It  is  the  case  that
    personal information relating to an individual's religious identity  is
    not disclosed on any identification documents currently used  in  Iraq,
    though it may be disclosed for example to a police  officer  though  an
    individual  has  the  right  to  refuse.  In  practice,   however,   an
    individual's  tribal  name  and  place  of  birth  will  give  a  clear
    indication of their religious identity.   The  Embassy  was  told  that
    there are no  significant  risks  to  mixed  Sunni/Shi'a  families  and
    couples  as  opposed  to  those  of  the  same  religious  affiliation.
    Marriages are possible through registration at a civil  court  ceremony
    without  the  requirement  to  provide  evidence  of  one's   religious
    identity, though a  marriage  certificate  will  indicate  whether  the
    ceremony was carried out in accordance with Sunni  or  Shi'a  practice.
    Anecdotal evidence suggests  that  the  number  of  such  marriages  is
    increasing (records are not maintained).  According  to  the  Embassy's
    contacts, there are a number of areas  in  central  Baghdad  and  other
    major cities where mixed Sunni and Shi'a families  live  together.   It
    was explained however that this was not always the case  in  rural  and
    tribal areas where mixed marriages were less common.  In other areas it
    might be possible for a Sunni man to marry a Shi'a lady, but  not  vice
    versa.  In rural  areas,  a  mixed  marriage  couple  might  also  face
    security risks from groups such as Al-Qaeda and the  Islamic  State  of
    Iraq occasionally as part of ongoing "Islamification"  activities.   It
    is said that mixed marriage couples in the  Kurdistan  region  face  no
    problems or security risks.  It is said that the scheme  that  we  have
    referred to above of the payment of US$2,000 to a mixed marriage couple
    has now  ended.   It  is  also  said  that  the  Iraqi  government  had
    contributed to the creation of divisions between  Sunni  and  Shi'a  by
    government departments preferring to employ people from one sect or the
    other.

38.   One can see from this survey of the  evidence  a  significant  overall
    improvement in  the  situation  for  parties  to  a  mixed  Sunni/Shi'a
    marriage today  in  Iraq.   This  mirrors  to  an  extent  the  overall
    improvement in the security situation overall in Iraq between 2006/2007
    and today.  We consider that the evidence shows an improvement  in  the
    situation for couples to mixed marriages to the extent that we think it
    can properly be concluded that in general there is not a real  risk  of
    persecution or other significant  harm  to  parties  to  a  Sunni/Shi'a
    marriage in Iraq.  This must, however, we  think,  be  subject  to  the
    caveat set out in the letter from the British Embassy of  9  May  2011,
    that there may be enhanced risks in rural and tribal areas where  mixed
    marriages are less common, and areas where though a Sunni man may marry
    a Shi'a woman, the converse may not be the case.  This would have to be
    established by proof of  course.  Even  if  an  appellant  is  able  to
    establish that he or she would be  at  risk  in  their  home  area,  we
    consider that in general  a  couple  who  were  contemplating  marriage
    together but were from a  rural  and  tribal  area  would  be  able  to
    relocate to an area in a city such as Baghdad  where  there  are  areas
    where mixed Sunni and Shi'a families live  together,  or  alternatively
    relocate to the Kurdistan region where the evidence  shows  that  there
    are not problems.  We do not agree with Mr  Hashimi's  submission  that
    the existence of past conflicts and the tenor of the  current  evidence
    indicates a real risk on return.  In  our  view  the  evidence  clearly
    shows an improvement and a reversion to the  pre-2006  situation  of  a
    lack of risk of harm to parties to mixed marriages between  Shi'as  and
    Sunnis in Iraq.

39.   We conclude therefore that:

    (1)    In general there is not a real  risk  of  persecution  or  other
         significant harm to parties to a Sunni/Shi'a marriage in Iraq;


    (2)    It may,  however,  be  shown  that  there  are  enhanced  risks,
         crossing the relevant risk thresholds, in rural and  tribal  areas,
         and in areas where though a Sunni  man  may  marry  a  Shi'a  woman
         without risk, the converse may not pertain.


    (3)    Even if an appellant is able to demonstrate risk in his/her home
         area, in general it will be feasible for relocation to be effected,
         either to an area in a city such as Baghdad, where mixed Sunni  and
         Shi'a families live together, or to the Kurdistan region.

40.   The appellant lived in the Baghdad area.  We see no reason why he  and
    his wife should not be able to go back to live, given the existence  of
    mixed Shi'a/Sunni areas in Baghdad and the general level of improvement
    in the background evidence as we have set out above.  Accordingly  this
    appeal is dismissed.





Signed                                             Date


Senior Immigration Judge Allen
(Judge of the Upper Tribunal)

                         APPENDIX

                                   LIST OF DOCUMENTATION CONSIDERED


|No. |Item                                             |Date             |
|1.  |The Telegraph                                    |18 September 2005|
|2.  |IRIN                                             |8 November 2006  |
|3.  |LATWP Mens Service                               |8 March 2007     |
|4.  |Islam - Sunnis and Shi'ites                      |January 2009     |
|5.  |Associated Press:                                |7 August 2009    |
|6.  |Islam on Line.net, "Mixed Sunni/Shi'a marriages  |25 August 2009   |
|    |are increasingly common in Iraq"                 |                 |
|7.  |Minority Rights Group, "Still Targeted: Continued|2010             |
|    |Persecution of Iraq's Minorities"                |                 |
|8.  |Washington Post                                  |17 February 2010 |
|9.  |New York Times                                   |6 April 2010     |
|10. |UPI                                              |7 April 2010     |
|11. |Global Issues Organisation                       |20 April 2010    |
|12. |Economist, "Sectarian Animosity still prevails"  |17 June 2010     |
|13. |Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre (IDMC),  |14 December 2010 |
|    |"Iraq: Political wrangling leaves around 2.8     |                 |
|    |million displaced Iraqis with no durable         |                 |
|    |solutions in sight"                              |                 |
|14. |SIGIR Report                                     |30 January 2011  |
|15. |COIR                                             |25 March 2011    |
|16. |SIGIR                                            |30 April 2011    |
|17. |British Embassy (letter)                         |9 May 2011       |

