

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                 Moneke (EEA - OFMs) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00341(IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On  14 June 2011                              |                             |
|                                              |22 August 2011               |


                                   Before

                         MR JUSTICE BLAKE, PRESIDENT
                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE STOREY

                                   Between

                              TONIA OBY MONEKE
                         FIDELIS CHUKWUALOKA MONEKE
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mrs R Akthar instructed by Time Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

     i. A person claiming to be an OFM  under  Article  3(2)  of  Directive
        2004/38/EC may either be a dependant or a member of  the  household
        of the EEA national: they are alternative ways of qualifying as  an
        OFM.


    ii. In either case the dependency or membership of the  household  must
        be on a person who is an EEA national at  the  material  time.  For
        this reason it is essential that tribunal judges establish when the
        sponsor acquired EEA nationality.
   iii. By contrast with Article 2(2) family  members,  an  OFM  must  show
        qualification as such before arrival in the United Kingdom and  the
        application to join the EEA national who is resident here.


    iv. Membership of a household has the meaning set out in KG (Sri Lanka)
        [2008] EWCA Civ 13 and Bigia & Ors [2009] EWCA Civ 79; that  is  to
        say it imports living for some period of time under the roof  of  a
        household that can be said to be that of the  EEA  national  for  a
        time when he or she had such nationality. That necessarily requires
        that whilst in possession of such nationality the family member has
        lived somewhere in the  world  in  the  same  country  as  the  EEA
        national, but not necessarily in an EEA state.

     v. By contrast the dependency on an EEA national can be dependency  as
        a result of the material remittances sent by the  EEA  national  to
        the family member, without the pair of them  having  lived  in  the
        same country at that time before making those remittances.

    vi. The country from which the OFM has come can be either  the  country
        from which he or she has come to the United Kingdom or his  or  her
        country of origin.

   vii. Notwithstanding the preliminary reference to the Court  of  Justice
        made by the Upper  Tribunal  in  MR  &  Ors  (EEA  extended  family
        members) Bangladesh [2010]  UKUT  449  (IAC)  tribunal  judges  can
        proceed to determine OFM appeals in accordance  with  the  guidance
        given by the Upper Tribunal in this and related cases, making  sure
        to make findings of fact based on a  rigorous  examination  of  the
        evidence.

  viii. Where relevant, findings need also to be  made  on  whether  it  is
        appropriate to issue  a  residence  card  in  accordance  with  the
        discretion  afforded  by  regulation  17(4)  of   the   Immigration
        (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

    ix. In deciding whether a person falls within  the  material  scope  of
        regulation  8  of  the  2006  Regulations,  policy   considerations
        relating to such matters as the  appellant's  immigration  history,
        the impact of an adverse  decision  on  the  exercise  by  the  EEA
        national of his or her Treaty  rights,  etc  are  irrelevant.  Such
        policy considerations are relevant, however,  to  the  exercise  of
        regulation 17(4) discretion.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The facts

    1. This is an appeal from a decision  of  Immigration  Judge  Kopieczek
       given on 14 January 2011 dismissing the appeals of  both  appellants
       from a refusal of the Secretary of State to issue residence cards to
       them as dependent members of an EEA national.  At the conclusion  of
       the hearing we indicated that we found a material error of  law,  we
       would set aside the decision of the IJ and remake it for  ourselves,
       but we  concluded  that  a  more  detailed  factual  examination  of
       dependency is required in order to finally determine the appeal.  We
       here give our reasons for those conclusions.
    2. Anselem Egboh was born in Nigeria in November 1967 and  has  made  a
       statement accepted by the IJ that he was brought up in  his  uncle's
       house in Nigeria along with the present appellants, his cousins.  In
       1997 Mr Egboh moved to Germany to reside and conduct business there.
       It appears he subsequently obtained German nationality.  Neither his
       original statement nor his supplementary statement  or  evidence  to
       the IJ explains when this was.  In 2005 Mr Egboh came to the  United
       Kingdom.  It is unclear precisely when but it  seems  to  have  been
       shortly after 7 March 2005.  Thereafter there is  evidence  that  he
       was exercising a Treaty right as a worker in this country.

    3. The first appellant, Tonia Moneke, was born in August  1976  and  is
       now aged 34; the second appellant, her brother Fidelis, was born  in
       August 1978 and is now aged 32.  Fidelis came to the United  Kingdom
       as a visitor on 7 March 2005 which  appears  to  have  been  shortly
       before Mr Egboh moved here from Germany.  Tonia  followed  in  2006.
       They both gave short witness statements accepted by the  IJ  to  the
       effect that for a period of time they lived in the house of Mr Egboh
       in London.  The appellants, supported by  their  sponsor  Mr  Egboh,
       applied for residence cards under regulation 8  of  the  Immigration
       (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ("the 2006  Regulations").
       The applications were refused by  the  Secretary  of  State  on  the
       simple grounds that she was not satisfied they were  dependent  upon
       the sponsor and therefore fell within the definition of other family
       member in EU law as transposed by the 2006 Regulations.

    4. Shortly before the appeals were heard the appellants  filed  witness
       statements. Fidelis's statement stated that the  sponsor  "has  been
       extremely helpful; and has helped fund my education since my  father
       died...the sponsor is looked up to in our family as he has  provided
       me with a home in Nigeria and in the United Kingdom and he  is  also
       given me financial assistance  in  order  to  survive.   My  sponsor
       rented the house I lived in whilst in Nigeria. Since my  arrival  in
       the United Kingdom he welcomed me to  live  in  his  house...Anselem
       would often send money down with friends or other relatives in order
       to support us and he would ask for nothing in return...I have needed
       my sponsor all my life as family in Nigeria could not afford to care
       for me without Anselem's assistance". Tonia made a witness statement
       in similar terms.

    5. The sponsor Mr Egboh's statement was  in  these  terms:  "whilst  in
       Nigeria I did financially assist both the  appellants  by  providing
       them with enough money to sustain them through their  education  and
       allowed them to stay in the house which I had rented. I ensured that
       they had sufficient finances so they could look after themselves and
       get what they needed.  I provided them money  on  several  occasions
       throughout a number of years prior to their arrival  in  the  United
       Kingdom.  This was done through trusted people of mine and who  went
       to Nigeria.  I would give them money to give to  the  appellants  so
       that they could spend it on what they needed.   The  property  which
       Fidelis and Tonia lived in Nigeria is rented by  me  and  I  confirm
       that I have always supported  them  throughout  their  time  in  the
       United Kingdom."
The Immigration Judge's decision

    6. When the case was called on for hearing before the IJ there  was  no
       attendance by the Home Office Presenting Officer and no response had
       been made to those witness statements. The IJ  heard  oral  evidence
       from the parties and in the absence of any challenge concluded  that
       the appellants  were  dependent  on  this  sponsor  in  Nigeria  and
       continued to be financially dependent  on  him  when  they  were  in
       Nigeria and when he was in Germany.  The dependency continues in the
       United Kingdom where the appellants are  members  of  the  sponsor's
       household. The IJ nevertheless concluded he was bound to dismiss the
       appeal following the decision of the Court of Appeal in Bigia &  Ors
       [2009] EWCA Civ 79 paragraphs 21  and  38  to  the  effect  that  in
       addition to having to show  dependency  as  a  matter  of  fact  the
       appellants had to show they were dependant upon the sponsor  in  the
       country that he was in before he came to the United Kingdom, in this
       particular case, Germany.

    7. He concluded that the decision of the Upper Tribunal in  RK  (OFM  -
       membership of household - dependency) India [2010]  UKUT  421  (IAC)
       was inconsistent with the Court of Appeal decision that was  binding
       on him.  It is of course trite law that the Upper Tribunal  as  well
       as the First-tier Tribunal is bound by any decision of the Court  of
       Appeal or the  Supreme  Court  directly  in  point  subject  to  any
       subsequent clarification of the law by the higher courts or  in  the
       case of EU law by the Court of Justice. If he was bound  to  dismiss
       the appeal on this ground as a result of Bigia, then  so  would  we.
       For the reasons we give below we conclude that the determination  of
       this appeal turns upon the  meaning  of  an  EU  law  Directive.  We
       conclude that the IJ's interpretation of the Directive was erroneous
       and that neither the IJ nor we are bound by the decision in Bigia to
       reach a different conclusion.  We recognise the IJ's concerns  on  a
       difficult point of law, and  we  have  carefully  reviewed  previous
       decisions of the Upper Tribunal and the Court of Appeal as  well  as
       those of the Court of Justice in reaching the conclusions  to  which
       we have come.

    8. Subject to any further guidance given  by  the  higher  courts,  the
       approach we set out in this decision is to be applied by immigration
       judges.

The relevant provisions of Directive 2004/38/EC

    9.  Article 3(2) of Directive  2004/38/EC  ("the  Citizens  Directive")
       provides:


          "without prejudice to any right to free  movement  and  residence
          the persons concerned may have  in  their  own  right,  the  host
          Member State shall, in accordance with its national  legislation,
          facilitate entry and residence  for the following persons:


           a) any other family members, irrespective of their  nationality,
              not falling under the definition in point 2 of Article 2, who
              in the country from which they have come, are  dependants  or
              members of the household of  the  Union  citizen  having  the
              primary right of residence, or where serious  health  grounds
              strictly require the personal care of the  family  member  by
              the Union citizen."

   10.  Other family members (OFMs) whose admission and residence there  is
       a duty to facilitate under Article 3(2) are to  be  contrasted  with
       family members as  defined  in  Article  2(2).  The  latter  may  be
       summarised as the spouse, partner, direct descendants  under  21  of
       the EU national or spouse/partner, or dependant direct relatives  in
       the  ascending  or  descending  line   of   the   EU   national   or
       spouse/partner. The Directive recognises a right of residence  of  a
       Union citizen who moves to or resides in a Member State  other  than
       that or which he is national, to the family members as  defined  who
       accompany or join such citizens.


   11.  We note that the text of the Directive contrasts  the  position  of
       family members and OFMs in, amongst other, the following ways:-


          a) Dependent family members may be dependants on either the  union
             citizen or the spouse/partner of such a citizen,  whereas  OFMs
             must be members of the household of or dependants of the  Union
             citizen alone.
          b) Family members qualify for a right of admission  whenever  they
             accompany or join the Union citizen in the host state,  whereas
             the duty to facilitate  the  admission  or  residence  of  OFMs
             requires dependency or membership  of  the  household  "in  the
             country from which they have come", that is  to  say  prior  to
             their arrival in the host state. However, being a dependant  is
             an  alternative  rather  than  a  cumulative  requirement,   it
             suffices if the OFM is a dependant in the  country  from  which
             they have come rather than a dependent member of a household in
             that country.


   12. We recognise that there remains uncertainty as to who qualifies  for
       admission as an OFM dependant and  the  extent  to  which  admission
       turns  on  the  terms  of  national  regulations  or  the   Citizens
       Directive. The Upper Tribunal has reviewed the sequence of Court  of
       Appeal cases from  KG (Sri Lanka) [2008]  EWCA  Civ  13  through  to
       Pedro [2009] EWCA Civ 1358 in the case of MR  &  Ors  (EEA  extended
       family members) Bangladesh [2010] UKUT 449 (IAC). It concluded  that
       although the Directive did not grant rights of residence to OFMs and
       the matter could not be answered with complete confidence, it seemed
       that national law (in the case of the United Kingdom this means  the
       terms of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2006)
       had to comply with the requirements of Article 3(2) of the  Citizens
       Directive as respects the scope of the class to  whom  the  duty  to
       facilitate admission may extend. A reference has been  made  to  the
       Court of Justice of the European Union for an opinion on a number of
       aspects of Article  3(2)  including  those  raised  in  the  present
       appeal. The Tribunal's review included:


          a) consideration of the predecessor legislation to Article 3(2) of
             the Directive, namely Regulation EEC No. 1612/68 Article  10(2)
             and the fact  that  the  rights  and  duties  set  out  in  the
             Directive were intended to expand on the provisions set out  in
             the Regulations;
          b) consideration of the decision of the Court of Justice in Case C-
             1/05  Jia  [2007]  QB  545,  where  the  Court  relied  on  the
             equivalent provisions to Article 10 of the  Citizens  Directive
             in  the  preceding  legislation  to  interpret  the  scope   of
             application of dependency;
          c) consideration of the fact that in KG (Sri  Lanka)  [2008]  EWCA
             Civ 13 and Bigia [2009] EWCA Civ 79 the Court of Appeal was not
             apparently concerned with the distinctions  between  membership
             of  a  household  and  dependency,  and   factors  relevant  to
             dependants where not brought to its attention and considered in
             its reasoning;
          d) noting the  decision of the  Court  of  Appeal  in  SM  (India)
             [2009] EWCA Civ 1426 with respect to  dependent  OFMs  and  the
             fact that whilst this decision followed the two preceding  ones
             in concluding that dependency had to pre date the  OFM's  entry
             into the United Kingdom, it did not proceed on the  basis  that
             the earlier decisions imposed a minimum requirement that  to be
             eligible under Article 3(2) an OFM  has to demonstrate that  he
             or she was dependent on the Union citizen at a  time  when  the
             citizen and the OFM lived in the same country (whether  in  the
             EEA or elsewhere) prior to coming to the United Kingdom.

   13. Shortly after the decision in MR (Bangladesh)  was  promulgated  the
       Upper Tribunal further considered the question of dependent OFMs  in
       the case of RK (OFM -  membership  of  household  dependency)  India
       [2010] UKUT 421 (IAC).  In that case the appellant was the wife of a
       dependent son of an EEA national exercising  Treaty  rights  in  the
       United Kingdom.  She lived in her husband's home  formerly  occupied
       by her in-laws before they  came  to  the  United  Kingdom  and  was
       dependent on remittances from the United Kingdom.  In  neither  case
       had she lived in India with her in-laws in the same household as her
       in laws or as a dependent spouse when her in-laws resided in  India.
       We recognised that applying the approach laid down in KG (Sri Lanka)
       she could not be  said  to  have  been  a  member  of  her  in-laws'
       household, as that implied sharing a common roof with them as  such.
       The Tribunal concluded, however, that she was  potentially  eligible
       as a dependant on the proper interpretation of  the  Directive,  and
       that such a conclusion was not prevented  by  the  analysis  of  the
       Court of Appeal in Bigia.

The respondent's submissions

   14. In the course of the hearing we sought clarification from Mr  Walker
       as to what the respondent's case was on this point.  He replied that
       the appeal was opposed on two grounds.  First  that  there  was  not
       sufficient evidence of dependency within the meaning of EU law which
       was the original basis of the refusal. Second even if there had been
       the appellants could not meet  the  definition  of  OFM  within  the
       meaning of reg. 8 of the 2006 Regulations because they had not lived
       with Mr Egboh in a common country after he became an  EEA  national.
       As to the  latter  he  submitted  that  his  case  turned  upon  the
       construction of Article 3(2)(a) of the Directive: "Any other  family
       members irrespective of their nationality...who, in the country from
       which they have come are dependants or members of the  household  of
       the Union citizen having the primary  right  of  residence  or  were
       serious health grounds strictly require the  personal  care  of  the
       family member by the Union citizen" (emphasis added).  He  submitted
       that "they" referred to  both  the  family  members  and  the  Union
       citizen implying that the country from which they had both come must
       be the same.  We recognise that the decision of the Court of  Appeal
       in KG (Sri Lanka) as varied in Bigia provides  support  for  such  a
       conclusion.


Discussion

   15. In considering Mr Walker's second submission we consider that it  is
       instructive to examine first the text of  the  previous  legislative
       arrangements. Regulation EEC  No.  1612/68  Article  10(2)  provided
       that:


             "Member States shall facilitate the admission of any member of
             the family not coming within the provisions of paragraph 1  if
             dependent on the worker referred to above or living under  his
             roof in the country whence he comes".


       We observe that dependency is not qualified by the  phrase  "in  the
       country whence he comes", whereas  living  under  the  roof  of  the
       worker is.

   16. This was certainly how the United Kingdom authorities understood the
       position when they transposed the duty under the EEC Regulation into
       domestic law. By  regulation  10(1)  of  the  Immigration  (European
       Economic Area) Regulations 2000 ("the 2000 Regulations") a dependent
       or a member of a household of a qualified person  was  eligible  for
       the exercise of discretion to grant  a  residence  document  if  the
       conditions set out in  regulation  10(4)  were  complied  with.  The
       material conditions were that the relative of the  qualified  person
       was:

                 a. dependent on the EEA national or his spouse;
                 b. living as part of the EEA national's  household  outside
                    the  United Kingdom; or
                 c. living as part of the EEA national's  household   before
                    the EEA national came to the United Kingdom.


   17. The point about these requirements is first that  they  stress  that
       compliance with any limb suffices and second there is a  distinction
       between dependency and membership of the household. Whereas  present
       or past membership  of  the  EEA  national's  household  imports  an
       implied geographical nexus - the household must be  somewhere  where
       the sponsor lives or lived when an EEA national - being a  dependant
       carries  no  such  geographical  nexus.   This  reflected   previous
       national practice in the United Kingdom from 1973 in admitting other
       family members who were  financially  dependent  on  the  EU  worker
       before arrival (see Macdonald "Immigration  Law  and  Practice"  4th
       edition 1995 para 8.58 citing  ex parte Yennin [1995] Imm AR 93.)

   18. In April 2006 the 2006 Regulations came  into  force  replacing  the
       2000 Regulations. By this time Directive 2004/38/EC  had  come  into
       force although Article 10 of Regulation No. 1612/68 was only  to  be
       repealed from a date 2 years after the  coming  into  force  of  the
       Directive and so it was still in force at this time. We consider the
       impact of the provisions of the Citizens  Directive  on  this  issue
       below at [23].

   19. Regulation 8(2)(a) of the 2006 Regulations for the first time sought
       to impose the same geographical  restriction  on  dependants  as  on
       members of a household:

         "the person is residing in an EEA State in which the  EEA  national
         also resides and is dependent upon the EEA national or is a members
         of a household".


   20. This restriction of both dependents and  members  of  households  to
       those who had resided in an  EEA  state  and  the  imposition  of  a
       geographical nexus was both new and contrary to the plain  words  of
       Article 10(2) of Regulation 1612/68 noted above . Our  understanding
       is that the more restrictive provision was based on the belief  that
       a  markedly  narrower  scope  for  non-national  family  members  of
       qualified persons had been adopted by the Court of Justice in Case C-
       109/01 Secretary of State for the Home Department v Akrich [2004] QB
       756. The view was taken that Akrich concluded that  only  those  who
       had entered the EU lawfully prior to admission  to  the  host  state
       were eligible for admission  as  family  members.  That  remained  a
       controversial view until the decision in Akrich was  re-visited  and
       abandoned first in Case C-1/05 Jia and then in Case C-127/08 Metock.
       Both these cases  were  dealing  with  family  members  rather  than
       OFMs/extended family members.  In Jia  the  Court  of  Justice  made
       plain that prior admission to the EU was not a requirement for a non-
       national dependent parent of the qualified  person  but  that  prior
       dependency was necessary  under  the  predecessor  Directive[1].  In
       Metock the Court of Justice made plain that lawful admission to  the
       EU was not necessary for family members generally.

   21. On 2 June 2011 the 2006 Regulations were amended to  substitute  for
       regulation 8(2)(a) the following:

         "the person is residing in a country other than the United  Kingdom
         in which the EEA national also resides and is  dependent  upon  the
         EEA national or a member of his household"


   22. The amendment gives belated effect to  the  point  conceded  by  the
       Secretary of State in Bigia (above) that the scope of eligibility of
       OFMs/extended family families under Article  3(2)  of  the  Citizens
       Directive must have been affected by the Metock decision  on  family
       members and that it is no  longer  necessary  to  demonstrate  prior
       lawful residence in the EU as a dependent or  as  a  member  of  the
       household of a qualified person.

   23. However, the amendment does not  return  the  domestic  law  to  the
       position it was in before 2006 and the misunderstanding of Community
       law based on the Akrich  decision.  If  some  general  principle  of
       Community law did not require reading in to the Directive  generally
       some  geographical  nexus  for  the  pre-entry  dependency,  it   is
       difficult to see where such a requirement comes from. We have  noted
       that it was not imposed in Regulation EEC No.1612/68  that  has  now
       been replaced by the Citizens Directive. It would be  surprising  if
       this Directive imposed stricter requirements than Regulation EEC No.
       1612/68 given that the purpose of the Directive was  to  consolidate
       and extend rather than restrict rights.

   24. Mr Walker  submits  that  the  wording  of  the  revised  regulation
       nevertheless properly  reflects  Article  3(2)(a)  of  the  Citizens
       Directive:

             "any other family members, irrespective of their  nationality,
             not falling  under the definition in point 2 of Article 2 who,
             in the country from which they have  come  are  dependants  or
             members of the household  of  the  Union  citizen  having  the
             primary right of residence". (emphasis supplied)


       He submits that "they" refers to the EU citizen and the non national
       OFMs/extended family members.

   25. Viewed entirely in isolation, such a construction is possible  as  a
       matter of language but for the reasons given in RK  (India)  and  MR
       (Bangladesh), and the observations made below in our  judgment  that
       construction cannot be right.

   26. First, it  would  mean  that  the  Citizens  Directive  has  greatly
       restricted the  possibility  of  admission  of  non-national  family
       members who are dependants from  the  position  they  enjoyed  under
       Article 10(2) of Regulation EEC No. 1612/68 as accurately  reflected
       in the 2000 Regulations. This startling conclusion would be contrary
       to the consistent jurisprudence of the Court  of  Justice  that  the
       Directive consolidated and enhanced  the  rights  of  admission  and
       residence of family members.

   27.  Second, the submission affords  no  role  in  the  construction  of
       Article  3(2)  to  Article  10(2)(e)  of  the   Citizens   Directive
       concerning the procedures for issuing documents.  Yet  this  Article
       (or its equivalent in earlier legislation) is a permissible  aid  to
       construction of the scope of Article 3 as the Court of Justice found
       in Jia cited for this purpose by the Court  of  Appeal  in  both  SM
       (India)  and Pedro.

   28. Article 10(2)(e) states in the case  of  OFMs  the  document  Member
       States shall require to establish admission is:

         "a document issued by the relevant  authority  in  the  country  of
         origin or country from which they are arriving certifying that they
         are dependants or members of the household of the  Union  citizen".
         (emphasis added)


       In this Article "they" is  plainly  only  referring  to  the  family
       members and the country from which they have come  may  mean  either
       their country of origin or the country from which they are arriving.
        First, these plain words give no indication that the  country  must
       be a country which the OFMs  have  shared  with  the  EEA  national;
       secondly, they contain nothing to indicate that  "they"  in  Article
       3(2) is to be read  as  meaning  something  different  from  Article
       10(2)(e).

   29. Taking these two points together  and  setting  them  alongside  the
       jurisprudential developments since  the  decision  of  Akrich  first
       suggested a more restrictive approach was permissible,  we  conclude
       that the language of the 2000  Regulations accurately  reflects  the
       continuing  EU  law  requirement  for  admission  and  residence  of
       dependent  OFMs/extended  family  members   and   the   geographical
       restrictions on dependants imposed in 2006 and maintained in 2011 is
       inconsistent with Article 3(2) of the Directive.

   30. Third, if dependants of an EEA national who  have  exercised  Treaty
       rights are in fact dependants in the country from  which  they  have
       come or their country of origin, we see no reason  why  they  should
       not be eligible for consideration as extended family members or OFMs
       as they are described in EEA Regulations. Neither the text  nor  the
       purposes of the Directive seen in the light of its drafting  history
       require such a restricted reading. We  recognise  that  a  purposive
       reading of the Directive will take  account  of  the  prevention  of
       abuse, and  the  final  words  of  Article  3(2)  of  the  Directive
       recognise the scope for some state discretion:

         "The host Member State shall undertake an extensive examination  of
         the personal circumstances and shall justify any denial of entry or
         residence to these people".

   31.  However, in our judgment any general consideration  of  immigration
       policy that is relied on by a host state to deny residence to "these
       people" is a separate question from who "these people" are. If it is
       decided that a person comes within the material scope of  regulation
       8 as an OFM/extended family member, that is not  conclusive  of  the
       question of their entry or residence. In the  terms  of  the  United
       Kingdom's legislative scheme the issue of whether he or she is to be
       granted a residence  card  remains  a  matter  of  discretion  under
       regulation 17(4).  At this stage of the process concerns about abuse
       of rights, breach of the criminal law in entering  the  host  state,
       and potential adverse affects on the exercise of  Treaty  rights  by
       the qualified person may all come into play. But such considerations
       are not relevant  to  deciding  whether  a  person  is  a  dependent
       OFM/extended family member or a member of the household  of  an  EEA
       sponsor.


   32.  Fourth,  we  conclude  that  there  are  also   important   general
       considerations in favour of the former and  wider  construction.  An
       EEA national may want  to  support  the  family  members  of  a  non
       national spouse irrespective of whether such  a  family  member  has
       lived in the same country as the EEA citizen in the past. In an  age
       of trans-national marriages there will be increasing numbers of  EEA
       families where the EEA national has not lived in the  country  where
       his spouse's relatives live. Article 3(2) of the Citizens  Directive
       restricts members of the household and dependants to  those  of  the
       EEA national him or herself and does not include members of the non-
       national spouse's family.  We cannot accept in the absence of  clear
       legislative words that enormous numbers of "foreign" OFM  dependants
       are excluded from the scope of the Directive by the happenstance  of
       international geography.


   33. We say "happenstance" because in relation to dependent OFMs there is
       no necessary inference as to their dependency happening in the  same
       home or town as the EEA national. Nor can we see that there is   any
       difference in impact on the exercise of Treaty  rights  by  the  EEA
       national whether the dependant lives in a remote and distant part of
       the same country or in a different country  altogether  to  the  EEA
       national. An interpretation that cuts all these  applicants  out  of
       consideration in limine would appear to  be  discriminatory  on  the
       grounds of national origin without any  justification  for  such  an
       approach. We are entitled to interpret EU legislation in  the  light
       of the fundamental principles  of  EU  law  and  these  include  the
       principle of non discrimination reflected for example in Article  21
       of the EU Charter on Fundamental Rights.

   34. Having for these reasons reached our own conclusions, subject to any
       further guidance from the Court of Justice on the meaning of Article
       3(2) when applied to dependants, we must now consider whether we are
       bound  to  dismiss  this  appeal  for  the  reasons  given  by   the
       Immigration Judge, namely the authority of Bigia.

   35. We do not consider that we are bound by this decision because it did
       not consider and was presumably not referred to Article  10  of  the
       Directive as an aid to the construction of Article 3(2). Further, as
       we understand the decisions in both KG (Sri Lanka) and Bigia:

              i. Their Lordships were not distinguishing between  dependents
                 and members of a  household  in  reaching  a  policy  based
                 construction of the scope of EU law whereas the latter also
                 has and does distinguish between them.  We  recognise  that
                 membership of a household means having shared a  roof  with
                 the EEA national at some time somewhere in the world before
                 the qualified person came to the United  Kingdom.  Being  a
                 dependent relative of such a person does not.
             ii. Policy considerations first  led by the decision in  Akrich
                 and  then  the  jurisprudence  of  the  Court  of   Justice
                 reversing Akrich  may still result in negative decisions in
                 some OFM cases because they can be accommodated within  the
                 regulation 17(4)  discretion, as  can  the  EU  concept  of
                 abuse of rights.  Considerations of policy do not  have  to
                 rest on an artificial restriction of the term "dependants".


            iii. The approach adopted in KG (Sri  Lanka)  and  continued  in
                 part by Bigia has yielded in the subsequent case law of the
                 Court of Appeal to the text  based  reading  that  we  have
                 sought to apply. In particular the decision of the Court of
                 Appeal in SM (India) remitting a dependant case for further
                 consideration is inconsistent with the proposition that the
                 claim must fail in limine because the dependant never lived
                 in  the  same  country  as  the  qualified  person   before
                 admission to the United Kingdom.

   36. Further, we do not understand that UKBA practice in considering such
       cases is consistent  with  the  exclusionary  submission  now  made.
       There  are  two  reasons  for  this  observation.   First,   in   MR
       (Bangladesh) there was no submission advanced to the Upper  Tribunal
       that the claim must fail because we were bound by Bigia to  conclude
       that a dependant who had not lived in another country in  which  the
       qualified person also lived could not be a dependent OFM within  the
       meaning of the Directive or  the  Regulations.  There  was  no  such
       residence in Ireland or elsewhere with the Irish national in-law  in
       that case.

   37. Second, the current European Casework Instructions (ECIs)  published
       on the UKBA website and  last  updated  in  May  2011  supports  the
       broader interpretation we have identified.  Section  2.4  under  the
       heading of extended family members says as follows:

                 "Regulation 8  of  the  2006  Regulations  covers  extended
                 family members (for example, brothers, sisters,  aunts  and
                 cousins).  It also covers direct family  members  (such  as
                 parents or children over the age 21)  who  have  failed  to
                 provide evidence for financial dependencies.  An  applicant
                 may  be  considered  under  Regulation  8   of   the   2006
                 Regulations if s/he  falls  within  any  of  the  following
                 conditions (the ECIs proceed to use bullet pointing but for
                 ease of reference we shall number them (e) - (i)):


                  d.    Was living as part of the EEA national's  household
                     in a EEA state before the EEA  national  came  to  the
                     UK�. Note: there is no dependency test for persons who
                     can show that they have lived under the same  roof  as
                     the EEA national before coming to the UK.  or
                  e.    Was living as part of the EEA national's  household
                     in the UK or
                  f.     Has  joined  the  EEA  national  in  the  UK   and
                     continues to be dependant upon  the  EEA  national  or
                     his/her spouse or
                  g.     Strictly  requires  personal  care  from  the  EEA
                     national on serious health grounds or
                  h.    Can prove s/he is in a  durable  relationship  with
                     the EEA national."


       Although the reference to "living...in an EEA state" with respect to
       members of the household must presumably yield to the terms  of  the
       2011 amendment to the 2006 Regulations, we do  not  understand  that
       limb (g) imposes any requirement of  residence  in  another  country
       other than the United Kingdom where the sponsor resided  before  the
       dependant came to the United Kingdom.


   38. Finally, there is a more pragmatic reason why we consider that First-
       tier Tribunal judges should follow the  approach  set  out  in  this
       ruling pending further decisions from the Court of  Justice  or  the
       higher courts.  We are aware that there are a great many OFM appeals
       pending at First-tier and Upper Tribunal level and that it will take
       some months before a decision is given by the CJEU. In the  meantime
       immigration judges of the First Tier Tribunal need to know what they
       should be doing when determining such claims and, if cases  have  to
       be held in suspension pending  clarification,  at  what  stage  this
       should be. On the approach we enjoin it is possible for  immigration
       judges to proceed with the fact-finding that OFM cases require.  But
       it is of particular importance that such fact-finding  is  rigorous.
       It should particularly cover the factual question of  dependency  as
       well as those considerations that are relevant to  the  exercise  of
       the regulation 17(4) discretion as to whether to issue  a  residence
       card. Such detailed factual findings will not be made if  judges  of
       the First-tier Tribunal dismiss dependency on the  sole  basis  that
       there was no evidence of residence in the same country before coming
       to the United Kingdom.

   39. If such an approach is adopted,  cases  can  proceed  to  the  Upper
       Tribunal if they remain disputed on a point of EU law principle.  If
       our view of the scope of the Directive proves to be  accurate,  then
       outstanding cases can be speedily determined  or  appeals  withdrawn
       because the necessary facts have been found. There will be  no  need
       to send cases back to the First-tier for primary  fact  finding.  If
       our view does not turn out to be accurate, then the  disputed  cases
       can also be speedily resolved applying the correct  construction  of
       EU law subject to any Article 8 ECHR considerations that  may  arise
       on the particular facts found.



Conclusions:  place of dependency

   40. We therefore conclude that for the time  being,  subject  to  future
       clarification by the higher courts, IJs should adopt  the  following
       approach:


        i. A person claiming to be an OFM may either be a  dependant  or  a
           member  of  the  household  of  the  EEA  national:   they   are
           alternative ways of qualifying as an OFM.
       ii. In either case the dependency or  membership  of  the  household
           must be on a person who is an EEA national at the material time.
           Thus dependency or membership of a household that  preceded  the
           sponsor becoming an EEA national would not be sufficient. It  is
           necessary for the pre entry dependency to be on the EEA national
           and not a person who subsequently became an EEA  national.  Thus
           if a sponsor has  been  financially  supporting  OFMs  who  live
           abroad for many years  before he became  an  EEA  national,  but
           there was  no  such  support  after  the  sponsor  acquired  EEA
           nationality, there would be no evidence of dependency on an  EEA
           national.
      iii. By contrast with Article 2(2) family members, an OFM  must  show
           qualification as such not  just  since  arrival  in  the  United
           Kingdom but before arrival here and the application to join  the
           EEA national who is resident here. The applicant must have  been
           a dependent in the country from which they have come, that is to
           say their country of origin or other  country  from  which  they
           have arrived in the United Kingdom.
       iv. Membership of a household has the meaning set  out  in  KG  (Sri
           Lanka) and Bigia (above); that is to say it imports  living  for
           some period of time under the roof of a household  that  can  be
           said to be that of the EEA national for a time when  he  or  she
           had such nationality.  That necessarily requires that whilst  in
           possession of such  nationality  the  family  member  has  lived
           somewhere in the world in the same country as the EEA  national,
           but not necessarily in an EEA state.
        v. By contrast the dependency on an EEA national can be  dependency
           as a result of the material remittances sent by the EEA national
           to the family member, without the pair of them having  lived  in
           the same country at that time.


Conclusions: evidence of dependency

   41. Nevertheless dependency is not the same  as  mere  receipt  of  some
       financial assistance from the sponsor. As the Court of  Appeal  made
       plain in SM (India) (above) dependency means dependency in the sense
       used by the Court of Justice in the case of Lebon [1987]  ECR  2811.
       For present purposes we accept that the definition of dependency  is
       accurately captured by the current UKBA ECIs which read  as  follows
       at ch.5.12:


             "In determining if a family member or extended  family  member
             is dependent (i.e. financially dependent) on the relevant  EEA
             national for the purposes of the EEA Regulations:


             Financial dependency should be interpreted as meaning that the
             person needs financial support from the EEA national  or  his/
             her spouse/civil partner in order to  meet  his/her  essential
             needs - not in order to have a certain level of income.

             Provided a person would not be able to meet his/her  essential
             living  needs  without  the  financial  support  of  the   EEA
             national,  s/he  should  be  considered  dependent   on   that
             national. In those circumstances, it does not matter that  the
             applicant may in addition receive financial support  /  income
             from other sources.

             There is no need to determine the reasons for recourse to  the
             financial support provided by the EEA national or to  consider
             whether the applicant is able to support him/herself by taking
             up paid employment.

             The person does not need to be living or have lived in an  EEA
             state which the EEA national sponsor also lives or has lived."



   42. We of course accept (and as the ECIs reflect) that  dependency  does
       not have to be "necessary" in the sense of  the  Immigration  Rules,
       that is to say an able bodied person who chooses  to  rely  for  his
       essential needs on material support of the sponsor may  be  entitled
       to do so even if he could meet those needs from his or her  economic
       activity: see SM (India). Nevertheless where,  as  in  these  cases,
       able bodied people  of  mature  years  claim  to  have  always  been
       dependent  upon  remittances  from  a  sponsor,  that   may   invite
       particular close scrutiny as to why this should be the case. We note
       further that Article 10(2)(e) of the Citizens Directive contemplates
       documentary evidence. Whether dependency can ever be proved by  oral
       testimony alone is not something that we  have  to  decide  in  this
       case, but Article 10(2)(e) does suggest that the  responsibility  is
       on the applicant to satisfy Secretary of State  by  cogent  evidence
       that is in part documented and can be tested as to whether the level
       of material support, its duration and its impact upon the  applicant
       combined together meet the material definition of dependency.


   43. Where there is a dispute as to  dependency  (as  there  was  in  the
       present case) immigration judges should therefore carefully evaluate
       all the material to see whether the applicant has satisfied them  of
       these matters.

    Conclusions: outcome

   44. Applying these guidance points to the present decision, we find that
       there were two  material  errors  of  law  made  by  the  First-tier
       Tribunal.   First,  he  wrongly  concluded  that  absence  of  prior
       residence in the same country from which the EEA national  had  come
       precluded the applicants from being the dependants of their sponsor.
        Second, he found as a fact that the appellants had  been  dependent
       upon the sponsor prior to their admission to the United Kingdom when
       the material  before  him  did  not  enable  him  to  reach  such  a
       conclusion.  We have examined the oral evidence as recorded  by  the
       judge and the written evidence with  some  care.   We  observe  that
       following information is missing:


                    i) It is  unknown  when  the  sponsor  became  a  German
                       citizen - a crucial start point for establishing that
                       there  had  been  remittances  during  the   relevant
                       period.


                   ii) It is unknown when the appellants'  father  died  and
                       when therefore there was a material need for them  to
                       be relying upon remittances from the sponsor.

                  iii) It is unknown what the appellants were  doing  before
                       their father died  or  thereafter  whether  they  had
                       financial means  available to  them  from  their  own
                       labours and why they were not, as able bodied adults,
                       engaged in productive  activity  prior  to  2005  and
                       2006.  It would be somewhat remarkable  if  they  had
                       been doing nothing with their lives by the age of 30.

                   iv) We do not know what the level of remittances made  by
                       the sponsor was or the  income  in  Germany  that  he
                       earned in order to be able to make them. The evidence
                       does not seem to go beyond the fact some  remittances
                       were made through friends from time to time.

                    v) Accordingly the IJ on the material before  him  could
                       not calculate whether the material  support  provided
                       by the sponsor met the essential living needs of  the
                       appellant family member in the place where they  were
                       living  at  the  material  time  or   rather   simply
                       supplemented their income in some  undefined  aspect.
                       Nor can we calculate this.

   45. We appreciate the second error of law was not  contemplated  in  the
       grant of permission and the appellants have therefore  not  prepared
       submissions or material directed to it. However, it represented  the
       respondent's original reasons for refusing the  application  in  the
       first place and in our judgement it was incumbent on the  First-tier
       Tribunal to have examined the state of the evidence more  carefully,
       albeit that  the IJ did not have  the  assistance  of  a  presenting
       officer or any response to the evidence filed by appellants.


   46. In the circumstances, we set aside the decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal and propose to remake it in the light of the guidance given
       in this decision.  For the determination of the  appeal  there  will
       have to be a further hearing in which the  appellants  may  seek  to
       identify all the evidence they rely  upon  to  prove  they  are  OFM
       dependants within the terms we have analysed above.  It  may  be  if
       fresh evidence is introduced that the Home Office will now  wish  to
       test it in a way that was not done at the hearing before the  First-
       tier Tribunal.

   47. We will issue case management  directions  to  give  effect  to  the
       resumed hearing in due course. When we have finally  determined  the
       appeal either party may well want to apply for permission to  appeal
       to  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  respect  of  the   terms   of   this
       determination.




                               Signed








                               Mr Justice Blake
                               President of the Upper Tribunal,
                               Immigration and Asylum Chamber





-----------------------
[1] We are aware that the Court of  Appeal  in  Pedro  reached  a  different
conclusion with respect to  dependent  family  members  under  the  Citizens
Directive, but did so because of the material change between Article  10  of
the Directive and the equivalent provisions considered in Jia.

