

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

 Greenwood (Automatic Deportation: Order of Events) [2014] UKUT 00342 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                              |Promulgated on               |
|On 20 March 2014                              |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           JOSEPH HILMAN GREENWOOD

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Gill QC, instructed by Emmanuel & Co

   (1) The appealable decision that s 32(5)  of  the  UK  Borders  Act  2007
      applies is not invalid by reason of being dated after the  deportation
      order to which it relates.


   2) In an appeal against automatic deportation there is no appeal  against
      a decision to deport or against the order to deport, but only  against
      the decision that s 32(5) applies.

   3) If the  First-tier  Tribunal  gives  directions  under  s  86  of  the
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 they should be clear,  so
      that the person affected knows whether to challenge them and everybody
      can tell whether they have been complied with.

   4) It does not appear that the First-tier Tribunal has power  to  'remit'
      to the Secretary of State.






                            DECISION AND REMITTAL

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State.  The  respondent,  whom  I
    shall call "the claimant", is a national of Jamaica, born  in  December
    1978.  He came to the United Kingdom in 2002 as a visitor.  He sought a
    year's further leave as a student, which was granted,  expiring  on  30
    September 2003.  He undertook only three months of the course.  He then
    remained in the United Kingdom without leave.

 2. Save for family matters, to which I refer in a moment, there appears to
    be little or no information about his activities in the United  Kingdom
    for the subsequent ten years, other than in relation  to  his  criminal
    offending.  He has been twice convicted of possession of Class A  drugs
    with intent to supply, and has been sentenced to terms of  imprisonment
    totalling six years.

 3. The claimant married shortly after his  first  arrest.   His  wife  has
    three children from  a  former  relationship,  two  of  whom  are  over
    eighteen.  His wife has another child, born in 2009, said not to be the
    claimant's child; and the claimant has  another  child,  also  born  in
    2009, to a different woman.  The claimant's marriage is, however,  said
    to be subsisting.

 4. The Secretary of State has made  a  number  of  attempts  to  have  the
    claimant  deported  on  the  grounds  that  his  deportation  would  be
    conducive to the public good.  A decision to make a  deportation  order
    followed his first conviction.  The  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal
    allowed an appeal against that decision.  As a result, the claimant was
    granted leave to remain for just over four years.

 5. After the expiry of that leave  he  applied  for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain as the spouse of his wife.  That application was refused, and an
    appeal was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal.  The claimant's second
    conviction followed and he was sentenced to  five  years  imprisonment.
    The claimant had obtained permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    against the dismissal of his appeal.  Judge Grubb set aside the  First-
    tier Tribunal's decision, but made a new decision also  dismissing  the
    appeal.  The claimant applied out of time for permission to  appeal  to
    the Court of Appeal and no such permission was granted.  The  Secretary
    of State then sought to carry that decision into effect by means  of  a
    deportation order.  The claimant was served with two  notices.   First,
    there is a deportation order, specifically made under s.32(5) of the UK
    Borders Act 2007 ("the 2007 Act").  That order is dated 17  June  2013.
    The other notice is headed "Decision  that  section  32(5)  of  the  UK
    Borders Act 2007 applies".  It  considers  in  detail  the  information
    available to the Secretary of State, in relation in particular  to  the
    claimant's immigration and offending history and his relatives  in  the
    United Kingdom.  That decision is dated 24 June 2013.

 6. The appellant appealed again to the First-tier Tribunal.   The  grounds
    of appeal, as summarised by the First-tier Tribunal were as follows:

           "(i)    a decision to deport on section 32 grounds must be  made
               before a Deportation  Order is made,  a  decision  which  is
               made after a Deportation Order has been signed cannot  be  a
               lawful decision; and
            (ii)   in any event, the decision to deport under section 32(5)
               is contrary to the Article 8 rights of the appellant and his
               family members."

 7. The First-tier Tribunal (Judge Holder and Mrs S E Singer) was persuaded
    of the merits of the first ground.  It concluded  at  paragraph  23  as
    follows:


           "23. The respondent's decision to deport Mr Greenwood  dated  24
               June 2013 is not in accordance  with  the  law.   Given  the
               fundamental nature of the respondent's error, we  remit  the
               matter back to the respondent for the error to be  remedied.


               We, therefore, do not proceed to decide the substance of the
               article 8 appeal.
               We allow  the  appeal  against  deportation  to  the  afore-
               mentioned extent only."

 8. The Secretary of State sought and obtained permission to appeal to this
    Tribunal.  The grounds of appeal are, first, that s.34 of the 2007  Act
    requires the deportation order to be made  at  a  time  chosen  by  the
    Secretary of State;  there  is  no  reference  in  that  section  to  a
    requirement that the order post-date the decision, so that  the  timing
    of the order cannot affect the legality of the process;  secondly,  the
    appeal to the Tribunal is against the decision, not against the order.

The Law

 9. Although the Secretary of State sets out s.34 of the 2007  Act  in  her
    grounds, neither the First-tier Tribunal in its  determination  nor  Mr
    Gill QC in his skeleton argument thought it worthwhile setting out  the
    other statutory provisions  applicable  in  this  case.   They  are  as
    follows.  In the UK Borders Act 2007:

        32. Automatic deportation
        (1)  In this section "foreign criminal" means a person -
             (a)   who is not a British citizen,
             (b)   who is convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence, and
             (c)   to whom Condition 1 or 2 applies.
        (2)  Condition 1 is that the person is sentenced  to  a  period  of
           imprisonment of at least 12 months.
        (3) Condition 2 is that -
             (a)  the offence is specified by  order  of  the  Secretary  of
               State under section 72(4)(a) of the Nationality, Immigration
               and Asylum Act 2002 (c.41) (serious criminal), and
             (b) the person is sentenced to a period of imprisonment.
        (4) For the purpose of section 3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act  1971
           (c.77), the deportation of a foreign criminal  is  conducive  to
           the public good.
        (5) The Secretary of State must make a deportation order in respect
           of a foreign criminal (subject to section 33).
        (6) The Secretary of State may not revoke a deportation order  made
        in accordance with
              subsection (5) unless -
             (a) he thinks that an exception under section 33 applies,
             (b) the application for revocation is made  while  the  foreign
             criminal is outside the
                   United Kingdom, or
             (c) section 34(4) applies.
        (7) Subsection (5) does not create a private  right  of  action  in
           respect of consequences of non-compliance by  the  Secretary  of
           State


        33. Exceptions
        (1) Section 32(4) and (5)-
             (a) do not apply where an exception  in  this  section  applies
               (subject to subsection (7) below), and
             (b) are subject to sections 7 and 8 of the Immigration Act 1971
             (Commonwealth
                  citizens, Irish citizens, crew and other exemptions).


        (2) Exception 1 is,  where  removal  of  the  foreign  criminal  in
        pursuance of the deportation order would breach -
             (a) a person's Convention rights, or
             (b)  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations  under   the   Refugee
             Convention.
        (3) Exception 2 is where the Secretary of  State  thinks  that  the
        foreign criminal was
              under the age of 18 on the date of conviction.
        (4) Exception 3 is where the removal of the foreign  criminal  from
        the United Kingdom
             in pursuance of a deportation order would breach rights of the
        foreign criminal
             under the Community treaties.
        [(5)(6) set out exceptions 4 and 5]
        (7) The application of an exception -
             (a) does not prevent the making of a deportation order;
             (b) results in it being assumed neither that deportation of the
             person concerned is
                  conducive to the public good nor that it is not  conducive
             to the public good;
           but section 32(4) applies despite the application of Exception 1
        or 4.


        34. Timing
        (1) Section 32(5) requires a deportation order to be made  at  time
           chosen by the Secretary of State.
        (2) A deportation order may not be made under section  32(5)  while
           an appeal or further appeal against the conviction  or  sentence
           by reference to which the order is to be made -
             (a) has been instituted and neither withdrawn  nor  determined,
             or
             (b) could be brought.
        (3) For the purpose of subsection (2)(b)-
             (a) the possibility of an appeal out of  time  with  permission
             shall be disregarded, and
             (b) a person who has informed the Secretary of State in writing
               that the person does not intend to appeal shall  be  treated
               as being no longer able to appeal.
        (4) The Secretary of State may withdraw  a  decision  that  section
           32(5) applies, or revoke a deportation order made in  accordance
           with section 32(5), for the purpose of -
             (a) taking action under the  Immigration  Acts  or  rules  made
               under  section  3  of  the  Immigration  Act   1971   (c.77)
               (immigration rules), and
             (b) subsequently taking  a  new  decision  that  section  32(5)
               applies and making a deportation order  in  accordance  with
               section 32(5).


        36. Detention
        (1) A person who  has  served  a  period  of  imprisonment  may  be
           detained under the authority of the Secretary of State -
             (a)  while the Secretary of  State  considers  whether  section
             32(5) applies, and
             (b) where the Secretary of  State  thinks  that  section  32(5)
               applies, pending the making of the deportation order.
        (2) Where a deportation order is made in  accordance  with  section
           32(5) the  Secretary  of  State  shall  exercise  the  power  of
           detention under paragraph 2(3) of Schedule 3 to the  Immigration
           Act 1971  (c.77)  (detention  pending  removal)  unless  in  the
           circumstances the Secretary of State thinks it inappropriate.
        (3) A court determining an appeal against  conviction  or  sentence
           may direct release from detention under subsection (1) or (2).
        ...


        38. Interpretation
        ...
        (4) In sections 32 and 33-
        ...
             (c) "deportation order" means an order under section 5, and  by
               virtue of section 3(5), of the Immigration Act 1971
        ... .

    In the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002:


        82. Right of appeal: general
        (1) Where an immigration decision is made in respect of a person he
        may appeal
        (2) In this Part 'immigration decision' means-
        ...
              (j)  a decision to make a deportation order under section 5(1)
             of [the Immigration Act 1971]
        ...
        (3A) Subsection (2)(j) does not apply  to  a  decision  to  make  a
             deportation order which states that it is  made  in  accordance
             with section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007; but -
             (a) a decision that section 32(5)  applies  is  an  immigration
               decision for the purposes of this Part, and
             (b) a reference in this Part to an appeal against an  automatic
               deportation order is a reference  to  an  appeal  against  a
               decision of  the  Secretary  of  State  that  section  32(5)
               applies.

    Section 84 sets out grounds of appeal, including,  in  s.84(1)(e)  that
    the immigration decision is otherwise not in accordance with the law.
    Section 86 provides as follows:


        86. Determination of appeal
        (1) This section applies on an appeal under section 82(1)
        (2) [The Tribunal] must determine -
           (a) any matter raised as a ground of appeal (whether or  not  by
           virtue of section 85(1))
        ...

    The Immigration (Notices) Regulations 2003 (SI  658/2003)  require  the
    decision-maker to give notice of a decision which carries  a  right  of
    appeal, and the notice has to include or be accompanied by the  reasons
    for the decision.  The  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)
    Rules 2005, as applied to the  First-tier  Tribunal,  provide  for  the
    calculation of time for appealing from the date of the service  of  the
    notice of the decision.




Submissions


10. Mr Gill's response to the Secretary of State's grounds is  as  follows.
    Section 32(5) is expressly  subject  to  s.33.   It  follows  that  the
    deportation order under s.32(5) cannot  be  made  in  circumstances  in
    which s.33 prevents it being made.  Accordingly, the Secretary of State
    is required to consider whether s.33 applies,  before  the  deportation
    order can be made.  Considering whether s.33 applies is  equivalent  to
    considering whether s.32(5) applies: if the one  does  not  apply,  the
    other does.  It is only once the Secretary of State  has  decided  that
    s.32(5) applies (which decision is appealable, and notice of which  has
    to be served on the person affected), that the deportation order is  to
    be made.  It follows, in Mr Gill's  submission  that  a  decision  that
    s.32(5) applies must be made before the deportation order is made.  The
    Secretary of State's invocation of s.34 is incorrect: it may be for the
    Secretary of State to decide when the deportation order  is  made,  but
    that cannot permit the Secretary of State to make a  deportation  order
    at a time when she cannot lawfully make such an order.  Further,  if  a
    deportation order has already been made, it is "an unlawful  fetter  on
    the  process  of  assessing  the  relevant  article  8   considerations
    resulting in appealable  decision".   Thus,  there  can  be  no  proper
    consideration of the applicability of s.32(5), including  any  relevant
    s.33 exceptions, if the decision-maker is working in the context of the
    orders having already been made.  In  Mr  Gill's  written  skeleton  he
    asserts:

           "It flaws both decisions, which in this case are the deportation
           order and the decision concluding that it has to be made".

11. Mr Gill's  argument  is  accordingly  that  in  the  present  case  the
    deportation order was unlawfully made, because it was made  too  early,
    and the decision that s. 32(5) applies was unlawful because it was made
    in the context of an existing deportation order.

Error of Law

12. There are two, possibly three, errors of law in  paragraph  23  of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal's  determination.   The  first,   and   the   most
    important, is that the decision referred to in that paragraph is not  a
    decision that was for the Tribunal's consideration.  In  a  deportation
    under s.32 of the 2007 Act, there is no "decision to deport".   Such  a
    decision is made in the case of a  discretionary  deportation  decision
    under the Immigration Act 1971 ("the 1971 Act"), and carries a right of
    appeal as an immigration decision under s.82(2)(j)  of  the  2002  Act.
    But as subsection (3A) of s.82 makes clear, that is not the process  in
    the case of an automatic deportation.  There, there are two events: the
    making of the deportation order  (which  does  not  carry  a  right  of
    appeal) and the decision that s.32(5) applies (which does).

13. The First-tier Tribunal had concluded in the  preceding  paragraphs  of
    its determination that the deportation order must in  all  cases  post-
    date the appealable decision.  That was also wrong, for reasons which I
    shall set out.  If it had been right, it  might  have  meant  that  the
    deportation order itself could have been challenged in  another  forum.
    The decision that s.32(5)  is  in  those  circumstances  also  "not  in
    accordance with the law" would have required an  investigation  of  the
    circumstances in which such a decision could lawfully be made after the
    making of an (ex hypothesei invalid) deportation  order.   Although  Mr
    Gill made submissions on that issue to me, and perhaps  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, the conclusion that having the events occur in the order
    they did in this case invalidates the decision as  well  as  the  order
    appears to be wholly unreasoned in the First-tier Tribunal's  decision;
    and the reference in paragraph 23 to the "decision to deport" makes  it
    clear, in my judgement, that the Tribunal was confused.

14. The second error was the failure to consider  the  article  8  grounds:
    that was an error because s.86(2) required the  Tribunal  to  determine
    "any matter raised as a ground of appeal".   Although the failure to do
    so was clearly an error of law in this case, it is not  one  for  which
    the Tribunal should be criticised.  Despite the terms of s.86(2) it  is
    very often proper for a First-tier Tribunal to determine that,  because
    an appellant succeeds on one or more of his grounds, it is  unnecessary
    to  consider  the  others.   In  those  circumstances,   to   issue   a
    determination dealing with  the  grounds  on  which  the  appellant  is
    successful alone is an effective, economical and (despite s.86)  proper
    way of the Tribunal's performance of its duties.  On an appeal, if  the
    First-tier Tribunal's primary conclusion was correct, then although the
    failure to determine all the matters raised as grounds of appeal  is  a
    technical error of law, it will not cause the determination to  be  set
    aside: in those circumstances, the First-tier Tribunal's  determination
    will stand as the determination of the appeal.

15. Where, however, the  First-tier  Tribunal's  reason  for  allowing  the
    appeal on the grounds it did consider is one which on appeal  is  found
    itself to be erroneous in law, the unfortunate consequence is that  the
    view has to be taken in retrospect that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
    obliged to determine the other grounds as well.  In such circumstances,
    therefore, the error constituted by the breach of s.86(2)  acquires  an
    importance, because, owing to the failure to deal with what have  again
    become important  issues  in  the  appeal,  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    determination cannot stand.  That is the position here.

16. As I indicated above, there is a third possible error in  paragraph  23
    of the Tribunal's decision.  In the second sentence, the Tribunal says:

           "Given the fundamental nature  of  the  respondent's  error,  we
           remit the matter back to the respondent  for  the  error  to  be
           remedied".

17. Ignoring the pleonasm of "remit back" I think it is in general doubtful
    whether the First-tier Tribunal has jurisdiction to remit a matter to a
    decision-maker.  It has a power to allow or dismiss an appeal;  and  if
    allowing an appeal it has a power to give directions,  with  which  the
    Secretary of State must comply.  It does not formally have the power to
    quash the decision under appeal, but  it  is  well  understood  that  a
    decision of the Tribunal to the effect that the  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the law prevents the decision-maker from relying on  it
    or acting on it, so that it is to that extent of no effect.   In  those
    circumstances, if the decision is one which results from an application
    made by  an  individual,  the  position  is  that  the  application  is
    outstanding, awaiting a lawful decision.   No  remittal  is  necessary.
    Any circumstances arising from the fact that an application has not yet
    been decided (for example under s.3C of the 1971 Act, or  s.77  of  the
    2002 Act) will continue,  and  will  be  treated  as  not  having  been
    interrupted by the unlawful decision.  If there is any doubt about  the
    matter, the First-tier Tribunal, in allowing the appeal, can direct the
    decision-maker to treat the applicant accordingly.

18. If, on the other hand, the decision is one which results  not  from  an
    application but from the Secretary of State's own motion (for  example,
    deportation, removal, curtailment) the  Tribunal's  determination  that
    the decision was an unlawful one simply leaves the matter open,  as  it
    was before.  The Secretary  of  State  cannot  continue  to  treat  the
    appellant as though the decision under appeal had been  a  lawful  one.
    Again, if necessary, that can be made clear by a direction;  but  there
    the First-tier Tribunal's  jurisdiction  stops.   In  cases  where  the
    Secretary of  State  is  the  initiator  of  actions,  it  is  not  the
    Tribunal's function to  suggest  that  such  action  ought  to  be  re-
    initiated.

19. The parties have a right of appeal  against  the  direction  itself  by
    virtue of s.87(4) of the 2002 Act, and it  is  therefore  open  to  the
    Secretary of State to challenge a direction if she considers that it is
    not the  appropriate  one  for  carrying  into  effect  the  Tribunal's
    determination.  If it is not challenged, the Secretary  of  State  must
    comply with it: s.87(2) and (3).  For these  reasons  it  is  essential
    that any direction that is given is clear, so that  the  decision-maker
    can know whether it needs to be challenged, and so that  everybody  can
    know whether or not it has been complied with.

20. In the present case the purported remittal in para 23 must be  supposed
    to be a direction, because  it  is  not  merely  the  allowing  or  the
    dismissing of the appeal.  If it is a direction, it is a direction "for
    the error to be remedied".  The Tribunal had no  jurisdiction  to  give
    any view on the validity of  the  deportation  order  itself.   It  had
    apparently decided that a notice that s.32(5) applied to the  appellant
    was, because dated after the deportation order, unlawful.  It is wholly
    unclear how the Tribunal considered that the matter could be  remedied;
    and it would accordingly be wholly unclear whether the matter had  been
    remedied by any subsequent action by the Secretary of State.

21. For these reasons I have concluded that the Secretary of State's second
    ground has merit.  The Tribunal's determination contains  an  error  of
    law and I set it aside.

The interpretation of ss 32(5) and 33

22. That leaves again  for  determination  the  principal  question.   That
    question is, in my judgement, rather more complex than  the  First-tier
    Tribunal appear to have appreciated.  Mr Gill's primary submission,  at
    first sight attractive although, as I shall explain, wrong, is that, if
    the decision that s.32(5)  applies  post-dates  the  deportation  order
    itself, the process is unlawful.  But the Tribunal has no  jurisdiction
    to determine the general lawfulness of the process: it has jurisdiction
    only in relation  to  the  decision  that  s.32(5)  applies.   For  the
    appellant to succeed in this argument, therefore, he needs to show both
    that the process is unlawful and that, as a result, the  decision  that
    s.32(5) applies is an unlawful decision.  That submission is  not  even
    immediately attractive.  If, as a matter of law, Decision A  must  pre-
    date Decision B, it is easy to see that Decision B might be unlawful if
    it preceded Decision A; but it is by no  means  so  easy  to  see  that
    Decision A, which should anyway have been the earlier,  is  invalidated
    by being illegally preceded by Decision B.  In those circumstances  the
    more obvious conclusion would be that Decision A was unaffected by  the
    illegality, but opened the doors to a lawful Decision B now being made.



23. In order to discover whether either of these arguments can succeed,  it
    is necessary to consider the statutory provisions in  some  detail.   I
    should say that I do not for a moment doubt  that  the  normal  process
    envisaged is that a decision that s.32(5) applies will be  made  before
    the deportation order is signed, and that, as a result, the  appealable
    notice that s.32(5) applies will be dated before, or on the  same  date
    as, the deportation order itself.  The question is whether the reversal
    of  the  dates  invalidates  the  process  and,  if  so,  what  is  the
    consequence for an appeal before the Tribunal.

24. Section 32(5) contains the rule: a  deportation  order  must  be  made.
    Section 32(5) is  subject  to  s.33,  which  contains  the  exceptions.
    Although a number of the exceptions (such as a claim  under  the  Human
    Rights Act) may require assessment and judgment, none is  a  matter  of
    discretion.  If an exception applies, s.32(5) does not apply,  although
    a deportation order under the 1971 Act may  be  made  as  a  matter  of
    discretion.  If no exception applies, s.32(5) has its mandatory effect.



25. Once a deportation order under s.32(5) has been made, the circumstances
    in which it can be revoked are limited, and, for present purposes, very
    interesting.   If  the  appellant  is  in  the  United   Kingdom,   the
    deportation order can be revoked only in the circumstances set  out  in
    s.32(6)(a), and s.34(4).   Section  32(6)(a)  necessarily  envisages  a
    situation in which, after the deportation  order  has  been  made,  the
    Secretary of State reaches a  view  that  an  exception  applies.   The
    section does not specify how such a thing might  happen,  but  the  two
    obvious possibilities are (a) that the person  affected  persuades  the
    Secretary of State that some matter previously brought to her attention
    establishes an exception and (b) that some new matter is brought to the
    Secretary of State's attention which,  alone  or  in  combination  with
    matters of which she was  previously  aware,  establish  an  exception.
    Experience suggests that such representations  will  very  often  be  a
    claim  that  deportation  would  breach  some  person's  human  rights.
    Clearly the Secretary of State must deal with the representations.   If
    indeed she is persuaded of their force, she will reach  the  conclusion
    that an exception applies (whether or not it applied at the time of the
    making of the order itself) and is entitled, under s.32(6)(a) to revoke
    the deportation order.  If she is not persuaded by the representations,
    then s.32(6)(a) does not apply and she is not entitled  to  revoke  the
    deportation order.  It must stand.

26. Before examining Mr Gill's submissions in the light of those  statutory
    provisions, I must refer to s.34(4)  which  sets  out  the  only  other
    circumstances in which a deportation order made under  s.32(5)  can  be
    revoked while the person affected is in the United Kingdom.  The making
    of a deportation has a number of effects, including the invalidation of
    any leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom that has been  given
    to the person at any time.  That is the effect of s.5(1)  of  the  1971
    Act, as made applicable to automatic deportations by s.3(5)(a) of  that
    Act and s.32(4) of the 2007 Act.  Thus, if the  deportation  order  has
    been made, it may not be possible to take certain  other  action  under
    the Immigration Acts or the Immigration Rules.  For these purposes  the
    Secretary of State is entitled to revoke the deportation order for  the
    sole purpose of taking such action, and on the  clear  condition  that,
    following such action, there  will  be  a  new  decision  that  s.32(5)
    applies and a new deportation order.  Section 34 permits only temporary
    revocation.  Whatever other actions or decisions take place whilst  the
    order is revoked, they take place solely on the basis  that  the  order
    will be re-made in due course.

27. If Mr Gill's submissions are correct, and the  appealable  notice  that
    s.32(5) must pre-date the deportation order and is necessarily unlawful
    if it does not, a number of surprising and in my judgement unacceptable
    consequences would follow.  In essence, the Secretary of State would be
    prevented  from  considering  any  new  submissions  made   after   the
    deportation order was signed.  She could not consider them  and  reject
    them in a new notice that s.32(5) applied,  because  that  would  be  a
    notice post-dating the deportation order, which she  could  not  revoke
    for the purpose of considering the submissions.  Further, on the  basis
    of Mr Gill's second submission, she could not lawfully consider them at
    all, because, as he put it, her judgement would be fettered by the fact
    that the deportation order had already been  made.   That  last  factor
    throws doubt upon whether she could even consider such submissions  and
    accept them.  Once it is brought to her attention  that  her  judgement
    would be clouded by the fact that the deportation order has been  made,
    it is difficult to know how that factor ought to be taken into account.
     The truth of the matter is that  the  statute  clearly  envisages  the
    possibility of reconsideration of a person's case, and  revocation  (or
    at any rate permanent revocation) of the deportation order  only  if  a
    s.33 exception applies.  That reconsideration necessarily has  to  take
    place under the shadow of the deportation order; it necessarily results
    in the deportation order remaining in  place  unless  an  exception  is
    applicable; and it necessarily results in a decision that s.38  applies
    that post-dates the deportation order.

28. It follows from this that the mere fact  that  a  notice  that  s.32(5)
    applies post-dates  the  deportation  order  cannot  be  a  reason  for
    concluding that an illegal process has been followed.

29. That  may  not  be  regarded  quite  as  answering  Mr  Gill's  primary
    submission which is that the decision that s.32(5) applies  to  a  case
    must, as a matter of the rationality of the making of  the  deportation
    order, precede the making of that order.  To that  there  is  a  simple
    answer.  The making of the deportation order expressly under s.32(5) is
    a decision that s.32(5) applies to the case.   To  treat  it  otherwise
    would be bizarre.

30. That is not, however, the end of the matter, because the decision  that
    s.32(5) applies is an  appealable  decision,  and,  under  the  Notices
    Regulations, an appealable decision must be served with the reasons for
    the decision.  The prospective appellant thus  knows  the  case  he  is
    meeting.  But I do not think it can be said for a moment that, even  in
    a case where there were no new submissions  after  the  making  of  the
    deportation order, the dating of the notice  required  by  the  Notices
    Regulations can invalidate either it or  the  deportation  order.   The
    sole purpose of the notice is to generate and facilitate the  right  of
    appeal.  It is not an essential part of the process envisaged by  ss.32
    -  34  of  the  2007  Act.   (This  is  in  contrast  to  discretionary
    deportation orders made  directly  under  the  1971  Act.   There,  the
    appealable notice of decision is a part of the  statutory  process,  as
    s.79 of the 2002 Act makes clear.  Section  79  specifically  does  not
    apply to automatic deportation.)  The dating of the  statement  of  the
    reasons for the decision is not, and cannot reasonably be  read  as,  a
    conclusion  that  those  reasons  were  only   identified   after   the
    deportation order was made.

31. Mr Gill also sought to draw comfort from s.36.   He  pointed  out  that
    strict interpretation is required where detention is  permitted.   That
    may be so: but s.36 does not assist him.  In sub-section (1)  detention
    is permitted under certain  circumstances  before  the  making  of  the
    deportation order: but it cannot properly be said that that sub-section
    indicates that those circumstances, or either of them,  have  to  exist
    before the order is made; and they are also necessary in order to allow
    the Secretary  of  State  to  maintain  detention  during  the  s.34(4)
    process.   Sub-section  (2)  applies  the  Immigration  Act  powers  of
    detention to those subject to automatic deportation.   The  purpose  of
    the whole section is clearly to bring powers of detention of those  who
    are or may be subject to automatic deportation  into  line  with  those
    applying to persons subject to discretionary deportation.

32. I think nothing of the Secretary of  State's  submission  that  because
    s.34(1) does not specify an order of events,  no  particular  order  of
    events is required.  If Mr Gill  had  persuaded  me  that  the  statute
    required the notice that s.32(5) applied to bear a date no  later  than
    that of the deportation  order,  s  34(1)  would  not  have  saved  the
    decision is this case.  But he has not done so.

33. Nevertheless, in my judgement, Mr  Gill's  submission  falls  at  every
    hurdle.  So far as the 2007 Act is concerned, the  proposition  that  a
    person will only make a deportation order under s.32(5)  if  he  thinks
    that s.32(5) applies is too obvious to need  specific  statement.   The
    making of the deportation order under that sub-section is the  clearest
    possible indication that the decision-maker has decided that  the  sub-
    section applies.  So far as the 2002 Act is concerned,  s.82(3A)  makes
    it clear that in these circumstances there is  no  appeal  against  the
    deportation order itself, but only against the decision.   The  Notices
    Regulations therefore require  the  reasons  for  the  decision  to  be
    communicated to the person affected.  If the date of the notice  giving
    those reasons is a few days after the deportation order, that of itself
    can give not the slightest ground for suspicion that the person  making
    the deportation order had no reason for  doing  so.   If  it  is  dated
    later,  that  may  (but  need  not)  be  because  there  has   been   a
    reconsideration of the person's case.  In either event, the  mere  fact
    that the notice bears a decision after that of the deportation order is
    no ground for saying that the deportation order was made unlawfully or,
    in particular, that the reasons are unlawful.  I  therefore  reject  Mr
    Gill's primary submission relating to the  nature  and  timing  of  the
    process.

34. I turn now to  Mr  Gill's  second  submission,  which  related  to  the
    decision-making process in circumstances where  the  deportation  order
    had already been made.  The submission was that, if  the  reasons  were
    properly to be characterised as having been formulated only on the date
    of the notice, they were bad in law because a decision-maker could  not
    properly look at the case, taking all relevant factors into account, if
    he or another person had already made a deportation order  which  would
    have been, on Mr Gill's submissions, an order which could  not  in  law
    yet have been made.  This is a very bold  submission,  and  it  appears
    again to carry the implication that, where such an order had been  made
    no further consideration of the  case  could  take  place  without  the
    erection of some sort of "Chinese wall" in the Home Office preventing a
    subsequent decision-maker from knowing that  a  previous  decision  had
    been made.

35. That submission is wholly unrealistic.  It is a frequent feature of the
    administration of immigration control that the Secretary of  State  and
    other decision-makers reconsider decisions that have already been made.
     Entry Clearance Officers reconsider visa refusals in the light of  new
    materials and arguments; the  Secretary  of  State  acts  similarly  in
    relation to her own decisions both on  applications  and  on  decisions
    made of her own motion.  There are provisions in the Immigration  Rules
    (for example paragraph 353A of the Statement of Changes in  Immigration
    Rules, HC 395) and in the Secretary of State's  published  instructions
    to staff that require new submissions and new factors to be taken  into
    account.  In the vast majority of cases such considerations fall to  be
    taken into account where there has already been  an  adverse  decision.
    The Secretary of  State's  staff  are  well  practiced  in  determining
    whether an adverse decision should stand or should be varied or revoked
    in the light of new or re-emphasised material.  There can be no general
    doubt that they are capable of performing that task and do perform  it:
    it would in my judgement require very specific facts  to  show  that  a
    decision-maker has been so influenced by the existing decision that  he
    was unable to consider properly the circumstances as a whole.

36. Of course the situation envisaged by Mr Gill is slightly  different  in
    two respects.  First, the earlier decision was in Mr Gill's  submission
    unlawful, and secondly  the  decision-maker  is  not  responding  to  a
    challenge but merely justifying the earlier deportation  order.   Those
    are indeed differences.  But even if Mr Gill  was  right  to  say  that
    there has been no decision that s.32(5) applies until the signature and
    date are placed on the notice of that decision, there would again  need
    to be clear evidence to demonstrate that  the  person  formulating  the
    reasons has been unable to do so fairly in the context of the  decision
    having already been made.

37. The right of appeal is against the decision that s.32(5) applies.  Such
    a decision is not rendered unlawful by bearing a date after that of the
    deportation order, either  on  the  basis  that  combination  of  dates
    necessarily indicates a failure of due process or on the basis that  it
    necessarily indicates that the person giving  the  reasons  was  unable
    fairly to consider the case.  The appellant's first ground of appeal to
    the First-tier Tribunal therefore is to be rejected.   The  appellant's
    second ground of appeal is based on article 8.   The  relevant  matters
    were considered by Judge Grubb, and no  doubt  his  determination  will
    have an impact on the final determination at the  present  appeal,  but
    those grounds need to be considered by the First-tier Tribunal.

38. The First-tier Tribunal's determination contains errors  on  points  of
    law.  I set it aside.  I remit the  case  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    under s.12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcements  Act  2007.   I
    make no directions as to the constitution of the Tribunal, but I direct
    that the appellant's first ground of appeal be determined in accordance
    with this determination.








                                                              C M G OCKELTON

VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                           Date: 4 July 2014
