

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

   Wang and Chin (extension of time for appealing) [2013] UKUT 00343 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 5th June 2013                              |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                      Mr C M G Ockelton, Vice President
                         Upper Tribunal Judge McKee
                    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McCarthy

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                YUAN YUAN WANG
                                KIM HAI CHIN

                                                                 Respondents
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Allan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr John Walsh, instructed by Stephen & Richard
Solicitors LLP

When considering an application for permission to  appeal  that  is  out  of
time, a judge  must  (i)  consider  all  available  material  including  the
material on file and bear in  mind  the  need  for  evidence  to  rebut  the
presumption of service, (ii) consider the extent of the  delay  and  whether
any explanation covers the whole of that period; (iii)  give  brief  reasons
for the discretionary decision to extend time or refuse to do so.  The  same
principles apply whichever side is the applicant.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of  State.   The  respondents  ("the
    claimants") are nationals of Malaysia, husband  and  wife.   The  first
    respondent ("the claimant") appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against
    the decision of the Secretary of State on 22 December 2011 refusing her
    leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom.   The  second  respondent  had
    applied and appealed as her dependent: it is  common  ground  that  the
    outcome of his appeal depended upon that of the claimant.  Following  a
    hearing on 9 February 2012, Judge Y J Jones issued  her  determination.
    She concluded that the  claimant  had  failed  to  show  that  she  was
    entitled to leave under the Immigration Rules, but allowed  her  appeal
    under Article 8 on the basis that it  would  not  be  proportionate  to
    remove the claimants or require them to leave the United Kingdom  given
    the length of their residence here.  The Secretary  of  State  now  has
    permission to appeal against that decision.

 2. This appeal raises a difficult procedural question.  In  the  interests
    of clarity, although at the expense of logic, we  shall  consider  that
    question after dealing with the substance of the appeal.

 3. The claimant first came to the United Kingdom on 23 October 2001.   She
    had entry clearance as a student.  Her entry clearance as a student was
    extended and was due to expire on 31 October 2007.  On 10 October 2006,
    however, the claimant was granted leave until 10 October 2011 as a work
    permit holder.  Her work was to be for MHL Trading  Ltd  and  work  for
    that concern was a condition of her leave.

 4. The evidence showed that in March 2009 she was ill and unable to  work,
    certainly until the end of July  or  later.   Approached  by  MHL,  she
    agreed to take unpaid leave in order to assist the company's  financial
    difficulty.  By February 2010 she was well enough to  work,  and  began
    doing a certain amount of occasional work and more regular work for the
    Workers' Education Association (WEA).  She regarded herself,  according
    to her evidence, as still committed to MHL and awaiting return to  work
    for them.  In August 2011 she was informed that she  had  been  removed
    from the payroll, following a change in ownership of that company.  The
    application leading to the refusal under appeal was made on  7  October
    2011.

 5. The evidence before the judge showed that the claimant  had  previously
    worked for WEA, apparently entirely legally as it was incidental.  But,
    in the more recent period, she had in essence ceased to  work  for  MHL
    and obtained a considerable income from her work with WEA.

 6. The claimant clearly could not now meet the requirements of  the  rules
    relating to employees, nor could she benefit from the "long  residence"
    provisions of paragraph 276B of the Statement of Changes in Immigration
    Rules, HC 395 (which has since been  superseded),  because  of  earlier
    short breaks in her lawful residence owing to late  applications.   The
    judge's findings on the parts of the evidence  relevant  to  her  final
    decision are as follows:

           "61.  Although  I  find  the  first  appellant  to  be  generally
        credible I do not believe that she knowing that she  was  permitted
        to work for MHL Trading Limited, did not understand that she  could
        [not] go off and work for another  company  without  informing  the
        Home Office.  The work permit plainly enabled her to work  for  MHL
        Trading Limited.  If there was no limitation on the employment then
        the work permit would be issued on the  basis  that  she  would  be
        employed for the next  five  years.   I  find  that  she  may  have
        convinced herself of this situation and relied on legal advice that
        she was given on the basis that she was employed full time  by  MHL
        Company Limited.  She was advised as is set out in the  MacDonald's
        extract that  she  could  undertake  supplementary  work  not  work
        instead of her employment with MHL Limited.  The picture is of  the
        first appellant burying her head in the sand until the time came to
        apply for indefinite leave to remain.  As soon as she was placed on
        unpaid leave she should have contacted the Home  Office  under  the
        terms of her permit.  Furthermore she earned a  substantial  amount
        with WEA and she was not receiving any income from MHL and had  not
        received income since July 2009.  She was clearly fit for work from
        November 2009 and indeed undertook work other than  with  MHL  from
        that date until her work permit expired.
                   ...

             65.  In  this  case  also  the  first  appellant  breached  the
        conditions of her work  permit  leave  from  2009  onwards  by  not
        informing the respondent that she was no  longer  employed  by  MHL
        Company Limited and was working for WEA.  I  accept  that  in  2009
        between March and November she was very unwell  but  once  she  had
        recovered and continued working for WEA  on  a  regular  basis  she
        should have reported the fact of the  change  of  employer  to  the
        respondent.  I therefore find  that  she  and  her  husband  cannot
        benefit from the long residence rule as she has not had  continuous
        lawful residence in the UK for a period of ten years".

 7. In dealing with Article 8, the judge set out the Razgar questions,  and
    noted that the removal of the claimants together  would  not  interfere
    with their family life.  She then said this:

          "68. The issue here is whether the appellants have  established  a
        private life in the UK and once again it cannot be denied that they
        have been here for  a  period  of  ten  years  and  have  built  up
        relationships, friends and work in the  UK.   There  is  supporting
        evidence in respect of this from Mr  Steve  Marshall  and  Mrs  Lee
        which shows that the appellants have been industrious during  their
        time spent in the UK and have undertaken a  substantial  amount  of
        volunteering in support of the Chinese community in the UK.  I have
        no doubt that they have worked hard and contributed to their  local
        community.  The first appellant has told me that their life is  now
        in the UK and that Malaysia seems a distant place to them.  I  find
        that they have established a private life in the UK.

              69.  The  following  questions  in  Razgar  I  answer  in  the
        affirmative.

             70. In respect of  proportionality  I  have  to  weigh  in  the
        balance those factors in favour of  the  appellants  in  particular
        whether it is necessary and proportionate to remove the  appellants
        from the UK when  they  are  so  well  established  here.   I  have
        sympathy for the appellants who no doubt consider their breaches in
        continuous lawful residence were not of their making and the breach
        of the conditions of the first  appellant's  work  permit  occurred
        because of the  first  appellant's  illness  and  then  the  unfair
        treatment by the Li family as a result  of  her  illness.   All  of
        which are not disputed by the respondent.

            71.  Against the appellants are the facts  that  they  have  not
        complied with the Immigration Rules, they do not have close  family
        in the UK and they do not  own  property  in  the  UK.   They  have
        transportable  working  skills  and  could  resume  their  life  in
        Malaysia where it is still the case that they have  spent  most  of
        their lives.  They no doubt have family and friends in Malaysia and
        can return there to continue their private and family life.

             72. However overall their conduct has been commendable and  the
        breaks in their lawful residence can be considered unfortunate  and
        probably not of their own making.  They have  produced  substantial
        documentary evidence and live evidence to support their  claims  in
        respect of their  lives  in  the  UK.   No  doubt  they  have  been
        extremely concerned about the outcome of this case.

             73. On the balance of probabilities I find  that  weighing  all
        the  factors  in  the  balance  that  it  is   not   necessary   or
        proportionate to remove these appellants  and  that  their  removal
        would amount to a substantial interference in their private life in
        the UK.  This decision will not result in them obtaining  immediate
        indefinite leave to remain in the UK but may do in  the  future  if
        they pay more attention to the legalities involved in the privilege
        of being allowed to remain in the UK".

 8. Thus she allowed the claimants'  appeals.   The  Secretary  of  State's
    grounds for permission are, so far as material, as follows:

             "1. ... At paragraph 61 of the determination,  the  Immigration
        Judge does not believe that the appellant was not  aware  that  she
        was not permitted to take employment with a company other than that
        stated  on  her  work  permit.   However,  when  carrying  out  the
        balancing exercise, the Immigration Judge states at paragraph 70 of
        the determination that he has  sympathy  for  the  appellants,  but
        finds that they  have  not  complied  with  the  immigration  rules
        (paragraph 71 of the determination).   It  is  submitted  that  the
        Immigration Judge's findings lack clarity.

               2. The  appellants  will  be  removed  together,  there  will
        therefore be no breach  of  their  family  rights  which  they  can
        continue in Malaysia where they have spent the  majority  of  their
        adult  lives.   As  acknowledged  by  the  Immigration  Judge,  the
        appellants have no  property  in  the  UK  and  have  transportable
        skills.   The  private  life  they  have  established  set  out  at
        paragraph  68  of  the  determination   is   also   one   that   is
        transportable.  It is submitted  that  the  Immigration  Judge  has
        failed to make any or  adequate  findings  on  why  the  appellants
        cannot  continue  their  private  life  in  Malaysia   with   their
        transportable skills and maintain contact through modern  means  of
        communication.

              3.  The  Immigration  Judge  notes  that  the  breaks  in  the
        appellants leave, preventing them from being granted ILR under  the
        Immigration Rules is unfortunate.  It is submitted that this  could
        be regarded as a near miss situation and the Immigration Judge  has
        failed to give adequate reasons for finding  that  the  immigration
        rules should not prevail over the appellants Article 8 rights.   MM
        & SA Pakistan 2010 UKUT 481 (IAC) (paragraph 28). Judicial decision
        makers should be careful to identify and reject arguments based  on
        alleged near-miss, which, on proper analysis,  are  an  attempt  to
        import extraneous qualifications into a provision of  the  rules...
        Such  factors  might  have  a  legitimate  part  to  play  in   the
        proportionality exercise, as weighing in favour of an applicant who
        has an independently strong private or family life case;  but  they
        should not be used to diminish  the  weight  to  be  given  to  the
        consideration described in paragraph 16 of Huang 2007 UKHL".

 9. The grounds were the subject of submissions to us by Mr Allan; he  said
    that the position was that the decision to allow  the  appeal  was  not
    sufficiently clearly  reasoned.   The  judge  had  failed  properly  to
    balance negative  factors  against  the  positive  ones  that  she  had
    identified.  The judge had found that the claimants' work  skills  were
    transportable, and that they could resume their lives in Malaysia.  The
    judge  had  failed  to  afford  sufficient  weight  to  the  claimant's
    inability to meet the requirements of the immigration  rules.   We  did
    not need to call on Mr Walsh to  reply  to  the  Secretary  of  State's
    grounds.

10. It is perfectly clear to us that  the  judge  took  into  account  both
    positive and negative factors in making her assessment of the Article 8
    rights of the claimant and the claimants together.  She  was  obviously
    aware that she had made some negative credibility findings: that is  no
    doubt what she had in mind when she said that "overall" the  claimant's
    conduct had been commendable.  There had been  no  curtailment  of  the
    claimant's leave, and the reference to breaks in "lawful residence" can
    therefore refer only to the short periods - totalling  20  days  in  10
    years - during which leave had expired before a renewal application had
    been made.

11. The fact that individuals could return to their own  country  and  live
    there does not of itself mean that it would be proportionate to require
    them to do so.  The  question  of  proportionality  was  a  matter  for
    assessment by the judge.  Her conclusion was neither irrational nor  in
    any other way defective in public law terms.  The Secretary of  State's
    appeal accordingly falls to be dismissed.

12. We return now to the procedural difficulties.  These arise out  of  the
    process by which the Secretary of State sought and obtained  permission
    to appeal.  The date typed on the judge's determination as the date  of
    promulgation is "20.02.2012." on both the claimants' Tribunal files are
    copies  of  a  covering  letter  indicating  in  each  case  that   the
    determination was sent by post on 21  February  2012  to  the  parties,
    including  the  Secretary  of  State's  Presenting  Officers'  Unit  in
    Cardiff.  The letter is annotated to indicate that  the  determinations
    were sent to each of the recipients by first class mail.   The  letters
    correctly indicate that any application for permission to appeal needed
    to be made within five days  of  receipt  of  the  determination.   The
    Secretary of State was also directed to pay to each  of  the  claimants
    the amount the judge had awarded by  way  of  recovery  of  fees.   The
    Secretary of State's application for permission was  not  made  shortly
    after that date.  It was made on 18 October 2012.  The explanation  for
    the lateness reads, in full, as follows:

        "Enquiries made with the  IAC  have  confirmed  that  although  the
        determination was promulgated on 20th February it was not  received
        by UKBA, a request for a second copy was made  on  or  around  20th
        February 2012, this was not  acted  upon  until  on  or  around  15
        October 2012.  The copy was received in the Specialist Appeals Team
        on 17th October 2012.  Due to the delay in receiving  this  allowed
        determination, permission is respectfully  sought  to  lodge  these
        grounds out of time".

13. The judge responsible for determining the permission application  dealt
    with this delay of nearly eight months as follows, also in full:

        "There is an  out  of  time  application  on  this  file.   I  have
        considered the reasons given in Section B as to why the application
        has been made out of time.  In light of this explanation  I  extend
        time".

14.  Both  the  application  and  the  manner  of  dealing  with  it  raise
    considerable concerns.

15. First, during the course of the hearing it  became  apparent  that  the
    truthfulness of the "explanation" provided by the  Secretary  of  State
    was in considerable doubt.  First, on its face the "explanation" cannot
    be right: even if the original determination had been sent out  on  the
    20th, which, according to the file, it was not, a second copy could not
    have been sought on or about the same date.  Secondly, the Secretary of
    State had on at least one previous occasion been sent  a  copy  of  the
    determination by those acting for the claimants, who tried to cause the
    Secretary of State to put  the  determination  into  effect.   Thirdly,
    despite the bold assertion that no copy of the determination  had  been
    received before 15 October 2012, it was apparent from the way in  which
    Mr Allan dealt with the matter, that the Secretary of State has  opened
    a number of different files under different reference numbers  relating
    to these claimants, and that there appears to  be  no  way  of  knowing
    whether the determinations were indeed  put  on  one  of  those  files.
    Indeed the letters to which we have referred have received no reply, it
    cannot be the case that if there is a communication to the Secretary of
    State dealing with these claimants, from whatever source, it  does  not
    arrive.  The letters must be somewhere, and perhaps  the  determination
    is with them.  So it seems to us that there simply was no  good  reason
    for the Secretary of State to assert the facts that  were  asserted  in
    the "explanation".

16. Secondly, the procedure rules provide, at rule 55(5) of the Asylum  and
    Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005  (which  still   govern
    proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal), that a  document  sent  by
    post from and to places within the  United  Kingdom  is  deemed  to  be
    served on the second day after it was sent,  "unless  the  contrary  is
    proved".  Proof requires evidence.   There  was  no  evidence  of  non-
    receipt by the Secretary of State tendered with the application or even
    referred to in it.  In these circumstances it is difficult to  see  how
    the judge could have been  satisfied  that  the  Secretary  of  State's
    "explanation" had been made out in the manner required for her to  make
    a decision in the Secretary of State's favour.

17. Thirdly, it appears to us that the judge's treatment of the matter, and
    her decision to extend time by many months, is  simply  not  adequately
    dealt with in her decision.  A permission decision  on  the  papers  is
    necessarily short, but it ought nevertheless to give some indication of
    the process by which a judge has reached a conclusion which may well be
    contentious.  If she had considered the papers on the files, she  would
    have been aware of the two separate letters each enclosing  a  copy  of
    the determination sent to the Secretary of State on 21  February.   She
    must have been aware of the procedural rule requiring  non-delivery  to
    be proved.  Bearing in mind the length of the  delay,  she  might  have
    thought it right to consider whether the Secretary of State had left it
    unduly long to attempt to obtain a copy of the determination after  the
    hearing in February.  The decision was of course for her, but it needed
    to be a decision taking into account all relevant  matters  and  giving
    some indication of the reasons for it.  As written, her decision  gives
    no hint of her having appreciated the difficulties we have mentioned.

18. It is for those reasons that, following the grant  of  permission,  the
    claimants sought to challenge the judge's extension of time, and before
    us Mr Walsh argued that we had  jurisdiction  to  reverse  the  judge's
    decision to extend time.  Mr Allan's position was that even  though  in
    this case the extension of time had been obtained on  the  basis  of  a
    misstatement by the Secretary of State, and without the  evidence  that
    the Secretary of State ought  to  have  provided,  it  was  in  essence
    unchallengeable and that he was entitled  to  rely  on  a  decision  so
    obtained.

19. Because of our view as to  the  merits  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
    appeal,  we  think  it  is  unnecessary  to  determine  that  issue  of
    jurisdiction  in  these  proceedings.   Clearly  it  has  some  general
    relevance in the interpretation of the  Upper  Tribunal's  jurisdiction
    across all chambers, and it would perhaps not be  right  to  express  a
    concluded view from this chamber alone.

20. It is, however, clear that a judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  dealing
    with a permission application which is out of time needs to ensure that
    he  or  she  has  considered  all  the  available  material,  including
    indications of when the determination was sent and whether there is any
    evidence that it was not received in accordance with the deemed service
    provisions of the Procedural  Rules.   The  judge  will  also  need  to
    consider  the  extent  of  the  delay  and  whether  the  evidence   or
    explanations provided cover the whole  of  that  delay.   The  decision
    whether to extend time is the exercise of a  judicial  discretion,  and
    there should normally  be  reasons,  which  may  well  be  very  brief,
    supporting the decision reached.  The same rules apply  whether  it  is
    the individual or the government that seeks an extension of time.

21. For the reasons given at paragraphs 10 and 11  above,  this  appeal  is
    dismissed.








                                                              C M G OCKELTON

VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                           Date: 8 July 2013
