

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

           Ihemedu (OFMs - meaning) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00340(IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 16 May 2011                                |                             |
|                                              |17 August 2011               |


                                   Before

                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE STOREY



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ADEPOJU OLADAPO IHEMEDU


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Respondent/Claimant: Mr O Yehinni, Solicitor, Supreme Solicitors
For the Appellant/SSHD:                  Ms J Isherwood, Home Office
Presenting Officer

i) Article 3(2) of Directive 2004/38/EC ("Citizens Directive") treats  other
family members ("OFMs") as a residual category and,  in  contrast  to  close
family members ("CFMs") within the meaning of Article 2(2), does  not  limit
it to particular types of relatives (plus spouses or civil partners).  There
is nothing in the Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006
akin to the Immigration Appeals (Family Visitor) Regulations 2003  which  in
our domestic immigration law seeks to specify  exhaustively  the  categories
of family relationship  that  can  qualify  a  person.  Only  relatives  are
covered, albeit with focus on those relatives with whom  the  Union  citizen
has significant factual ties.

ii) An important  consideration in the context  of  an  OFM/extended  family
member case is that if a claimant had come to the UK without applying for  a
family permit from abroad (for which provision is made  in  reg  12  of  the
Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006), this will mean  that
the UK  authorities  have  been  prevented  from  conducting  the  extensive
examination of the individual's  personal  circumstances  envisaged  by  reg
12(3) and in the course of  such  an  examination  check  the  documentation
submitted. If an applicant chooses not to apply from  abroad  for  a  family
permit under reg  12  of  the  2006  Regulations,  thereby  denying  the  UK
authorities an opportunity to check documentation in the country  concerned,
he cannot expect any relaxation in the burden of proof that applies  to  him
when seeking to establish an EEA right.

iii)  Regulation  17(4)  makes  the  issue  of  a  residence  card   to   an
OFM/extended family member a matter of discretion. Where  the  Secretary  of
State has not yet exercised that discretion the most  an  Immigration  Judge
is entitled to do is to allow the appeal as being  not  in  accordance  with
the law leaving the matter of whether to exercise  this  discretion  in  the
appellant's favour or not to  the Secretary of State.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1. The respondent (hereafter "the Claimant") is a citizen of Nigeria.  On  5
November 2010 the appellant (hereafter "the  Secretary  of  State")  made  a
decision refusing to grant him a residence card pursuant to the  Immigration
(European Economic Area) Regulations  2006  ("the  2006  Regulations").  His
application for such a card was based on his being a  cousin  and  hence  an
"extended family member" of his sponsor, Mr John Kenneth Ihemedu, a  Belgian
national born in Nigeria in November 1973. The  respondent  did  not  accept
the two were related as claimed. The Claimant appealed.

2. In a determination  notified  on  21  January  2011  First-tier  Tribunal
judge, Immigration Judge Somerville,  noted the Claimant's evidence that  he
had gone to Belgium to live with the sponsor in  2008,  that  he  could  not
find a job  there  and  so  had  decided  to  come  to  the  United  Kingdom
illegally. The IJ also noted the sponsor's evidence that  he  had  lived  in
Belgium since 2002 and  that  between  2002  and  2005  he  was  financially
supporting the Claimant. Having set out their evidence the  IJ  went  on  to
make a finding that the two were related as claimed (para 15) and  that  the
Claimant was residing with the sponsor and was  dependent  on  him.  The  IJ
said he had seen a lease agreement relating to the property  in  the  United
Kingdom in which the sponsor, the sponsor's half brother  and  the  claimant
were all named as co-tenants. That sufficed for him  to  find  the  Claimant
and sponsor were residing together in the  UK.  As  to  dependency,  the  IJ
wrote: "...given that the [Claimant] is in the United Kingdom  illegally,  I
accept that he does not and indeed cannot work here and therefore I  further
accept that he is dependent on the sponsor". At para 17 the IJ concluded:


    "For these reasons I find that the [Claimant]  is  an  extended  family
    member of an EEA national who is in the UK exercising Treaty rights and
    is therefore entitled to a residence card".

3. Earlier, at para 13, the IJ had noted a submission  by  Mr  Yehinni  (who
also represented the Claimant then) that the Claimant, the sponsor  and  the
sponsor's half-brother had all  applied  at  the  same  time  but  only  the
claimant had been refused a residence permit.

4. The Secretary of State was successful in obtaining a grant of  permission
to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  The  Secretary  of  State's  grounds  were
twofold: first it was contended that  the  IJ  had  failed  to  address  the
concerns raised by the Secretary of State in the refusal  letter  about  the
evidence  the  claimant  had  submitted  as  to  the  claimed  relationship;
secondly, it was argued that the IJ had misdirected himself  in  failing  to
make a finding concerning whether the claimant had  been  dependent  on  the
sponsor both prior to and since arrival in the United Kingdom.  In  relation
to prior dependency abroad, the grounds cited Article 10(2)(e) of  Directive
2004/38/EC  ("the  Citizens  Directive")  which  stipulates  that  in  cases
falling under Article 3(2)(a)  [which  deals  with  "Other  Family  Members"
(OFMs)]  applicants  must  produce  "a  document  issued  by  the   relevant
authority in the country of origin or country from which they  are  arriving
certifying that they are dependants or  members  of  the  household  of  the
Union citizen..." The Senior Immigration Judge  who  granted  permission  to
appeal noted that it was also arguable that  the  IJ  may  have  incorrectly
applied the guidance given in the Upper Tribunal case of RK  (OFM-membership
of household - dependency) India [2010] UKUT 421 (IAC).

5. At the hearing Ms Isherwood for the Secretary  of  State  relied  on  the
grounds emphasising that the IJ had  not  made  a  finding  on  whether  the
claimant was  dependent on the sponsor abroad and had  not  shown  that  the
claimant met the reg 8(2) requirement that he be  someone  "accompanying  or
joining" the sponsor. Mr Yekkini submitted that as there was no Home  Office
Presenting Officer present  at  the  hearing  before  the  IJ,  the  IJ  was
entitled to treat the evidence he heard from the  Claimant  and  sponsor  as
credible and this had dealt with dependency both abroad and in  the  UK.  In
the claimant's bundle  there  was  documentary  evidence  showing  that  the
Claimant and the sponsor  had  resided  together  both  in  Nigeria  and  in
Belgium. Following Case C-127/08  Metock  it  did  not  matter  whether  the
claimant arrived in the UK  before  or  after  the  sponsor  or  legally  or
illegally. The fact that the  sponsor's  half-brother  had  been  granted  a
residence card on the same documents was  a  separate  reason  that  the  IJ
could have used, if he had wished,  to  justify  allowing  the  appeal.   In
reply Miss Isherwood confirmed that the  Claimant's  half-brother  had  been
granted a residence card at the same time as the sponsor.

Legal framework
6. The relevant legal provisions distinguish  between  Article  2(2)  family
members or close family members (whom I shall term CFMs)  on  the  one  hand
and (OFMs)/extended family members on the other. Dealing with CFMs,  Article
2(2) of the Citizens Directive states:
          "'Family member' means:
           (a) the spouse;
           (b) the partner with whom the Union citizen has contracted a
           registered partnership, on the basis of the legislation of a
           Member State, if the legislation of the host Member State treats
           registered partnerships as equivalent to marriage ... ;
           (c) the direct descendants who are under the age of 21 or are
           dependants and those of the spouse or partner as defined in
           point (b);
           (d) the dependant direct relatives in the ascending line and
           those of the spouse or partner as defined in point (b)."
7. The corresponding provision of the 2006 Regulations, reg 7 (1) states in
it relevant parts that:
      " ...for the purposes of these Regulations the following persons shall
      be treated as the family members of another person -
   a) his spouse or his civil partner;
   b) direct descendants of his, his spouse or his civil partner who are -
   i) under 21; or
  ii) dependants of his, his spouse or his civil partner;
   c) dependent direct relatives in his ascending line or that of his spouse
      or his civil partner;
   d) a person who is to be treated as the family member of that other
      person under paragraph (3)".
8. Dealing with OFMs/extended family members, Article 3 of the Directive
provides:
    "1. This Directive shall apply to all Union citizens  who  move  to  or
    reside in a Member State other than that of which they are a  national,
    and to their family members as defined in point  2  of  Article  2  who
    accompany or join them.
    2. Without prejudice to any right to free movement  and  residence  the
    persons concerned may have in their own right, the  host  Member  State
    shall, in accordance with its national  legislation,  facilitate  entry
    and residence for the following persons:
          (a) any other family members, irrespective of their  nationality,
          not falling under the definition in point 2 of Article 2 who,  in
          the country from which they have come, are dependants or  members
          of the household of the Union citizen having the primary right of
          residence, or where serious health grounds strictly  require  the
          personal care of the family members by the Union citizen;
          (b) the partner  with  whom  the  Union  citizen  has  a  durable
          relationship, duly attested.
     The host Member State shall undertake an extensive examination of  the
    personal circumstances  and  shall  justify  any  denial  of  entry  or
    residence to these people."
 9.  Up  until  2  June  2011  the  corresponding  regulation  in  the  2006
   Regulations, regulation 8, headed "Extended family members" stipulated at
   8(2):

         "(2)   A person satisfies the condition in this  paragraph  if  the
             person is a relative of an EEA national,  his  spouse  or  his
             civil partner and-

             (a) the person is residing in an EEA State in which the EEA
               national also resides    and is dependent upon the EEA
               national or is a member of his household;

             (b) the person satisfied the condition in paragraph (a) and is
               accompanying the EEA national to the United Kingdom or
               wishes to join him there; or

             (c) the person satisfied the condition in paragraph (a), has
               joined the EEA national in the United Kingdom and continues
               to be dependent upon him or to be a member of his
               household."

My assessment

10. I have no hesitation in finding that the IJ materially erred in law.  In
the refusal letter the Secretary of  State  stated  that  the  documentation
submitted by the claimant to prove his relationship  with  the  sponsor  and
his dependency on him both prior  to  arriving  in  the  UK  and  since  was
insufficient. Despite that clear rejection  the  IJ  did  not  even  make  a
finding on whether the claimant had been dependent on the sponsor  prior  to
arrival in the UK. The suggestion made by Mr Yehenni that the IJ made  clear
that his summary of  the  claimant's  and  sponsor's  evidence  about  prior
dependency/household membership in Nigeria and Belgium also doubled  as  his
findings on these matters, does not withstand scrutiny. The IJ prefaced  his
summary of such matters with the caveat: "Save for the matters  to  which  I
refer below the facts of this appeal are not in dispute".  If  he  meant  by
that that there was no dispute about  the  claimant's  claimed  relationship
with and dependency on the sponsor abroad, that was  simply  wrong.  And  in
the absence of any concessions made  by  the  Secretary  of  State,  he  was
obliged, not simply to summarise the evidence, but to make findings  on  all
relevant aspects of it. The IJ did go on to find (1) that the  claimant  was
a cousin of the sponsor; and (2) that the claimant  was  residing  with  the
sponsor in the UK and was dependent on him in the UK. But nothing else.

11. Whilst current case law on the issue of precisely where and when an  OFM
must show dependency prior to arrival in the UK is not  wholly  settled  (cf
Bigia & Ors [2009] EWCA Civ 79; MR and Others (EEA extended family  members)
Bangladesh [2010] UKUT 449 (IAC); and RK), the authorities are unanimous  in
considering that prior dependency is one of the requirements set out in  reg
8 of the 2006 Regulations. Hence the failure of the  IJ  to  make  a  proper
finding on this matter was a material error of law.

 12. There are also aspects  of  the  IJ's  reasoning  in  relation  to  the
claimant's claimed dependency  in  the  UK  and/or  membership  of  the  EEA
principal's household in the UK which  are  also  questionable,  but  it  is
unnecessary to address those. The fact, however, that  the  IJ  went  on  at
para 17 to find that the claimant was entitled to a residence card  for  the
sole reason that he was an extended family member  (see  above  para  2)  is
another plain error. Regulation 17(4) of the  2006  Regulations  confers  on
the decision-maker discretion  as  to  whether  a  person  found  to  be  an
OFM/extended family member is to be granted a residence card. In  exercising
that discretion matters such as whether an  applicant  has  entered  the  UK
lawfully  or  otherwise  are  plainly  relevant  (although  not  necessarily
determinative: see YB (EEA reg 17(4) - proper approach) Ivory  Coast  [2008]
UKAIT 00062 and Aladeselu and Others (2006 Regs  -  reg  8)  Nigeria  [2011]
UKUT 00253 (IAC)). But in this case the  Secretary  of  State  had  not  yet
exercised that discretion and so the most the IJ  was  entitled  to  do  was
allow the appeal as being not in accordance with the law leaving the  matter
of whether to exercise the  reg  17(4)  discretion  in  his  favour  to  the
Secretary of State: see Yau Yak Wah [1982] Imm AR  16;  MO  (reg  17(4)  EEA
Regs) Iraq [2008] UKAIT 00061. Given  the  fundamental  nature  of  the  two
errors of law identified above I hereby set aside his decision.

13. Both representatives indicated that if I found  the  IJ  had  materially
erred in law I should proceed to remake the decision  without  further  ado.
Both relied on the evidence as it was before the  IJ  and  their  subsequent
submissions. I shall deal below with the issue of to what extent it  remains
appropriate to preserve any of the IJ's findings of fact.

14. Ms Isherwood clarified that it was accepted that the  sponsor  has  been
and is exercising Treaty rights in the  UK  and  that  he  had  been  issued
residence documentation in view of that fact. She  also  accepted  that  the
sponsor's half-brother had also been issued a residence  card  at  the  same
time as had he.

15. In reply to my question as to whether the claimant  was  going  to  take
the opportunity to give oral evidence  (as  directions  made  following  the
grant of permission provided) Mr Yehinni confirmed that the claimant  wished
to rely on the evidence already given in documentary and oral  form  to  the
IJ.

Meaning of other family members/extended family members

16. The first matter to be addressed is whether the claimant  has  shown  he
is a cousin of the sponsor. Two observations are in order. One is  that  the
respondent did not dispute that if the claimant  was  the  sponsor's  cousin
that that was a qualifying relationship for the  purposes  of  reg  8.  That
must be right. Article 3(2) of the Directive treats "Other  Family  Members"
as a residual category and, in  contrast  to  CFMs  within  the  meaning  of
Article 2(2), does not limit it  to  particular  types  of  relatives  (plus
spouses or civil partners). There is nothing in the  2006  Regulations  akin
to the Immigration Appeals (Family Visitor) Regulations 2003  which  in  our
domestic immigration law seeks to specify  exhaustively  the  categories  of
family relationship that can qualify a person. Recital 5 refers to the  need
for the position of OFMs to be examined with a view to  the  maintenance  of
"the unity of the family in a broader sense" and  for  such  examination  to
consider  "their  relationship  with  the  Union  citizen   or   any   other
circumstances, such as their financial or physical dependence on  the  Union
citizen", so clearly only relatives are covered, albeit with focus on  those
relatives with whom the Union citizen has significant factual ties. In  this
respect  these  provisions  closely  resemble  those  set  out  in  the   EU
legislation in place  prior  to  the  coming  into  force  of  the  Citizens
Directive. Article  10(1)  of  Regulation  No.  1612/68  accorded  residence
rights to close family members. Article 10(2)  stated  that  "Member  States
shall facilitate the admission of  any  member  of  the  family  not  coming
within the provisions of para 1 if  dependent  on  the  worker  referred  to
above or living under his roof in the country whence he  comes."  Regulation
8 of the 2006 Regulations is in similar but  not  identical  terms.  Whereas
Article  3(2)  differentiates  between  OFMs  and  partners  in  a   durable
relationship, reg 8 includes both within the definition of "extended  family
members". The European Casework Instructions (as  updated  May  2011)  state
that:
        "Regulation 8  of  the  2006  Regulations  covers  extended  family
        members (for example, brothers, sisters, aunts  and  cousins).   It
        also covers direct family members (such as parents or children over
        the age 21) who have  failed  to  provide  evidence  for  financial
        dependencies."


This formulation does not seek to  define  the  class  of  "extended  family
members" exhaustively. None of the leading textbooks  consider  that  either
the OFM or extended family member category is limited to only certain  kinds
of relatives or family members. It is noteworthy that in  the  instant  case
the Secretary of State accepted the sponsor's half-brother  as  an  extended
family member.

17. The other observation is this.  Whilst I have found that  the  IJ  erred
in law in more than one respect the matter of the relationship  between  the
claimant and the sponsor was something that he did address in the  light  of
the evidence. He pointed out that the refusal letter had simply declined  to
accept the documents submitted as sufficient evidence  of  the  relationship
because "this department requires  genuine  birth/marriage  certificates  as
evidence of the  relationship"  and  that  at  the  hearing  the  Presenting
Officer had not cross-examined the claimant  on  the  documentation  he  had
presented, confining herself to asking why original birth  certificates  had
not been produced. Counterbalancing that, in addition to hearing  from  both
the claimant as to their relationship, the IJ  also  looked  at  the  family
tree they had submitted. When considering this aspect of  the  case  I  have
also to bear in mind that the only express basis for  challenging  the  IJ's
finding on the relationship related to his  alleged  misapplication  of  the
correct standard of proof, but that challenge is  entirely  unsupported  and
flies in the face of the IJ's own identification of the correct standard  at
para 6. The alleged failure  of  the  IJ  to  state  "on  balance"  why  the
documents produced by the claimant were acceptable is belied  by  the  terms
of the IJ's assessment at para 14. I do not  consider  it  would  be  right,
therefore, to interfere in this particular finding of the IJ.

Dependency and membership of the household

18. Like Article 3(2), reg 8 requires an OFM to  demonstrate  what  I  shall
call prior connection with an EEA principal, i.e. connection either  in  the
form of prior dependency on or prior membership of the household of the  EEA
national/Union citizen. As stated succinctly by the Tribunal in RK  at  para
16, "...OFMs must show dependency or membership  of  the  household  of  the
Union citizen "in the country of origin or the country from which  they  are
arriving". It is to be observed that for CFMs there is  also  provision   in
Article 2(2) for dependents in the ascending  or  descending  line  who  are
over 21, but, unlike OFMs, they are not required to  show  prior  dependency
abroad, only current dependency: see Pedro [2009] EWCA Civ  1358.  For  CFMs
there is no provision for household members or indeed for persons  who  have
serious health difficulties.

19. Turning to the evidence in  this  case,  I  do  not  consider  that  the
claimant has discharged the burden on him of  showing  either  that  he  was
dependent on the sponsor prior to arrival or that he was  a  member  of  the
sponsor's household prior to arrival. There is not even  evidence  that  the
sponsor was an EEA national earlier than April 2008 (the date shown  on  his
Belgian ID card) and if he only became Belgian in 2008 then that would  mean
that evidence relating to the claimant being a member of  his  household  or
dependent on him before that time would not be relevant in any  event:  both
Article 3(2) and reg 8 make clear it has to be dependency on someone who  is
a Union citizen/EEA national. Even leaving aside this difficulty, the  state
of the evidence is still  quite  unsatisfactory.  There  is  before  me  the
record of the evidence the claimant and sponsor gave  to  the  IJ  in  which
both claim both types of prior connection. However, their evidence  differed
on the matter of when the claimant went to  Belgium  (the  claimant  stating
2008, the sponsor stating 2007). Further,  the  claimant  only  admitted  to
having  arrived  in  the  UK  illegally   under   cross-examination.   These
discrepancies are made more significant by the fact that  the  claimant  has
produced only very scant documentary evidence to substantiate  his  and  the
sponsor's claims about prior connections and events over  this  period.  The
documentary evidence relating to connections abroad consisted  in  a  energy
bill made out to the sponsor at an address in  Lagos   dated  November  2006
and a tenancy agreement at an  address  in  Lagos  covering  the  period  28
October 1999 - 29 October 2001  naming  the  Claimant  and  sponsor  as  co-
tenants. In the claimant's bundle  there  was  also  a  document  in  French
identifying the claimant and sponsor as co-tenants at an address in  Belgium
circa January 2007.

20. I note in addition that despite the ground of  appeal  raising  a  clear
challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence relating to prior  connections,
the Claimant has not sought to adduce any further documentary evidence.  The
sponsor in his  evidence referred to his having been  able  to  support  the
claimant financially between 2002-2005 from his father's  money  over  which
he had been given control, but no documentary evidence has been  adduced  to
show that. The documents identifying the Claimant and the sponsor  as  joint
tenants do not of themselves show that the  sponsor  was  the  head  of  the
household (as  required  by  Bigia  &  Others  and  RK).  Even  if  it  were
considered (contrary to Bigia &  Others)  that  the  dependency  requirement
does not necessarily import  recent  dependency  (see  MR  and  Others  (EEA
extended family  members)  Bangladesh  [2010]  UKUT  449  (IAC)  (04)),  the
documents relating to the sponsor's  financial  means  during  the  relevant
periods relied on (2002-2005 in Nigeria and 2007/8  in  Belgium)  were  non-
existent.  Certainly the energy bill proves nothing.  An  important  further
consideration in the context of an OFM/extended family member case  is  that
if the claimant had applied for a family  permit  from  Nigeria  or  Belgium
(for which provision is made in reg 12 of  the  2006  Regulations),  the  UK
authorities  would  have  been  in  a  position  to  conduct  an   extensive
examination of the individual's personal circumstances (reg  12(3))  and  in
the course of such an examination check the documentation submitted.  If  an
applicant chooses to not to apply from abroad for a family permit under  reg
12  of  the  2006  Regulations,  thereby  denying  the  UK  authorities   an
opportunity to check documentation  in  the  country  concerned,  he  cannot
expect any relaxation in the burden  of  proof  that  applies  to  him  when
seeking to establish an EEA right.

21. For the above reasons I am not satisfied that the claimant has shown  he
meets the  reg  8  requirements  of  prior  connection  and  his  appeal  is
dismissed for that reason. In view of this conclusion it  is  not  necessary
for me to make a finding on whether he does meet the additional  requirement
set out in reg 8 of being able to show that he is either a  dependent  or  a
household member of the sponsor in the United Kingdom.

22. In light of what has been mentioned earlier  in  this  determination  it
may assist to make three further observations.

Article 10(2)(e) of the Citizens Directive

23. The first concerns the contention in the Secretary  of  State's  grounds
that in order to show prior dependency  a  claimant  must  comply  with  the
requirements of Article 10(2)(e) of the Citizens Directive,  which  requires
a document issued by the relevant authority in  the  country  of  origin  or
country from which they are arriving certifying that they are dependants  or
members of the household of the Union citizen. That is indeed a  requirement
set out in Article 10, but it is not replicated  in  the  2006  Regulations.
The latter merely require that a person prove  it  without  specifying  how.
Whether that makes much practical difference is another  matter.  It  is  of
course the case that where  provisions  of  the  EEA  Regulations  are  more
generous than the Directive, it is they, rather than those of the  Directive
which must be applied: see Article 37; but  the  Secretary  of  State  makes
clear  in  communications  with  applicants  that  documentary  evidence  is
required.

Accompanying or joining and lawful presence

24. The second concerns Ms Isherwood's submission that the Claimant  had  to
lose  under  the  Regulations  because  he  had  failed  to  show   he   was
accompanying or joining the sponsor as required by  reg  8(2)(b)  (see  also
reg 12(2)(b)) or that he was lawfully present in  the  United  Kingdom.  She
pointed out that the evidence left unclear whether the claimant had  arrived
before or after the sponsor and so the claimant had not shown it was  after.


25. On both these matters it will suffice to refer to  the  recent  Tribunal
decision in Aladeselu and Others (2006 Regs - reg  8)  Nigeria  [2011]  UKUT
00253 (IAC) whose headnote states:


    "1. For the purposes of establishing whether a person qualifies  as  an
    Other Family Member (OFM)/extended family member under regulation 8  of
    the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations   2006,   the
    requirement that they accompany or join the Union citizen/EEA  national
    exercising Treaty rights must be read as encompassing  both  those  who
    have arrived  before  and  those  who  have  arrived  after  the  Union
    citizen/EEA national sponsor. "


    2.  The  2006  Regulations  do  not  impose  a  requirement   that   an
    OFM/extended family member  must  be  present  in  the  United  Kingdom
    lawfully.


    3. But in the context of the exercise of regulation 17(4) discretion as
    to whether to issue a residence card, matters relating to how and  when
    an OFM/extended family member arrives in a host Member  State  are  not
    irrelevant."

26. Finally the IJ's statement at para 16 of this  determination  concerning
dependency  - "given that the[claimant] is in the United  Kingdom  illegally
I accept that he does not and  indeed  cannot  work  here  and  therefore  I
further accept that he is dependent  on  the  sponsor"  -  is  questionable.
Being in the UK illegally does not establish, without more,  that  a  person
does not as a matter of fact work and thereby avoid dependency. In  EU  law,
dependency is a question of fact: see Case C-316/85 Lebon [1987]  ECR  2811,
Case C-200/02 Chen [2005] QB 325and Case C-1/05 Jia [2007] QB 545. If  there
is a  reason to consider that earnings from  illegal  employment  would  not
count for the purposes of assessing whether a person is a dependent for  the
purposes of the Citizens Directive they have yet to be stated by the  Court.
 Nevertheless, even if a claimant were considered unable to show  dependency
because of earnings from illegal  employment  he  might  still  be  able  to
qualify as a member of the household. As noted earlier the  Tribunal  in  RK
and other cases has made clear  that  the  two  categories,  dependants  and
members of the household, are alternative categories.

27. Near the end of the hearing I said  to  the  parties  that  it  was  not
immediately obvious why the Secretary of State had  reached  a  decision  in
favour of the sponsor's half-brother but a negative decision in relation  to
the claimant, when they had applied on the same  application  form  and  had
relied (seemingly)  on  the  same  evidence  in  respect  of  the  sponsor's
affairs. The reason for the different decisions is not immediately  obvious.
However, I do not have before me the evidence that was produced by the half-
brother and/ or the sponsor to prove their relationship, nor do I  have  any
evidence relating to any  prior  connection  or  United  Kingdom  connection
asserted to  exist  between  them.  I  do  not  know,  either,  whether  the
Secretary of State decided that the half-brother was an OFM because  of  his
dependency or  his  membership  of  the  sponsor's  household.  Given  these
unknowns I do not consider it would be safe to  draw  any  conclusions.  All
that can be said is that if in fact there were  no  significant  differences
in the legal and  substantive  reasons  why  the  half-brother  was  granted
residence documentation then, on the principle that  like  cases  should  be
treated alike, the Secretary of State may wish to reconsider the  claimant's
case in the light of my finding (different from that made by the  respondent
originally) that the claimant  is  an  OFM/extended  family  member  of  the
sponsor.

28. For the above reasons:

The First-tier Tribunal materially erred in law  and  its  decision  is  set
    aside.

The decision I remake is  to  dismiss  the  claimant's  appeal  against  the
decision of the Secretary of State to refuse to grant him a residence card.


                               Signed




                               Senior Immigration Judge Storey
                               (Judge of the Upper Tribunal)
