

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

           Anoliefo (permission to appeal) [2013] UKUT 00345 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at George House, Edinburgh              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 12 June 2013                               |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before


               THE PRESIDENT, THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE BLAKE




                                   Between

                               EKENE ANOLIEFO

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     B Criggie, of Hamilton Burns and Co. Solicitors
For the Respondent:    A Mullin, Home Office Presenting Officer

   Where there is no reasonable prospect that any error of  law  alleged  in
   the grounds of appeal could  have  made  a  difference  to  the  outcome,
   permission to appeal should not normally be granted  in  the  absence  of
   some point of public importance  that  it  is  otherwise  in  the  public
   interest to determine.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1.   This is an appeal from a decision  of  a  panel  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal, Judge Reid presiding, dated 11 March 2013.  In that decision
      the panel dismissed the appellant's appeal from a deportation decision
      made against him on 18 December 2012.


   2.    The material facts are as follows.  The appellant is a national  of
      Nigeria born in November 1974.  He arrived in the  United  Kingdom  in
      October 2004 when he was nearly 30 years of age.  He  arrived  with  a
      student visa valid until January 2006 that was  subsequently  extended
      until October 2008.  In July 2008 the appellant was arrested by Police
      and charged with serious sexual offences and has remained  in  custody
      ever since.

   3.  On 28 May 2009, following a trial, he was convicted of  a  number  of
      counts of assault and breach of the peace and one count  of  rape  for
      which he was given a custodial sentence of twelve years in June  2009.
      He subsequently appealed to the High Court  of  Judiciary  and,  on  3
      December 2012, he was successful in  part  in  that  the  assault  and
      breach of the peace convictions were quashed and he  was  re-sentenced
      on the single rape count to nine years imprisonment.

   4.    I was informed at the hearing of the case today that the  basis  on
      which he challenged each of his  convictions  was  that  he  had  been
      improperly denied access to a solicitor before his  police  interview.
      Although decisions of the High Court  of  Judiciary  are  final  in  a
      criminal cause or matter, the appellant sought permission to appeal to
      the Supreme Court on the basis  of  a  devolution  issue,  namely  the
      compatibility of the admission of his police  interview  on  the  rape
      charge with Article 6 of the European Convention on Human Rights.  The
      High Court refused that application on the 19 December 2012 and I  was
      informed no application has subsequently  been  made  to  the  Supreme
      Court for permission to appeal.


   5.    When this appeal came before a panel in February 2013 there  was  a
      preliminary application that  the  case  be  adjourned  to  enable  an
      application to be lodged for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Supreme
      Court.  The panel refused that application and  although  this  formed
      the first ground for permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,  the
      First-tier judge correctly rejected it and it  has  not  been  renewed
      before me today.  Whether a deportation hearing  should  be  adjourned
      pending further proceedings in relation to a conviction by  which  the
      detrimental conduct is sought to be proved, depends upon all  material
      circumstances of the case, and the facts that are in issue.  There was
      no want of fairness by the panel in refusing this application where no
      application for permission had been made and otherwise the decision of
      the High Court was final with regard to this criminal conviction.

   6.    Having refused the application for an adjournment  the  panel  then
      considered all the evidence.  This was a case of automatic deportation
      subject to any human rights claim that the appellant could  make  out.
      He could only point to three features upon which he relied to  support
      such a claim:-


          i. He had lawfully resided for four years as a  student  and  had
             entertained hopes of being allowed to remain  indefinitely  in
             this country if he had completed his studies and moved  on  to
             post-study employment.


          ii. During the course of his studies he had  a  girl-friend;  the
              relationship had now broken down and she had not visited  him
              in detention since July 2008.


         iii. He had a cousin resident in the United Kingdom with  whom  he
              had maintained contact.


   7.    The panel at paragraph 46 of its decision correctly identified  the
      fact that there were no family or personal relationships that could be
      relied upon to show family life. It continued, "there was no  evidence
      before us of any particular feature  of  a  private  life  that  would
      suffice to engage Article 8".   The  panel  nevertheless  went  on  to
      balance deportation with Article 8 rights at paragraphs 47 and  50  of
      its decision and noted the sentencing remark of Lord Pentland that the
      rape  was  particularly   brutal   and   degrading   involving   false
      imprisonment of the  victim  in  a  car  who  was  then  subjected  to
      pornography.  The judge concluded that the appellant was  a  dangerous
      and determined sexual predator who has not the slightest  respect  for
      women.  In the circumstances the panel found  that  deportation  would
      not be disproportionate.


   8.     On the 28 March 2013 the First-tier Tribunal Judge  Sharp  granted
      permission to appeal on the ground that the panel had not referred  to
      the new rules promulgated in July 2012 or the decision in MF  (Article
      8 - new rules) Nigeria [2012] UKUT 393 (IAC) and did not consider  any
      case law in respect of  their Article 8 conclusions.  The judge  noted
      however that the prospects of success were slim having regard  to  the
      strength of the public interest in deporting.

   9.    Mr Criggie submits that the features identified  above  meant  that
      there was a private life that engaged Article  8.   Having  heard  the
      submission developed I indicated that there was no substance in it and
      this appeal would be dismissed.  I now give my reasons for doing so.

  10. The panel was right to conclude that there was no family life in  this
      case. The question was whether there was private  life  of  sufficient
      seriousness to require  justification  for  any  interference.   I  am
      satisfied that this was what the panel intended by the reference to no
      private life that engages Article 8.

  11. If the panel at paragraph 47 had said that there was no  private  life
      that deserved respect or would be interfered with by  the  immigration
      decision, in my judgment, it would have  been  perfectly  entitled  to
      have  reached  that  conclusion  applying  the   structured   approach
      identified by Lord Bingham in Razgar.  If the panel had spelt out that
      conclusion then there would be no factor at all to be weighed  in  the
      balance against deportation.  As it is, it did  go  on  to  perform  a
      balance between the public interest and the  case  for  the  claimant,
      and, as was inevitable, found against him.

  12. It is unfortunate that permission to appeal  was  granted  since  this
      appeal is wholly without merit.


  13.  First, something much more substantial by  way  of  private  life  is
      required in the case of a person who arrived in the United Kingdom  as
      an adult  with limited leave as student  and  who  was  never  granted
      indefinite leave to remain before it could be  said  that  removal  or
      deportation was  an  interference  with  private  life  that  required
      justification.


  14. Second, any failure to have regard to the July 2012 rules and the two-
      stage process identified in MF would have been  wholly  immaterial  to
      the appellant as the new rules make the task of identifying an Article
      8 private life that much more onerous where a  person  has  not  spent
      half his life or twenty years here.  It is rightly accepted  that  any
      private life that has developed whilst he has been in custody is of no
      consequence.

  15. Third, it is obvious that where a claimant has been convicted of  rape
      and the conviction upheld on appeal, and certainly any rape  with  the
      aggravating features identified by the sentencing judge, even if there
      were private life to be weighed in  the  balance,  no  properly  self-
      directing judge could have done  other  than  to  have  dismissed  the
      appeal on the basis that the public interest manifestly outweighed it.



  16.  Where there is no reasonable prospect that any error of  law  alleged
      in the grounds of appeal could have made a difference to the  outcome,
      permission to appeal should not normally be granted in the absence  of
      some point of public importance that it is  otherwise  in  the  public
      interest to determine.

  17.  There was no material error of law made by the panel. For  all  these
      reasons this appeal is dismissed.


                               Signed


                               Date 26 June 2013






                                Chamber President of the Upper Tribunal
