
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

R (on the application of A) v London Borough of Croydon AAJR [2013] UKUT
00342 (IAC)


             IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW



|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 26, 27 & 28 November and                   |                             |
|17 December 2012                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                       The Queen on the application of

                                      A
                                                                    Claimant
                                     and

                          LONDON BOROUGH OF CROYDON

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Claimant: Mr C Buttler, instructed by Luqmani Thompson, Solicitors
For the Defendant:     Ms S Rowlands, instructed by London Borough of
Croydon






                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   This is an application for judicial review by the claimant,  a  citizen
    of Iraq, of a decision by the defendant made on 2 March 2009  assessing
    his date of birth as 9 November 1990, contrary to his assertion that he
    was born on 9 November 1992.  A previous age  assessment  made  by  the
    defendant on 21 February 2008 also assessing his date  of  birth  as  9
    November 1990 was quashed following judicial review proceedings  on  29
    November 2008. Permission was  granted  to  challenge  the  defendant's
    second decision and following  a  stay  pending  the  decision  of  the
    Supreme Court in R (A) v London Borough of Croydon [2009] UKSC  8,  the
    appeal was transferred to the Upper Tribunal.  Our task is to carry out
    a fact finding exercise to assess the claimant's age.

The Evidence before the Tribunal

2.   We  heard  oral  evidence  from  the  claimant,  Albertha  Golding  and
    Jennifer Dunn, social workers employed by the defendant, Dr Nadja  Alim
    a psychologist who prepared a psychological assessment of the appellant
    and Susan  Van  Scoyoc,  a  consultant  counselling  psychologist,  who
    prepared a report in response for the defendant.

3.   The documentary evidence is contained in an agreed bundle  indexed  and
    paginated 1-1239.  We were also provided with a bundle  of  authorities
    and helpful and comprehensive skeleton arguments from both counsel.

Background

4.   It is not disputed that the claimant is a citizen of Iraq  who  arrived
    in the UK on 21 February 2008.  He made a clandestine  entry  by  lorry
    and after leaving the lorry he made his way to Brighton  and  contacted
    the police. They took his details and gave him a train ticket  and  the
    address of Lunar House where he claimed asylum (701).   In his  witness
    statement of 18 April 2008 in support of his asylum claim he said  that
    he had left his home in Kirkuk and arrived in  Turkey  on  19  November
    2007 where he stayed for six days.  He left with others on 25  November
    2007 by boat but as soon as they left the boat they were arrested.   He
    thought he was still in Turkey at that  time.   He  was  detained  over
    night and fingerprinted.  He was  able  to  continue  his  journey  and
    eventually arrived in France where he was  fingerprinted  and  released
    twice when caught trying to board lorries.   However,  he  was  finally
    able to get on a lorry and arrived in the UK on 21 February 2008.

5.   His application for asylum was  refused  by  the  Secretary  of  State.
    There was a preliminary hearing before IJ Kumrai on 6  July  2009.   He
    found that the claimant's  date of birth was 9  November  1990.   There
    was a full hearing on 24 August 2009 before IJ Jhirad who dismissed his
    appeal on all grounds.  That decision was later set aside by  agreement
    and directions were given for the appeal  to  be  heard  afresh.   That
    rehearing has been adjourned pending the decision in these proceedings.

The Evidence of the Claimant

6.   The claimant gave his evidence in  English  but  there  was  a  Kurdish
    Sorani interpreter present throughout to assist him  on  the  very  few
    occasions when he had  difficulty  in  understanding  the  question  or
    giving his answer.  He referred to his witness statement at 105-109 and
    in particular to [18] where he said that his agent had ordered him  not
    to tell anyone that he had been fingerprinted or he  would  be  beaten,
    detained and sent back to Iraq.  He had also been told  to  change  the
    dates when he had left Iraq. It was for this reason that the  dates  he
    had given at the screening interview were incorrect but after receiving
    advice from his legal representatives he said that in fact he had  left
    Iraq on 15 November  2007.   He  then  referred  to  his  supplementary
    statement of 7 August 2008 at 96 and his statement of 4 September  2008
    at 84.  In that statement at [5] - [8] he refers to his  identity  card
    which his uncle had given him when he left.   He  was  aware  that  his
    solicitors had subsequently obtained a report from Dr George  and  that
    it was his view  that  this  card  was  not  genuine,  but  he  had  no
    explanation for this.

7.   He then referred to his statement of 25 January 2010 at  110-118  where
    he sets out his evidence to support his  assertion  that  his  date  of
    birth is 9 November 1992.  He confirms that he  had  always  known  his
    date of birth. He deals with his time at school in  [5]  -  [21].   The
    claimant gives further information about his schooling in  his  witness
    statement of 8 June 2012 at 1202-1209.  This  statement  sets  out  his
    evidence that when he was in year 5, academic year 2003/2004, following
    the fall of Saddam Hussein Kurdish started being taught in his  school.
    The name of his school was also changed from Al Wahda School to Rezgari
    School and a lot of places in Kirkuk changed their  names  from  Arabic
    back to Kurdish at this time.  He repeats in this statement what he had
    said in his previous statement that he had started school at the age of
    6 in 1999, leaving at the end of year 5 in 2004.

8.   He then deals with the accommodation provided by the defendant in  [18]
    - [24]. After a short time in bed and breakfast accommodation,  he  was
    moved to semi-independent accommodation where he stayed from  11  March
    2008 to April 2008.  The three other residents  there  were  all  older
    than him and ranged from between 16 and 18.   He  felt  frightened  and
    intimidated by the other residents and was  unhappy  there.   His  case
    worker at the Refugee Legal Centre wrote to social services about these
    problems and he was then moved to 1 Lesley Grove where he  stayed  from
    April 2008 to December 2010.  He was moved at the end of December  2010
    to Morden where the residents are all  adults  and  the  age  range  is
    varied.

9.   In his oral evidence he  said  that  when  he  first  went  there,  his
    bedroom was very dirty, the carpet was dirty and there was  no  bed  or
    TV.  He was told by his key worker Megan that he had no option  but  to
    go and he accepted the position although he did feel sorry for himself.
     His contact with his social worker Ms Dunn had been very limited.   He
    saw her about every six weeks and  their  contact  tended  to  be  very
    brief.  He accepted, referring to [7] of her witness statement at  1210
    -1212, that he had lost his temper.  He had been angry  and  upset  and
    should not have spoken the way he had.

10.  So far as his age assessment interview in February 2009 was  concerned,
    he had received a letter telling him when it was.  He had not  felt  it
    was up to him to ask someone to go with him.  During the  interview  he
    explained that he had started school in 1999 and had left in 2004.   He
    had not said that he had left in 2002 or 2003.  When he left school  in
    2004, he was 11 almost 12.  He had written down year 1 as 2000 and  had
    tried to explain the position.  He accepted that he  had  become  angry
    during the interview because he believed what he was saying was correct
    whereas Ms Golding was saying that it was not correct.  He felt he  was
    being put under pressure.  He acknowledged that she was nice to him but
    he was in a room with two people who kept asking him questions.

11.  In cross-examination he accepted  that  he  had  gone  over  his  story
    several times with different people including his  solicitors  and  the
    various doctors he had seen.  He had been at school for five years.  He
    confirmed that his father had been born in 1970 and his mother in 1975:
    this was not a guess although he could not remember the actual date  or
    place of their birth.  He did not know the year when they  married.  He
    had first been seen by Croydon on 4 March 2008.  He  did  not  remember
    who had first asked him about his schooling.  He was  referred  to  the
    report of Dr Birch at 218 recording that he was school from the age  of
    5 to 11.  He said that he did not  remember  this.   At  the  next  age
    assessment he had not had anyone with him.  He had been asked if he was
    happy to proceed and he had agreed thinking that it would not last  for
    long.

12.  He was aware that Dr George had said  that  his  identity  card  was  a
    forgery. He  had  no  explanation  but  repeated  the  account  in  his
    statement about how it was obtained.  He accepted that the agent  would
    have cost about $12,000.  He did not know where his uncle had  got  the
    money from.  He accepted that when first interviewed, he had said  that
    he had a birth certificate but he was referring to his  identity  card.
    His birth had been registered in Kirkuk. He had not given a  false  age
    to try and improve his asylum claim.  He had not thought he  would  get
    asylum if he said he was younger than he was.  He accepted that he  had
    not always told the truth to Dermot Williams, one of his  key  workers,
    about his girlfriends.

13.  He had had a girlfriend of 27 and she had cleaned his  house  for  him.
    He had had a number of girlfriends.  He  did  gamble  to  maximise  his
    income.  He did not drink every night.  He had started working in  Iraq
    when he was 15 in a teashop and then with a business which made windows
    and doors.  It had not been heavy work so far as he was  concerned:  he
    was doing the simple stuff.  He had been to the Red Cross  to  try  and
    make contact with his  school  or  with  his  uncle  but  he  had  been
    unsuccessful. He accepted that normally he had a beard but  had  shaved
    it off for this hearing as he felt it would be respectful to do so.  He
    denied that his beard had had grey hairs in it.  He  accepted  that  he
    had been fingerprinted twice in France.  Although he had shown  his  ID
    card, the French authorities had not accepted what he  said  about  his
    date of birth.

The Evidence of Albertha Golding

14.  Ms Golding adopted her witness statement at  123-5  and  confirmed  the
    record of the age assessment at  128-135.   She  and  a  colleague  had
    carried out the age assessment on 6 February 2009  and  their  decision
    was dated 2 March 2009.  They had assessed  the  claimant's  age  as  9
    November 1990.  There is an addendum to the report at 137-141  and  her
    notes made during the course of the assessment  are  at  562-580.   Her
    attempt to collate the information the appellant  gave  her  about  his
    schooling is at 580.

15.  In her oral evidence Ms Golding confirmed that  she  no  longer  worked
    for the defendant. She had gone  to  work  for  Bromley  and  had  also
    started her own company so that  she  could  work  as  a  locum  social
    worker.  She had been aware  that  the  defendant  had  carried  out  a
    previous age assessment on the claimant in March 2008 when his age  had
    also been assessed at 2 years older than he claimed  and  that  it  had
    been quashed on grounds  of  irrationality  by  the  High  Court.   The
    interview on 6 February 2009 probably lasted for about two hours with a
    break of 20 minutes.  The questioning lasted for about one to one and a
    half hours and she had made notes.  The assessment  was  written  on  2
    March 2009. She was aware of the guidance that decisions should be made
    in a timely way but said that at the time of this  assessment  she  had
    overall responsibility for about 600 young people.

16.  She confirmed that she had wanted the claimant  to  clarify  the  dates
    when he was at school and needed to challenge him on this matter.   She
    accepted that no other adverse points were put to him  apart  from  his
    schooling. She had not questioned his account that his parents had been
    killed or the events leading to him leaving Iraq.  She qualified  as  a
    social worker in 1996 and believed that she had the necessary skills to
    carry  out  a  holistic  assessment.    She  did  not  accept  that   a
    psychologist was in a better position to assess maturity and felt  that
    evidence of anxiety, nervousness and  lack  of  self  esteem  could  be
    consistent with the claimant being either 16 or 18.  She accepted  that
    being anxious and nervous could indicate that he was younger  than  his
    assessed age.  She also accepted that  some  16-year  olds  would  have
    skills which others did not have.  She was  referred  to  a  number  of
    reports at 394, 401, 405, 451 and 528 and she accepted that this  could
    be an indication that the claimant was younger rather  than  older  but
    referred to 529 that he was happy  in  semi-independent  accommodation.
    She accepted that from April 2008 to  December  2010  when  he  was  at
    Lesley Grove, he had been with 16 and 17 year olds and there  had  been
    no concerns about his behaviour.

17.  She accepted that  the  claimant  had  not  had  an  appropriate  adult
    present at the February 2009 age assessment and she was aware  that  it
    was a legal requirement. When asked about the claimant's education, she
    accepted that he had studied Kurdish and that he had left school at the
    end of year 5.  She was referred to the notes at 580 and accepted  that
    if the school year began in September, then  the  dates  given  by  the
    claimant did add up.  She also accepted that she had not challenged the
    dates he had given about the respective years in which his  father  and
    mother had been born and had not considered  whether  those  ages  were
    consistent with the age he gave.  She accepted  that  if  in  fact  his
    mother was born in 1975 then the appellant would  have  been  conceived
    when she was 14 or 15 if in fact he was born in 1990.

18.  She agreed that the claimant's  physical  appearance  should  be  taken
    into account.  She had known young people to develop a deep voice at 13
    and she had experience of a number of Kurdish young  men  who  from  13
    onwards had a deep voice and had developed an Adam's  apple.   She  was
    referred to the report of Dr Birch at 77 that in June 2008 he  did  not
    have a developed Adam's apple whereas by February 2009 he did.  If  so,
    she accepted that his voice must have  broken  between  June  2008  and
    February 2009.  She had budgetary responsibility in her  work  and  was
    aware of the relative cost of foster care and living semi-independently
    which would be about �200 per week cheaper.  The  fact  that  assessing
    the age of 18 rather than 16 meant that there would be less cost to the
    local authority had not been relevant to her assessment.

19.  She said that the claimant appeared older  than  his  claimed  age  and
    also appeared to be comfortable in semi-independent accommodation.   It
    was common practice to accept the claimed day of birth  but  to  adjust
    the year as appropriate when making an age  assessment.   She  believed
    that he was older than  he  claimed  but  denied  that  it  was  common
    practice if the age was disbelieved simply to assign  a  two  year  age
    difference.  A second statement from Ms Golding appears at 1215-1216 on
    the issue of whether there is a practice of routinely adding two  years
    to an individual's age in such cases.

20.  In re-examination she accepted that there was  a  need  to  consider  a
    whole range of factors when reaching a decision on an  age  assessment.
    She was asked why the day of birth of 9 November was allocated and  she
    explained that in circumstances where there was a specific date claimed
    they did not change the day or the month whereas in cases  where  there
    was no asserted date routinely a date of 1 January  was  allocated  and
    then the year assessed.  So far as the claimant  was  concerned,  there
    was no reason to pick any other date of birth apart from that  asserted
    by him, 9 November. She accepted that it was normal  practice  for  the
    interview and assessment to take place with an  appropriate  adult  but
    the claimant had been asked whether he wished to  proceed  and  he  had
    been  happy to go ahead.  She felt that the mother's date of birth  was
    not implausible with the allocated date of birth for  the  claimant  of
    1990.  She said that when  a  boy's  voice  broke  and  he  acquired  a
    prominent Adam's apple varied from individual  to  individual  but  she
    thought it would be on average about age 13.

Evidence of Jennifer Dunn

21.  Ms Dunn's witness statement is dated 9 July 2012 and is  at  1210-1212.
    She is the claimant's current allocated  social  worker  and  has  been
    since December 2010.  In her statement she says that she has met him on
    a number of occasions at her office and at his  accommodation  and  has
    regular telephone contact with him.  She said that he comes across as a
    mature adult who  appears  very  independent  and  confident.   In  her
    experience he tries  to  manipulate  relationships  with  professionals
    especially females so that he is the superior  party.   When  her  line
    manager was  involved  in  moving  him  from  his  semi-independent  to
    independent accommodation, he presented as authoritative and  tried  to
    dictate the situation.  She said that the claimant  has  a  controlling
    nature and there have been two occasions when his girlfriend who is  27
    years old had been present at his accommodation  and  admitted  to  her
    line manager that she was the one who cleaned  the  house  rather  than
    him.  She said that the claimant's presentation appears to be  that  of
    an older person and he can be rude and sarcastic with an  authoritative
    manner which can be intimidating.

22.  She referred to  an  incident  on  27  January  2011  when  he  was  so
    aggressive that she was reluctant to be in a room alone with  him.   He
    asked for a television and an increased  weekly  subsistence  and  when
    these were refused, the claimant told her that she was  lucky  she  was
    pregnant otherwise  he  would  "deal  with  her".   There  was  another
    occasion early on 6 January 2011 when a colleague went  to  speak  with
    him but she was dismissed in a rude way, the claimant waving her  away.
    He was always well dressed in high quality clothes and appeared to live
    well in excess of the �45  weekly  subsistence  he  received  from  the
    defendant.  He has told her that he gambles  to  fund  his  life  style
    which includes going to nightclubs, drinking, smoking  and  women.   In
    her view the claimant presents as being at least  his assessed  age  of
    21 if not older than that.

23.  In her oral evidence Ms Dunn said that she believed that  the  claimant
    had now changed his girlfriend.  Her contact with him was  very  short,
    up front with no chit- chat and this was her  agenda.   General  things
    were discussed about the house  and   his  wellbeing.   She  said  that
    normally he had a beard which had  a number of grey strands of hair but
    it had been shaved off.

24.  In re-examination she accepted that she owed the  claimant  a  duty  of
    care and should build a relationship with him and  had  done  so  to  a
    certain extent.  Since he had been in the UK, he  had  had  key  worker
    support of about five hours per week.  She had not been aware  that  he
    had been on a course to boost his self-esteem but his independence  and
    self-confidence had grown.  He was now an adult and it was  his  choice
    how to make his life.  The issues she had raised were not  inconsistent
    with her duty of care and did not undermine their relationship.

25.  She had not witnessed the incident which had taken place  when  he  had
    moved to independent accommodation but had been told about  it  by  her
    manager.  She had not seen the accommodation provided but said it would
    have been cleaned up and she was not aware that there had been  no  hot
    water.  She was  surprised  that  the  claimant  had  remained  in  his
    previous accommodation for so long; he would normally be  moved  a  bit
    earlier.  She felt his behaviour was not consistent with that of an  18
    year old.  She did not approve of his girlfriend cleaning for  him  and
    would not associate a young adult being with such an older person.   If
    there had been no bed at his new accommodation then one would have been
    provided the same day.  This had been the first time she had  heard  of
    this.

26.  So far as the January 2011 incident was  concerned  this  was  not  the
    first time he had spoken to her aggressively.  She  was  used  to  some
    outbursts but not the way he presented himself on this  occasion.   She
    said that he thought everything should remain the  same  and  had  been
    quite na�ve to think that he could have a TV.   She did not accept that
    such behaviour was indicative of immaturity.  She had been told that he
    had been gambling and he had said that he put bets on football  and  it
    looked like he had been very lucky.  She was not aware  of  whether  he
    received money from fellow Kurds but accepted it  was  not  necessarily
    unusual for someone of his age to go  to  nightclubs  or  to  drink  or
    gamble.

The Evidence of Dr Nudja Alim

27.  Dr Alim  is  a  psychological  consultant,  a  senior  psychologist  in
    learning  disabilities  and  visiting  lecturer  at  the  Institute  of
    Psychiatry of Kings College London.  Her full  qualifications  are  set
    out at paragraph 3 of her report dated 28 April 2012 at 1178-1198.  She
    was instructed by the claimant's solicitors  to  carry  out  an  expert
    psychological assessment to consider  the  claimant's  adaptive  skills
    level, his intellectual functioning, his age equivalence, to assist the
    Tribunal by examining in general terms  what  was  being  assessed,  to
    provide details of her qualifications, to consider  the  qualifications
    and expertise of Dr Birch and Dr Stern and to comment on  whether  they
    have the necessary qualifications to assess the claimant's intellectual
    functioning and emotional/intellectual development,  to  state  whether
    she agreed or disagreed with their findings and to express  a  view  on
    whether the claimant's responses are genuine and accurate and how  easy
    it would be for him to  exaggerate  those  responses  with  a  view  to
    manipulate the results of the  tests  without  a  trained  psychologist
    being able to detect this.

28.  Dr Alim sets out the background information she was  supplied  with  at
    part 6 (1182-1184) and at part 7 the tests she  used  and  the  results
    obtained in the Wechsler Abbreviated Scale of Intelligence (WASI),  the
    Ravens Coloured Progressive Matrices (Ravens),  the  Vineland  Adaptive
    Behaviour Scales Second Edition (Vineland II)  and  the  Brief  Symptom
    Inventory (BSI).  Her conclusions are set out in part 8.  So far as the
    claimant's adaptive skills level is concerned, the tests indicated that
    his skills are moderately low overall in comparison with individuals in
    an age range of 19 to 21 where 93% function at a  higher  level.   When
    considering his intellectual functioning, Dr Alim felt that the  Ravens
    test rather than the WASI test more accurately reflected  his  ability.
    The IQ range on the WASI test suggested an IQ of 69  to  78  which  for
    someone of 21 would equate to a mild  intellectual  disability  whereas
    the Ravens test gave a  result  lying  in  the  range  of  80  to  100.
    Following his overall presentation he did not appear  to  be  a  person
    with an intellectual disability and it was her view that he  functioned
    at an average  level of intellectual ability.

29.  She then went on to consider the  question  of  age  equivalence.   His
    scores in various areas set out in the table on 1194  vary  extensively
    between  6.4  years  for   expressive   communication   and   22+   for
    interpersonal relationships.  The report emphasises that these  results
    need to be treated with care as the  values  do  not  indicate  "mental
    ages" or give an indication of a person's likely chronological age  but
    are merely age equivalence indicating at what age the "average"  person
    in a Western society normally performs at this level.   The  claimant's
    low level of functioning in the areas of  communication,  personal  and
    daily domestic living skills as well as an exceptionally high level  of
    performance with regard to interpersonal relationships were  likely  to
    be  affected  by  cultural  factors,   psychopathology   and   survival
    mechanisms which might have impeded his function and skill acquisition.
     It was her view that the claimant functions most likely at  the  level
    of a 19 rather than a 21 year old.  She referred to the reports  of  Dr
    Birch and Dr Stern who are paediatricians and  says  that  neither  are
    likely to have the necessary qualifications to  assess  the  claimant's
    intellectual functioning but would have  the  necessary  experience  to
    assess his emotional development.   She  makes  it  clear  that  it  is
    impossible for her to judge the validity of Dr Birch's  assessment  and
    her judgment of the claimant's "mental age" as  it  was  impossible  to
    judge the validity of her assessment procedure.

30.  To Dr Alim's knowledge the methods used  did  not  allow  judgments  of
    this kind and it was impossible to derive a  person's  age  from  their
    intellectual performance.  She does believe that  Dr  Birch  holds  the
    necessary qualifications and clinical experiences to assess  the  level
    of  emotional  development  and  notes  that  she  does  not  give   an
    independent  opinion  of  the  claimant's  emotional  and  intellectual
    functioning. She says that the assessments  were  carefully  considered
    and there was no evidence of exaggeration of responses by the claimant.
     He seemed keen to show off his levels  of  ability  when  judging  his
    adaptive behaviour using Vineland  II.   He  showed  a  good  level  of
    functioning for all lower level tests whilst in some areas higher level
    adaptive skills were judged as unsuccessful.  There was no evidence  of
    exaggerated responding by the claimant.

31.  In her oral evidence, she confirmed that his  intellectual  functioning
    would be normal for a developed 19 year old  but  if  he  was  21,  his
    performance may have been in line with a mild intellectual  disability.
    She felt he was at a low level for 19 but still in the  average  range.
    She said that she would look at the pattern  of  responding  to  assess
    whether there was confabulation or suppressed responses.  When she  was
    preparing her report the claimant  had  said  that  he  was  getting  a
    headache and feeling stressed and she felt that there was no reason  to
    believe that he was trying to exaggerate.  The claimant had  been  very
    keen to show how well he was able to do and that he was able to  manage
    his affairs.  She did not believe  that  he  was  trying  to  skew  the
    results.  She believed that it was possible to given an opinion on  age
    and that a psychologist was well qualified to do so.

32.  In cross-examination she said that she had considered the  ages  of  19
    and 21.  She accepted that it was easier to tell the difference between
    a 7 and a 9 year old than between a 19 and a 21 year old although there
    would be significant differences, unlike for example an age range of 30
    to 32.  She had sought to assess maturity for a normal  healthy  member
    of the population.  She agreed that the claimant had had no problem  in
    communicating and she had asked him about  his  current  accommodation.
    He had complained of headaches and she had made a note  of  this.   She
    had considered the way that he was responding and this impacted on  her
    judgment.  She had taken into account that his first language  was  not
    English and accepted that  the  tests  would  be  used  to  inform  her
    clinical judgment.  She accepted  that  he  did  not  fall  within  the
    intellectually disabled range.  When considering adaptive skills it was
    known from clinical research that  people  subjected  to  psychological
    trauma were less likely to do well than those in optimal circumstances.
     She said that it was possible  to  distinguish  between  the  two  age
    ranges of 19 and 21.  When asked about the table  at  1194  she  agreed
    that it was not possible to  attach  a  scientific  value  to  the  age
    equivalence set  out.   She  was  aware  of  the  test  of  memory  and
    malingering (TOMM) but had not carried out this assessment.   She  felt
    from the claimant's pattern of responding that there was  no  issue  of
    malingering or fabricating.  It was part of her role  to  question  the
    claimant's account. This had been the first age assessment  report  she
    had carried out.  When doing so she  had  to  show  empathy  towards  a
    claimant rather than sympathy.

The Evidence of Susan Van Scoyoc

33.  Mrs Van Scoyoc's report appears at 1218 - 1223.   She  is  a  chartered
    counselling psychologist, a chartered health psychologist and Associate
    Fellow of  the  British  Psychological  Society.   Her  background  and
    experiences are set out at 1219 of her report, which was written at the
    request of  the  defendant's  solicitors  to  address  the  methodology
    usually used by Dr Alim, whether it is reliable enough  to  lead  to  a
    reasonably accurate assessment of age and if not, why  not.   She  made
    the point that Dr Alim had used a number  of  psychometric  assessments
    usually used to assess those with suspected  learning  difficulties  or
    disabilities and accepts that she is suitably qualified and experienced
    to do so.  She has no concerns on how those measures were  administered
    but significant concerns regarding the underlying  assumptions  on  the
    use of such tests to assess an individual's chronological age.  So  far
    as she  is  aware  there  are  no  psychometric  measures  designed  to
    determine chronological age.  She says that the WASI is not designed to
    assess chronological age nor is Raven's or Vineland II.

34.  Dr Alim  had  highlighted  some  of  the  difficulties  in  using  this
    assessment for someone not raised within UK culture.  The claimant  was
    not raised in Western Europe; he only came  to  the  UK  in  his  later
    adolescence and is not therefore part of  the  "norm"  population  upon
    which this test was developed.   The  test  can  therefore  only  be  a
    "guide" as to how he compares with the UK population at best and cannot
    be considered reliable enough  to  determine,  even  if  possible,  his
    chronological age.  It is her opinion  that  the  methodology  used  is
    inappropriate for determining chronological age.  Even if the test were
    a means of calculating by inferring from results obtained in ability to
    chronological age and even if the claimant met  the  criteria  for  the
    population usually assessed by such tests,  there  appeared  to  be  no
    statistical significant difference in the scaled score when  calculated
    between a 19 or 21 year old.  The full IQ for the claimant if  19  fell
    between 72 and 81 of the fifth percentile but for 21 between 69 and  78
    at the fourth percentile. Therefore, there was a  lack  of  significant
    difference between the results expected for a 19 year old compared to a
    21 year old, which would mean that the conclusions drawn by Dr Alim  to
    support a particular age were not reliable even if  psychometric  tests
    were designed to achieve this.

35.  In her oral evidence Mrs Van Scoyoc said that when using  these  scales
    a complex judgment had to be made as  to  whether  a  particular  scale
    applied and it was highly questionable whether the claimant would  meet
    the required norms.  He was likely to underscore under the  WASI  scale
    but she accepted that Ravens was regarded as a  less  culturally  bound
    system.  Vinelands II was largely to see  how  someone  was  coping  or
    adapting to daily life and their ability to look after themselves.  The
    results would inevitably be affected by cultural influences and  family
    background.   If someone was clinically depressed, they would do  worse
    across all levels.  In any event, people reacted  very  differently  to
    difficult experiences.  There should also be an assessment  of  whether
    the information given was false in circumstances where the result might
    lead to financial gain.  It would be useful to approach answers with  a
    level of scepticism.  It was her view that the  conclusion  was  highly
    questionable that the claimant was functioning at the  level  of  a  19
    year old. This needed to be picked  apart  to  take  into  account  the
    influences which may have increased or  decreased  the  adaptive  scale
    report.  She did not  agree  that  a  19  and  21  year  old  could  be
    distinguished through clinical impressions.

36.  In  cross-examination  she  explained  that  she  had  three  areas  of
    practice, seeing people privately, preparing expert reports for  courts
    and teaching psychology.  She had not examined the claimant  or  formed
    any opinion as to his age.  She accepted that Dr Alim was not trying to
    assess chronological age.  She said that it would be useful to  have  a
    reliability test when assessing the information received.   She  agreed
    it was a question for Dr Alim's clinical judgment as to  how  much  she
    could do. She had been surprised that she had managed to so as much  as
    she did.  However, she would have expected this to  take  longer  if  a
    reliable opinion was to be provided.  She accepted  that  Dr  Alim  was
    qualified to provide an opinion on psychological maturity and that  the
    Ravens and Vinelands II report would have been the most suitable.   The
    tests were about cognitive ability and needed to be considered  in  the
    context of the participant's life history.  Her concern was  about  the
    prevalence of figures and the use of the banding results and not  about
    Dr Alim's observations.  She confirmed that her concern was  that  most
    psychologists would not choose to make a judgment  between  such  close
    dates  and  she  doubted  whether  it  could  be  done  with  any  real
    reliability.

37.  Following the preparation of their reports  there  was  a  face-to-face
    meeting on 18 October 2012 between Dr Alim and Mrs Van Scoyoc which led
    to a considerable measure of agreement set out at 1239 - 1240.   It was
    agreed that the tests were not used to assess chronological age but  to
    make a clinical judgment with regard to the likely age of the claimant.
     It was agreed that psychological maturity was one factor  in  offering
    clues about age  and  in  assisting  with  forming  an  opinion  as  to
    someone's likely chronological age but disagreed as to  the  usefulness
    of the  clues  in  this  particular  case.   They  agreed  that  expert
    psychological opinion was a better judgment of  psychological  maturity
    than an impressionistic view of a non-expert and that caution needed to
    be exerted when interpreting numerical data from Dr  Alim's  assessment
    of the claimant because of the difficulties acknowledged by them  both.
    The points of disagreement were the necessity  and  appropriateness  of
    using psychometric scales to assess the reliability of  the  claimant's
    responses and they continued to disagree with regard to the  weight  to
    be given to the numerical data produced by the psychometric  assessment
    trials.  Dr Alim's clinical  impression  of  the  claimant's  case  was
    influenced by the outcome of the psychometric assessments  whereas  Mrs
    Van Scoyoc argued that the psychometric assessment results  should  not
    substantially affect the opinion and that the judgment on  whether  the
    claimant was 19 or 21, based largely on clinical impression, could  not
    be viewed as reliable in this case given the claimant's  environmental,
    social and cultural history.

Submissions for the Defendant

38.  Ms Rowlands referred to the Merton  guidelines,  that  we  should  have
    regard to the claimant's  physical  appearance,  personal  history  and
    demeanour and,  as  appropriate,  to  questions  of  credibility.   The
    starting point would  be  the  claimant's  physical  appearance  which,
    whilst not determinative, could be a strong indicator of age.   In  his
    case his appearance very strongly indicated that he was older  than  he
    claimed: he was fully grown, had a prominent  Adam's  apple  and  heavy
    hair growth.  It was harder to distinguish age the older a child became
    and therefore harder for the Tribunal to determine age than it was  for
    those who had dealt with him previously.  She  submitted  that  it  was
    therefore relevant to note that the French police  considered  that  he
    was 18 when they saw him in January  2008,  the  Secretary  of  State's
    officials had considered that his appearance  very  strongly  suggested
    that he was over 18 (371), Dr Ritchie considered that he was 17  as  at
    April 2008 (395) when he was described as sexually mature and  behaving
    like an older adolescent. The first assessors who saw him  on  4  March
    2008 considered he was over 18 noting that he was  about  5'6"  with  a
    pronounced larynx and a confident  demeanour.   The  Immigration  Judge
    (755) considered he was 18  in  July  2009.   She  submitted  the  best
    evidence of age was probably from Ms Dunn who had observed him over   a
    period of time and discussed him with colleagues.

39.  There was a consistent opinion that the claimant was a young adult  and
    that the local authorities' age assessment was accurate.  The  claimant
    normally had a beard but had chosen to shave it off when attending  the
    hearing and the issue therefore arose of whether he had done this to be
    respectful as he claimed or to try and give a more youthful appearance.
     At the hearing he had worn a scarf round his neck and it was submitted
    that this was to conceal his Adam's apple.   His  self-confessed  adult
    life  style,  involving  drinking,  gambling  and  smoking,  were   all
    activities where there were age  restrictions.   The  veracity  of  the
    claimant's evidence as a whole must be considered and this included the
    fact that there had been no satisfactory explanation for having  relied
    on an identity card regarded by his  own  expert,  Dr  George,  as  not
    genuine.  The claimant had not explained why he had used such  a  card,
    his first witness statement making no mention of his uncle obtaining it
    from his parents' house.

40.  She submitted that the claimant had a motive to lie, firstly to  obtain
    the advantages of being treated as a child and being cared for  by  the
    local authority and secondly, he believed being a  child  would  assist
    him in his asylum application.  The claimant had told untruths  to  his
    key worker about his girlfriends  and  also  lied  to  them  about  his
    background and whereabouts.  He confabulated, telling the Tribunal that
    he had been in Calais and in Sangatte as if he had  known  that  for  a
    fact whereas he could not  have known at the time but must have figured
    it out since.  His evidence that  his uncle had sold his parents' house
    to fund him leaving the country was based on speculation.  The  central
    issue on which the  claimant's  evidence  had  been  examined  was  his
    credibility as to his schooling. His evidence on this was inconsistent.
     In his witness statement of 18 April 2008 (105)  he  said  he  started
    school in 1999 aged 6.5 and left his school in 2004 aged almost 12  but
    this could not be accurate.  When interviewed by Dr Birch  he  said  he
    attended school for six years from between 5 and 11 and started work at
    the age of 14�.  When interviewed by Ms Golding without having  a  date
    written down he had given a variety of different dates, saying  he  had
    finished school in 2002, then 2005, then  2003,  then  2004  (129,566),
    that he was 12 or 13 when he left school, not 11, (131), that he was 13
    when he left in 2005 (131) and in the written note of dates at (580) he
    indicated that year 1 was 2000 rather than 1999 as stated elsewhere.

41.  She submitted that there were two issues about his schooling which  had
    not been rehearsed which might be indicative of his age.  He  had  said
    that until 2003 no Kurdish was spoken in the school but  in  year  5  a
    teacher joshed him about his age and this was in  Arabic.   This  would
    indicate that he was in year 5 before 2003.  The other factor was  that
    in answer to questions from the Tribunal, he said he had been  used  to
    being educated separately from girls and this indicated staying  on  at
    school after 12.

42.  Ms Rowlands commented on the absence of an independent social  worker's
    report or evidence from the claimant's school, arguing  that  obtaining
    evidence  from  Kurdish  Iraq  was  not  difficult  and   no   adequate
    explanation had been given for the failure to  produce  such  evidence.
    She also submitted that his evidence about his work was unsatisfactory.
     He had said in his witness statement at 105 that  he  painted  windows
    but when interviewed said that his employer had a metal workshop and he
    assisted with little jobs. When asked how he coped with this as a child
    he sought to minimise the work he had done.   She  submitted  that  his
    evidence of his age was simply his own assertion.   He  had  sought  to
    rely on medical evidence which had been of no  assistance.   Dr  Alim's
    evidence used tools which were not appropriate for a person of  a  non-
    English background and the attempt  to  differentiate  between  someone
    acting as a 19 or 21 year old was so inappropriate that Mrs Van  Scoyoc
    would not even have accepted instructions to carry out a task and  said
    that there was no body of competent doctors which would do so.

43.  Dr Alim had admitted that she had empathy with the  claimant  but  this
    was inappropriate for an expert giving dispassionate forensic  evidence
    and may well have affected her assessment.  Her  report  did  not  take
    account of the affect on the claimant of the traumatic life  events  he
    had been through.  Dr Alim said that was taken  into  account  but  she
    could not point to any part of her report where the scores had been  so
    adjusted.  There had been no assessment  of  the  claimant's  veracity.
    Her evidence, so she argued, could do no more than provide  a  snapshot
    taken on the wrong camera for a young person  practised  in  presenting
    himself.  In so far as it might be argued on the claimant's behalf that
    Ms Golding had conceded the claimant's age about the length of time and
    when he had been at school, she had simply been agreeing with the dates
    for the purposes of the arguments being advanced.  In any  event,  even
    if she had accepted them, that did not bind the Tribunal.

44.  She submitted that the defendant did not consistently pick a  date  two
    years older than that advanced by a claimant.  In any event, there were
    good reasons for selecting the day and month put forward because a  lie
    with a kernel of truth was more convincing so in giving a false date of
    birth, it would be sensible to stick to the  date  but  to  change  the
    year.  The fact that an adult was not present at the interview with  Ms
    Golding had not been raised in the pleadings but such  absence  without
    more did not undermine the age assessment.  There was no evidence  that
    the claimant had been disadvantaged by the absence of an adult.  He had
    the services of an interpreter and was  given  the  chance  to  have  a
    break.  Inconsistencies were put to him and he had a chance to  explain
    them.  She submitted that there was no reason  to  interfere  with  the
    careful assessment of age made by the local authority.

Submissions for the Claimant

45.  Mr Buttler submitted that the claimant had  given  an  account  of  his
    age, his educational history and his family background which, if  true,
    would be determinative of his age.  Even if an untrue account had  been
    given this did not necessarily indicate a lie as to his age and such  a
    lie in any event would leave open the question  of  his  true  date  of
    birth.  He submitted that the claimant's account was confirmed  by  the
    fact that Kirkuk was a large oil city with a  developed  infrastructure
    and it was to be expected that a middle class child would know his date
    of birth.  The school year in Iraq began in  September  and  compulsory
    education at the age of 6.   Saddam  Hussein's  regime  had  sought  to
    oppress Kurdish identity but that regime  was  toppled  in  2003.   The
    claimant's claim that he had been taught Kurdish in his  last  year  in
    2003-04 was therefore consistent with  the  background.   There  was  a
    filter at the end of year 5 and so only the  more  successful  students
    were admitted to year 6.

46.   When  assessing  the  weight  to  be  attached  to  Ms  Golding's  age
    assessment, it had to be taken into account that she  had  accepted  in
    cross-examination that the claimant had started school in 1999  at  the
    age of 6, had started year 5 in  2003,  the  school  started  to  teach
    Kurdish that year and had changed its name and he left at  the  end  of
    year 5 in 2004.  Overall, she had accepted that if  she  had  known  in
    2009 what she knew now, she would have found the claimant to be 16  not
    18.

47.  She had agreed that the only adverse point put to the claimant  at  the
    age assessment was the year when he left school.  In  any  event,  even
    if, which was not accepted, the claimant had given inconsistent answers
    about the year when he  left  school,  he  had  consistently  told  the
    interviewers that he attended school for five years  and  that  Kurdish
    was added to the curriculum after the fall of Saddam Hussein  when  the
    name of the school had been changed.   The  interview  notes  indicated
    uncertainty as to the calendar year in which he finished  school.   The
    claimant had produced a table in an attempt to explain the position  to
    the assessors (131).  In any event, following the  initial  uncertainty
    about what he was saying, he had clarified that he  started  school  in
    year 1 at the age of 6 in 1999 and finished at the end  of  year  5  in
    2004.  Ms Golding had then proceeded to calculate the dates but,  given
    that the Iraqi school year started in September,  the  table  supported
    what the claimant had told the assessors.  Further, the  interview  had
    been procedurally unfair as the claimant was not given  an  opportunity
    to bring an appropriate adult and it must follow  that  the  assessment
    was not lawfully conducted.  The absence of an appropriate adult in the
    present case  had  to  be  taken  into  account  when  considering  the
    confusion about the claimant's evidence about when he  went  to  school
    and his vulnerability in the light of the fact that he was recorded  as
    being nervous and anxious, upset and needing help with lack self-esteem
    (129, 133).  Further, the written reasons were  produced  21  days  (15
    working days) after the interview rather than within the time  set  out
    in the defendant's policy of giving reasons within 10 working days.

48.  Mr Buttler submitted that it was not open to  the  Tribunal  to  reject
    any part of the claimant's account which was not challenged  in  cross-
    examination and in particular the years of birth of  his  parents,  his
    evidence about his family life and the fact that he grew up knowing his
    place of birth.  His evidence that he had started working in  a  coffee
    shop in May 2007 and shortly afterwards at  a  workshop  had  not  been
    challenged, neither had his evidence that  he  had  reported  terrorist
    activity to his  father,  that  his  parents  had  disappeared  on  8/9
    November 2007 and had then been  killed.  So far as the  identity  card
    was concerned, there was no evidence before the Tribunal that it was  a
    forgery. The claimant had said that he clearly  remembered  going  with
    his father to obtain it  in  2005.   He  had  been  given  an  identity
    document by his uncle when he left Iraq which he assumed was  the  same
    card.  The claimant had arrived with it in this country and the details
    were recorded at the screening interview.  There was  no  substance  in
    the submission that he had back-peddled about the work he  carried  out
    at the workshop.  The claimant had accepted that he had  not  told  his
    key worker about his girlfriend  but  this  was  exactly  the  kind  of
    behaviour that could be expected by teenagers towards parental  figures
    and did not  bear on the credibility  of  his  account.   He  had  also
    accepted other matters raised by the defendant such as having an  older
    girlfriend, being involved in drinking and betting  and  getting  angry
    with the staff following his move to  accommodation  in  December  2010
    where there was less support.

49.   Mr  Buttler  then  dealt  with  the  evidence  about  the   claimant's
    appearance, noting that Dr Birch when examining him  on  16  June  2008
    found that his voice had  not  broken  and  that  his  larynx  was  not
    enlarged (227).  Ms Golding had accepted these observations  in  cross-
    examination.  Regardless of Dr Birch's methodology for  assessing  age,
    it had been accepted that she employed a  high  level  of  professional
    skill in her basic clinical observations (287).  If they were  correct,
    it must follow that by March 2009 the claimant's voice had  broken  and
    his Adam's apple had become visible.  In any event, it would clearly be
    exceptional to find a boy of 17 with an unbroken voice and  Ms  Golding
    had said from her experience that she  would  expect  a  Kurdish  boy's
    voice to break from the age of 13.   The  apparent  opinion  of  French
    police officers on the  claimant's  age  was  of  no  evidential  value
    because it was not known on what basis the view had been formed.

50.  So far as the claimant's demeanour was concerned,  there  was  evidence
    which should be given proper weight from his key workers, who  met  him
    more often than the social workers, that he was very shy  and  reserved
    and needed a great deal of support (401),  felt  intimidated  by  other
    residents in his accommodation (394), in  June  1998  continued  to  be
    reserved and shy but had shown other signs  of  improvement  (451),  in
    November 2008 he was assessed to need further support to enable him  to
    believe in himself (528) and by February 2009 he had been referred  for
    a course to boost his self-esteem (133).

51.  At the February 2009 assessment the claimant had presented as  anxious,
    nervous and at times upset and he had been placed with 16 and  17  year
    olds from April 2008 to December 2010.  He submitted that little weight
    could be attached to Ms Dunn's opinion because she  had  only  met  the
    claimant every six weeks or so and the meetings had  been  short.   She
    had  recounted  incidents  which  had  been  reported  to   her,   only
    witnessing one of them. Mr Buttler submitted that she  had  a  duty  to
    promote the claimant's welfare and that it was not appropriate for  her
    to produce such a jaundiced statement directed to undermining him.   In
    any event, her evidence did little to  advance  an  assessment  of  the
    claimant's maturity.  It could be little surprise after five  years  of
    key work support and  self  esteem  building  that  he  would  be  more
    assertive than he had been.  In any event, there was nothing surprising
    about a 20 year old drinking, betting or having girlfriends.   Dr  Alim
    had been in a position to assess the claimant's psychological  maturity
    and weight should be given to her clinical opinion that  his  level  of
    psychological maturity was more in line with a person  of  his  claimed
    rather than his assessed age.

52.  In summary, Mr Buttler submitted that the evidence indicated  that  the
    claimant was born on 9 November 1992 rather than 9 November  1990.   He
    sought to argue further that there was clear evidence that the decision
    was arbitrary in that  Ms  Golding  had  been  unable  to  provide  any
    rationale for concluding that the claimant was born on 9 November 1990.
     It was suspicious that the date of birth arrived at was precisely  the
    same as that in the quashed assessment and there  was  evidence  before
    the Tribunal that the defendant regularly  assigned  a  date  of  birth
    exactly two years earlier than claimed.  It  followed,  so  he  argued,
    that there was a proper basis for making a finding that  the  assessors
    had been influenced by the defendant's general practice, thereby taking
    an irrelevant factor into account.  He also argued  that  there  was  a
    real suspicion that this unlawful practice was unconsciously influenced
    by the defendant's financial interest in the outcome of the decision as
    the defendant stood to save a  substantial  sum  by  finding  that  the
    claimant was older than he claimed to be.  He accepted that  there  was
    insufficient evidence to enable the Tribunal to make a finding that the
    decision was influenced by financial considerations but  the  financial
    benefit to the defendant underscored, so he submitted, the  gravity  of
    the unlawful practice referred to.

The Law

53.  In R (A) v London Borough of Croydon [2009] UKSC 8  the  Supreme  Court
    held that in cases  involving  the  exercise  of  a  local  authority's
    statutory obligations in respect of  children,  a  child's  age  was  a
    matter subject to a determination by the court as a precedent fact.  In
    R (CJ) v  Cardiff City Counsel [2011] EWCA Civ 1950, Pitchford LJ said:

         "... I do not consider that the appellant can have  it  both  ways.
         It seems to me that once a court is invited to make a decision upon
         jurisdictional fact it can do no more than  apply  the  balance  of
         probability to the  issue  without  resorting  to  the  concept  of
         discharge of the burden of proof.  In my view a  distinction  needs
         to be made between a legal burden of proof, on the one hand, and  a
         sympathetic assessment of evidence on the other.  I accept that  in
         evaluating the evidence it may well be inappropriate to expect from
         the appellant conclusive evidence of age and circumstances in which
         he has arrived unattended without original identity documents.  The
         nature of the evaluation of  the  evidence  will  depend  upon  the
         particular facts of the case".

      Both counsel accepted that the assessment of age  was  a  question  of
    fact for the Tribunal to decide, neither the claimant nor the defendant
    having a burden of proving the age. It was for the Tribunal to  enquire
    and on the basis of the evidence produced  to  make  a  decision  on  a
    balance of probabilities.

54.  We were also referred to the judgments of the Court of Appeal in R  (K)
    v  Birmingham City Council [2012] EWCA Civ 1432 on  the  issue  of  the
    extent to which we should engage with arguments  based  on  traditional
    public law grounds as well as  the  factual  age  assessment.   In  his
    judgment at [50] - [52], the Master of the Rolls said:

         "50.     A number of other issues of some importance were discussed
             during the course of argument. It is right that I should say a
             few words about them. The first,  what  should  the  court  do
             where  an  applicant  brings   judicial   review   proceedings
             challenging the age assessment of a local  authority  both  on
             the facts and on traditional public law grounds, such as,  for
             example, procedural unfairness? This problem was considered in
             some detail in R (Z) v Croydon London Borough  Council  [2011]
             EWCA Civ 59 [2011] PTSR 748 at paras 5 to 10 of  the  judgment
             of the court given by Sir Anthony May.  I do not wish  to  say
             anything to qualify the guidance given there  as  to  how  the
             court should decide whether or not to give permission to apply
             for judicial review of a decision on the facts.  But  what  if
             there is also a challenge on judicial public law grounds?   At
             para 5, the Court said:


                  'A judicial review claim challenging the local authority's
                  assessment of age may thus be on various grounds.  Some of
                  them may be orthodox judicial  review  grounds.   But  the
                  core challenge is likely in most cases to be  a  challenge
                  to the age which the local authority assessed the claimant
                  to be.  Thus most of these cases are likely to require the
                  court  to   receive   evidence   to   make   its   factual
                  determination.  It is  therefore  understandable  that  Mr
                  Haddon, for the defendant local authority in  the  present
                  appeal, submitted that orthodox judicial review challenges
                  are  likely  to  be  subsumed  in  the   court's   factual
                  determination of the  claimant's  age.   If  the  claimant
                  succeeds on his factual case, the orthodox judicial review
                  challenges fall away as unnecessary.'

         51.  The point was also mentioned by Beatson J at  para  5  of  his
             judgment in MWA:

                  'In the case of the question of jurisdictional fact, it is
                  absolutely  clear  that  although  the   relevant   public
                  authority has to enquire into the facts, if  its  decision
                  as to those facts  is  wrong,  it  cannot  give  itself  a
                  jurisdiction which it does  not  have  and  cannot,  as  a
                  result of that decision, decline a jurisdiction  which  it
                  does have.  That does not,  however,  mean  that  a  local
                  authority's decision that a person is or is  not  a  child
                  for  the  purposes  of  the  Children  Act  1989  is   not
                  susceptible  to  challenge  on  ordinary  judicial  review
                  principles.  In R (A) v Croydon LBC and R  (M)  v  Lambeth
                  LBC the Supreme Court recognised that the local  authority
                  had to make its own determination in the first place  (see
                  [33] and [54]).  The fact that, in certain  circumstances,
                  a  court  is  ultimately  responsible  for  determining  a
                  matter, does not mean that in an appropriate  case,  where
                  the court has identified a public flaw,  it  cannot  remit
                  the matter to the local authority.'

         52.      I would put the point that the court made at para 5 of his
             judgment in R (Z) in rather more forthright terms than  merely
             to say that 'it is therefore understandable that [counsel] ...
             submitted that orthodox judicial review challenges are  likely
             to be subsumed in the court's  factual  determination  of  the
             claimant's age'.  These appeals show how disputes  as  to  age
             assessments can generate prolonged and costly litigation.  The
             expense is bad enough.  But even  worse  is  the  damage  that
             delay and uncertainty may cause to the interest  of  children.
             Let us suppose that the court gives an applicant permission to
             apply  for  judicial  review  of  a  local   authority's   age
             assessment on the grounds that it  is  tainted  by  procedural
             unfairness or some other  orthodox  public  law  ground.   The
             applicant will not raise such an issue unless he disputes  the
             authority's age assessment.  There is, therefore, no point  in
             deciding  that  there  has  been  procedural  unfairness   and
             remitting the case unless the court is  satisfied  that  on  a
             reconsideration the authority is likely to  make  a  different
             assessment and one which the applicant will not  dispute.   In
             most cases where there is a challenge both on the facts and on
             some orthodox public law ground, it will  be  better  for  the
             court to decide all issues in one hearing, or to transfer  the
             case to the UT for that purpose."

55.  We were also referred to authorities on the issue of  whether  reliance
    could be placed on an age assessment  carried  out  in  breach  of  the
    requirement that a young person must be  asked  whether  he  wished  to
    bring an appropriate adult in advance  of  the  interview.   In  AAM  v
    Secretary of State  [2012]  EWHC  2567,  Lang  J  found  that  the  age
    assessment in that case failed to comply with the Merton  standards  of
    good practice in that there was no appropriate adult present.  We  were
    also referred to R (AK) v Secretary of State [2011] EWHC 3188 where the
    Deputy Judge held that the absence of an  adult  at  the  time  of  the
    claimant's interview was not a ground even of  itself  for  undermining
    the age assessment [33] but we note that this  was  a  case  where  the
    claimant was given the opportunity of having a friend present prior  to
    the final interview and he declined.

Evaluation of the Evidence and Assessment of the Issues

56.  We now turn to our assessment of the  evidence.  It  is  common  ground
    that the claimant is a citizen of Iraq who made an unlawful entry  into
    this country on 21 February 2008 in the back of a lorry. He went to the
    police and then made a claim for  asylum.   From  his  arrival  he  has
    claimed that his date of birth is 9 November 1992, he is an only child,
    his family was middle class and until his parents' death,  he  expected
    to have a reasonably comfortable future.   He  said  at  the  screening
    interview that his father was born in 1970 and his mother in 1975.   He
    claimed that he started school in year 1 at the age of  6  in  1999  at
    Warda Al Wahda Primary School for Boys.  He did not  repeat  any  years
    and so started year 5 at the age of 10 in September 2003.  In that year
    the school started to teach Kurdish and changed  its  name  to  Rezgari
    Primary School.  He left at the end of year 5 in June 2004 when he  was
    11 because he had failed his exams and because of the worsening of  the
    security situation.

57.  He started working in a coffee shop in May 2007 and shortly  afterwards
    began working at a workshop that made windows  and  doors.   He  claims
    that he reported apparent terrorist activity at  the  workshop  to  his
    father who told him to stop working there  and  in  November  2007  the
    police arrested the owner of the workshop.   On  8  November  2007  the
    claimant and his parents went to  his  uncle's   house.   The  claimant
    stayed over night and his parents returned home.  On the following  day
    it was discovered that his parents had disappeared and on  12  November
    they were found dead.  On 15 November 2007 the claimant's uncle  handed
    him over to an agent and he travelled to  Turkey,  then  across  Europe
    arriving in the UK on 21 February 2012.

58.  The points argued in favour of the  claimant's  account  are  that  not
    only is it consistent within itself but is corroborated by a number  of
    factors.  He was born in Kirkuk and it would be expected that  a  child
    born there would know his date of birth.  There is  evidence  that  the
    school year in Iraq began in September and compulsory education at  the
    age of 6 (789).  The fact that the claimant would have had  lessons  in
    Kurdish in his final year is consistent with  Saddam  Hussein's  regime
    being toppled in March 2003 as is the change of name in the school from
    an Arabic to a Kurdish name.  There is also evidence that the  security
    situation in Iraq worsened in 2004.  It is  argued  that  a  number  of
    aspects of the claimant's account have not been challenged, or at least
    that during the age assessment he was  not  given  the  opportunity  of
    commenting on them.  These include the years of birth of  his  parents,
    the details of his family life, the fact that he grew  up  knowing  his
    date of birth and the evidence that the school's name was changed, that
    Kurdish was only taught in  his  final  year,  the  background  to  his
    arrival in the UK, his report of terrorist activity and the  fact  that
    his parents had disappeared and been killed.  There is  force  in  this
    submission as Ms Golding accepted in her evidence that the  only  issue
    of substance challenged during the age assessment  was  the  claimant's
    evidence about his schooling.

59.  However, his evidence and its credibility has been  challenged  on  the
    basis that there  was  no  reasonable  explanation  about  why  he  had
    travelled with an identity card which his own  expert  found  was  very
    likely to be false and no explanation for the lack of any evidence from
    Kirkuk where there would be a record of when he was at school.  It  was
    also submitted that he had a clear motive  to  lie  about  his  age  to
    obtain treatment as a child to which he was not entitled or for  longer
    than he was entitled and because he  believed  that  reducing  his  age
    would assist him in his asylum application.   Reliance is  also  placed
    on the fact that the claimant has told lies to his  key  workers  about
    his girlfriends, his own evidence being that he  did  not  always  tell
    them the truth about his background and whereabouts.  It is also argued
    that his general  behaviour  and  lifestyle  is  more  consistent  with
    someone born in 1990 rather than 1992.

60.  We attach little weight to the submissions  based  on  the  appellant's
    behaviour such as gambling, drinking, having an  older  girlfriend  and
    getting  angry  with  staff  following  his  move  to  less   supported
    accommodation in December 2010.  This  behaviour  seems  to  us  to  be
    equally consistent with either being born in 1990 or 1992.  However, we
    do have serious concerns about his use of  a  document  which  his  own
    expert did not regard as genuine.  We  are  also  concerned  about  the
    failure  to  produce  evidence  which  should  be  available  from  the
    authorities in Kirkuk which could confirm the appellant's account about
    his age and his schooling.   However, we must be careful  not  to  fall
    into the error of requiring corroboration  and  of  drawing  inferences
    from the absence of evidence without  a  full  enquiry  about  why  the
    evidence was not obtained.  Nonetheless, we do not find the claimant to
    be a sufficiently reliable or credible witness to conclude on the basis
    of his evidence alone that on a balance of probabilities  his  date  of
    birth is 1992 rather than 1990.

61.  We must look his evidence in the context of the evidence  as  a  whole.
    The age assessment carried out by the defendant in February 2009  gives
    rise to its own concerns.   Ms  Golding  accepted  that  there  was  no
    appropriate adult present and we are not satisfied  that  the  claimant
    was invited to bring an adult with him.  We accept the submission  that
    it was not the defendant's practice to  invite  appropriate  adults  in
    February 2009.  We also note that the notes were written up 15  working
    days rather than 10 working  days  after  the  interview  but  we  must
    balance this with the fact  that  Ms  Golding  was  responsible  for  a
    considerable case load and was overseeing six to eight age  assessments
    a week.  But when cross-examined Ms  Golding  accepted  that  the  only
    matter put in issue during the assessment was the claimant's account of
    his schooling.  We find that there  was  considerable  confusion  about
    what he was trying to say, possibly arising  from  the  fact  that  the
    school year ran from September and the inquiry into what  the  claimant
    was saying appears to have been on  the  assumption  of  calendar  year
    basis.  The  defendant's  case  by  necessary  inference  is  that  the
    claimant is  deliberately  putting  forward  a  prepared  false  story.
    Assuming this to be the case, it is still not easy to see how  what  he
    was saying about his school dates became so  confused.   We  must  also
    bear in mind that there was no appropriate adult present who might have
    helped the claimant explain himself in a way avoiding such confusion.

62.  We do not accept that we are necessarily bound to find that  individual
    matters not specifically put to the claimant must be  resolved  in  his
    favour but we  must  take  into  account  that  he  was  not  given  an
    opportunity at his interview of dealing with significant points such as
    the dates of birth of his parents.  These dates had been given  at  the
    screening interview and maintained. When dates were put to  Ms  Golding
    in cross-examination about the claimant's schooling, including when  he
    started, when he left and when  he  was  able  to  study  Kurdish,  she
    certainly appeared to accept that had those matters been  more  clearly
    expressed or appreciated at the interview, they  would  at  least  have
    affected her assessment.  Whilst we  are  not  bound  by  her  apparent
    acceptance of the matters put to her in cross-examination, we must take
    into account that she is an experienced social  worker  and  it  is  no
    criticism of her  that  she  was,  apparently  at  least,  prepared  to
    reconsider her assessment in the light of the issues raised  in  cross-
    examination.

63.  A similar point was raised about the  claimant's  physical  appearance.
    It is clear that Dr Birch in her report of June  2008  found  that  the
    appellant did not have a developed larynx with an Adam's apple and that
    his voice had not broken but that had happened by  February  2009.   Ms
    Golding accepted on this basis that his voice must have broken  between
    June 2008 and February 2009.  It is right to note at  this  point  that
    the defendant's previous age assessment of 27 February 2008, quashed by
    the High Court, had said that there was such  physical  development  at
    that date but Ms Golding said that she had not  read  that  assessment.
    However, she did say that she had experience of assessing  the  age  of
    young Kurdish men and accepted  that  normally  the  Adam's  apple  had
    appeared and the voice broken by the time they were 13,  which  on  the
    basis of the assessed age would be November 2003.   Therefore,  in  the
    light of the concessions made by Ms Golding during her evidence and the
    fact that there was no  appropriate  adult  present,  we  have  serious
    concerns about the reliability of the age assessment report.

64.  We now turn to  the  evidence  of  Ms  Dunn.   Her  evidence  has  been
    severely criticised on the  basis  that  as  the  claimant's  allocated
    social worker she  has  produced  a  jaundiced  statement  filled  with
    hearsay and failed in her duty to build an effective relationship  with
    him.  We do not accept these criticisms.  Her evidence must set out the
    facts as she sees  them.   We  find  that  aspects  of  the  claimant's
    behaviour towards her and his key workers  have  been  overbearing  and
    unacceptable. Whatever his age there has been no justification for such
    behaviour and at the hearing before us he accepted this.  However, most
    of the evidence related by Ms Dunn comes from other people  and  as  we
    have already indicated, we do not draw an  inference  simply  from  the
    claimant's behaviour or his life style that he is older than he  claims
    to be. It could  be  equally  consistent  with  immature  behaviour  by
    someone of his claimed age.

65.  We now turn to the evidence from the psychologists.  We have  a  number
    of concerns about Dr Alim's evidence. We are  not  satisfied  that  the
    assessment tools relied on provide any reliable guide in this  case  to
    the claimant's chronological age.  The tests  are  aimed  at  assessing
    psychological maturity and both Dr Alim and Mrs Van Scoyoc accepted  in
    their  final  joint  report  that  they  were  not   used   to   assess
    chronological age but as an aid to make  a  clinical  judgment  on  the
    claimant's likely age.  We accept the evidence of Mrs Van  Scoyoc  that
    the tools used were generally not appropriate for someone from  a  non-
    English background and that the  exercise  of  differentiating  between
    someone acting at a 19 year level and a 21 year level was  particularly
    unreliable in the circumstances of this appeal.   In  her  evidence  Dr
    Alim essentially relied on the fact that if the appellant were  21  her
    results would lead to a conclusion that he had some  mild  intellectual
    disability but we accept Ms Van Scoyoc's evidence that  the  difference
    between a 19 and 21 year old in the IQ results is so  insignificant  as
    to have little weight but in any event we prefer her evidence that  the
    use of psychometric assessment scales in this context is flawed as  the
    scales used can only give reliable and valid results  for  IQ  and  age
    comparative adaptability if the correct chronological age  is  used  to
    calculate scaled scores for cognitive ability  and  adaptive  behaviour
    and  even  when  the  assessments  are  applied  correctly,  they   are
    unreliable until a true chronological age can be established.  Further,
    the WASI, Ravens and Vineland II assessments were developed by using  a
    "norm" population and the claimant due to his background and upbringing
    falls outside that "norm" and does not  meet  the  criteria  for  being
    assessed by such psychometric assessments with the  possible  exception
    of Ravens: see Mrs Van Scoyoc's report of 5 September 2012, pages  4-5.
    In summary, we find that the psychological evidence does to take us any
    further in our assessment of the claimant's age.

66.  We therefore find ourselves in a position where there  is  very  little
    reliable evidence on which we can reach a finding as to the  claimant's
    age.  As both counsel accepted in their submissions, the assessment  of
    age is in these circumstances a very difficult, exercise.  However,  we
    must make a finding on the evidence before  us.   As  we  have  already
    indicated, we do have considerable concerns about  the  claimant's  own
    evidence.  We take into account that he was regarded as older  than  he
    claimed to be by  the  French  police  although  there  is  nothing  to
    indicate how or why they reached this conclusion and by the Home Office
    when they first interviewed him, taking the view  that  his  appearance
    very strongly suggested that he  was  over  19.   We  accept  that  the
    appellant's appearance and demeanour could be consistent with him being
    born in 1990 but equally in 1992.

67.  We must remind ourselves that physical appearance  and  characteristics
    are an unreliable guide as to age as is behaviour and maturity. We must
    also take into account the points  made  in  the  reports  of  the  key
    workers, noting that in April  2008  the  claimant  was  very  shy  and
    reserved and needed a  great  deal  of  support  (401),  that  he  felt
    intimidated by other residents in  his room  and  felt  frightened  and
    spent most of  his time in  his room (394), in June 2008  he  continued
    to be reserved and shy but  has  shown  signs  of  improvement  in  his
    confidence (451), in November 2008 he  was  assessed  to  need  further
    support to enable  him to believe in  himself  (528)  and  by  February
    2009 he had been referred to a course  to  boost  his  self-esteem.  It
    might  well  be  said  that  the  evidence  about  his  gambling,   his
    girlfriends and drinking indicates  that  these  assessments  were  not
    correct but as we have already indicated, this kind of behaviour  seems
    to us to be equally consistent with a date of birth in 1990 or 1992.

68.  We also take into account the concessions made  by  Ms  Golding  during
    her cross-examination. We were certainly left with the impression  that
    this experienced social worker was accepting in the light  of  the  way
    the case was being put to her  that  her  age  assessment  may  not  be
    accurate.  We also take  into  account  that  there  were  no  reported
    problems about how the claimant related to other residents when  placed
    in accommodation for those within his claimed age  range.   Suffice  to
    say that we have found this matter to be very difficult and albeit with
    some hesitation, we have come to the view on  the  evidence  before  us
    that on a balance of probabilities the most probable date of  birth  is
    as the claimant has asserted, 9 November 1992.

69.  Mr Buttler sought to challenge the decision on  other  grounds  arguing
    that the defendant had applied an unlawful policy  of  simply  reducing
    the claimed age by two years in circumstances when it was not believed,
    that the age assessment in the present case had been influenced by that
    general practice and was therefore vitiated by the  application  of  an
    irrelevant consideration.  He also argued  that  there  was  no  proper
    basis for accepting the claimed day and month of birth but not the year
    of birth.  However, having reached a decision on the claimant's date of
    birth, we do not see any need  or  purpose  in  the  present  case  for
    exploring these issues further in the light of the  guidance  given  by
    the Court of Appeal in R (K) v Birmingham City Council.


Decision

70.  In summary, doing the best we can on the evidence before  us,  we  find
    on a balance of probabilities that the claimant's date of  birth  is  9
    November 1992 and we make a declaration accordingly.  The  parties  may
    make further written submissions on the terms  of  any  further  orders
    sought and in particular on the issue of  costs.   In  the  absence  of
    agreement these issues will be determined on the basis of  the  written
    submissions.





Signed                                  Date: 15 February 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Latter
