
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


MS (British citizenship; EEA appeals) Belgium [2019] UKUT 00356 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 July 2019                               |                              |
|Further submissions: 31 July and 5 August 2019|..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH


                                   Between

                                     MS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B. Amunwa, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis &
                   Co Solicitors (Harrow Office)
For the Respondent:    Mr I. Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

(1)  If, on appeal, an issue arises as to whether the removal  of  a  person
(P) from the United Kingdom  would  be  unlawful  because  P  is  a  British
citizen, the tribunal deciding  the  appeal  must  make  a  finding  on  P's
citizenship; just as the tribunal must do so where the consideration of  the
public interest question in Part 5A  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
Asylum Act 2002 involves finding whether another  person  falls  within  the
definition of a "qualifying child" or  "qualifying  partner"  by  reason  of
being a British citizen.

(2) The fact that P might,  in  the  past,  have  had  a  good  case  to  be
registered as a British citizen has no material bearing on the  striking  of
the proportionality balance under Article 8(2) of the ECHR. The  key  factor
is not whether P had a  good  chance  of  becoming  a  British  citizen,  on
application, at some previous time but is, rather, the nature and extent  of
P's life in the United Kingdom.

(3)  If P is  prevented  by  regulation  37  of  the  Immigration  (European
Economic Area) Regulations  2016  from  initiating  an  appeal  under  those
Regulations whilst  P  is  in  the  United  Kingdom,  it  would  defeat  the
legislative purpose in enacting regulation 37 if P were  able,  through  the
medium of a human rights  appeal  brought  within  the  United  Kingdom,  to
advance the very challenge to the  decision  taken  under  the  Regulations,
which Parliament has ordained can be initiated only from abroad.

(4)  In considering the public interest question in  Part  5A  of  the  2002
Act, if P is an EEA national (or family member of an EEA national)  who  has
no basis under the 2016 Regulations or  EU  law  for  being  in  the  United
Kingdom, P requires leave to enter  or  remain  under  the  Immigration  Act
1971. If P does not have such  leave,  P  will  be  in  the  United  Kingdom
unlawfully for the purpose of section 117B(4) of the  2002  Act  during  the
period in question and, likewise, will not be lawfully resident during  that
period for the purpose of section 117C(4)(a).

(5)  The modest degree of flexibility contained in section  117A(2)  of  the
2002 Act, recognised by the Supreme Court in Rhuppiah v Secretary  of  State
for the Home Department [2018] UKSC 58, means that, depending on the  facts,
P may nevertheless fall to be treated as lawfully in the United Kingdom  for
the purpose of those provisions, during the time that P was an EU  child  in
the United Kingdom; as in the present case, where P was  under  the  control
of his parents; was able to attend  school  and  college  without  questions
being asked as to P's  status;  and  where  no  action  was  taken  or  even
contemplated by the respondent in respect of P or his EU mother.



                            DECISION AND REASONS


A. PRELIMINARY

   1. This is the re-making of the appellant's appeal against the refusal of
      his human rights claim by the respondent.


   2. Amongst the issues that fall to be considered in deciding  this  human
      rights appeal, which turns  upon  Article  8  of  the  ECHR,  are  the
      significance of a person having had, in the past, an  entitlement,  on
      application, to be registered as a  British  citizen  or  (as  in  the
      present case) an entitlement to apply to  be  so  registered,  at  the
      respondent's discretion; and the significance  of  a  person  being  a
      citizen of the European Union  (other  than  as  a  British  citizen),
      particularly  with  regard  to  the  operation  of  Part  5A  of   the
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.


   3. On 26 July 2019, we heard oral evidence from  the  appellant  and  his
      mother.  Closing submissions were subsequently made in writing  by  Mr
      Jarvis and Mr Amunwa.  We also had their written  skeleton  arguments
      and Mr Amunwa's Note of 26 July 2019.  We commend the quality of their
      respective submissions.


   4. In addition  to  the  criminal  offending  described  in  our  earlier
      decision, on 9 January 2019, the appellant was  convicted  of  assault
      against his former partner, whom we shall call X,  who  was  the  same
      complainant as in the March 2017 offences committed by the  appellant.
      In respect of the latest offence,  the  appellant  received  custodial
      sentences of nineteen weeks, with a post-sentence  supervision  order.
      He is also subject to a restraining order, which runs until 2021.


   5. At the hearing on 26 July, Mr Jarvis sought  to  introduce  a  witness
      statement of Tracy Dang, a police staff  investigator  at  Southampton
      Central Police Station.  This statement, dated 19 July 2019,  referred
      to Ms Dang having recently been informed by X that the  appellant  had
      broken the terms of his restraining order by sending her letters on  9
      April and 7 May 2019, as well as "numerous letters and phone calls ...
      being sent from Winchester Prison ... to my home address and my  place
      of work".


   6. After taking instructions, Mr Amunwa informed the  Tribunal  that  the
      appellant was able to address and rebut what was  said  in  Ms  Dang's
      statement.  In the circumstances, the Tribunal admitted the statement,
      pursuant to Rule 15(2A) of the Tribunal  Procedures  (Upper  Tribunal)
      Procedure Rules 2008.






      B. THE EVIDENCE


      (a) The appellant


   7. The appellant adopted two written witness statements.  In  the  first,
      which he signed on 5 October 2018, he described his background and the
      circumstances leading to, and following, the respondent's decision  to
      deport him from the United Kingdom.


   8. The appellant was born in Antwerp, Belgium in July 1998.  He  did  not
      know his birth father.  He was adopted by NS in 2003.  He said he  had
      lived in Belgium with his family for two years and nine months, before
      his parents, siblings and he moved to the United Kingdom.  He has  two
      sisters and three brothers.  His two sisters, who featured prominently
      in the evidence, we shall describe as Y and Z respectively.


   9. The family moved to Grangemouth, Scotland and later to Hampshire.  The
      appellant said he, his mother and his siblings are  Belgian  citizens,
      whilst his adoptive father is a British citizen.   He  said  that  his
      father's parents and relatives lived in the United  Kingdom  and  that
      was one of the reasons that they came to this country.


  10. In 2007, the appellant moved back to Belgium with his  family  but  in
      February 2011, they moved again to the United Kingdom.  It  was  there
      that the appellant finished his schooling, before  later  working  for
      various employers.


  11. In 2016, the appellant began a relationship with X.  At  the  time  of
      the first statement,  X  was  pregnant  with  the  appellant's  child.
      Regrettably X miscarried, as she did on another occasion.


  12. The appellant's statement continued by saying that "I am going to  say
      something that I have not mentioned to the authorities  before  but  I
      feel it is very important and could help  in  explaining  why  I  have
      acted in the way I have.  I come from an abusive family, what  I  mean
      by this is physical and sexual abuse".


  13. The appellant described returning home at the age of  8  to  find  his
      adoptive father in a sexual position with Y.  The appellant was  aware
      that his mother knew of this "but nothing changed".


  14. The appellant  also  described  how  he  and  his  two  brothers  were
      physically beaten by their mother on "so many occasions  ...  I  can't
      count".  The appellant said that this abuse "goes on now and I can see
      that all this background has a direct link with my offending".


  15. The appellant in  his  statement  admitted  having  fourteen  criminal
      convictions in the UK which "mainly involved assaults, vandalisms  and
      destruction of property".  These were committed in the years  2013  to
      2015 when the appellant "was  young  and  I  had  met  some  people  I
      shouldn't have".


  16. The appellant's conviction in 2017 occurred because  he  "leaked  some
      photos of my ex-partner.  I was going  through  a  difficult  period".
      His ex-partner had, according to the appellant, put his life in danger
      by  cutting  his  car's  brake  cables  and  damaging   its   gearbox.
      Nevertheless, the appellant knew that he should not have done what  he
      did and felt ashamed about it.  He said:  "I  am  a  different  person
      now".   The  appellant  also  considered  that  he  was  in  need   of
      psychological help.


  17. The appellant said that he had suffered from depression for  the  past
      three years.  This has started when he was still at  school.   He  had
      contemplated  seriously  twice  whilst  in  detention.   He  had  been
      prescribed anti-depressants but these had not helped him.


  18. The statement recorded  that  the  appellant  had  "been  deported  to
      Belgium three times so far".  His partner had assisted him financially
      to return to the United Kingdom.  The appellant said that he  did  not
      know why the respondent wanted to  deport  him  and  that  he  was  "a
      European citizen.  I have lived my whole life in the UK.  I could have
      been a British citizen since my father is one, if I wanted  to".   The
      appellant said that "all my relatives live here in the UK" and that he
      "went to school here.  I worked here".   By  contrast,  the  appellant
      said that he had "no family  ties  in  Belgium.   I  have  no  friends
      either.  I know none there and I cannot even speak French or Flemish".




  19. The appellant also adopted a  second  witness  statement,  signed  and
      dated 8 July 2019, although he told us that he had not read it. He was
      therefore given time at the hearing to read it through.


  20.  In  this  statement,  the  appellant  gave  more  details  about  the
      allegation of sexual abuse and of the ill-treatment meted out  to  him
      by his mother and step-father.


  21. In 2015, the appellant said that he decided that  "enough  was  enough
      and I left my house and walked to a place ... and turned  myself  over
      to  social  services  for  foster  care".   He  also   described   his
      relationship with X.  He regretted acting in anger and  hurting  X  in
      2017.  He accepted that he had "hurt her and caused a lot of damage in
      the flat".


  22. At paragraph 11, the  appellant  described  how  he  was  deported  to
      Belgium on 3 November 2017.  Since he did not "speak Dutch (sic)" the
      appellant  could  not  remember  much  but  he  considered  that   the
      respondent "might as well have just sent me to a country  in  Asia  or
      Africa that I have never been to,  because  I  feel  like  a  complete
      stranger, there is no one there who I know, my  family  and  relatives
      are in the UK".


  23. The appellant described how on his first night in Belgium he slept  in
      park and then X came to Brussels and tried to help him  come  back  to
      the United  Kingdom  through  Calais,  but  he  was  not  allowed  in.
      "However, later on I met someone  who  said  that  as  I  was  an  EEA
      national I could get through Ireland, so we went to Dublin,  and  then
      we got a ferry to Holyhead and that was how I came back  into  the  UK
      the first time".  The appellant emphasised that he returned "because I
      did not have anything or know anyone in Belgium".


  24. At paragraph 12, the appellant  said  that  in  January  2018  he  was
      arrested by the police because he had come back to the United  Kingdom
      in breach of his deportation order.  He was removed to Belgium  on  18
      March 2018 but, again, with the financial help  of  X  he  headed  for
      Scotland but was arrested when he took the ferry there.  The appellant
      was detained again and removed on 7 May 2018.


  25. After being removed on 7 May, the appellant returned to the UK at  the
      end of May 2018.  This was because, again, he had no choice but to  go
      sleeping in the same park, although he did manage to spend  one  night
      in "what was like a homeless shelter".  He started stealing food  from
      local shops, in order to survive.  That was how he survived in Belgium
      "for a few weeks before my partner ... came to Belgium and  helped  me
      to get back into the UK at the end of May 2018".  The  appellant  was,
      however, arrested again in June 2018 and sent to a detention centre.


  26. The appellant's appeal hearing was held in October 2018 and his appeal
      was subsequently allowed.  He went to live with X and his mother and X
      became pregnant in May/June 2018.  However, in November 2018, X had  a
      miscarriage.  The appellant held himself responsible for this  "as  it
      was because of me that she got stressed and was unwell especially when
      I was in detention".  After the miscarriage X turned more and more  to
      alcohol.


  27. In January 2019 the appellant and X argued after X had been  drinking.
      The appellant kicked down a door but X was on the other  side  of  the
      door and it hit her, causing her "serious injury".  The appellant  was
      arrested and sentenced to nineteen weeks' imprisonment.


  28. Since going to prison in January 2019, the appellant had taken courses
      run by a charity called "Phoenix Futures" on "Managing  Anger"  and  a
      large number of other courses, including "Motivation" and  "Anger  and
      Criticism".   He  also  successfully  completed  the  Young  Offenders
      Programme, which looks at  ways  in  which  to  build  resilience  and
      develop self-esteem.  The appellant found these  courses  useful.   He
      accepted that they would not somehow "fix" him since he realised  that
      "there are deeper psychological problems that I need help  with".   In
      April 2019 he described trying "to hang myself in prison, but  luckily
      my cellmate stopped me".  The  appellant  said  that  he  was  "trying
      everything I can to change my life".


  29. The appellant also recognised that he  needed  help  with  his  mental
      health and had referred himself to  the  NHS  Mental  Health  Team  in
      February or March 2019.  He had not, however, been able to see anyone,
      owing to the fact that he was still held in prison.


  30. The appellant reiterated that he could not  return  to  Belgium  since
      "each time I was sent back, I was destitute and sleeping rough, and it
      was only because of [X] that I was able to  return.   I  have  no  one
      there, I can hardly remember any Dutch, I had to use Google  Translate
      to try and work out where I was.  My family are  all  in  the  UK,  my
      mother, my siblings, my life is here".


  31. Given that X was no longer there to help out  the  appellant,  he  did
      "not know what I would need to do to survive or how  I  would  survive
      mentally, I am really really worried".


  32. In supplementary questions in chief, the  appellant  was  asked  about
      Tracy Dang's statement, regarding  X.   He  said  that  he  wanted  to
      address this as he would "rather be honest".  The appellant said  that
      he had received four letters from X, which had been  printed  off  for
      him in prison.  He had also received pictures from X.   He  had  given
      letters and pictures to a solicitor at Duncan Lewis.  X's letters said
      how the appellant needed to get help and should not brood on the past.




  33. The appellant said that he was in a predicament and now realised  that
      he had been stupid to reply to X.   He  had,  nevertheless,  done  so.
      Asked if he had made telephone calls, the appellant said that he could
      not do so from prison, owing to the restrictions imposed by the prison
      authorities.


  34. The appellant said that each time he had been deported to  Belgium  he
      had come back the next day and "lay low".   The  appellant  was  being
      honest in saying this.  After the appellant was deported a second time
      in March 2018 he had come back in a day or two as he could  not  speak
      the language.  He had gone to the local council in  Belgium  for  help
      but they said that since he had been away a long time they  could  not
      assist.  The longest time he had spent in  Belgium  after  deportation
      was less than a week; around three or four days.


  35. The appellant said that he did not have any relatives in  Belgium  and
      had never met or known his real father.


36. The appellant accepted that the assault which  took  place  in  January
    2019 had been after he had received  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, allowing his appeal.  The  miscarriage  of  X  had,  however,
    greatly harmed the relationship.


37. Cross-examined, the appellant was asked whether he had been involved in
    gang culture.  He said he had not.  It was put to the appellant that at
    D656, where there is found a Central and North-West  London  NHS  Trust
    ACCT Mental Health Screening Tool,  recording  an  interaction  with  a
    mental health nurse, following the appellant's attempt in 2019 to  hang
    himself, the nurse recorded the  appellant  as  stating  that  "he  was
    involved in a lot of gang culture".


38. The appellant said that he was not involved in this but a  lot  of  his
    friends had "passed away"  and  an  uncle  had  been  "murdered".   The
    appellant had associated with people who were involved in gangs and  he
    was friends with them.


39. The appellant also said that he had taken drugs a lot of the  time  and
    had seen "stuff it would take a long time to move on from".


40. The appellant was asked about his sisters, Y and Z.  Z  lived  with  an
    aunt in the United Kingdom and Y was studying abroad to be a barrister.
     Asked where they were in 2018, the appellant said that Z was with  her
    aunt and Y was with her biological father in Belgium.


41. The appellant was asked  about  a  letter  from  Duncan  Lewis  to  the
    respondent, dated 9 July 2018, in which it was said that the  appellant
    "has two sisters in Belgium but no other family.  His  sisters  do  not
    speak to the client due to his connection with his adoptive father  who
    was involved in a serious family incident.  He cannot rely on  them  if
    he is returned".  The appellant said that he had not spoken  to  Y  for
    three years and that it was "a touchy subject".  His mother,  who  came
    from Morocco, was from a background where matters of abuse tended to be
    "brushed under the carpet".


42. The appellant said his mother was aware  that  he  had  spoken  of  her
    carrying out physical abuse of the appellant.


43. The appellant was asked whether it was the case that  he  had  gone  to
    school in Belgium from 2007 to 2011, where the language of  instruction
    was, he said, Dutch and English.  He had been put in a  special  school
    as he was due to return to the United Kingdom and needed to improve his
    English.  Asked why this was so, the appellant said that it was because
    of his "tossing and turning" and Dutch was a tough language.


44. The appellant was asked about his illegal return to the United  Kingdom
    in November 2017.  He said that he had tried to get back via Calais but
    was encountered and so he and X had gone to Ireland and then  Scotland.
    He had been told about the possibility of entering the  United  Kingdom
    via Ireland by a person nicknamed "Stabber" who had been  in  the  same
    detention centre as the appellant.  Asked how it was that paragraph  11
    of the second statement referred to the appellant  "later  on"  meeting
    someone who had told him about entering as an EEA national via Ireland,
    the appellant said that it was "a bit of both".  "Stabber" had told him
    beforehand about this possibility.


45. Regarding his removal in May 2018, the appellant said that he had  been
    looking at the possibility of using  a  solicitor  but  had  needed  to
    obtain legal aid.  The appellant was asked about the updated chronology
    of events at D641 of the bundle  where,  at  D643,  the  appellant  was
    recorded as having been removed on 7 May 2018 and as having  re-entered
    the United Kingdom on 31 May 2018.  The appellant had first  said  that
    this was incorrect but having  been  shown  D643  he  agreed  that  the
    chronology was, in fact, correct.


46. The appellant was asked whether he had not, therefore, been in  Belgium
    between 7 and 31 May 2018.  He said that he had not in that he and  his
    partner, X, had gone on holiday to the south of France before embarking
    on the trip via Dublin to the United Kingdom.


47. The appellant said that he had lived in Belgium for a few  weeks  after
    his second deportation, not his third one.  He had, as  he  just  said,
    gone on holiday after his third deportation.


48. The appellant was asked why he had made no reference in  his  statement
    to this holiday.  The appellant agreed that it should have been  added.
    Paragraph 13 of his statement, which described his having to sleep on a
    park bench and steal food from shops  in  order  to  survive,  was  not
    referable to the position he faced after his deportation in  May  2018.
    After his second deportation, he had stayed in Belgium for a number  of
    weeks.


49. The appellant was asked about paragraph 11 of his second  statement  in
    which he said that the respondent had given him a "list  of  addresses"
    that he could use in Belgium.  He said he tried both of the  addresses.
    One was a shelter where he stayed for a day  and  the  other  one  only
    dealt with asylum cases.


50. The appellant was asked why in paragraphs 11 to 13 he had not mentioned
    going to the council, who had told him about the need to have a  period
    of five years' residence in  order  to  qualify  for  assistance.   The
    appellant said he had not known about the procedures but it would  have
    been helpful if he had mentioned this.  He had not mentioned it to  his
    solicitors.


51. The appellant was asked whether he had sought legal advice in  Belgium.
    He said that he did not have any money to do so.  It  was  put  to  the
    appellant that X was financing him and she could have  paid  for  legal
    advice.  The appellant said that she had been there  the  night  before
    the appellant had arrived in Belgium.


52. The appellant said that his family had had several days' notice of  the
    fact that the appellant was going to be deported.   He  was  asked  why
    they had not therefore sought legal advice for him.   He  replied  that
    money was tight for his mother.  His mother had taken him back again in
    order to give him a couple of  weeks  to  get  himself  together.   The
    authorities had arrested him at his mother's house, where he was hiding
    in a cupboard.  At the time he had been working for an alcohol company.




53. The appellant said his suicide attempt in 2019 had been as a result  of
    a build-up of everything that was going on.


54. The appellant was asked why, at paragraph 27 of  his  first  statement,
    there had been no mention of the appellant being destitute in  Belgium.
    The appellant said that his previous lawyers  had  prepared  his  first
    statement and it had needed work.  His present lawyers had had time  to
    go into matters in more detail.


55. In re-examination, the appellant said that he had received the  letters
    from X in late January and February 2019.  He had shared them with  his
    solicitor on 8 July 2019.






      (b) The appellant's mother


56. The appellant's mother gave evidence.   She  adopted  her  two  written
    statements.  In the first,  dated  26  July  2019,  she  described  the
    appellant's birth and early life.  Her partner, the  appellant's  step-
    father, had struggled in Belgium, following the family's  return  there
    from the United Kingdom.  After four years, they had  returned  to  the
    United Kingdom.  She had separated from him in 2013.


57. The mother said that they had "had some problems  in  our  family  that
    resulted in [the appellant] voluntarily going  into  care  ...   I  was
    obviously very shocked by this but there was a lot going on at home  at
    the time and he felt that it will be best for  him".   She  had  worked
    night and day to support the family.  Looking back, she  accepted  that
    she had not been in the house as much as she should have been.  When he
    was in prison she had only visited him once "because I could  not  bear
    to see him in prison.  It was very painful".


58. In her second statement, dated 11 July 2019, the witness said that  "on
    each occasion that [the appellant] was deported to Belgium in the past,
    I was not in a position to help him financially".  She could  not  help
    him if he were to go to Belgium "as there is no family left  there  who
    could help him get on his feet, he would be completely  alone  with  no
    place to stay or anyone to help him".  The witness said  she  had  been
    attempting to get in contact with the appellant's adoptive father, whom
    she believed lived in Yorkshire, but he had not  returned  any  of  her
    calls or messages.


59. When the appellant was released in October 2018, he had  come  back  to
    live with her, along  with  X,  but  X's  miscarriage  had  very  badly
    affected X's relationship with the appellant.  She considered  that  to
    return the appellant to Belgium "would be a disaster".


60. In examination in-chief, the appellant's mother said that  Y  lives  in
    Belgium and that she herself had other relatives in  that  country  but
    does not have contact with them.  Y had lived in Belgium  since  birth.
    She was in her final year in university and her partner was  Irish.   Y
    wished to return to live in England, following her studies.


61. Asked when she had  last  had  contact  with  her  other  relatives  in
    Belgium, she said it was very complex.  There was  no  contact  between
    the appellant and those relatives in Belgium.


62. The witness said that she herself had contact with Y and that they  did
    talk about the appellant.  Y had found it hard  that  the  witness  had
    gone to the United Kingdom with the appellant.  Y blamed the  appellant
    for the fact that the witness had moved away.


63. Cross-examined, the witness said that the appellant's  adoptive  father
    had always tried to "bring him down".   Asked  if  there  was  anything
    going on between that individual and another child,  the  witness  said
    that she could not remember.  She also said that sometimes in a  moment
    of rage she might have physically abused the appellant  but  it  was  a
    long time ago and she could not remember.


64. It was put to the witness that the appellant had said that she had been
    told about his pending removal a week or so beforehand and it  was  put
    to her that she would, therefore, have been in a position to  help  the
    appellant.  She said she had tried but could not  get  help.   She  had
    gone to a solicitor and they had  said  that  they  needed  information
    about the appellant's school in Scotland but they could  not  get  that
    information.  After his return following the  deportation  of  November
    2017, the appellant had lived at the witness's address.  She could  not
    remember how the authorities had known that  he  was  there.   She  had
    tried to get legal advice for him.  She had been told that she needed a
    solicitor in family law.  Asked why this  was  the  case,  the  witness
    replied that they had to check.


65. The witness said that the appellant's longest spell in  Belgium,  after
    deportation action, had not been very long.  X had  brought  him  back.
    He had been living on the streets in Belgium.


66. The witness was asked about the appellant's evidence to the effect that
    he had gone on holiday to France with X.  The appellant said she  could
    not remember this.


67. Whilst the appellant had been in Belgium, she had spoken to him on  the
    telephone and had asked him to pass the phone so that the witness could
    speak to the lady from the council, who  said  that  he  had  not  been
    resident in Belgium for long enough to be entitled to assistance.   The
    appellant had therefore gone to another town and they told him the same
    thing.


68. The witness was asked why none of this was in her  witness  statements.
    She said that she was of the view that  she  would  rather  answer  the
    judge directly at the hearing.  She had had a nervous breakdown and had
    only been to see the appellant in prison once.  She wanted to say  what
    she had just said in court.


69. The witness said that her daughter, Z, had lived  in  Belgium  but  had
    returned to the United Kingdom some three or four years  ago.   It  was
    wrong for Duncan Lewis to have informed the respondent in 2018  that  Z
    was then living in Belgium.


70. The witness said that she worked as a cleaner.  She was asked how  much
    she earned.  She said that  she  had  three  jobs  but  could  not  say
    exactly.


71. In answer to a question from Upper Tribunal  Judge  Gill,  the  witness
    said that she had tried  to  get  a  lawyer  in  Belgium  to  help  the
    appellant but she considered that she had to be in Belgium in order  to
    get such help.  Asked why she had not gone there temporarily to  assist
    the appellant, the witness said that her  other  children  needed  her.
    Her other children were aged 14, 15 and 17.


72. There was no re-examination.






      C. CREDIBILITY


73. In assessing the credibility of the appellant and his mother and in our
    general consideration of the weight to be given to the evidence adduced
    by him and on his behalf, we have had full regard to the fact  that  he
    is, and has been, in detention.  Not  only  is  this  likely  to  cause
    stress and anxiety; we also accept that it  may  make  the  giving  and
    taking of instructions more difficult.


74. In addition (and cumulatively) we have had regard  to  the  appellant's
    youth.  We are also mindful of  the  fact  that,  whether  or  not  the
    appellant's childhood has, in reality, been as troubled as  he  claimed
    in his evidence, it has on any view been somewhat problematic.


75. In the second witness statement that the appellant  signed  on  8  July
    2019, it was categorically  stated  that,  after  his  removal  by  the
    respondent on 7 May 2018, he found himself homeless and needed to sleep
    in a park and steal food from shops in order to survive "in Belgium for
    a few weeks before my partner [X] came to Belgium  and  helped  me  get
    back into the UK at the end of May 2018".   This  contrasted  with  the
    appellant's oral evidence, which was that the  longest  period  he  had
    remained in Belgium was  three  or  four  days.   It  also  contrasted,
    strikingly, with the assertion -  which  had  not  previously  featured
    anywhere - that after his removal on 7 May 2018, the  appellant  and  X
    decided to go on holiday together to the south of France (specifically,
    Provence), before making their way back  to  the  United  Kingdom,  via
    Ireland.


76. When this discrepancy was put to the appellant in cross-examination, he
    attempted to explain that the period of time in  Belgium  described  in
    paragraph 13 of the second witness statement in  fact  related  to  the
    second post-removal period spent there by him.  However, that does  not
    fit with his account of time spent in Belgium on that occasion.


77. In making our findings, we  have  had  regard  to  the  fact  that  the
    appellant's present solicitors are highly experienced in the  field  of
    immigration.  We do not accept that they would have produced the second
    witness statement in such glaringly inaccurate terms, other than on the
    basis of what the appellant had told them.   Furthermore,  as  we  have
    noted, the appellant  signed  the  witness  statement  even  though  he
    asserted at the hearing that he had not been able to  read  it  through
    (which, again, is problematic, given the identity of his solicitors).


78. The appellant was told "later on" by someone he met,  after  his  first
    deportation removal, how it was possible to  get  back  to  the  United
    Kingdom, as an  EEA  national,  via  Ireland.   In  oral  evidence,  by
    contrast, the appellant said that this information had  been  given  to
    him in the detention centre in the  United  Kingdom  by  an  individual
    nicknamed "Stabber".  When the discrepancy was put to the appellant  in
    cross-examination, he said that he had been told both before and after.




79.  We  agree  with  Mr  Jarvis  that  this   purported   explanation   is
    unsatisfactory.  Indeed, it struck us as a  further  incidence  of  the
    appellant making things up as he went  along  and  saying  whatever  he
    thought might best advance his case.  In the present context, it  would
    plainly be in the appellant's interest to seek to minimise  the  period
    of time that he was in Belgium on this occasion.


80. There is also no reference in the written evidence to  the  appellant's
    claims in oral evidence that he went to council officials in Belgium in
    order to seek help but was told that this was unavailable, owing to his
    lack of residence in that country and the fact that he was not claiming
    asylum in  Belgium.   Given  the  detail  in  the  appellant's  written
    statements, we  do  not  find  it  credible  that,  if  all  this  were
    reasonably likely to be true, he would have omitted to tell  those  who
    prepared the statements. We make that finding, bearing in mind that the
    appellant's mother gave evidence about speaking on the telephone  to  a
    council official.  We shall have more to say about that evidence later.




81. The appellant was asked in cross-examination about  his  first  witness
    statement, signed on 4 October 2018, in which no reference was made  to
    the appellant being destitute in Belgium.  The appellant said that  his
    previous lawyers had prepared the first statement and this  had  needed
    work.  Once he got a new lawyer, there had been more time  to  go  into
    detail.  We note, however, that this first witness statement  was  made
    to the appellant's present solicitors.


82. In paragraph 28 of his first witness statement,  the  appellant  stated
    categorically that "all my relatives live here in  the  UK".   That  is
    plainly untrue.  As we have noted, the appellant's sister, Y, has lived
    in Belgium since her birth.


83. In the light of the appellant's first witness statement  and  the  oral
    evidence given to the First-tier Tribunal, the judge of  that  Tribunal
    was satisfied "that the appellant had reasonably  addressed  issues  of
    anger management, the impact of his actions on victims and how he would
    deal with those situations which he  accepts  were  the  cause  of  his
    previous problems".  The  Tribunal  assessed  his  overall  insight  as
    "reasonable".  However, it is common ground that, within  a  matter  of
    weeks, the appellant again assaulted X, for which he was convicted  and
    imprisoned.  In the circumstances, we agree with  Mr  Jarvis  that  the
    appellant is someone who unhesitatingly will lie or dissemble, in order
    to get what he wants.


84. In view of our findings, we treat with caution what the appellant  told
    us about the circumstances in which he breached the  restraining  order
    regarding further contact with X.  Given the lateness of  the  evidence
    in  respect  of  this  matter,  as  adduced  by  the   respondent,   we
    nevertheless decline to make a finding against the appellant in respect
    of this particular  issue.   The  stark  fact  is,  however,  that  the
    appellant's credibility is seriously undermined, in any event, for  the
    reasons we have given.


85. We did not find the appellant's mother to be a credible  witness.   She
    was markedly evasive when asked when she had last had contact with  her
    relatives in Belgium.  This evasion had no connection with the issue of
    whether, as the appellant claims, his mother was aware  of  the  sexual
    abuse of Y and had physically abused the  appellant.  What  did  emerge
    from the evidence of the appellant's mother, however, which we  accept,
    is that Y has at all material times been living in Belgium.


86. It is also wholly unbelievable that the appellant's mother claimed  not
    to remember how the United Kingdom authorities knew that the  appellant
    was living at her address.


87. The appellant's mother's evidence  regarding  attempts  to  seek  legal
    advice  on  behalf  of  the   appellant   was,   likewise,   profoundly
    unsatisfactory.  She could not explain why she  would  have  been  told
    that she needed a solicitor who was expert in  family,  as  opposed  to
    immigration, law.


88. The appellant's mother gave in evidence that  she  had  spoken  on  the
    telephone to someone from  a  local  council  in  Belgium,  whilst  the
    appellant was in that country, following his deportation.   When  asked
    why this was not in her witness  statements,  she  said  that  she  was
    thinking that she  would  rather  answer  the  judge  directly  at  the
    hearing.  That is, frankly, a bizarre and  an  incredible  explanation.
    We are entirely satisfied that, even if such a conversation might  have
    taken place, it is not reasonably likely that the council official  was
    told anything like the truth  by  the  appellant  or  his  mother.   In
    particular, we do not believe that the appellant's mother was  told  by
    anyone in Belgium that she could  not  receive  legal  advice  in  that
    country, on behalf of the appellant, because she was not in the  United
    Kingdom.  That too was not in her  witness  statement  and  is,  as  Mr
    Jarvis submitted, a lie intended to explain why nothing was done,  when
    plainly it could have been.


89. The appellant's mother claimed to be unable to tell us,  even  roughly,
    how much she earned from her three jobs as a cleaner.  She produced  no
    bank  statements   disclosing   her   financial   position.    In   the
    circumstances, the appellant has failed to show that it  is  reasonably
    likely that his mother lacks the financial means to provide him with at
    least some assistance, should he be  removed  to  Belgium.   Given  the
    problems we have with the credibility of the appellant and his  mother,
    it is, further, not shown to be reasonably likely that Y's relationship
    with the appellant is such that she would be unable  and  unwilling  to
    provide him with some modest assistance there.






      D. RE-MAKING THE DECISION IN THE APPELLANT'S HUMAN RIGHTS APPEAL


      (a) The issue of British citizenship


90. At paragraph 64 of our error of law decision in the  present  case,  we
    noted how,  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  Secretary  of  State's
    contention was that any resolution of the appellant's  contention  that
    he was a  British  citizen  had  to  be  resolved  by  judicial  review
    proceedings, rather than in an appeal to the Tribunal.


91. Before us, both Mr Amunwa and Mr Jarvis were  effectively  agreed  that
    the position taken by the respondent (as she now is) before the  First-
    tier Tribunal on the issue of nationality was incorrect.   If,  as  was
    then the case, the appellant was contending that he  was,  in  fact,  a
    British citizen by reason of adoption, then it was  necessary  for  the
    Tribunal to decide whether the respondent had the legal power to deport
    the appellant from the United Kingdom.  In a human rights  appeal,  the
    ability of the  respondent  to  effect  removal  is,  plainly,  of  the
    greatest significance in determining whether removal would be a  breach
    of  section  6  of  the  Human  Rights  Act  1998,  as  constituting  a
    disproportionate interference with (normally) a person's Article 8 ECHR
    rights: See Charles (Human rights appeal: scope) [2018] UKUT 89  (IAC).




92. When determining an appellant's human rights appeal under Article 8  of
    the ECHR, it is frequently necessary to have regard to the human rights
    of persons other than  the  appellant.  Part  5A  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 requires regard to be  had  to  various
    such scenarios, in determining whether the appellant's removal would be
    a disproportionate interference with his or her Article 8 rights.


93.  In section 117B(4) little weight is to  be  given  to  a  relationship
    formed with a qualifying partner at a time when a  person  was  in  the
    United Kingdom unlawfully.  In section  117B(6),  the  public  interest
    will not require removal of a person not subject to  deportation  where
    that person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with  a
    qualifying child and it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to
    leave the United Kingdom. In the case  of  certain  foreign  criminals,
    section 117C(5)  provides  an  exception  to  the  public  interest  in
    deportation, if the person concerned has a relevant relationship with a
    qualifying partner or a qualifying child, and the effect of deportation
    on either partner or child would be unduly harsh. Section 117D  defines
    both a qualifying child and a qualifying partner as  including  someone
    who is a British citizen.


94. The appellant's stance in relation to his citizenship has significantly
    changed since the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.  As a  result  of
    Mr Amunwa's detailed and helpful analysis, as  set  out  in  his  third
    skeleton argument  (12  July  2019),  it  is  common  ground  that  the
    appellant did not acquire British citizenship by  reason  of  the  fact
    that he was adopted by a British citizen (namely, the person with  whom
    the appellant's mother moved to Scotland).

95. Notwithstanding this, Mr Amunwa  submits  that  the  issue  of  British
    citizenship as it impacts directly on the appellant, is still  relevant
    to the appellant's human  rights  appeal.   Mr  Amunwa  points  to  the
    following provision of the British Nationality Act 1981:-

         "3.  Acquisition by registration: minors

         (1)  If while a person is a minor an application is  made  for  his
             registration as a British citizen, the Secretary of State may,
             if he thinks fit,  cause  him  to  be  registered  as  such  a
             citizen."


96. As can be seen, section  3(1)  confers  an  entitlement  to  apply  for
    registration, not an entitlement to be registered as a British citizen.
     It is common ground that, if the appellant had been the subject of  an
    application under section 3(1) whilst he was a  minor,  the  respondent
    would have been entitled to refuse  registration  on  "good  character"
    grounds.


97. In Akinyemi v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2017]  EWCA
    Civ 236, the court was concerned with an appeal against deportation  by
    a Nigerian national who had been born in the United Kingdom but who had
    Nigerian nationality.  He had lived continuously in the United  Kingdom
    for some 30 years but had been convicted of serious criminal  offences.
    Under the provisions of the British Nationality Act 1981 as in force at
    the relevant times, the court found that:-


         "there was a nineteen-year window, between the ages of four and 23,
         when the  appellant  had  an  absolute  right  to  acquire  British
         citizenship.  For the first fourteen years  the  application  would
         have fallen to be made by his parents on his behalf and in the last
         five years by himself".  (paragraph 22: Underhill LJ).


98. The court held that  the  Upper  Tribunal  had  misdirected  itself  in
    finding that the appellant had lived in the United Kingdom  unlawfully,
    when applying section 117B(4) in its assessment of whether  deportation
    would constitute a disproportionate interference with  the  appellant's
    Article 8 rights. Section 117B(4) provides as follows:-


         "(4) Little weight should be given to -


             (a)  a private life, or


             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,


         that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
         United Kingdom unlawfully."


99. The court agreed with the appellant that his  presence  in  the  United
    Kingdom could not be described as "unlawful",  given  that  he  was  in
    breach of no legal obligation by  being  here.   The  court  noted  the
    Immigration Directorate's Instructions of November 2009, which read:-


         "This section relates to children born in the United Kingdom on  or
         after 1 January 1983 who are not British citizens because,  at  the
         time of their birth, neither of their parents was a British citizen
         or settled here.  Such children do not have the right of abode  and
         are subject to immigration control.  They are not here  unlawfully,
         however, and are not required to apply for  leave  to  remain  ..."
         (paragraph 36)


100.  At  paragraph  39  of  its  judgment,  the  court  distinguished   the
    expression "unlawfully" in section 117B from the expression  "lawfully"
    considered by the Supreme Court in R  (ST)  (Eritrea)  v  Secretary  of
    State  for  the  Home  Department  [2012]  UKSC  12,   which   involved
    consideration of whether an asylum-seeker was "lawfully" in the UK.  At
    paragraph 40 of Akinyemi, Underhill LJ said that  the  meaning  of  the
    language of section 117B(4) was "not to be found by following decisions
    on the effect of cognate,  though  not  identical,  language  in  other
    statutes".  In his view,  it  was  unnatural  to  describe  a  person's
    presence in the UK as "unlawful"  when  "there  is  no  specific  legal
    obligation of which they are in breach by being here and no legal right
    to remove them - and all the more so where they have, as the  appellant
    did from the ages of 4 to 23, an absolute right at any time to  acquire
    British  nationality  simply  by  making  the  necessary   application"
    (paragraph 41).


101. Mr Amunwa sought to  rely  upon  the  judgment  in  Akinyemi.   In  his
    submission, there was a period between 7 May 2003  and  2013  when  the
    present appellant was a minor, without any record of offending,  during
    which time Mr Amunwa said the appellant would have met the requirements
    for discretionary registration under section 3(1) of the 1981  Act,  if
    an application had been made on  his  behalf.   In  so  submitting,  Mr
    Amunwa accepted that, unlike the position of the appellant in Akinyemi,
    the present appellant's entitlement "was not absolute but was simply an
    entitlement to be considered for discretionary registration.   However,
    prior to [the appellant's] convictions, there would not have  been  any
    sensible  policy  reason/s  for   [the   respondent]   to   refuse   an
    application".


102.  Indeed,  Mr  Amunwa  submitted  that  even   after   the   appellant's
    convictions as a minor, none of the offences in question would have met
    the threshold  for  automatic  refusal  under  the  respondent's  "good
    character" policy guidance.  Mr  Amunwa's  submission  on  this  matter
    ended by saying that the appellant had been "disadvantaged  and  badly"
    by the failure of those with parental responsibility for him to make an
    application for his  registration  as  a  British  citizen,  whilst  he
    remained a minor.


103. We do not consider that Akinyemi affords  the  appellant  any  material
    assistance in advancing his human rights case by reference to the  fact
    that he may well have been able to obtain British  citizenship  in  the
    past.  As can be seen from the judgment, the court was  concerned  with
    the question of whether, for the purposes of section 117B of  the  2002
    Act,  the  appellant  had  formed  a  private  life   and/or   relevant
    relationship at a time when he was in the United Kingdom  "unlawfully".
    That was the key question and, as we shall see,  it  will  need  to  be
    addressed in the present appellant's case by reference to his  position
    as an EEA national who has lived in the United Kingdom. The judgment in
    Akinyemi does not, however, provide any  support  for  the  proposition
    that, in considering a human rights appeal - particularly in respect of
    someone who it is proposed to deport as a foreign criminal  -  material
    weight falls to be given to an appellant who, at some point,  may  have
    had, in practice, a good (even indisputably good) case to be registered
    as a British citizen.  In the Tribunal's experience, very many  foreign
    criminals who are deported would have been in that  position,  at  some
    point during their time in the United Kingdom.


104. Mr Amunwa's categorisation of the appellant as  having  an  entitlement
    to make an application under section  3(1)  is  no  different  in  this
    regard than one made for naturalisation  as  a  British  citizen  under
    section 6(1):-


         "(1) If, on an application for naturalisation as a British  citizen
         made by a person of full age and capacity, the Secretary  of  State
         is  satisfied  that  the  applicant  fulfils  the  requirements  of
         Schedule 1 for naturalisation as such a  citizen  under  this  sub-
         section, he may, if he thinks fit, grant to him  a  Certificate  of
         Naturalisation as such a citizen."


105. An application under section 6(2) is in similar terms.


106. The key factor is not whether someone had a good chance of  becoming  a
    British citizen, on  application,  at  some  previous  time  or  times.
    Rather, it is the nature and extent of the  individual's  life  in  the
    United Kingdom.  Thus, in the present case, the factors weighing in the
    appellant's favour will include the length of time he has been  in  the
    United Kingdom, whether any part of that time involved  what  might  be
    described as "formative years";  and  the  nature  and  extent  of  his
    private and family life in this country.  We shall address those in due
    course.


107. Before leaving the topic of British citizenship, we must  deal  briefly
    with a further  case  relied  on  by  Mr  Amunwa.   In  SF  and  Others
    (Guidance, post-2014 Act) Albania [2017]  UKUT  120  (IAC),  the  Upper
    Tribunal was  faced  with  Article  8  appeals  by  Albanian  citizens,
    comprising a mother and her two children.  The Upper  Tribunal,  noting
    that a further child had British citizenship, had regard  to  the  then
    policy of the  respondent,  contained  in  an  Immigration  Directorate
    Instructions, which indicated that it would usually be  appropriate  to
    grant leave to the parent of a British citizen child, where it would be
    unreasonable to expect that child to leave the United Kingdom.


108. The Upper Tribunal held as follows:-


         "9.  It appears to us inevitable that if the guidance to  which  Mr
             Wilding has drawn  our  attention  had  been  applied  to  the
             present family, at any time after it was published, and on the
             basis that the  youngest  child  is  a  British  citizen,  the
             conclusion would have been that  the  appellants  should  have
             been granted a period of leave in order to enable the  British
             citizen child to remain in the United Kingdom with them.   The
             question is then whether that guidance  as  guidance  has  any
             impact on the First-tier Tribunal or on us.


         10.  It is clear that the appellants do not have available to  them
             a ground of appeal on the basis that the decision was  not  in
             accordance with the law such as before the amendments made  to
             the  2002  Act  by  the  2014  Act  they   might   have   had.
             Nevertheless it appears to us that the terms of  the  guidance
             are an important source of the Secretary of  State's  view  of
             what is to be regarded as reasonable in the circumstances, and
             it is important in our judgement  for  the  Tribunal  at  both
             levels to make  decisions  which  are,  as  far  as  possible,
             consistent with decisions made in other areas of  the  process
             of immigration control.


         11.  If the Secretary of State  makes  a  decision  in  a  person's
             favour on the basis of guidance of this  sort,  there  can  of
             course be no appeal, and the result will be that the  decision
             falls below the radar of consideration by a Tribunal.   It  is
             only possible for Tribunals to make decisions on matters  such
             as reasonableness consistently with those that are being  made
             in favour of individuals by the  Secretary  of  State  if  the
             Tribunal applies  similar  or  identical  processes  to  those
             employed by the Secretary of State.


         12.  On occasion, perhaps where it has more  information  than  the
             Secretary of State had or might have had, or perhaps if a case
             is exceptional, the Tribunal may find a reason  for  departing
             from such guidance.  But where there is clear  guidance  which
             covers a case where an assessment has to be  made,  and  where
             the guidance clearly demonstrates  what  the  outcome  of  the
             assessment would have been made by the Secretary of State,  it
             would, we think, be the normal practice for  the  Tribunal  to
             take such guidance into account and to apply it  in  assessing
             the same consideration in a case that came before it.


         13.  In our judgement, therefore, the way forward in this  case  is
             to conclude that, not for the reasons argued by Mr Eaton,  but
             for those, as it happens, argued by Mr Wilding, this is a case
             where it would be unreasonable to expect the youngest child to
             leave the United Kingdom.  We will  therefore  set  aside  the
             decision of the First-tier Tribunal and substitute a  decision
             allowing the appeals of all three appellants on  that  ground.
             The period of leave is  a  matter  to  be  determined  by  the
             Secretary of State.  "


109. As can be seen, however, SF involved the taking  into  account  by  the
    Upper Tribunal of a current policy, which fell to be applied in  favour
    of the appellants.  In view of the policy,  the  respondent  could  not
    successfully resist the appellants' human rights appeals by pointing to
    the importance of maintaining immigration control as  justifying  their
    removal.


110. In the present case, by contrast,  there  is  no  currently  applicable
    policy that avails the appellant.  The fact that the  appellant  might,
    in the past, have been able  to  take  advantage  of  the  respondent's
    policy guidance on applications for British citizenship  under  section
    3(1) of the 1981 Act has no material bearing on  the  striking  of  the
    proportionality  balance  that  is  necessary  in  order  to  determine
    whether, in 2019, the appellant  should  be  removed  from  the  United
    Kingdom.






      (b)  The  relevance  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic   Area)
      Regulations 2016


111. In our error of law decision, we held  that  the  appellant  could  not
    initiate an appeal  under  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations  2016,  whilst  in  the   United   Kingdom,   against   the
    respondent's decision under those Regulations to refuse to  revoke  the
    deportation order made in respect of the  appellant.   If  deported  to
    Belgium, therefore, the appellant may appeal  on  the  basis  that  the
    decision was contrary to regulation 27 (Decisions taken on  grounds  of
    public policy, public security and public health).


112. We do not consider that the appellant is entitled to argue his case  by
    reference  to  regulation  7  (or  the  underlying  provisions  of  the
    Citizens' Rights Directive and relevant case law of the  CJEU)  in  the
    present human rights appeal.   Mr Amunwa  relied  upon  R  (Jonas  and
    Lauzikas) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2019] EWCA  Civ
    1168.   However,  that  case  involved  the  relationship  between  the
    respondent's power of removal of an EEA national  and  her  ability  to
    detain that national, pending removal.  Lauzikas was not concerned with
    the respondent's ability to determine that certain EEA appeals  may  be
    initiated only from abroad.


113. Given we have found that, in  the  present  case,  the  respondent  was
    entitled to rely upon regulation 37 (out of  country  appeals)  of  the
    2016 Regulations to require the appellant to bring his  appeal  against
    the decision taken under those Regulations only once he  has  left  the
    United Kingdom, it would defeat the  legislative  purpose  in  enacting
    regulation 37 if the appellant were able, through the medium of a human
    rights appeal, to advance the  very  challenge  to  the  regulation  27
    decision which can only be initiated from abroad.   The  appellant  has
    failed to show that the scheme of the 2016 Regulations is  such  as  to
    deprive the appellant of the opportunity of seeking  to  vindicate  his
    rights as an EEA citizen.






      (c) Part 5A of the 2002 Act as it applies to EEA nationals


114. This does not, however, mean that the fact of the appellant's being  an
    EEA national has no significance in  the  determination  of  his  human
    rights appeal.  On the  contrary,  that  fact  has  a  bearing  on  the
    application of Part 5A of the 2002 Act, which concerns the way in which
    the Tribunal will answer "the public interest question", as defined  in
    section 117A(3).  The fact that the appellant would be returned  to  an
    EU state is also relevant in deciding whether the  situation  he  would
    face there is (taken together with all  other  relevant  circumstances)
    such as to render his removal disproportionate.


115. In Badewa (ss 117A-D and EEA Regulations) [2015] UKUT  329  (IAC),  the
    Upper Tribunal considered the position of an  appellant  who  appealing
    against a removal decision under  the  Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006.  One of the issues was whether Part 5A  of  the
    2002 Act had application in such an appeal.   The  Tribunal  held  that
    "Part 5A considerations must be relevant to any  human  rights  grounds
    raised in an EEA appeal"  (paragraph  19).   But  their  relevance  had
    particular characteristics:-


         "20. ... it does not follow  that  ss.117A-D  considerations  -  or
             broader "Convention rights" (i.e. ECHR rights)  considerations
             - per se can be applied to the task of determining whether  an
             appellant meets the requirements of the EEA Regulations.   The
             EEA Regulations are in this respect a  self-contained  set  of
             legal  rules  and  an  appellant  cannot   comply   with   the
             Regulations unless able to show that those rules are met.  Not
             only  are  the  two  legal  regimes  distinct  but  there  are
             significant differences between  them.   One  example  of  the
             difference between the two legal  regimes  when  it  comes  to
             issues of expulsion and deportation - and it is one  pertinent
             to this appeal -  is  that  whereas  Article  8  jurisprudence
             permits decision-makers when weighing matters  on  the  public
             interest side of the scales  to  have  regard  to  matters  of
             general prevention or deterrence (see e.g.   RU  (Bangladesh))
             in the EU/EEA context, by regulation 21(5)(d) "matters"  which
             relate to "considerations of general prevention do not justify
             the decision."


         21.  The above analysis does not, of course, mean that human rights
             have no part to play in analysis of an EEA decision.   EU  law
             also incorporates human rights guarantees in  the  Charter  of
             Fundamental Rights (which is now part of primary EU law)  many
             of whose  rights  are  described  as  co-extensive  with  ECHR
             rights; and the Court of Justice of the European Union  (CJEU)
             has long treated ECHR rights as being  fundamental  principles
             of EU law.  Nevertheless, the human rights dimension of EU law
             is not to be elided with ECHR rights: see Opinion Pursuant  to
             Article 218(11) TGFEU, C-2/13, December 18, 2014.  It has  its
             own autonomous  scope  of  application  as  part  of  EU  law.
             Likewise ECHR rights ("Convention  rights"),  as  incorporated
             into UK law by the Human  Rights  Act  1998,  have  their  own
             distinct scope of application. Whilst,  therefore,  Article  8
             considerations may arise in the context of a determination  of
             whether  an  appellant  meets  the  requirements  of  the  EEA
             Regulations or free movement provisions of EU law  (in respect
             of which the Court of Justice has seen that Article to play  a
             role as a  general  principle  informing  the  meaning  of  EU
             provisions (see  e.g.  Carpenter  (Freedom  of  establishment)
             [2002] EUECJ C-60/00), their application in  that  context  is
             governed by EU law, not by the ECHR or the Human Rights Act or
             ss.117A-D.


         22.  We observe that in regard to what we have just set out -  that
             ECHR considerations cannot be interpolated into  decisions  as
             to whether an appellant meets the requirements of the 2006 EEA
             Regulations - both parties were in agreement.  Mr Tufan indeed
             said that the respondent accepted  that  the  FtT  had  elided
             regulation 21 and sections 117A - 117D considerations and that
             it was wrong to do so, although he did not consider this was a
             material error.  He drew our attention to paragraph 2.6 of the
             Immigration Directorate Instructions, Chapter 13:  criminality
             guidance in Article 8 ECHR cases, which states:


                  "2.6.1   The Immigration Rules and Part 5A of the 2002 Act
                        do not apply directly to  EEA  nationals.  However,
                        Article 8 applies equally to  everyone,  regardless
                        of nationality, and to consider  Article  8  claims
                        from EEA nationals differently, either more or less
                        generously  than  claims  from  non-EEA  nationals,
                        would breach the common law principle of  fairness.
                        Therefore, decisions in relation to  EEA  nationals
                        must be taken consistently with  Parliament's  view
                        of the  public  interest  as  set  out  in  primary
                        legislation."


         23.  For the purposes of this appeal we are prepared to accept that
             as an accurate  rendition  of  the  legal  position  that  now
             prevails,  but  would  emphasise  that  it  only  purports  to
             describe "Article 8 claims from EEA nationals", not EEA claims
             that are subject of an EEA decision as defined in regulation 2
             of the 2006 Regulations.


          24. It may assist  to  summarise  the  main  conclusions  we  have
             reached as to the correct approach to be applied  by  tribunal
             judges in relation to ss.117A-D in the context of EEA  removal
             decisions. It is:


                  (i)  first to decide if a person satisfies requirements of
                      the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations
                      2006. In this context ss.117A-D has no application;


                  (ii) second where a person  has  raised  Article  8  as  a
                      ground of appeal, ss.117A-D applies.


             "Person" in (i) and (ii) above  means  the  person  appealing,
             whether he or she is an EEA  national  or  is  the  (extended)
             family member of the EEA national."


116. In the present  case,  the  respondent's  decision  of  19  July  2018,
    refusing to revoke the deportation order, contained the following:-


         "Article 8 ECHR


         59)  In addition to considering your client's position under EU law
             and the EEA Regulations  2016,  consideration  has  separately
             been given to whether your client's deportation  would  breach
             the United Kingdom's obligations under the European Convention
             on Human Rights (ECHR).


         60)  Article 8(1) sets out that everyone has the right  to  respect
             for his private and family life.  However, every state has the
             right to control the entry of non-nationals into its territory
             and Article 8 does not give a person  an  automatic  right  to
             choose to pursue their private of family life  in  the  United
             Kingdom.  Any interference with an individual's  private  life
             or  family  life  will  only  be  unlawful  if  it  is   first
             established that private or family life exists and  then  only
             if the interference is not for  one  or  more  of  the  public
             interest reasons that are set out in Article 8(2)  or  if  the
             interference  is  disproportionate  to  the  public   interest
             reasons.


         61)  The Immigration Rules at paragraph A362 and paragraphs A398 to
             399D set out the practice to be followed by  officials  acting
             on behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State  when  considering  an
             Article 8 claim from a person liable  to  deportation  on  the
             basis  of   criminal   convictions.    These   rules   reflect
             Parliament's view of what the public interest requires for the
             purposes of Article 8(2).  Parliament's view  is  set  out  at
             sections  117A  to  117D  in  Part  5A  of  the   Nationality,
             Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  (as   inserted   by   the
             Immigration Act 2014).


         62)  The Immigration Rules and Part 5A of the 2002 Act do not apply
             directly to EEA nationals.  However, Article 8 applies equally
             to everyone, regardless of nationality, and it  would  not  be
             fair to consider Article 8 claims from EEA  nationals,  either
             more or less generously than claims  from  non-EEA  nationals.
             Therefore, your client's Article  8  claim  has  been  decided
             consistently with Parliament's view of the public interest  as
             set out in the above instruments and  consideration  has  been
             given below  to  whether  he  would  meet  the  exceptions  to
             deportation or whether there are very compelling circumstances
             such that your client should not be deported."


117. The reason why the respondent said the Immigration Rules do  not  apply
    directly to EEA nationals is, presumably, section 7 of the  Immigration
    Act 1988.  Section 7(1) provides that a  person  shall  not  under  the
    Immigration Act 1971 require leave to enter or  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom "in any case in which he is entitled to do so by virtue  of  an
    enforceable [EU] right or of any provision made under section 2 of  the
    European Communities Act 1972".  Section 7(2) enables the respondent by
    statutory instrument to give leave to enter the United  Kingdom  for  a
    limited period to any class of persons  who  are  nationals  of  Member
    States but who are not entitled to enter, as mentioned in section 7(1).


118. So far as Part 5A of the 2002 Act  is  concerned,  once  one  has  been
    through the process described by the Upper Tribunal in paragraph  24(i)
    of Badewa or (as in the present appeal) where the question  of  whether
    an individual can be deported compatibly with his or her  rights  under
    the 2016 Regulations is not in play, it is difficult to see why Part 5A
    cannot be said to apply directly, albeit that (as we shall see) some of
    the terminology used in that Part needs to be construed  on  the  basis
    that the regime of the 1971 Act is different from that which applies to
    EEA nationals exercising rights as such.


119. In section 117B(2) and (3)  of  the  2002  Act,  it  is  provided  that
    "persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom" should,  in
    the public interest, be  able  to  speak  English  and  be  financially
    independent.  An EEA national who is  not  relying  upon  their  rights
    under the 2016 Regulations (or otherwise deriving from the EU treaties,
    as  interpreted  by  the  CJEU)  plainly  falls  within  the  ambit  of
    subsections (2) and (3).


120. The more difficult question is in what circumstances  an  EEA  national
    can be said to be in the "in the United Kingdom unlawfully" within  the
    meaning of section  117B(4).   The  same  question  arises  in  section
    117C(4)(a), which describes Exception 1 to  the  proposition  that  the
    public interest requires deportation, in the case of a foreign criminal
    who has not been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or
    more. Exception 1 applies if three conditions are  met,  of  which  the
    first is that the person concerned "has been lawfully resident  in  the
    United Kingdom for most of" their life (section 117C(4)(a)).


121. In Secretary of State for the Home Department  v  SC  (Jamaica)  [2017]
    EWCA Civ 2212, the Court of Appeal examined the analogous provision  to
    section 117C(4), contained in paragraph 399 of the  Immigration  Rules.
    In his judgment, the Senior President of Tribunals said:-


         "54. Somewhat surprisingly,  there  is  no  definition  of  'lawful
             residence' for the purposes of paragraph 399A  of  the  Rules.
             The exception in paragraph 399A to which the lawful  residence
             condition attaches is the strength of the person's  connection
             to the UK as  compared  with  the  strength  of  the  person's
             connection with their home country where connection  is  their
             social and cultural integration. It is clearly  the  intention
             of the Secretary of State that length of stay in the UK  is  a
             proxy for strength of connection given that the  exception  is
             predicated on the temporal condition of 'most  of  his  life'.
             There is an  un-related  definition  of  lawful  residence  in
             paragraph  276A(b)  of  the  Rules  for  the  purposes  of  an
             application for indefinite leave to remain as follows:


                  "lawful residence" means  residence  which  is  continuous
                  residence pursuant to:


                  (i)  existing leave to enter or remain; or


                  (ii) temporary admission within section 11 of the 1971 Act
                      where  leave  to  enter  or  remain  is  subsequently
                      granted; or ..."


         55.  The Secretary of State says that if she had intended to  apply
             this definition to paragraph 399A of the Rules she would  have
             said so but that simply leaves the question unanswered.  It is
             also unhelpful to say that the definition in paragraph 276A(b)
             does not include lawful residence under EU  law  to  which  an
             applicant is entitled.  What is submitted by SC  is  not  that
             paragraph 276A(b) should directly apply but that an  analogous
             interpretation of lawful residence should be  applied  to  the
             wording in paragraph 399A.


         56.  It appears to be  common  ground  that  a  person  is  granted
             temporary admission from the date of their application to be a
             refugee.  Temporary admission for an  adult  is  a  precarious
             status.  Such a person cannot work and by the very  nature  of
             it being precarious, social and cultural integration cannot be
             established.  It is only once the asylum claim is granted that
             the person can start to build a  life  in  the  UK.   On  this
             basis, a rational basis for lawful residence would be  a  date
             from which a person has a valid right to remain.  That is  the
             submission of the Secretary of  State.   On  the  other  hand,
             'lawful' ordinarily has the meaning 'permitted by law' and  if
             a person is permitted to remain by temporary leave that should
             be  sufficient.   That  would  at   least   provide   internal
             consistency to the different usages of the same phrase in  the
             Rules and would also reflect the  fact  that  the  concept  of
             precarious status is not relevant to a child, and hence to SC,
             for part of the time under consideration on the facts of  this
             case.


         57.  Of the two possible  interpretations  put  to  this  court,  I
             prefer that which is internally consistent and which  provides
             for the circumstances of  both  adult  and  children  ie  that
             lawful residence for the purposes of  paragraph  399A(a)  runs
             from the date of application  for  refugee  status.   On  that
             basis the FtT took an appropriate date from which to determine
             lawful residence."


122. In his judgment, Davis LJ held:-


         "73. However, for the (specific) purposes of the provisions in  the
             Immigration  Rules  relating  to   long   residence,   "lawful
             residence" includes continuous residence pursuant to temporary
             admission where leave  to  enter  or  remain  is  subsequently
             granted: paragraph 276A (b).  I fully accept that it does  not
             follow that that is also necessarily then so for the  purposes
             of paragraph 399A.  But it at least shows that Parliament  was
             accepting that temporary admission is not entirely and  always
             to be excluded from notions of "lawful residence": although of
             course in many contexts it may  be  so  excluded  (cf.  R  (ST
             (Eritrea) v SSHD [2012] UKSC 12).  At all events, a person  is
             not necessarily "unlawfully" present  in  the  United  Kingdom
             simply because he has no vested right of  residence:  see  cf.
             Akinyemi v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 236.  Moreover, in a case such
             as the present the grant of leave to remain will have been  on
             the footing of acknowledging a pre-existing status.   It  thus
             makes some sense for the lawful residence at least  to  relate
             back to the date of the application for asylum: at which  date
             (as was accepted before us on this appeal) temporary admission
             was to be deemed to be granted.   Overall,  albeit  with  some
             hesitation, I consider that the approach  taken  in  paragraph
             276A (b) can and should be applied by analogy to  the  present
             context.  If  this  does  not  represent  the  wishes  of  the
             Government the remedy is to provide a definition of the phrase
             for the specific purposes of Rule 399A."


123. We have already looked at the judgment of Underhill LJ in  Akinyemi  in
    the context of the British  citizenship  issue.   But  Mr  Amunwa  also
    relies upon that judgment and those in SC (Jamaica) to take issue  with
    what he describes as the "somewhat equivocal view" of the  respondent's
    policy guidance "Long residence - version 15.0 (3 April 2017) that only
    a person exercising Treaty rights can be treated for the  purposes  for
    paragraph 276A of the Rules as being "lawfully resident" in the  United
    Kingdom; and only then if the respondent exercises discretion to  treat
    time spent in the United Kingdom in that capacity as  lawful  residence
    for the purpose of paragraph 276A (which deals with long residence).


124. As we have seen from section 7  of  the  1988  Act,  a  person  is  not
    subject to the requirements of the 1971 Act to have leave to  enter  or
    remain in the United Kingdom whilst that person is entitled to do so by
    virtue of "an enforceable [EU] right" or of any  provision  made  under
    section 2(2) of the 1972 Act.   The  problem  is  that,  whilst  it  is
    relatively straightforward to ascertain whether a person, who is not an
    EEA national and therefore requires 1971  Act  leave  at  all  relevant
    times, has had or did not have such leave at any point in time, it  may
    often be difficult to look back at the immigration history  of  an  EEA
    national and ascertain at what points in time he or she was entitled to
    be in the United Kingdom by virtue of an enforceable right of the  kind
    described in section 7(1) of the 1988 Act.  For example, in the case of
    a "qualified person", a glance at regulation 6 of the 2016  Regulations
    (which  defines  "qualified   person")   highlights   the   difficulty,
    particularly where (as here)  the  Tribunal  is  looking  back  over  a
    considerable period of time and where  there  may  well  have  been  no
    official pronouncement  by  the  respondent  regarding  the  period  or
    periods during which the person in question was or was not a  qualified
    person and thus entitled to remain under EU law.


125. A similar point arises in relation to the concept of a "family  member"
    under regulation  7.   The  issue  is  exacerbated  by  the  fact  that
    residence  documentation  under  the   2016   Regulations   is   merely
    declaratory of the underlying right of the EEA  national,  in  contrast
    with the position under the 1971 Act, where a person only has leave  to
    enter or remain if he or she has been given it by the respondent  in  a
    document of which there should be a record.


126. The position of the present appellant is a  good  illustration  of  the
    difficulties just described.  The appellant moved as a child  with  his
    mother and her then British citizen partner from Belgium to the  United
    Kingdom in  2003.   There  has  never  been  any  formal  determination
    regarding the basis upon  which  the  appellant  lived  in  the  United
    Kingdom from 2003 to 2007, when the family returned  to  Belgium.   One
    might reasonably assume that the appellant was the family member of his
    mother during this time, although the position is  complicated  by  the
    British citizen status  of  the  appellant's  step-father.   After  the
    family's return to the United  Kingdom,  the  appellant  was  studying,
    whilst still a minor.  In the circumstances, it seems unlikely that the
    appellant met the requirements of regulation  4  to  be  treated  as  a
    student.


127. In the case of an appeal under the 2016 Regulations, the  ascertainment
    of the "level" of protection  under  regulation  27  will  depend  upon
    whether  the  person  concerned  has  acquired  a  permanent  right  of
    residence under regulation 15.  If so, the decision can only  be  taken
    on "serious grounds of public policy and  public  security".   To  that
    extent, in such an appeal, the Tribunal will have to  make  a  specific
    finding, applying the requisite burden of proof, by  reference  to  the
    evidence regarding the person's position  at  all  relevant  points  in
    time.


128. For this reason, paragraphs 18 to 29 of the  respondent's  decision  in
    the appellant's case dealt expressly with  the  issue  of  whether  the
    appellant had acquired a permanent right of residence.  In this regard,
    the respondent did  not,  however,  appear  to  have  turned  her  mind
    specifically to whether the appellant was a  family  member.   Instead,
    she primarily considered whether the appellant had acquired  the  right
    of permanent residence by reason of being a qualified person under  the
    heading of "student".  The respondent concluded that the appellant  had
    not shown that he fell to be treated as a person  who  had  acquired  a
    permanent right of residence.


129. We are  not  here  deciding  the  appellant's  appeal  under  the  2016
    Regulations because, for the reasons we have given, no such appeal  has
    yet been validly made.  It is not, however, possible to  side-step  the
    question of what is meant by "unlawfully"  in  section  117B(4)(b)  and
    "lawfully resident" in  section  117C(4)(a)  in  the  case  of  an  EEA
    national, whether or not the human rights appeal is  to  be  determined
    alongside the appeal under the 2016 Regulations.


130. At paragraph 41 of Akinyemi, Underhill LJ pointed out  that  "unlawful"
    presence in the United Kingdom was not necessarily the same as  it  not
    being "lawful".  What, then, does it mean for an EEA national to be "in
    the United Kingdom unlawfully"?  Such a person who  is  not  exercising
    relevant rights requires leave to be in the  United  Kingdom.   Unlike,
    however,  the  position  of  a  non-EEA  national  section  24  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971 (illegal entry and  similar  offences)  would  not
    seem to criminalise a person who becomes, by reason of section 7 of the
    1998 Act, subject to a requirement to  have  leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom, at some  point  after  entering  pursuant  to  the  EEA
    Regulations.  In a paradigm case, the EEA national would  have  entered
    initially pursuant to regulation 13 of the  2016  Regulations  (initial
    right of residence) and so would not have entered  the  United  Kingdom
    "without leave", contrary to section 24(1)(a).  Nor,  by  remaining  in
    the United Kingdom once he or she had ceased to have a right to  do  so
    under EEA Regulations, etc would that person become an overstayer,  and
    so would not commit a criminal offence under section 24(1)(b).


131. In paragraph 41 of Akinyemi, Underhill LJ stressed that, in that  case,
    there was "no specific legal obligation of which [the appellant was] in
    breach by being here and no  legal  right  to  remove  them".   In  the
    scenario just described, however, the legal obligation stems  from  the
    interaction of section 7 of the  1988  Act  and  the  1971  Act,  which
    requires a person to have leave, once  he  or  she  has  ceased  to  be
    entitled to be here  under  the  EEA  Regulations,  etc.   Furthermore,
    unlike the appellant in Akinyemi, the EEA national becomes subject to a
    power of removal under regulation 23(6)(a), specifically by  reason  of
    ceasing to have a right to reside under the Regulations.


132. Accordingly, we do  not  consider  that  the  appellant  can  draw  any
    material assistance  from  the  judgment  in  Akinyemi.   Nor  does  SC
    (Jamaica) assist him.  As we have seen, at  paragraph  55,  the  Senior
    President  of  Tribunals  rejected  as  "unhelpful"  the   respondent's
    submission that the  definition  of  "lawful  residence"  in  paragraph
    276A(b) of the Immigration Rules "does  not  include  lawful  residence
    under EU law to which an applicant is entitled".


133. Whilst we entirely accept that a person who is resident  in  accordance
    with the 2016 Regulations, etc. is in the United Kingdom  lawfully,  if
    he or she is not so present and has no other basis to be here, then the
    person is, we find, "in the United Kingdom unlawfully" for the purposes
    of section 117B(4)(b). The fact that he or she may not be guilty  of  a
    criminal offence under the 1971 Act is not determinative of the  matter
    for the purpose of construing part 5A of the 2002  Act.  It  must  have
    been Parliament's intention, in enacting Part 5A, to treat  someone  as
    unlawfully resident in the United Kingdom, who had entered pursuant  to
    the initial right of admission in regulation  11,  but  who  thereafter
    remained without ever being a jobseeker, worker, student  etc  and  who
    has, therefore, never been a qualified person. To find otherwise  would
    be to discriminate in favour of EU nationals  in  a  way  that  has  no
    justification by reference to EU law.


134. A fortiori, when one turns to section 117C(4)(a)  and  the  concept  of
    being "lawfully resident in the United Kingdom", a person  who  has  no
    basis under the 2016 Regulations/EU law to be in the United Kingdom, or
    any other  legal  entitlement  to  be  here,  cannot  be  described  as
    "lawfully resident".  The fact that the respondent may not  have  taken
    action under the EEA Regulations to have the person removed  cannot  be
    said to render that person's residence lawful.  Here too, there  is  no
    coherent distinction to be drawn between EU nationals and others.   The
    fact that the respondent may not have taken enforcement action  against
    non-EEA nationals present in  the  United  Kingdom  without  leave  has
    never, to our knowledge, been advanced as an  argument  for  describing
    them as being lawfully present.  Manifestly, they are not.


135. We accordingly find that the respondent's stated  policy,  referred  to
    in the decision letter,  of  considering  Article  8  claims  from  EEA
    nationals neither more nor less generously  than  claims  from  non-EEA
    nationals,  is  not  only  correct  but  also  that  it  requires   the
    interpretation of Part 5A that we have just described.


136. We return to our earlier discussion about the practical  problems  that
    may arise, in connection with a historic analysis  of  whether  an  EEA
    national has, at any point in time, been present in the United  Kingdom
    in accordance with the EEA Regulations, etc.  We have  noted  that  the
    difficulties  which  may  be  encountered  in  this   regard   can   be
    significant, the appellant's  own  immigration  history  being  a  good
    exemplar.


137. As will now be evident, the present case is somewhat unusual  in  being
    confined to a human rights appeal. Although involving an  EU  national,
    it is not an appeal that involves the substantive adjudication  of  the
    appellant's ability to resist removal  under  regulation  23.  In  most
    cases, the position  will  be  otherwise;  with  the  result  that  the
    Tribunal can expect there to  be  evidence  before  it  going  to  show
    whether the appellant has acquired a permanent right of residence under
    regulation 15, so as to be removable only on "serious grounds of public
    policy and public security" (regulation 27(3)); or that he or she meets
    to criteria in  regulation  27(4)  so  as  to  be  removable  only  "on
    imperative grounds of public security".


138. In such cases, the Tribunal will be able to reach conclusions,  on  the
    evidence, which will not  only  inform  its  decision  under  the  2016
    Regulations but also, if necessary, enable it to make  findings  as  to
    the appellant's lawful/unlawful residence for the purposes of  Part  5A
    of the 2002 Act. On the basis of our  interpretation  of  the  relevant
    expressions in Part 5A, as they affect EU  nationals,  there  can,  for
    example, be no question of an adult being treated as  lawfully  in  the
    United Kingdom during a period when the evidence shows on balance  that
    he was not a qualified person or relevant family member.


139. However, as the present case shows, an EU national who came as a  child
    to the United Kingdom may have profound difficulties  in  showing  that
    his or her residence during their minority was in  accordance  with  EU
    law, compared with an adult who makes the conscious  decision  to  come
    here in order to exercise the right of free movement  of  a  worker.  A
    child will be unable directly to regularise their status,  even  if  it
    were to become apparent that it might be necessary to do so. In such  a
    case, for the purposes of looking at Article 8 through the lens of Part
    5A, the Tribunal needs to appreciate this difficulty.


140. For the reasons we have earlier given, the  answer  to  the  difficulty
    does not lie in construing the relevant terminology in Part 5A in a way
    that  confers  an  unwarranted  advantage  upon  all   EEA   nationals,
    irrespective of age, treating them as lawfully resident etc, regardless
    of whether they have any right to be in the  United  Kingdom  under  EU
    law. Rather, the answer  lies  in  appreciating  that  section  117A(2)
    contains  a  modest  degree  of  flexibility,  to  be  resorted  to  in
    exceptional  cases:  Rhuppiah  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the   Home
    Department [2018] UKSC 58, per Lord Wilson at paragraph 49.


141. Although other cases may, on their  facts,  still  demand  a  different
    outcome, we consider that, despite  our  adverse  credibility  findings
    regarding the appellant and his mother, it would be wrong to categorise
    the appellant's time as an EU child in the United Kingdom as not  being
    lawful time for the purposes of Part 5A, given that he  was  under  the
    control of his adoptive father and his mother;  that  he  was  able  to
    attend school and college without any questions being asked  about  his
    status; and that no action  was  taken  or  even  contemplated  by  the
    respondent in respect of him or his mother. Indeed, to do so would risk
    a result that is incompatible with  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations
    under Article 8 of the ECHR.






       (d) Deportation as a foreign criminal


142. In the analysis we have just undertaken, we have assumed  that  section
    117C applies to the appellant.  In order for that to  be  so,  he  must
    meet the definition of a "foreign criminal" in section 117D(2).  In the
    present case, the respondent contends that the appellant  falls  within
    the definition because he has been  convicted  of  offences  that  have
    "caused  serious  harm"  and  that  the  appellant  is  a   "persistent
    offender".


143. We have earlier referred to the appellant's criminal history.   It  is,
    however, convenient at this stage to summarise it.


144. In 2013  and  2014,  the  appellant  received  criminal  cautions  for,
    respectively, assault and battery.  In June 2014, when he was aged  16,
    the appellant was convicted of  destroying  or  damaging  property  and
    battery.  He was in due course  sentenced  to  a  youth  rehabilitation
    order.


145. In July 2014, aged 16, the appellant was  convicted  of  destroying  or
    damaging property  and  using  threatening/abusive  words/behaviour  or
    disorderly behaviour likely to cause harassment/alarm.  He was,  again,
    eventually sentenced to a youth rehabilitation order.


146. In August 2014, aged 16, the appellant was convicted of two  counts  of
    battery.   He  was  sentenced  to  a  referral  order   and   a   youth
    rehabilitation order.


147. In March 2015, aged 16, the appellant was convicted of  two  counts  of
    battery.  He again received a youth rehabilitation  order  as  well  as
    being ordered to pay a victim surcharge.


148. In 2017, aged 18, the appellant was  convicted  of  disclosing  private
    sexual photographs and films with intent to cause distress, four counts
    of battery, assaulting a constable and failing to surrender to  custody
    at the appointed time.  The appellant  was  subsequently  sentenced  to
    nine months in a young offenders  institution  and  ordered  to  pay  a
    victim surcharge.  The offence of battery committed on 3 May  2017  had
    been whilst the appellant was on bail.


149. It was in the light of those convictions that,  on  5  July  2017,  the
    appellant was served with a notice  of  liability  to  deportation.   A
    deportation decision was made in September 2017,  which  the  appellant
    did not appeal.  We were referred to  the  sentencing  remarks  of  His
    Honour Judge P. Henry, sitting at Southampton Crown Court, on  19  June
    2017.  The judge referred to the incident in September 2016,  in  which
    the appellant assault Female 1 in a park, after she told him that their
    relationship was over.  He grabbed her around the throat until she felt
    she had passed out.  When the police came to arrest the  appellant,  he
    assaulted an officer.  In January 2017, the appellant put a  number  of
    embarrassing photographs for Female 1 on a Facebook chat  group.   This
    was done in order to embarrass and humiliate her.


150. The appellant then started a relationship with X.  He assaulted her  in
    February 2017 as well as damaging the flat.  She had  to  be  taken  to
    hospital.


151. In March 2017, X was assaulted by the  appellant  after  she  indicated
    she did not want him to meet one of his friends.  The appellant slammed
    X into a bathroom mirror, trapped her foot in  the  door,  causing  her
    pain, and pinned her onto the floor  of  the  bedroom  with  his  hands
    around her throat so that "she thought she  was  going  to  die".   The
    appellant then put a blanket or similar around X's face and neck.   The
    judge said that "what you did to her was incredibly dangerous".


152. The  judge  noted  the  pre-sentence  report,  which  stated  that  the
    appellant was "considered to be at high risk of causing serious harm to
    women".  The judge expressed the hope that X would "take note  of  it".
    He agreed with the description in the pre-sentence report of  the  form
    of  violence  as  including  "strangulation,  aggressive,   controlling
    behaviour and willingness to place private sexual  photographs".    The
    sentencing judge's warning to X was, as we have seen,  well  made.   In
    January 2019, the appellant kicked  down  a  door,  causing  X  serious
    injury, to use his own words from his  second  witness  statement.   He
    received a prison sentence of nineteen weeks,  together  with  a  post-
    sentence supervision order.


153. Mr Amunwa submits that the offences committed whilst the appellant  was
    under the age of 18 should not fall for consideration,  in  determining
    whether the appellant is a persistent offender.  However, as Mr  Jarvis
    submits, the definition of "foreign criminal" in section 117D  contains
    nothing to  suggest  that  Parliament  intended  such  offences  to  be
    excluded.


154. Any weight that  falls  to  be  attached  to  the  fact  that  criminal
    offences were committed whilst the appellant was a child is,  we  find,
    to be dealt with in the general Article  8  assessment  in  respect  of
    foreign criminals, that must be undertaken pursuant to section 117C(6),
    in  order   to   determine   whether   there   are   "very   compelling
    circumstances", such as to make deportation of the foreign  criminal  a
    disproportionate  interference  with  his  or  her  Article  8  rights.
    Notwithstanding the wording of section  117C(6)  which,  on  its  face,
    applies only to those sentenced to imprisonment of at least four years,
    the fact that section 117C(6) covers all foreign criminals was conceded
    by the respondent to the Court of Appeal in NA (Pakistan) and Another v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 662: see  RA
    (s117C: "unduly harsh"; offence: seriousness  (Iraq)  [2019]  UKUT  123
    (IAC).


155. Viewing the appellant's criminal history as a  whole,  it  is  manifest
    that he is a persistent offender.  He is  clearly  someone  who  "keeps
    breaking the law": Chege ("is a persistent offender") [2016]  UKUT  187
    (IAC). His offences show a pattern of behaviour comprising the physical
    abuse of women.


156. Furthermore and in any event, we find that the appellant  falls  to  be
    treated as foreign criminal by reason of the fact that, as an adult, he
    has been convicted of offences that have "caused serious  harm".   That
    is the view taken by the respondent in  the  decision,  with  which  we
    agree.  In accordance with LT (Kosovo) v Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 1246, we have given significant  weight
    to that view.


157. We accept that there is a difference  between  someone  being  a  "high
    risk" of causing serious harm  to  women  and  having  actually  caused
    serious harm.  The fact is, however, that  he  plainly  caused  serious
    physical and psychological harm to Female 1, as well as assaulting X on
    a number of occasions, necessitating her hospitalisation (at  least  on
    one such occasion).






      (e) Taking stock


158. It is time to take stock of the position we have reached:


          (a) The appellant's human rights appeal falls to be determined  on
         the basis that he is a person who has not established  his  private
         life in the United Kingdom at a time when he was here unlawfully.


         (b) The appellant is  a  foreign  criminal,  for  the  purposes  of
         section 117C, by reason of having been convicted of  offences  that
         have  caused  serious  harm  and/or  because  he  is  a  persistent
         offender.


         (c) In deciding whether Exception 1 in section 117C(4)  applies  to
         the appellant, as a person who has not been sentenced to  a  prison
         sentence of four years or more, the appellant was legally  resident
         in the United Kingdom between 2003 and 2007 and  between  2011  and
         2016, when he ceased to be a child.  Thereafter, until the point at
         which the deportation order was made in  respect  of  his  criminal
         offending, there is nothing to indicate the appellant  has  been  a
         person who could have been removed from the United Kingdom pursuant
         to regulation 23(6)(a), as a result of not having a right to reside
         under the Regulations, etc.


         (d) As a result, we approach Exception 1 in section 117C(4) on  the
         basis that, perhaps giving the appellant the benefit of the  doubt,
         he satisfies the requirement in paragraph (a) to have been lawfully
         resident in the United Kingdom for most (i.e. the majority) of  his
         life.  This calculation is based upon  the  updated  chronology  of
         events at D641 to D643.  Erring on the side of the appellant, where
         it has not been possible to provide exact  dates,  the  total  time
         spent by the appellant  in  the  United  Kingdom  up  to  when  the
         deportation order was signed (and he ceased to have any legal basis
         for being here) is approximately eleven years.  The appellant  was,
         at the date of the hearing on 26 July 2019, four days short of  his
         21st birthday.  He has therefore spent the majority of his life  in
         the United Kingdom.






(f) Exception 1: section 117C(4)


159. We look first at section 117C(4) because, if Exception 1 is  satisfied,
    then section 117C(3) tells us the public interest does not require  the
    appellant's deportation on human rights grounds.


160. As we have just found, the appellant has shown, albeit barely, that  he
    has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most of his  life.
    The second requirement of Exception 1 is that  the  appellant  must  be
    "socially and culturally integrated in the United  Kingdom".   On  this
    issue, Mr Amunwa took exception to  Mr Jarvis's  submission  that  the
    appellant's involvement in gang culture was such  as  to  preclude  him
    from showing that he was socially and culturally integrated.  There  is
    no hard and fast rule, whereby a person  who  is  involved  with  gangs
    must, as a result, be unable to show social and cultural integration in
    the United Kingdom.  The real point is that, if and to the extent  that
    a person's life  is  governed  by  adherence  to  the  anti-social  and
    criminal behaviour of a gang, the person will, to that extent, find  it
    very difficult to show social and cultural  integration  in  the  sense
    intended by Parliament in section 117C(4)(b).


161. In the present case, we find that Mr Jarvis, in cross-examination,  did
    squarely put to the appellant that he had been  significantly  involved
    in gang culture.   The  appellant  was  specifically  referred  to  the
    document from  Central  and  North  West  London  NHS  at  D656,  which
    describes the appellant himself as  saying  "he  has  seen  family  and
    friends who have taken their lives and been murdered.  He states he was
    involved in a lot of gang culture".   At  paragraph  16  of  his  first
    witness statement, the appellant described himself as  having  fourteen
    criminal convictions in the United Kingdom mainly involving  "assaults,
    vandalisms and destruction of property for the years 2013 to  2015.   I
    was young and I had  met  some  people  I  shouldn't  have".   In  oral
    evidence, we  find  that  the  appellant  unpersuasively  attempted  to
    qualify these statements, telling us that  he  had  merely  "associated
    with people who were involved" with gangs and that he was  "friends  of
    theirs".


162.  The  pattern  of  the  appellant's  teenage  criminal  offending  also
    strongly suggests that what he is  recorded  in  the  NHS  document  as
    saying was true and that much of his time was  spent  with  people  who
    cannot rationally be said to have facilitated his social  and  cultural
    integration.


163. On the other hand, the appellant has spent a good deal of time  in  the
    education  system  in  this  country.   He  has  been  able   to   form
    relationships with women who, so far as  we  are  aware,  are  ordinary
    members of society.


164. Although the appellant has produced some evidence of being employed  in
    the United Kingdom, we find this to be somewhat exiguous in nature.


165. Overall we consider that the appellant  has  shown  that  he  satisfies
    section 117C(4)(b), albeit by the barest of margins.


166. The third and final requirement of  Exception  1  is  that  "(c)  there
    would be very significant obstacles to  [the  appellant's]  integration
    into the country to which [the appellant] is proposed to be  deported".




167. Having considered all the evidence and  the  submissions,  and  in  the
    light of our credibility  findings  regarding  the  appellant  and  his
    mother, we firmly find that the requirement in  section  117C(4)(c)  is
    not satisfied.  The appellant is a citizen of  Belgium  by  birth.   He
    lived in that country for the first five years of his life and for over
    three years, from the age of 9, during which time he  went  to  school.
    The evidence about whether the appellant learned  Dutch/Flemish  during
    that time was, we found, evasive and incoherent.  We do not  accept  it
    is likely the appellant has no knowledge of this language, particularly
    in the light of the fact that the appellant's mother apparently  speaks
    it.


168. In any event, the appellant can use  English  whilst  he  improves  his
    Dutch/Flemish.  He is still of an age when it would be possible to hone
    his linguistic  skills.   In  this  regard,  we  note  the  appellant's
    keenness to take training courses, whilst he has  been  in  prison  and
    detention.


169.  The  appellant's  (at  least  superficially)  engaging  character,  as
    observed at the hearing, together with his fluency in English would put
    him in a good position, when it came to seeking employment in  Belgium.




170. What we have said is independent of any  contact  with  and  assistance
    from Y, which the appellant might  obtain.   Given  our  problems  with
    credibility, we do not consider that we have been told the truth  about
    Y's relationship with the appellant.


171. We note that, as  held  in  AS  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2017]  EWCA  Civ  1284,  the  "integration  test"  requires
    consideration  of  "all  relevant  factors,  some  of  which  might  be
    described as generic, such as  a  person's  ability  to  adapt  to  the
    culture,  their  health,  employability   and   level   of   education"
    (paragraphs 58 and 59).  We also note that at paragraph 60,  the  court
    pointed out that persons such as friends or relatives might be able  to
    assist an individual with integration.  In other words, such "ties"  do
    not have to be direct.


172. Overall, looking at all  the  relevant  matters,  it  is  in  our  view
    manifest that the appellant would face no  real  obstacles  (let  alone
    significant ones) in integrating in Belgium.  The social  and  cultural
    differences between Belgium and the United Kingdom are, of course, less
    pronounced than between the United Kingdom and at  least  some  of  the
    countries of, say, Africa or Asia.


    We have had regard to the  appellant's  health  issues  in  making  our
    finding regarding section 117C(1)(c).  We note that the recommendations
    from the appellant's mental health support team include that he  "would
    benefit from continued substance  misuse  rehabilitation  work  in  the
    community" and "will benefit from psychological support when he returns
    to the community".  We do not consider that the appellant's  issues  in
    this regard pose any obstacle to his integration in Belgium.  There  is
    a complete absence of evidence to suggest that  similar  support  would
    not be given by Belgium to one of its citizens, compared with what  may
    be available to the appellant in the United Kingdom.






      (g) The overarching question: "Very compelling circumstances ..."


173. Since Exception  1  is  not  made  out,  we  turn  to  the  overarching
    question, as identified by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  NA  (Pakistan);
    namely, whether there are very  compelling  circumstances  which  would
    make the appellant's deportation a violation of his Article 8 rights.


174. We look first at the factors weighing in favour of the appellant.


175. We reiterate the findings we have made in respect  of  the  appellant's
    length of lawful residence in the United Kingdom and that  his  private
    life was established at a time when the evidence does not show  he  was
    in the  United  Kingdom  unlawfully,  within  the  meaning  of  section
    117B(4)(b).


176. We also reiterate our  finding  that  the  appellant  is  socially  and
    culturally integrated into the United Kingdom.


177. As we indicated we would, we take account of the fact that many of  the
    appellant's criminal offences were committed whilst he was a child.  As
    is apparent from Maslov v Austria [2008] ECHR 546, when  assessing  the
    nature and seriousness of offences committed by an individual,  in  the
    context of proposed removal from a  jurisdiction,  account  has  to  be
    taken of whether that person committed the offences as a juvenile or as
    an adult.


178. In this regard, we have also taken account of  the  appellant's  family
    history.   Despite  our  concerns  regarding  the  credibility  of  the
    appellant and his mother, it is clear that their family has experienced
    difficulties and that these have directly impacted on the appellant, to
    the point where he entered into the care of a local authority.


179. The appellant says that he has made serious  attempts  to  address  his
    offending, in particular his propensity for violence towards women.  We
    take account of this and the various courses  that  the  appellant  has
    undertaken whilst he has been  deprived  of  his  liberty,  which  were
    designed to facilitate his rehabilitation.


180. The appellant points to his alleged experiences in  Belgium,  following
    three removals to that  country  pursuant  to  the  deportation  order.
    Whilst we have not accepted that any  difficulties  he  encountered  at
    that time arose despite his reasonable efforts  to  secure  appropriate
    assistance, we  accept  that  there  will  be  challenges  in  him  re-
    establishing himself in Belgium.


181. The factors  weighing  in  favour  of  the  respondent's  interests  in
    removing the appellant from the United Kingdom are as follows.


182. The appellant's time in the United Kingdom, albeit considerable,  falls
    to be set against the fact that over eight years of his childhood  have
    been spent in Belgium.  As we have already explained, even on the  most
    favourable analysis of the available evidence, the appellant  has  been
    lawfully resident in the United Kingdom only barely for the majority of
    his life.


183. As we have  also  explained,  the  appellant's  degree  of  social  and
    cultural integration is such as only barely to enable  him  to  satisfy
    section 117C(4)(b).   He  has,  by  his  own  admission,  been  heavily
    involved with anti-social elements in this country.


184. That  brings  us  to  the  criminal  offending  undertaken  whilst  the
    appellant was under the age of 18.   Whilst  we  take  account  of  the
    judgment of the CJEU in Maslov, we observe that in R (Akpinar) v  Upper
    Tribunal/Secretary of State for the Home Department AV DRC [2014]  EWCA
    Civ 937, the Court of Appeal held that  the  CJEU's  reference  to  the
    requirement of "very serious reasons" for deporting "a settled  migrant
    who has lawfully spent all or the major part of his  or  her  childhood
    and youth in the host country" is not to be read as if the phrase "very
    serious  reasons"  meant  "very  serious  offending"  (paragraph   30).
    Furthermore, as a general matter, the court in Akpinar did not consider
    that the binding domestic case law suggested that Maslov had "made  any
    significant  change  to  the  law,  which  continues  to  require   the
    proportionality exercise mandated by  the  House  of  Lords  in  Huang"
    (paragraph 53).


185. The significance of the offences committed whilst the appellant  was  a
    child are, firstly,  that  the  rehabilitative  sentences  he  received
    obviously made no difference to  his  anti-social  attitude  and  that,
    secondly, they can now be seen as a  pattern  that  extended  into  the
    appellant's adulthood, when he has committed serious  offences  against
    women.


186. Whilst we take account of the fact that the appellant's background  was
    problematic, the same can be said of very many of those who  criminally
    offend.  It would, in our view,  be  wrong  to  give  very  significant
    weight  to  this  aspect  of  the  appellant's   case   for   resisting
    deportation.


187. Whilst the appellant has, we find, established  a  private  life  at  a
    time when he was in the United Kingdom lawfully, that private life  has
    little to say for itself.  There is scant  evidence  of  the  appellant
    having worked or having made any other contribution to society.


188. So far as family life  is  concerned,  there  is  plainly  very  little
    between the appellant and his mother and his United  Kingdom  siblings;
    certainly, nothing to cause material weight  to  be  afforded  to  that
    family life.


189. The appellant claims to have seen the error of his ways.  He points  to
    the courses which he has undertaken in prison  and  detention.   As  we
    have found, however, these claims are plainly hollow.  The same general
    assertions were being made at  the  time  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing, only to be followed by the assault on X in January  2019.   We
    consider the appellant's motivation  has  been  to  undertake  as  many
    courses as humanly possible, so that their sheer number  would  impress
    us.  It does not.


190. We consider that the appellant remains as  he  was  assessed  in  2017;
    namely, that he poses a serious risk to women.


191. We reject the assertion  that  the  appellant  would  be  destitute  in
    Belgium, if returned  there.  We  bear  in  mind,  in  particular,  the
    strenuous efforts made by Mr Amunwa, in his  post-hearing  submissions,
    to persuade us that the appellant's evidence, and that of  his  mother,
    was in general plausible.  The plain fact of the matter is that  during
    none of his sojourns in Belgium, following his  enforced  removal,  did
    the appellant  make  a  serious  effort  to  accommodate  and  maintain
    himself.  Each time, his intention was, plainly, to  get  back  to  the
    United Kingdom, by whatever means possible.  Instead of using financial
    assistance from X to help him in this regard,  the  appellant  brazenly
    decided to go with her on holiday to Provence.  Although we accept  the
    appellant and his mother might have had an interaction with  a  council
    official in Belgium, we are not persuaded that it is reasonably  likely
    the official  was  presented  with  the  true  position  regarding  the
    appellant.  The evidence of the appellant's mother, that she  was  told
    legal assistance could not be provided  for  the  appellant  since  his
    mother was outside Belgium, is entirely unbelievable.


192. In short,  neither  the  appellant  nor  his  mother  (or  anyone  else
    involved) ever had any intention of making any genuine effort to engage
    the assistance of the relevant Belgian authorities.  Were the appellant
    to do so now, we are in no doubt that those authorities would  be  able
    to provide a  level  of  support  that  would  not  only  preclude  the
    appellant from becoming destitute  but  also  would  lead  to  him  re-
    establishing himself in Belgium.  We are here dealing  with  a  Western
    European nation that is a member of the European Union.  The  appellant
    has not begun to show that Belgium  would  decline  to  offer  him  the
    assistance that is due to one of its citizens.


193. In considering the proportionality of deportation, in terms of  Article
    8, it is not only the appellant's criminality that is relevant.  It  is
    also necessary to take account of the egregious defiance of the law  of
    the United Kingdom, which the  appellant  has  exhibited  in  returning
    unlawfully to the United Kingdom on no fewer than three occasions after
    he has been lawfully removed.   For  this  reason  alone,  there  is  a
    pressing public interest in deportation.


194. Having set out the matters weighing in  favour  of  the  appellant  and
    those weighing in favour of the  respondent,  representing  the  public
    interest, we firmly find that the latter  outweigh  the  former,  by  a
    considerable margin.






      DECISION

The appellant's appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him, any member of his family or any former  partner  of
the appellant referred to in this decision.  This direction applies both  to
the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply with this  direction
could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                      Signed                     Dated:






                      The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                      President of the Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber
