

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                     Khaliq (entry clearance - para 321) Pakistan [2011]
UKUT 00350(IAC)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 16 February 2011                           |                             |
|                                              |21 July 2011                 |

                                   Before

                      Mr C M G Ockelton, Vice President
                          Immigration Judge Farrelly


                                   Between

                                ABBAS KHALIQ

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       AN IMMIGRATION OFFICER, GATWICK
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Katani, Katani & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Home Office Presenting Officer

A person  who  has  entry  clearance  that,  under  the  provisions  of  the
Immigration (Leave to Enter and Remain) Order 2000, takes  effect  as  leave
to enter, does not on arrival in the United Kingdom "seek" leave  to  enter,
and paragraph 321 therefore does not apply to  him.   Paragraph  321A  does,
but only if the circumstances set out in that  paragraph  can  be  shown  to
exist in his case.




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal raises in an acute form the question whether the  rules  of
    the Points Based Scheme for  the  admission  of  students  achieve  any
    useful purpose.

 2. The appellant is a national of  Pakistan.  He  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom on 3 January 2010.  He had entry clearance as a student, issued
    on 25 December 2009.  He had obtained that visa on the strength  of  an
    acceptance letter from Leeds Professional College, offering him a place
    on an HND course in Business Management.

 3. On arrival he was examined by the Immigration Officer.  The Immigration
    Officer found he was  in  difficulties,  because  the  appellant  spoke
    virtually no English.  In his baggage was a certificate stating that he
    had obtained an "A" Grade  in  English  language  from  the  Anglophile
    English Learning Centre in Karachi.  But the appellant admitted that he
    had bought that  certificate  from  somebody  else.   The  college  was
    consulted, and said that they did provide  intensive  English  language
    training at the beginning of their courses, but that they would have  a
    problem in dealing with a person who had very little English.

 4. The Immigration Officer  decided  that  the  appellant  should  not  be
    admitted on the strength of his visa. As he put it  in  his  Notice  of
    Decision, "you have no proficiency in the English language" (sic).   As
    the accompanying narrative makes clear,  refusal  was  under  paragraph
    321A of the Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules, HC395.  In full,
    the reasons are as follows:

          "You hold a current visa, but I am  satisfied  that  either  false
          representations were employed or material facts were not disclosed
          for the purpose of obtaining the visa or a change of circumstances
          since it was issued  has  removed  the  basis  of  your  claim  to
          admission.


          The college you say you will study at has a requirement  that  you
          have a minimum proficiency of the English language.   However  you
          have no profficiency in the English language.  You  have  admitted
          on arrival that you paid a third party for your  English  learning
          certificate course, which  would  lead  me  to  believe  that  you
          employed false representations to obtain your  visa.   Furthermore
          your brother is an overstayer in the UK and I  am  satisfied  that
          you did not disclose this fact, which I consider to  be  material,
          in your visa application.  It is also of concern to  me  that  the
          course itself is a course you know nothing about and paid  someone
          else to choose it for you.  The visa is not, therefore  effective.
          "

 5. The Immigration Officer therefore cancelled the visa  and  refused  the
    appellant leave to enter.  Under the provisions of paragraph  2A(9)  of
    Schedule 2 to the Immigration Act  1971,  in  these  circumstances  the
    appellant  has  an  in-country  right  of  appeal.   The  date  of  the
    respondent's decision was 11 January 2010.

 6. The appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   His  appeal  was
    heard by Immigration  Judge  Agnew  in  April  2010.   Mr  Katani,  who
    represented the appellant before  the  Immigration  Judge  as  he  does
    before us, accepted that, if evidence was going to be  taken  from  the
    appellant, an interpreter might be necessary "for  technical  reasons".
    But the Immigration Judge found that the appellant could not understand
    her at all.  Having heard his evidence through an interpreter, she  set
    out her general conclusion at paragraph 12: "I find that the  appellant
    is not a credible witness and that nothing which he says can be  relied
    upon".


 7. In his submissions before her, Mr Katani sought to draw  a  distinction
    between the obtaining of the entry clearance and the process undertaken
    by the Immigration Officer on the  appellant's  arrival.   Despite  the
    fact that at the latter point the appellant was found to  be  a  person
    who perhaps could not undertake  the  course  for  which  he  had  been
    admitted, he had a valid visa, which, in Mr  Katani's  submission,  was
    not tainted by any dishonesty.  There simply was, he said, no  evidence
    that the Entry  Clearance  Officer  had  sought,  or  had  been  shown,
    evidence relating to the appellant's  ability  to  understand  English.
    Nor had there been any suggestion that the appellant  should  make  any
    reference at all to his brother or the latter's immigration  status  in
    the United Kingdom.

 8. It is convenient at this point to set  out  the  relevant  law.   Under
    amendments to the Immigration Act 1971 introduced  by  the  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 1999, there may be regulations  prescribing  that  entry
    clearance (that is to say, a visa, granted to a person who  is  outside
    the United Kingdom) takes effect as leave to  enter.   The  regulations
    are the  Immigration  (Leave  to  Enter  and  Remain)  Order  2000  (SI
    1161/2000).   Regulation  4  (3)  applies  to  the  appellant's   entry
    clearance, and reads as follows:

               "(3)  In the case of any form of  entry  clearance  to  which
          this paragraph applies, it shall have effect as leave to enter the
          United Kingdom on one occasion during its period or validity; and,
          on arrival in the United Kingdom, the holder shall be treated  for
          the purposes of the  Immigration  Acts  as  having  been  granted,
          before arrival, leave to enter the United Kingdom:
          (a)...
          (b) in the case of an  entry  clearance  which  is  endorsed  with
             conditions, for a limited period, being  the  period  beginning
             the period beginning on the date on which the holder arrives in
             the United Kingdom and ending on the  date  of  expiry  of  the
             entry clearance".

 9. Paragraph 2A of Schedule 2 to the 1971 Act, to which  we  have  already
    made reference, applies, as sub-paragraph (1) makes clear, "to a person
    who has arrived in the United Kingdom with leave to enter which  is  in
    force but which was given to him before his arrival".  The  other  sub-
    paragraphs relevant to this appeal are as follows:-

          "2A(2) He may be  examined  by  an  immigration  officer  for  the
          purpose of establishing
               (a)  whether  there  has  been  such   a   change   in   the
                  circumstances of his case,         since that  leave  was
                  given, that it should be cancelled;
               (b) whether that leave was obtained as  a  result  of  false
                  information given by  him  or  his  failure  to  disclose
                  material facts; or
               (c) whether there are medical grounds on  which  that  leave
                  should be cancelled.
                       ...
             (8)  An immigration officer  may,  on  the  completion  of  any
                 examination of a  person under this paragraph,  cancel  his
                 leave to enter."


10. Those provisions are reflected in the Immigration Rules  in  paragraphs
    321 and 321A, which we set out with their titles:


          "321. Refusal of leave  to  enter  in  relation  to  a  person  in
          possession of an entry clearance


          A person seeking leave to enter the United Kingdom  who  holds  an
          entry clearance which was duly issued to him and is still  current
          may be refused leave to enter only where the  Immigration  Officer
          is satisfied that:
          (i)   false  representations  were  made  or  false  documents  or
              information were submitted (whether or not  material  to  the
              application, and whether or not to the  holder's  knowledge),
              or material facts were not  disclosed,  in  relation  to  the
              application for entry clearance; or:
          (ii)   a change of circumstances since it was issued  has  removed
              the basis of the holder's claim to  admission,  except  where
              the change of circumstances  amounts  solely  to  the  person
              becoming  over  age  for  entry  in  one  of  the  categories
              contained in paragraphs 296-316  of  these  Rules  since  the
              issue of the entry clearance; or:
          (iii)    refusal   is   justified   on   grounds   of   restricted
              returnability; on medical grounds;  on  grounds  of  criminal
              record; because the person seeking  leave  to  enter  is  the
              subject of a deportation order or because exclusion would  be
              conducive to the public good.

          321A. Grounds on which leave to enter or remain which is in  force
          is to be cancelled at port or while  the  holder  is  outside  the
          United Kingdom


          The following grounds for the cancellation of a person's leave  to
          enter or remain which is in force on his arrival in, or whilst  he
          is outside, the United Kingdom apply:
          (1) there has been such a change  in  the  circumstances  of  that
             person's case, since the leave was given,  that  it  should  be
             cancelled; or
          (2) false  representations  were  made  or  false  documents  were
             submitted (whether or not  material  to  the  application,  and
             whether or not to the holder's knowledge),  or  material  facts
             were not disclosed, in relation to the application for leave;


                ...."

11. Although the Immigration Judge clearly had the foregoing provisions  in
    mind, she did not set them out in her determination, to  which  we  now
    return.  She examined the evidence  before  her.  She  noted  that  the
    respondent had produced a copy of the college's website which imposed a
    minimum English language requirement, and she accepted  that  that  was
    the college's requirement.  She continued:


          "In that case, unless the College is  not  genuine  and  providing
          education as they claim, and whether or not they referred in their
          letter to the "Anglophile" document as one they relied upon, it is
          to be expected, given they have stipulated it  as  a  requirement,
          that they would ask prospective students, including the appellant,
          to supply the evidence of their ability to speak the  language  to
          the required standard.  I do  not  accept  as  credible  that  the
          college would not have  requested  evidence  of  this  appellant's
          ability to speak English, given the level and type of  course  the
          appellant claimed he planned to study.  He therefore supplied them
          with what I find on all  the  evidence  before  me  was  a  forged
          document claiming that he had obtained an  "A"  Grade  in  a  four
          month course in 2007 when he had not."


    The Immigration Judge went  on  to  make  further  comments  about  the
    appellant's  credibility  and  intentions.    The   final   substantive
    paragraphs of her determination are as follows:


          "I turn now to consider Mr Katani's submission that there  was  no
          evidence  before  me  that  the  appellant  had   employed   false
          representations to obtain his visa.  I agree with him  that  there
          is nothing before me lodged by the respondent  to  show  that  the
          appellant had failed to disclose information  on  his  application
          form about  his  brothers  in  the  United  Kingdom,  or  that  he
          submitted evidence with regard to his English qualification to the
          respondent.


          The appellant was granted entry clearance as a  Tier  4  (General)
          Student.  The relevant rule applicable at the time of  application
          was rule 245X.  Sub-paragraph (a) notes that  the  applicant  must
          not fall for refusal under the general grounds for  refusal.   The
          respondent has not shown that the appellant failed to meet any  of
          the other sub-paragraphs.  Part 9 of the  Immigration  Rules  sets
          out the general grounds of refusal and the respondent  has  relied
          on paragraph 321 A, sub-paragraph (2).  Mr Katani points out  that
          the  false  representations  have  to  have  been  made,  if   the
          respondent wants to rely on  this  ground  for  cancellation,  "In
          relation to the application for leave".  He submits because  there
          was no evidence that the appellant relied  on  the  document  from
          'Anglophile' at the time of the application for a visa, then  this
          ground does not apply to him.   However, having read  the  wording
          of the relevant sub-paragraph carefully,  I  take  the  view  that
          application for leave includes leave to enter the  United  Kingdom
          at port, not simply at the time the  application  for  a  visa  is
          made, if it did not, I consider that it would  have  been  clearly
          stated in the rule that the application for leave was confined  to
          the appellant's home country and not also at  the  port  of  entry
          when he does, again, make an application for leave to  enter.   At
          that time the appellant did seek leave to enter the United Kingdom
          having disembarked from the  aeroplane,  I  have  found  that  the
          appellant did make false representations to the respondent  during
          interview.


          On this basis I find that the respondent has, on  the  balance  of
          probabilities, shown that the appellant should have  been  refused
          leave to enter under paragraph 321 A.  I find that the decision of
          the respondent appealed against is in accordance with the law  and
          the applicable immigration rules."

12. She accordingly dismissed the appeal.  In applying  for  permission  to
    appeal to this Tribunal, the appellant's principal ground is  that  the
    Immigration Judge erred in making assumptions about what  had  happened
    at the time the appellant attained entry clearance, and in transferring
    backwards to that stage any dishonesty that there might  have  been  at
    the point  of  entry,  or  attempted  entry,  to  the  United  Kingdom.
    Permission to appeal  was  refused  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  but
    granted by Senior Immigration Judge Allen, who observed that "there may
    be an issue in respect of the timing of the misrepresentation  for  the
    purposes of 321 A of HC395".

13. Before us, Mr Katani offered what may be seen as essentially  the  same
    submissions as he made to the Immigration Judge.  Mrs O'Brien said that
    she  recognised  that  she  was  in  some  difficulties.    The   Leeds
    Professional College is classified by  the  Secretary  of  State  as  a
    "Highly Trusted Sponsor". Entry clearance is granted on  the  basis  of
    the  college's  admission  letter.   The  examination  of   whether   a
    particular applicant is suitable for a course is left to  the  college:
    the Entry Clearance Officer makes no independent investigation.  It did
    appear, she said, that the facts of the present case demonstrated  that
    the Leeds Professional College had not made any adequate  investigation
    either.  She was unable to  say  whether,  as  a  result  of  what  had
    transpired in the Immigration Officer's examination of this  appellant,
    any steps were being taken in respect of the college.  She  came  close
    to accepting that there was no  evidence  upon  which  the  Immigration
    Judge could properly find that, in this case, the college had  required
    the appellant to establish his proficiency  in  English,  or  that  the
    appellant had done so by producing the false certificate.

14. She referred us to a computer printout showing  the  various  enquiries
    made by the Entry Clearance Officer, which was before  the  Immigration
    Judge as well.  That printout  showed  that,  because  of  a  delay  in
    dealing with the appellant's application, the Entry  Clearance  Officer
    had made enquiries  of  the  college  to  ensure  that  the  letter  of
    acceptance was still valid.  There was no  suggestion  that  the  Entry
    Clearance Office had made any enquiry as to the appellant's ability  to
    take the course or his competence in English.

15. We must begin by examining the  Immigration  Judge's  reasons  for  her
    decision.  Was she  right  to  conclude  that  "application  for  leave
    includes leave to enter the United Kingdom at port, not simply  at  the
    time the application for a visa is made"?  We have  reached  the  clear
    conclusion that she was not.

16. Before the amendments to the 1971 Act made by  the  1999  Act,  it  was
    clear that a person who was outside the United Kingdom  could  have  no
    leave.  On arrival with Entry Clearance it was necessary to seek  leave
    to enter, on the  strength  of  the  Entry  Clearance  which  had  been
    granted.  Thus, there were two separate  processes,  the  applying  for
    Entry Clearance, and the applying for leave to  enter,  each  of  which
    might result in refusal; and there  might  have  been  refusal  at  the
    second stage, even if not at the first.  But following  the  amendments
    made by the 1999 Act, that is no longer the case.  Entry clearance,  in
    the words of article 4(3)  of  the  Immigration  (Leave  to  Enter  and
    Remain) Order, "shall have effect as leave to enter",  that  has  "been
    granted, before arrival".  That effect is clearly envisaged by  section
    3A of the 1971 Act.  It is also clearly reflected in  paragraph  2A  of
    Schedule 2, with its reference to a person  who  has  "leave  to  enter
    which is in force but which was  given  to  him  before  his  arrival".
    There can be no doubt that a person like the appellant, who arrives  in
    the United Kingdom with entry clearance effective for the  purposes  of
    article 4 of the Immigration (Leave to Enter and  Remain)  Order,  does
    not on arrival apply for leave to enter: he already has it.   Again  as
    paragraph 2A of Schedule 2 to the 1971 Act makes clear, the examination
    is an examination of a person who has leave, not an  examination  of  a
    person who seeks leave.  In this context it appears to us that there is
    simply no scope for saying that  anything  the  appellant  did  on  his
    arrival in the United Kingdom amounted to an  "application  for  leave"
    within the meaning of paragraph 321A.

17. Because, under the structure of section 3A of the 1971 Act, and article
    4 of the Immigration (Leave to Enter and Remain) Order, entry clearance
    takes effect as leave to enter, the application for entry clearance  is
    the application for leave to enter.  That is apparent not  merely  from
    the wording of paragraphs  321  and  321A  of  the  Immigration  Rules,
    including their titles, but also from that of paragraph 2A of  Schedule
    2 to the 1971 Act.  The relevant provisions are set out above.  It will
    be seen that sub-paragraph 2 relates to all those to whom the paragraph
    applies, that is to say those who have leave to enter which is in force
    but which was granted  before  arrival  in  the  United  Kingdom:  sub-
    paragraph 2A treats those whose  leave  derives  from  entry  clearance
    simply as a subset, as the use of the word  "also"  in  that  paragraph
    demonstrates.

18. It  follows  that,  where  a  person's  leave  derives  from  an  entry
    clearance, sub-paragraphs (2) and (2A) apply to him; but that does  not
    mean that his application for leave is made at the point of entry. What
    it does mean is that, in such a case, the additional question under sub-
    paragraph (2A) calls for consideration; that question  is  specifically
    directed to a difference between  the  basis  of  the  grant  of  entry
    clearance and the basis upon which the person seeks to use it.

19. The respondent's decision in the present case was clearly based on  his
    examination  of  the  appellant  at  Gatwick.   As  that  was  not   an
    application for leave to enter, the facts he discovered  could  not  of
    themselves justify refusal under paragraph 321A(2).  But  the  question
    nevertheless arises whether that paragraph applied to  the  appellant's
    application for entry clearance, which was in his case his  application
    for leave to enter.

20. If the appellant could be shown to have produced to the Entry Clearance
    Officer a false document in connection with his application  for  entry
    clearance, there might be little doubt  that  paragraph  321A  applied.
    But, as the printout of the Entry Clearance Officer's  log  shows,  the
    English certificate was not produced to the  Entry  Clearance  Officer:
    indeed, the Entry Clearance Officer apparently had no interest  in  it.
    It might be that, if it could be shown that the  appellant  produced  a
    false document  to  the  college  in  order  to  obtain  the  college's
    admission letter, that also would fall within paragraph  321A:  because
    obtaining the admission letter is an essential step in obtaining  entry
    clearance in the relevant category, but there is no evidence  that  the
    appellant produced his certificate to the Leeds  Professional  College.
    The Immigration Judge concluded that he must have done,  but  there  is
    simply no evidential basis for that. Although  the  Leeds  Professional
    College is a Highly Trusted Sponsor, neither  we  nor  the  Immigration
    Judge have any information about the process by which  they  decide  to
    admit any individual student.

21. It follows that it is simply impossible to say that the appellant  made
    a false representation or submitted a false document in relation to his
    application for leave.

22. In the  Notice  of  Decision,  the  respondent  referred  also  to  the
    appellant's failure to disclose that his  brother  was  in  the  United
    Kingdom as an overstayer.  It does not appear that that aspect  of  the
    case has been relied on in these appeals.  Certainly  Mrs  O'Brien  did
    not seek to rely on it before us.  It is very difficult to see that the
    status of the appellant's brother in the United Kingdom is in any sense
    "material" to his own compliance with the Immigration Rules; and we are
    inclined to agree with Mr Katani that, in any event, the appellant  was
    not given any opportunity to indicate his brother's immigration status:
    and, indeed, the absence of any such opportunity might  well  reinforce
    the view that the matter  was  not  material  to  the  appellant's  own
    application.

23. Our conclusion is, therefore, that paragraph 321A has no application in
    this case.  The result is that the appellant's entry clearance is valid
    and has effect as leave to enter from the date of his arrival until its
    expiry, subject to the conditions endorsed on it.

24. We reach that conclusion with no enthusiasm.  The  appellant  has  been
    judicially assessed as untruthful.  He has  been  prepared  to  deceive
    others as to the level of his competence in English.  He has arrived to
    undertake a course that his Highly Trusted Sponsor college admitted him
    for, but says that it would have difficulty in delivering to him.   But
    the UKBA's decision to allow  colleges,  rather  than  Entry  Clearance
    Officers, to assess whether students should be admitted, and to  remove
    from both Entry Clearance Officers and Immigration Officers  the  power
    to reach any view independent of the colleges (most  of  which  have  a
    clear financial motive to admit as many students as possible) forces us
    to the conclusion we have reached.  It is one which  demonstrates  that
    the Immigration Rules, as in force at the relevant time, provide little
    security against the admission  of  what  may  be  described  as  bogus
    students.   Changes have since been made, but they do not  affect  this
    appeal.

25. For the reasons we have given the appellant's appeal is allowed.






                                                              C M G OCKELTON

VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

