
[pic]

                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

R (on the application of AB) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
IJR [2015] UKUT 00352(IAC)


                                                                 Field House
                                                                      London


                                                              3 October 2014

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                     The Queen on The application of a b
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
                               - - - - - - - -

Mr R Khubber, of Counsel, instructed by JCWI appeared on behalf of the
Applicant.

Mr Z Malik, of Counsel, instructed by the Treasury Solicitor appeared on
behalf of the Respondent.

                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -


                                  JUDGMENT

                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -
ANONYMITY DIRECTION

In order to secure the anonymity  of  the  applicant's  children  throughout
these proceedings I  direct  that  pursuant  to  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules that no  report  or  other  publication  of
these proceedings or any parts of them shall name or directly or  indirectly
identify  the  applicant's  children.   Failure  by  any  person,  body   or
institution whether corporate or incorporate, for the avoidance of doubt  to
include either party to this appeal, to comply with this direction may  lead
to a contempt of court.  The direction shall continue  in  force  until  the
Upper Tribunal or an appropriate court shall lift or vary it.  It  has  been
necessary to anonymise  the  appellant  to  prevent  identification  of  his
children as was the case when the matter was before the Court of Appeal

1.   The  applicant  challenges  the  lawfulness  of  the  decision  of  the
    respondent of 4 November 2013 refusing to revoke the deportation  order
    against him.  He also challenges the decision of the respondent made on
    6 February 2014 to certify his right of appeal against the decision not
    to revoke his deportation order  as  "clearly  unfounded"  pursuant  to
    Section 94 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and that
    thus he is entitled only to an out of  country  right  of  appeal.  The
    deportation order in question was signed in 1999, and  there  has  been
    substantial litigation  since  then.  In  these  circumstances,  it  is
    necessary to set out in some detail the history to this application.

Immigration History and Factual Background

 2. The applicant is a citizen of Morocco born  on  21  January  1963.   He
    entered the United Kingdom on  12  May  1991  and  was  granted  twelve
    months' leave to enter as the spouse of  a  British  citizen.   He  was
    later on 5 May 1992 granted indefinite leave to remain on the basis  of
    marriage; that marriage was dissolved in May 1994.

 3. In 1996 the applicant was arrested, was convicted of  indecent  assault
    and sentenced to seven years' imprisonment with a  recommendation  from
    the court that he be deported.  A decision was then taken to deport him
    on the basis of  that  recommendation  and  he  appealed  against  that
    decision.  That appeal was dismissed on 7 October 1999; the deportation
    order was signed on 26 November 1999 and on 8 June 2000 he was deported
    to Morocco.

 4. On 25 December 2000 the applicant  re-entered  the  United  Kingdom  in
    breach of the deportation order and was granted temporary admission; he
    did not, however, comply with the conditions thereby imposed.

 5. The applicant then began to live with his now wife Ms S  with  whom  he
    has two children.  Ms S has a daughter from an earlier relationship who
    was born in 1997.  In June 2006 the applicant was arrested following  a
    domestic dispute between him and Ms S.  He then applied  for  leave  to
    remain on Article 8 grounds on the basis of his relationship, which was
    refused on  29  July  2006.   His  appeal  against  that  decision  was
    dismissed on 23 November 2006.

 6. A further application for  permission to remain was made on  the  basis
    that Ms S was an EEA national, and that as the family member of an  EEA
    national, the applicant could only be  deported  if  he  represented  a
    'genuine, present and sufficiently serious  threat'  to  a  fundamental
    interest of society which, he says, he did not.  That  application  was
    refused, and an appeal against that decision was made to the First-tier
    Tribunal, an appeal that ultimately reached  the  Court  of  Appeal  in
    2012.  I turn next to that decision and the findings made.

Decision of the Court of Appeal

 7. As noted, the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal reached  the  Court  of
    Appeal. It was reported as DH (Jamaica) and AB (Morocco) v SSHD  [2012]
    EWCA Civ 1736. At paragraphs 39 to 45  Lord  Justice  Elias  summarised
    proceedings as follows:-

    "39. The decision was appealed to the First-Tier Tribunal ('FTT') on  1
          December 2010 where it came before Judge Blake on 26 January 2011.
           The appeal was dismissed by a decision promulgated  on  21  April
          2011.  The learned Judge's analysis was that the appellant's  case
          fell within the scope of Article 3(1) of the Citizenship Directive
          2004/38/EC ('the Citizens Directive').  Ms S was  an  EU  national
          within the meaning of the EEA Regulations and AB  qualified  as  a
          'family member' within the meaning of those Regulations (paras 18-
          19).   By  regulation  21,  AB  could  be  deported  only  if   he
          represented a 'genuine, present and sufficiently  serious  threat'
          to a fundamental interest of society.

    40.  The judge noted that he had no  information  before  him  to  show
          whether the appellant had a propensity to re-offend.  However,  he
          agreed with the observations of DIJ Lewis in the  earlier  hearing
          to the effect that AB's remaining in  the  country  for  some  ten
          years following an unlawful re-entry posed a genuine  and  present
          threat  to  maintenance  control.   The  judge   recognised   that
          deportation would impact adversely on the Article 8 rights of  the
          appellant and his family, but concluded nonetheless that this  was
          one of those rare cases where the strength of  society's  interest
          in removal justified the impact it would have upon  those  rights.
          In exercising the proportionality assessment, the judge had regard
          to the best interests of the children as a  primary  consideration
          as required by the decision of the Supreme Court in ZH  (Tanzania)
          v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4 (a case decided between the hearing  and  the
          judge  finalising  his  decision).   The  judge  had  evidence  in
          particular of certain difficulties in the health of AB's daughter.

    The decision of the Upper Tribunal.

    41.  The Upper Tribunal (Mr Justice Blake and UT Judge Gill)  dismissed
          the appeal from the decision of Judge Blake.  The UT held that the
          FTT had in fact  been  wrong  to  conclude  that  the  Citizenship
          Directive was  applicable;  it  was  not  because  Ms  S  had  not
          exercised   any   free   movement   rights.     The    case    was
          indistinguishable from the case of McCarthy  decided  after  Judge
          Blake's decision, in which the CJEU held that  the  Directive  did
          not apply to an EU  citizen  who  had  not  exercised  freedom  of
          movement rights even where he or she was a dual national.   Ms.  S
          therefore had no rights under EU law and  her  partner  could  not
          claim any derivative right to a residence certificate.

    42.  The appellant had  foreseen  that  possibility  in  the  light  of
          McCarthy and switched the focus of challenge from the Directive to
          the decision in Zambrano, but unsuccessfully.  The Court  did  not
          accept that Zambrano was applicable either.  The UT observed  that
          Zambrano had been clarified by the ECJ  in  Dereci  and  concluded
          (para 25), in accordance with its earlier  ruling  in  Sanade  and
          Others v Secretary of State [2012]  UKUT  48,  that  the  relevant
          principle of EU law was that 'an EU national cannot be  forced  to
          leave the European Union whether he  or  she  has  exercised  free
          movement rights  or  not.'   In  this  case  the  removal  of  the
          appellant would not compel the wife and children to leave  because
          they could subsist as a family unit without him.  It was  accepted
          that it would be unreasonable to expect them to go to Morocco  but
          nonetheless the disruption of the family did not engage EU law.

    43.  As to the contention that deportation would be  incompatible  with
          Article 8, the UT held that the decision of the FTT  disclosed  no
          error of law.  The UT concluded, contrary to  the  submissions  of
          counsel, that the decision of the FTT was structured, particularly
          when seen in the light of DIJ Lewis' earlier decision, to which it
          made  reference;  that  it  properly  considered  the  impact   of
          deportation on the wife and children; and that  sufficient  weight
          had been given to the interests of the children in accordance with
          ZH (Tanzania).

    44.  The UT made two particular  observations  which  in  my  view  are
          highly pertinent to the Article 8 submissions in each of these two
          appeals.  First,  the  judges  confirmed  the  principle  recently
          reiterated in AH v Secretary of State that 'there are  classes  of
          offences so serious that, irrespective  of  a  propensity  to  re-
          offend, public policy justifies removal'.   Second,  the  Tribunal
          referred to the decision of the ECtHR in  Nunez  v  Norway  [2011]
          ECHE  1047   where   that   court   concluded   that   exceptional
          circumstances were required before family life  established  after
          illegal  entry  with  no  right  to  remain  would  make   removal
          incompatible with Article 8.  As  the  Strasbourg  court  put  it,
          'expulsion  would  constitute  an  important  means   of   general
          deterrence against gross or repeated violations of the Immigration
          Act.'

    45.  Accordingly, the UT concluded that although Judge Blake had  erred
          in his conclusion that the Citizenship Directive  was  applicable,
          there was no material error of law vitiating his conclusions."

 8. Having considered the arguments put forward by the  claimant  Elias  LJ
    dismissed the appeal for the following reasons:-

    "75. In my judgment, there was a very strong case for  the  First  Tier
          Tribunal reaching the conclusion it did.   There  is  a  complaint
          that its decision was not a  structured  one,  but  as  the  Upper
          Tribunal noted, the First Tier Tribunal referred to  and  approved
          the earlier decision of DIJ Lewis  which  expressly  followed  the
          Razgar analysis, and one has to look at both  judgments  in  order
          fully to understand the determination of Judge Blake.

    76.  Given that the appellant was at all times an illegal  entrant  and
          had  committed  a  serious  criminal  offence,  there  was   every
          justification for the conclusion which has in fact  been  made  by
          all judges who considered this below, namely that the  deportation
          of this appellant would not infringe the Article 8  rights  either
          of himself or any member of his family.

    77.  In my view, the appellant is simply asking this court to re-assess
          the weight to be given  to  various  factors.   That  is  not  its
          function, and in any event I do not see how the courts below could
          sensibly have reached any different conclusion."

 9. On 21 December 2012 his appeal was dismissed. Subsequent  to  that,  in
    October 2013 the applicant was  detained,  the  respondent's  intention
    being to deport him in line with the deportation order made as long ago
    as 1999. Submissions were then made on his behalf, initially seeking  a
    stay on removal, and then a  request  that  the  deportation  order  be
    revoked.

The Request to Revoke the Deportation Order

10. This request was initially made on 29  October  2013,  the  applicant's
    solicitors having sought (ultimately unsuccessfully)  to  petition  the
    European Court of Human Rights to place a stay on removal  pursuant  to
    Rule 39.  The submissions to the respondent were, in summary, that:-

      i. A significant period of time had elapsed since  the  last  Tribunal
         hearing such that the applicant and his family's Article  8  rights
         had strengthened rendering reliance on  his  past  immigration  and
         criminal history no longer reasonable or proportionate; that he had
         continued to comply with the requirements of  immigration  control,
         had continued to live a law-abiding life in the United Kingdom, and
         to play an integral role in the welfare of his children.

     ii. Any removal would have a seriously adverse impact on the welfare of
         his children and bearing in mind that the length of time  that  has
         elapsed since the criminal conviction the seriously adverse  impact
         would be disproportionate, the children's  best  interest  being  a
         primary consideration.

11. Subsequent to these submissions the applicant served on the  respondent
    a report from Mr Peter Horrocks, an independent  social  worker,  which
    deals with the relationship of the  applicant  and  his  children,  his
    spouse's position and the impact that his removal would have on her.

The Report of Mr Horrocks

12. In summary,  Mr  Horrocks  concern  is  that  the  deportation  of  the
    applicant will  have  a  significant  and  detrimental  effect  on  the
    children and on the applicant's partner.  That,  given  her  particular
    mental vulnerabilities, will have a detrimental effect on  her  ability
    as the sole remaining parent, to care for the children, one of whom has
    special needs.

13. Mr Horrocks' report was made after a  visit  to  the  family  home  and
    interviews with the applicant's spouse, their two children and  Ms  S's
    daughter from a previous relationship.   Mr  Horrocks  noted  that  the
    separation between the father of L (his own daughter) appears  to  have
    been traumatic; that there is a close and loving relationship between L
    and her father, that he is a key figure in her  life  and  one  of  her
    primary attachment figures [4.3].  He also noted that the son, A, had a
    positive  relationship  with  his  father  but  that  his  reaction  to
    separation from his father had been less traumatic  than  that  of  his
    sister.  He noted that the applicant is the only father figure that the
    stepdaughter has known; that she has significant learning  difficulties
    and struggles with many  aspects  of  her  daily  life  not  least  her
    inability to accept any form of change, finding that  anxiety-provoking
    and distressing concluding that the applicant plays a significant  role
    in her life [4.59].

14. Asked to comment on the likely impact on the children of  their  father
    being  removed  permanently  from  the  United  Kingdom,  Mr   Horrocks
    concluded that on the basis of L's previous reaction  to  removal  from
    her daily life, a permanent removal could  have  a  significantly  more
    devastating impact [4.11] in that it also impacted on  the  applicant's
    wife such that the disappearance of the father  would  have  an  effect
    like the death of her mother when she was 9.  Looking at the medium  or
    long-term impact [4.14] the loss of the father were he  to  be  removed
    could be inexplicable to them given their ages, it  being  likely  that
    they would grow up with a sense of injustice and unfairness,  it  being
    difficult to provide an age-appropriate explanation to the children and
    that to separate them would be significantly more harmful than if  they
    had grown up not knowing him, that they would experience a  significant
    and traumatic loss of life which could have a long-term impact  on  all
    aspects of their development.

15. Mr Horrocks noted that the applicant's wife, after  the  death  of  her
    mother, spent a number of years in care; has no other family other than
    her children, has in the past suffered from depression and self-harmed;
    the applicant is a stabilising figure and has become  her  key  support
    and protection, enabling her to function effectively.  He notes  [4.18]
    that the effect on her of the applicant's deportation will  lead  to  a
    significant  downturn  in  her  emotional/mental  health,   making   it
    difficult for her to meet all aspects of her children's needs,  causing
    them anxiety and stress, exacerbated by their father's  absence.  This,
    he is concerned, may lead to family breakdown

16. Mr Horrocks considered that the  removal  of  the  applicant  from  the
    family on a permanent basis would have a significant negative impact on
    the lives of all children of the family and would not be in their  best
    interests noting that the care he provides for the two younger children
    allows the mother to devote more  time  to  her  older  child  who  has
    significant additional needs.

The Secretary of State's Response - 6 February 2014

17. The respondent considered, having had regard to paragraph 390, 391  and
    391A of the Immigration Rules concluding that there  was  no  basis  to
    justify revoking the  deportation  order.   While  accepting  that  the
    decision to  remove  the  applicant  to  Morocco  would  give  rise  to
    interference with his rights under Article 8 and may not be in the best
    interests of his children she was satisfied that the  interference  was
    proportionate.  Having had regard to paragraph 398 of  the  Immigration
    Rules she considered that  there  were  no  exceptional  factors  which
    warrant departure from the stated position given:

        i. that although the family  had  not  been  forced  to  return  to
           Morocco with him they could choose to relocate  there  and  plus
           there may be further difficulties impacting on the  children  in
           various ways.  The wife is responsible for taking  into  account
           the needs of her children and for deciding whether  or  not  she
           wishes to join her husband;

       ii. no medical evidence had been  provided  to  confirm  that  Ms  S
           suffers from mental health and takes anti-depressants  and  beta
           blockers; that if Ms S chooses to remain in the  United  Kingdom
           she could seek further  support  from  the  NHS  to  assist  her
           problems and could seek treatment in  Morocco  where  facilities
           might not be to the standard she currently accesses  in  the  UK
           and as such her mental health did not  reach  the  threshold  of
           Article 3;

      iii. that if the wife decides to relocate her family to Morocco  then
           it would be her responsibility to put  mechanisms  in  place  in
           order to support her daughter and  although  this  change  would
           bring some difficulties it is her  responsibility  to  determine
           what would be the best for her children;

       iv. that  Mr  Horrocks'  report  did  not  provide  details  of  any
           exceptional circumstances;

        v. that any interference with the rights to the appellant's  family
           and private life was proportionate in that whilst the children's
           best interests would be served by having both  parents  to  care
           for them ideally in the UK that the applicant's own  actions  by
           way of his criminality had led to him being separated  from  his
           children and stepchild;

       vi. that the best  interests  of  the  children  and  stepchild  had
           previously been considered and that after consideration  of  all
           of  the  evidence  available  it  had  been  decided  that   the
           applicant's claim was clearly unfounded and thus the decision to
           refuse to revoke the deportation order was certified pursuant to
           Section 94(2) of the 2002 Act.

The Supplementary Decision Letter of 8 May 2014

18. The letter states that it  is  supplementary  and  should  be  read  in
    conjunction with the decision of 6 February 2014.  The letter considers
    that:-

        i. Deportation may well separate the applicant  from  his  children
           which may have an adverse effect on their development  but  that
           this did not render his deportation disproportionate  or  unduly
           harsh;

       ii. the fact  that  this  was  considered  in  the  context  of  the
           applicant's wife suffering from mental health and whilst it  was
           understandable that she would want the applicant to reside  with
           the family in the United Kingdom, if the deportation  led  to  a
           downturn in her mental health or ability to meet the  children's
           needs she could seek support from the NHS or local authorities;

      iii. having considered the best  interests  of  the  children  as  an
           integral part  of  the  overall  assessment,  that  in  all  the
           circumstances the best interests of the children are  outweighed
           by the applicant's serious criminal conduct and his  deportation
           is plainly proportionate;

       iv. there was no suggestion they should relocate to Morocco to  save
           the family unit or that  relocation  would  be  reasonable,  the
           applicant's relocation not being used to  test  proportionality;
           that the respondent had given consideration to the length of the
           applicant's residence in the United Kingdom,  the  time  elapsed
           since the offence was  committed  and  his  conduct  during  the
           period but the offence committed was a particularly serious  one
           and it justifies the deportation as being proportionate.

Legal Framework

19. Section 82(1) of the 2002 Act provides a right of appeal to the  First-
    tier Tribunal in respect of an immigration decision which  includes  by
    operation of Section 82(2)(k) a refusal to revoke a deportation  order.
    Although Section 92 of the 2002 Act permits an appeal against  such  an
    immigration decision if the applicant has made an  asylum  claim  or  a
    human rights claim in the United Kingdom, the right  to  an  in-country
    appeal only arises if the case is not certified pursuant to Section  94
    which provides as follows:

       "(1) This section applies to an appeal under section 82(1) where the
       appellant has made an asylum claim or a human rights claim (or
       both).


       (1A) A person may not bring an appeal against an immigration
       decision of a kind specified in [section 82(2)(c), (d), (e) or (ha)]
       2 in reliance on section 92(2) if the Secretary of State certifies
       that the claim or claims mentioned in subsection (1) above is or are
       clearly unfounded.


       (2) A person may not bring an appeal to which this section applies
       [in reliance on section 92(4)(a) if the Secretary of State certifies
       that the claim or claims mentioned in subsection (1) is or are
       clearly unfounded."

Submissions

20. The applicant's submissions are characterised  by  Mr  Khubber  in  his
    skeleton argument as follows:-

        i. The respondent has materially  misdirected  herself  in  law  in
           relation to Article 8 best interests consideration  when  making
           the decision on certification;

       ii. linked to ground 1 above, the respondent had failed to take into
           account  relevant  factors/taken  into  account  less   relevant
           factors; and,

      iii. the decision was  ultimately  irrational  applying  the  anxious
           scrutiny test.

21. Mr Khubber also raised  as  a  preliminary  issue  as  to  whether  the
    respondent should be allowed to rely on  the  new  letter  of  decision
    produced in response to the decision to grant permission  for  judicial
    review. Relying on Nash v Chelsea College Of Art & Design  [2001]  EWHC
    Admin 538 he submitted that the letter  should  be  viewed  with  great
    caution.

22. Mr Khubber submitted that the Secretary of State erred when considering
    the best interests of the children and their welfare in considering the
    impact that the deportation would have on the children, the impact  the
    deportation would have on the applicant's wife but not considering  the
    impact that the latter would have on her ability  to  provide  adequate
    care for the children thus adding or exacerbating the difficulties they
    would face.

23. Mr Khubber submitted also that this issue is not properly dealt with in
    the second refusal letter (it being accepted that it is not dealt  with
    properly in the first refusal  letter)  and  further  that  the  second
    letter is confused in that it appears in places  to  suggest  that  the
    family being able to relocate  to  Morocco  was  a  factor  taken  into
    account whilst saying that it could not; and, the fact that they  could
    not relocate to Morocco should in the proportionality exercise be  seen
    as a factor weighing in favour  of  the  applicant  rather  than  being
    neutral.

24. Mr Malik submitted that the decision in Nash  needs  to  be  viewed  in
    context in that it was concerned with adequacy of reasons, an issue not
    pleaded in this case. He submitted also that much of what is  now  said
    with regard to article 8 had been considered by the  Court  of  Appeal.
    While the welfare of the children is an important  factor,  it  is  not
    decisive, and that in reality the case does not disclose anything  new.
    He submitted that viewing the decision as a whole it was not irrational
    taking into account the history of the case, the applicant's case being
    in reality nothing more than a disagreement about the  weight  attached
    by the Secretary of State to various factors and  thus  the  criticisms
    are misplaced

25. I put it to Mr Malik that what the Secretary of State has not done here
    is, in considering the "best interests" of the children to take account
    of the extent of the harm caused.  Mr Malik submitted, relying on South
    Bucks v Porter [2004] UKHL at 35 and 36 that there was no need for  the
    Secretary of State  to  deal  with  every  single  point.   Mr  Khubber
    submitted, however, that this issue is not one which could  be  put  to
    one side.

26. Mr Khubber in reply, submitted also that what needs to be borne in mind
    in this case is that the new refusal  letter  was  developed  once  the
    Upper Tribunal had indicated that there was an arguable error  of  law.
    Whilst the applicant in Nash ultimately did not succeed, it has  to  be
    borne in mind that this was a case regarding education.  Similarly,  he
    submitted South Bucks District Council & Anor v Porter [2004]  UKHL  33
    was distinguishable from the circumstances of this case.

     Legal Framework

27. As it stood at the date of decision, section 82(1) of the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 provided a right of appeal  against  an
    "immigration decision" as defined in section 82 (2)  which  includes  a
    refusal to revoke a deportation order (section 82 (2)(k)).   Section 92
    (1) of the 2002 Act restricts the categories of appeal under section 82
    (1) which can be brought while an appellant is in  the  United  Kingdom
    and  excludes  appeals  against  decisions  to  refuse  to   revoke   a
    deportation order unless the appellant  has,  as  is  provided  for  in
    section 92 (4) made an asylum or human rights claim while in the United
    Kingdom.  That is, however subject to section 94 of the 2002 Act  which
    provides materially:

      "94 Appeal from within  United  Kingdom:  unfounded  human  rights  or
      asylum claim

      (1) This section applies to an appeal under section 82(1) where  the
      appellant has made an asylum claim or a human rights claim (or both).

      (1A) ...

      (2) A person may not bring an appeal to which this section applies  in
      reliance on section 92(4)(a) if the Secretary of State certifies that
      the claim or claims mentioned in subsection  (1)  is  or  are  clearly
      unfounded."

28. In ZL v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 25 gave guidance as the proper approach to
    the "clearly unfounded" test. Lord Phillips MR, giving the judgement of
    the court, stated:

    56. Section 115(1) empowers - but does not require - the Home Secretary
    to certify any claim "which is  clearly  unfounded".  The  test  is  an
    objective one: it depends not on the Home Secretary's view but  upon  a
    criterion which a court can readily re-apply once it has the  materials
    which the Home Secretary had. A claim is either clearly unfounded or it
    is not.

    57. How, if at all, does the test in s.115 (6) differ in practice from
    this? It requires the Home Secretary to certify  all  claims  from  the
    listed  states  "unless  satisfied  that  the  claim  is  not   clearly
    unfounded". It is useful to  start  with  the  ordinary  process,  such
    as s.115(1) calls for. Here the decision-maker will -

        (i) consider the factual substance and detail of the claim

        (ii) consider how it stands with the known background data

        (iii) consider whether in the round it is capable of belief

        (iv) if not, consider whether some part of it is capable of belief

        (v) consider whether, if eventually believed in whole or in part, it
        is capable of coming within the Convention.

    If the answers are such that the claim cannot on  any  legitimate  view
    succeed, then the claim is clearly unfounded; if not, not.

29. These observations were later  endorsed  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in
    Bagdanavicius v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 1605.  Further guidance  was  also
    given by the House of Lords in ZT (Kosovo) v SSHD [2009] UKHL  6  where
    Lord Phillips observed [23]:

       "23 Where, as here,  there  is  no  dispute  of  primary  fact,  the
       question of whether or not a claim  is  clearly  unfounded  is  only
       susceptible to one rational answer. If any reasonable  doubt  exists
       as to  whether  the  claim  may  succeed  then  it  is  not  clearly
       unfounded. It follows that a challenge to the Secretary  of  State's
       conclusion that a  claim  is  clearly  unfounded  is  a  rationality
       challenge. There is no way that a court  can  consider  whether  her
       conclusion was  rational  other  than  by  asking  itself  the  same
       question that she has considered. If  the  court  concludes  that  a
       claim has a realistic prospect of  success  when  the  Secretary  of
       State has reached  a  contrary  view,  the  court  will  necessarily
       conclude that the Secretary of State's view was irrational."

Discussion

30. There has been substantial consideration of the best interests  of  the
    children during the litigation preceding the decision of the  Court  of
    Appeal. This is not a "fresh claim" case but Elias LJ  identified  very
    strong reasons why the public interest was in favour of  deporting  the
    applicant. That said, there is now additional evidence in the  form  of
    an expert report; time has flowed  and  the  relationships  within  the
    family may well have changed.

31. I turn first to the issue of the second refusal letter.  The  judge  in
    Nash held [34]-[36]:

    "34. In my judgment, the following propositions appear from  the  above
           authorities:

           (i)        Where there is a statutory duty to  give  reasons  as
                  part of the notification of the decision, so that (as Laws
                  J put it in Northamptonshire County Council ex p  D)  'the
                  adequacy of the reasons is itself made a condition of  the
                  legality   of   the   decision',   only   in   exceptional
                  circumstances if at all will the Court  accept  subsequent
                  evidence of the reasons.

           (ii)    In  other  cases,  the  Court  will  be  cautious  about
                  accepting  late  reasons.   The  relevant   considerations
                  include the  following,  which  to  a  significant  degree
                  overlap:

                 (a)   Whether the  new  reasons  are  consistent  with  the
                 original reasons.

                 (b)   Whether it is clear that the new reasons  are  indeed
                 the original reasons of the whole committee.

                 (c)   Whether there is a real risk that the  later  reasons
                 have been composed subsequently in  order  to  support  the
                 tribunal's decision, or are a  retrospective  justification
                 of the original decision.  This consideration is really  an
                 aspect of (b).

                 (d)   The delay before the later reasons were put forward.

                 (e)   The circumstances in which the later reasons were put
                 forward.  In particular,  reasons  put  forward  after  the
                 commencement of  proceedings  must  be  treated  especially
                 carefully.   Conversely,   reasons   put   forward   during
                 correspondence  in  which  the  parties  are   seeking   to
                 elucidate  the   decision   should   be   approached   more
                 tolerantly.

    35.  To these I add two further considerations.  The first is based  on
           general  principles  of  administrative  law.   The  degree   of
           scrutiny and caution to be applied by the  Court  to  subsequent
           reasons  should  depend   on   the   subject   matter   of   the
           administrative decision  in  question.   Where  important  human
           rights are concerned, as in asylum cases,  anxious  scrutiny  is
           required; where the subject matter is less important, the  Court
           may be less demanding, and readier to accept subsequent reasons.

    36.  Secondly, the Court should bear in  mind  the  qualifications  and
           experience of the persons involved.  It is one thing to  require
           comprehensiveness  and  clarity  from  lawyers  and  those   who
           regularly sit on administrative  tribunals;  it  is  another  to
           require  those  qualities  of  occasional  non-lawyer   tribunal
           chairmen and members."

32. It is evident from paragraph  34  (ii)  that  the  principles  are  not
    limited to a consideration of cases where "adequacy of reasons"  is  in
    issue; they go considerably wider, and are, for  the  reasons  set  out
    below, applicable here.

33. It is important to bear in mind the context in which this second letter
    was produced.  It was provided after a decision of the  Upper  Tribunal
    in which Judge Storey said:-

         "As regards  (ii)  and  (iii),  which  it  is  convenient  to  take
         together, we observe that the respondent accepted that removal  may
         not be in the best interests of the children  to  the  extent  that
         separation  from  their  father  would   cause   them   significant
         difficulties.  The respondent also accepted that the  stepdaughter,
         A, had learning difficulties.   However,  these  findings  did  not
         necessarily  preclude  the  respondent  from  concluding  that  the
         applicant's removal was proportionate.  The principles relating  to
         the best interests of the child as set out in Zoumbas  v  Secretary
         of State for the Home Department [2013] UKSC  74  made  clear  that
         while the best interests of the child are a  primary  consideration
         they are not a paramount consideration and that the  assessment  to
         be conducted as to the best interests involved is an  overall  one.
         In that context the respondent was entitled  to  consider  that  in
         terms of the applicant's relationship with his children the  impact
         caused by  him  was  limited  to  difficulties  rather  than  undue
         hardship."

34. However, having viewed the report from Mr Horrocks the panel said:-

         "It seems to us that the decision fails to take  into  account  the
         position of the spouse and the impact on  her  of  the  applicant's
         removal  as  evidenced  by  the  independent  social  work  report.
         Reference as to consideration of the 'family as a whole'  as  found
         for example at paragraph 30 of the decision letter did  not  engage
         in any apparent way to the above findings and their implications on
         the best interests of the children."

         Looking at the decision letter (which as  Mr  Malik  has  correctly
         reminded us must be looked at as a whole) we bear in mind  that  in
         several paragraphs the author applied  an  incorrect  approach,  in
         regarding it as one of the options open to the applicant  that  his
         wife could accompany him with her children  to  Morocco.   That  is
         flatly contrary concession of  the  Secretary  of  State  given  in
         Sanade and others (British children  -  Zambrano  -  Dereci)  India
         [2012] UKUT 48."

35. It is evident from the letters that the more  recent  clearly  disavows
    what had been identified by Judge  Storey  as  an  incorrect  approach,
    namely, submitting that the applicant's wife  and  the  children  could
    accompany him to Morocco. The supplementary letter is thus  not  adding
    to the reasons, it is giving a different basis for the decision.   This
    change in  reasons  is  also  put  forward  well  into  the  course  of
    litigation which, I consider, is a significant factor  indicating  that
    the supplementary letter should be viewed with considerable  scepticism
    in assessing the legality of the initial decision  and I do not  accept
    the submission that the respondent did not, in reaching  her  decision,
    take into account  a matter  which  she  should  not  have  taken  into
    account, that is, the suggestion that the applicant's wife and  partner
    could go to Morocco.

36. Further, while the respondent has stated she has taken into account the
    best interests of the children, there is no sufficient indication  that
    she has taken into account the level of the harm caused when  balancing
    that against the public interest. Given that the best interests of  the
    children are the central concern, this is indicative of a flaw  in  the
    respondent's consideration of this issue.

37. In addition, there is no proper  indication  that  the  respondent  has
    taken into account  the  impact  on  the  children  of  their  mother's
    diminished ability to care for them, the central  issue  identified  by
    the Upper Tribunal when granting permission.  It  was  not  taken  into
    account in the initial letter and while the supplementary letter refers
    to the fact that the mother may be able to access help if her condition
    deteriorates, there is no sufficient consideration that her  consequent
    inability to care for the children further impacts on them in  addition
    to the effect of the applicant being deported. The submission that  the
    respondent is not under a duty to identify  expressly  each  and  every
    piece of information is not an answer to this, given that the letter in
    question was written to address this precise issue  identified  by  the
    Upper Tribunal.

38. I accept that there had been some consideration of article 8 issues  in
    the litigation leading up to the decision of the Court of  Appeal,  but
    there is no indication that  this  took  into  account  the  particular
    issues identified by the Upper Tribunal as causing  concern  when  they
    granted permission or raised in the submissions made to the respondent.
    It must also be borne in mind that the fact-finding exercise on article
    8 in the litigation leading up to the Court of Appeal preceded that  by
    a number of years and it is not at all clear that  the  effect  of  the
    applicant's deportation would have (as indicated in the  report  of  Mr
    Horrocks) on the partner, the children, and on the children due to  the
    effect on the partner were considered. That is,  given  the  manner  in
    which the case developed and progressed, perhaps inevitable.

39. It follows  from  this  that  I  am  satisfied  that  the  respondent's
    consideration of the application was unlawful in that it did  not  take
    the correct approach, took into account irrelevant factors  and  failed
    properly to take into account the  relevant  factor  of  the  secondary
    impact on the children flowing from their mother's  inability  properly
    to care for them. There was no proper or anxious scrutiny.

40. The respondent has not sought to demonstrate that the claimed error was
    immaterial, or submitted  that  there  could  rationally  only  be  one
    outcome.

41. For these reasons, I find that the respondent's decision to certify the
    application as clearly unfounded was unlawful and I quash it.

