

                                    [pic]

                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                      (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

R (on the application of HRP and Others) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
Department IJR [2015] UKUT 00351(IAC)

                                                        Heard at Field House

             IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                                  THE QUEEN
                            on the application of

                                   (1) HRP
                                   (2) BHP
                              (3) THP (a minor)
                                                                  Applicants
                                    -and-

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Applicants:    Mr Z. Malik, instructed by Malik Law solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms H Stout, instructed by the Treasury Solicitor






                                  JUDGMENT
                        Handed down on 14 April 2015


Judge O'Connor:

Introduction


   1. The first Applicant ("A1") and the second Applicant ("A2") are husband
      and wife, and are nationals of India. The third  Applicant  ("A3")  is
      their child, born in the United Kingdom on 29 January 2010.  Anonymity
      has been granted pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
      Tribunal) Rules 2008 in respect of A3.


   2. This is the Applicants' application for judicial review  of  decisions
      made by the Secretary of State for the Home Department ("SSHD") on  23
      October 2013 ("2013 Decisions").

   3. On 11 February 2015 the Respondent issued a  further  single  decision
      (2015 Decision) relating to each of the Applicants; refusing  each  of
      them leave to remain in the United Kingdom. The  Applicants  have  not
      sought permission to amend their Claim Form  or  grounds  to  bring  a
      discrete challenge to this further decision.

The Issues


   4. Although the Applicants originally sought to bring  challenge  to  the
      2013 Decisions on four bases,  only  the  following  grounds  are  now
      pursued:


       (i)  The Respondent's consideration of paragraph  276ADE(vi)  of  the
             Immigration Rules is unlawful;
       (ii) The  Respondent's  consideration  of  whether  to  exercise  her
             discretion  to  grant  leave  outside  the  Immigration  Rules
             breaches her obligations under  section  55  of  the  Borders,
             Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 ("section 55").

The Background


   5.  The  underlying  factual  circumstances  are  not  in  dispute.   The
      Applicants are citizens of India. A1 and  A2  arrived  in  the  United
      Kingdom on 9 October 2002 with entry clearance as visitors - leave  to
      enter  being  conferred  until  17  March  2003.   They   subsequently
      overstayed. On 3 May 2011 the Applicants applied for leave  to  remain
      on Article 8 ECHR grounds. This application was  refused  on  29  June
      2011.


   6. The Applicants made a further application for leave to  remain  on  30
      September 2013. The covering letter to  these  applications  asserted,
      inter  alia,  that:  (i)  the  Applicants  meet  the  requirements  of
      paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules; (ii)  their  removal  would
      breach Article 8 ECHR; and that consequently, (iii)  leave  should  be
      granted to them outside of the Rules. This  letter  also  invited  the
      Secretary of State to "pay particular attention" to section 55 and was
      accompanied by a lengthy Statement of Truth, signed by A1.

   7. The application of 30 September 2013 was refused in the 2013 Decisions
      under challenge in these proceedings.

   8. On 25 October 2014 Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson granted permission  to
      apply for judicial review.


   9. Subsequently, the Respondent wrote to the  Applicants  on  1  December
      2014 indicating that she was; "prepared to settle this matter  on  the
      terms set out in the enclosed consent order".  The  'enclosed  consent
      order' provided for the Applicants  to  have  permission  to  withdraw
      their judicial review application:


             "UPON the Respondent  agreeing  to  reconsider  the  decisions
             refusing leave to remain dated 23 October 2014 issued to [A1],
             [A2] and [A3] and to issue new decisions in due course"


  10. The Applicants refused to  sign  this  order,  indicating  a  wish  to
      proceed with the judicial review proceedings. Undeterred by  this,  on
      the 21 January 2015 the Respondent once again invited  the  Applicants
      to withdraw their judicial review  applications  on  the  same  basis,
      although with  the  additional  incentive  on  this  occasion  of  her
      agreeing to pay the Applicants' costs of the proceedings. Once  again,
      however, the Applicants refused to sign the order.

Respondent's Decisions

Decisions of 23 October 2013


  11. In her decision of 23  October  2013  made  in  relation  to  A1,  the
      Respondent concluded that:


   i)    A1 does not meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph  E-LTRP  1.2  of
      Appendix FM  to  the  Immigration  Rules  and  is,  consequently,  not
      entitled to leave to remain under the Partner Route in the Rules;
  ii)    A1 does not meet the requirements of paragraphs E-LTRPT 2.2 and 2.3
      of Appendix FM to the Rules and is not, therefore, entitled  to  leave
      to remain under the Parent Route in the Rules;
 iii) A1 does not meet the requirements of paragraph  267ADE  of  the  Rules
      (private life); and,
  iv)    A1's application does not  contain  any  exceptional  circumstances
      that might warrant consideration of a grant of leave to remain outside
      the requirements of the Immigration Rules.


  12. As to A2's application, the Respondent concluded that:


           i)     A2  does  not  meet  the  requirements  of  the   Partner
              Route under the Rules;
          ii)    A2 does not meet the  requirements  of  the  Parent  Route
              under the Rules.


  13. Finally, in relation to the child, A3, the Respondent found:


   i)    A3 does not meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph  E-LTRC  1.6  to
      Appendix FM of the Rules because her parents have been  refused  leave
      to remain; and,
  ii)    A3's application does not  contain  any  exceptional  circumstances
      that might warrant consideration of a grant of leave to remain outside
      the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

Decision of 11 February 2015


  14. The 2015 Decision identifies that it is: "written in response to  [the
      Applicants] application for judicial review" and is also stated to  be
      supplemental to the decisions of 23 October 2013.


  15. Paragraph 2 of this decision details that it:


        "[i]s intended to give further consideration  to  the  question  of
        whether [the Applicant] should be granted leave to  remain  outside
        the Rules and,  in  particular  to  [the  Applicant's]  submissions
        relating to section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and  Immigration
        Act 2009 and Article 8 of the ECHR. The decision letter  should  be
        read in conjunction with our letter of 23 October 2013."


  16. The decision then:


   i) Identifies that the  Applicant's  application  was  correctly  refused
      under the Family Life and Private Life provisions of  the  Immigration
      Rules, as detailed in the decision of 23 October 2013;
  ii) Gives consideration to  the  need  to  have  regard  to  the  need  to
      safeguard and promote the welfare of children pursuant to section 55 -
      it being concluded that it is in the best interests of A3 to remain in
      the United Kingdom; and,
 iii) Concludes that the  Applicants  have  not  provided  any  evidence  to
      warrant discretion being exercised to grant them leave outside of  the
      Rules.

Submissions

  17. Mr Malik observed that in her 2013 Decisions made in  relation  to  A2
      and A3, the  Respondent  failed  to  give  any  consideration  to  the
      application of paragraph 276ADE of the Rules.


  18. As to the Respondent's consideration of  this  Rule  in  the  decision
      letter relating to A1, it was submitted that the reasons given therein
      are inadequate, in particular in light of the evidence given by A1  in
      his  Statement  of  Truth.  Furthermore,  the  Respondent  failed   to
      undertake a rounded assessment of A1's circumstances, as commended  in
      the decision of the Upper Tribunal in Ogundimu (Article 8 - new rules)
      Nigeria [2013] UKUT 60 (IAC), recently approved by the Court of Appeal
      in YM (Uganda) -and- Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014]
      EWCA Civ 1292 at [50]-[52].

  19. The Respondent has not rectified the aforementioned  failings  in  her
      2015 Decision.

  20. As to the second ground, Mr Malik contended that  the  Respondent  had
      failed, in her 2013 Decisions, to have regard to her statutory  duties
      under section 55 when considering whether  to  exercise  her  residual
      discretion to grant the Applicants leave  to  remain  outside  of  the
      Rules.


  21. Reliance was placed on the decision of Holman J in R(SM and Others)  v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWHC  1144  (Admin),
      in support of a submission that  the  failure  of  the  Respondent  to
      consider her section 55 duties in the  2013  Decisions  could  not  be
      rectified by a consideration of such duties in  a  later  supplemental
      decision i.e. the 2015 Decision. The 2015 Decision had, he  submitted,
      been drafted through the prism of the subsisting judicial review claim
      and amounted to no more than an after the event attempt to demonstrate
      a  reasoning  process  that  the  Respondent  was  required  to   have
      undertaken, but did not undertake, at the time of the  making  of  the
      2013 Decisions.

  22. In response  Ms  Stout  submitted  that  in  her  2013  Decisions  the
      Respondent had: (i) undertaken a rounded assessment of the Applicants'
      ties to their homeland when considering whether  the  requirements  of
      paragraph 276ADE(vi) of the  Rules  had  been  met;  (ii)  came  to  a
      conclusion on this issue that was  open  to  her,  given  the  limited
      evidence  and  information  that  had  been  put  before  her  by  the
      Applicants; and, (iii) given adequate reasons for  doing  so.  In  any
      event, she said, the 2015 Decision  considered  this  issue  fully  in
      relation to all of the Applicants.

  23. In response to Mr Malik's submission that the 2013 Decisions  relating
      to A2 and A3 made no reference to paragraph 276ADE, Ms Stout  asserted
      that the decision letters of the three Applicants had to be read as  a
      whole and that the consideration given to this paragraph of the  Rules
      in the 2013 Decision relating to A1 should be  read  across  into  the
      decisions made in relation to A2 and A3.

  24. As to the claimed failure of the Respondent to consider her section 55
      duties in  the  2013  Decisions  this  submission,  it  was  said,  is
      misconceived because the Respondent had complied with her  section  55
      duties by applying the Immigration Rules; as to  which  see  paragraph
      GEN 1.1 of Appendix FM to the Rules. Furthermore, there is nothing  in
      the Applicants' circumstances not encompassed by a consideration under
      the Rules.

  25. If, contrary to the Respondent's view, the 2013 Decisions are unlawful
      because of a failure to consider section  55,  relief  should  not  be
      granted  because  the  Respondent   has   now   undertaken   a   fresh
      consideration  of  the  Applicants'  cases,  reflected  in  the   2015
      Decision. That decision clearly shows that the Respondent has complied
      with her section 55 duties.

Decision and Reasons

Paragraph 276ADE of the Rules


  26. To be entitled to leave to remain under Paragraph 276ADE of the  Rules
      the Applicants must satisfy the requirements of sub-paragraphs (i) and
      (ii) therein and, either of subparagraphs (iii), (iv), (v) or (vi). It
      is not in dispute that each of the Applicants meets  the  requirements
      of sub-paragraphs (i)  and  (ii)  and  that  none  of  them  meet  the
      requirements of sub-paragraphs (iii), (iv) or (v).


  27. Paragraph 276ADE (vi) requires that  an  Applicant,  at  the  relevant
      date:


        "Is aged 18 years or above, has lived continuously in  the  UK  for
        less than 20 years (discounting any period of imprisonment) but has
        no ties (including social, cultural or family) with the country  to
        which he would have to go if required to leave the UK."


  28. In Ogundimu the Upper Tribunal (Blake J and Judge O'Connor) stated, in
      relation to the meaning of the word 'ties':


        "[123] The natural and ordinary meaning of the word 'ties' imports,
        we think, a concept involving something more than merely remote and
        abstract links to the country of proposed deportation  or  removal.
        It involves there being a continued  connection  to  life  in  that
        country; something that ties a claimant to his or  her  country  of
        origin. If this were not the case  then  it  would  appear  that  a
        person's nationality of the country of proposed  deportation  could
        of itself lead to a failure to meet the requirements of  the  rule.
        This would render the application of the rule,  given  the  context
        within which it operates, entirely meaningless.


        [124] We recognise that the text under the  rules  is  an  exacting
        one. Consideration of whether  a  person  has  'no  ties'  to  such
        country must involve a  rounded  assessment  of  all  the  relevant
        circumstances and is not to be limited  to  'social,  cultural  and
        family' circumstances."


  29. The onus is on the Applicants to demonstrate that they have lost  ties
      to India since their arrival in the United Kingdom.  Both  A1  and  A2
      were born in India and, respectively, spent the first 25 years and  22
      years of their lives there. By  the  time  of  the  Respondent's  2013
      Decisions they had each spent  in  excess  of  11  years  continuously
      living in the United Kingdom.


  30. In his Statement of Truth of the 6 September 2013 A1  asserted,  inter
      alia:


        "We have slowly eroded all our ties with our country of origin  and
        have formed associations with friends and people in the UK  and  we
        cannot return to India where we have no prospect of a future...


        I would no doubt face extreme hardship if returned to India.  I  do
        not have a job there, and if I return, I shall  no  longer  have  a
        home or a livelihood. My personal circumstances back  home  do  not
        make it possible for me to return  and  enjoying  (sic)  my  family
        life. My wife has been suffering harsh treatment from her  in  laws
        because they refuse to accept  her  as  their  daughter-in-law.  We
        cannot go back as we have no home there...


        It would be cruel to expect us to return to a country  we  have  no
        connections with."


  31. The Respondent did not give any consideration to paragraph  276ADE  in
      her 2013 Decisions relating to A2 or A3. In her 2013 decision drawn in
      relation to A1 the Respondent said as follows:


        "Having spent 25 years in your home country and in the  absence  of
        any evidence to the contrary, it is not accepted that in the period
        of time that you have been in the UK you have  lost  ties  to  your
        home country and therefore the Secretary of State is not  satisfied
        that you can meet the requirements of Rule 276ADE (vi)."


  32. Contrary to the Respondent's assertions in her 2013 Decision  made  in
      relation to A1, A1 did provide evidence  in  his  Statement  of  Truth
      which related directly to the requirements of Paragraph 276ADE(vi)  of
      the Rules. Whilst decisions of this type do  not  need  to  be  overly
      detailed in their consideration of an  applicant's  claim,  they  must
      demonstrate  that  the  salient  features  of  such  claim  have  been
      considered and tested against the requirements of the Rules, in  order
      to  ascertain  whether  the  requirements  of  the  Rules  have   been
      fulfilled. This may only require the briefest  of  references  to  the
      factual assertions made by an applicant but, in the instant case,  the
      Respondent failed to make any reference to nature of the  A1's  claim;
      indeed, the terms of the 2013 Decision support  A1's  contention  that
      the Respondent failed to turn her mind to  the  evidence  provided  in
      this regard in his Statement of Truth.


  33. For these reasons I am satisfied that the Respondent's decision of  23
      October 2013 made in relation to A1 is unlawful.


  34. As to the Respondent's decision made in relation to A2, this makes  no
      reference, and fails to give consideration, to   paragraph  276ADE;  a
      failure that I am satisfied also renders this decision unlawful.


  35. Even if I were to accept Ms Stout's submission  that  the  conclusions
      reached by the Respondent in relation to A1 should  be  "read  across"
      into the decision made in  relation  to  A2,  which  I  do  not  -  A2
      undoubtedly being entitled to an individual consideration of her  case
      - this cannot avail  the  Respondent  given  my  conclusion  that  her
      consideration of paragraph 276ADE of the Rules  in  relation  to  A1's
      claim was unlawful.

  36. The failure of the Respondent to lawfully consider whether A1  and  A2
      meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE renders  the  2013  Decision
      made in relation to their child, A3, unlawful; the Respondent  relying
      in part therein on  the  fact  that  A3's  parents  do  not  meet  the
      requirements of the Rules.

  37. This, though, is not where the Respondent's case rests on this  issue,
      it being asserted; (i) that any  failing  in  the  2013  Decisions  is
      rendered academic by the further decision taken in 2015  and,  in  any
      event, (ii) the Applicants'  claims  are  so  weak  that  they  cannot
      succeed on a reconsideration. Consequently, it is said,  the  Tribunal
      should not exercise its discretion to quash the 2013 Decisions even if
      they are found to be unlawful.

  38. In her 2015 Decision, which relates to  all  of  the  Applicants,  the
      Respondent states:


        "[15]  Your  client  was  refused  correctly  under   (sic)   clear
        assessment of the private life  rules  under  Paragraph  276ADE  of
        Appendix FM. He failed to satisfy Paragraph 276CE with reference to
        Paragraph 276ADE (iii) - (vi) of HC 395 (as amended)  and  detailed
        in the refusal letter of 23 October 2013."


  39. Insofar as the 2015 Decision identifies that the Respondent has  given
      consideration to Paragraph 276ADE it does so in terms that do no  more
      than adopt the conclusions and reasoning found in  the  unlawful  2013
      Decision made in relation A1. In such circumstances - even putting  to
      one side consideration of the Applicants' general submission that  the
      Respondent should not be  entitled  to  place  reliance  on  the  2015
      Decision because  it  constitutes  no  more  than  an  ex  post  facto
      rationalisation of the 2013 Decisions - it  is  plain  that  the  2015
      Decision cannot render academic the  aforementioned  failings  in  the
      2013 Decisions.


  40. Turning to the second of the points raised by Ms Stout, whilst  it  is
      difficult to categorise the Applicants' underlying claims  as  strong,
      neither  can  it  be  said,  in  my  view  that  the  Respondent   has
      demonstrated that they are so weak that they must necessarily fail.

  41. The Applicants  are  entitled  to  a  lawful  consideration  of  their
      applications and they have not yet had that.  In  such  circumstances,
      and for the reasons given above, I quash the Respondent's decisions of
      23 October 2013. Mr Malik did not seek  an  order  quashing  the  2015
      Decision and, consequently, I make no such order.


Consideration of Section 55


  42. The second issue of whether the Respondent has lawfully discharged her
      duties under section 55 is academic given that I have quashed the 2013
      Decisions  for  other  reasons.  Nevertheless,   for   the   sake   of
      completeness I will set out my conclusions in relation to this issue.


  43. Section 55 sets out the duty imposed on the Respondent to have  regard
      to the welfare of children when making her decisions:

         "Duty regarding the welfare of children


   1) The Secretary of State must make arrangements for ensuring that-


   a) the functions mentioned in subsection (2) are discharged having regard
      to the need to safeguard and promote the welfare of children  who  are
      in the United Kingdom...

   2) The functions referred to in sub-section (1) are -


   a) any function of the Secretary of State  in  relation  to  immigration,
      asylum and nationality...


         (3)      A person  exercising  any  of  those  functions  must,  in
              exercising the function, have regard to any guidance given to
              the person by the Secretary of State for the purpose of  sub-
              section (1)."


  44. The guidance referred to in  section  55(3)  is  titled  "Every  Child
      Matters: Change For Children" and, inter alia, sets out  a  series  of
      obligations imposed on the Secretary  of  State.  The  application  of
      those obligations has generated a significant stream of case law,  but
      it is trite that a decision maker must treat the best interests  of  a
      child as a  primary  consideration  in  the  decision  making  process
      (Zoumbas v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2013]  1  WLR
      3690 - per Lord Hodge)


  45. The Applicants contend that when coming to her conclusions set out  in
      the  2013  Decisions  the  Respondent  unlawfully   failed   to   give
      consideration to her section 55 duties and, in particular, to the best
      interests of A3.


  46. Ms Stout accepts that no explicit consideration was given  to  section
      55 in these decision letters but submits  that  this  was  unnecessary
      given that the Immigration Rules:  "take  into  account  the  need  to
      safeguard and promote the welfare of children in the UK, in line  with
      the Secretary of State's duty under section 55...". Thus, it is  said,
      by giving consideration to the Immigration Rules  the  Respondent  has
      discharged  her  section  55  duties  in  relation  to   the   instant
      Applicants.


  47. I reject Ms Stouts' submission for two reasons. First, even if,  as  a
      general proposition, she is correct to  contend  that  the  Respondent
      can, in any given case, discharge her  section  55  duties  by  simply
      giving to consideration to whether an applicant meets the requirements
      of  the  Immigration  Rules,  this  must  as  a  minimum  require  the
      Respondent to undertake such task lawfully. In the instant case I have
      found the Respondent's consideration of whether  the  Applicants  meet
      the requirements of the Rules to be unlawful.

  48. In any event, I do not accept that Ms Stout is correct in her  general
      proposition. The position, in my view, is  more  nuanced.  Whilst  the
      Rules relating to family and private life "take into account the  need
      to safeguard and promote the welfare of children in the  UK,  in  line
      with the Secretary of State's duty under section 55  of  the  Borders,
      Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009" [GEN 1.1 of  Appendix  FM],  the
      question of whether such duties have been discharged by the Respondent
      in  any  given  case  is  necessarily  intensely  fact  sensitive.  If
      authority is needed for this, it can be found in Lord Hodge's judgment
      in Zoumbas in which his Lordship emphasis, in the sixth of  his  seven
      principles relating to a consideration of  the  best  interests  of  a
      child:

         "...there is  no  substitute  for  a  careful  examination  of  all
         relevant factors when the interests of a child are involved  in  an
         Article 8 assessment..."


  48. In JO and Others (section 55 duty) Nigeria [2014] UKUT  00517  (IAC),
      the President of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)  said  of  the  Respondent's
      duties under section 55, at [12]:


         "I consider that these provisions, considered in  tandem  with  the
         principles enunciated by the  Supreme  Court  and  the  public  law
         duties  rehearsed  above,  envisage  a  process  of   deliberation,
         assessment and final decision of some depth. The antithesis, namely
         something cursory, casual and superficial, will plainly not  be  in
         accordance with the specific duty imposed by section 55(3)  or  the
         overarching duty to have  regard  to  the  need  to  safeguard  and
         promote the welfare of any children involved in or affected by  the
         relevant factual matrix..."


  49.  Although  there  may  be  cases  in  which  a  consideration  of  the
      Immigration Rules will fully discharge  the  Respondent's  section  55
      duties, I do not envisage  such  cases  being  the  norm  and,  in  my
      conclusion, this is not such a case. Numerous features of the evidence
      given by A1 are relevant to a consideration of the best  interests  of
      A3; however, the 2013 Decisions do not disclose  that  the  Respondent
      gave any consideration to, or engaged with, such  evidence.  For  this
      reason I conclude that the 2013  Decisions  are  also  unlawful  as  a
      consequence of the  Respondent's  failure  to  lawfully  consider  the
      duties imposed upon her by section 55.


  50. Once again, however, Ms Stout relied on the 2015 Decision  in  support
      of a contention that  any  failing  of  the  Respondent  in  the  2013
      Decisions should not lead to such decisions being quashed. She  sought
      to draw support  for  this  submission  from  the  judgments  in  R  v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department ex parte  Turgut  [2001]  1
      All ER 719 and R (Khan) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
      [2012] EWHC 707.

  51. In response, Mr Malik asserted that the 2015 Decision was no  more  an
      ex post facto justification of the unlawful decisions  made  in  2013;
      drawing support for his position from the judgment of Holman  J  in  R
      (SM) v Secretary of State for the Home Department.

  52. I have found the judgments that the parties have  respectively  sought
      to rely upon to be  of  little  assistance,  each  decision  providing
      nothing more than an example of a court coming to a conclusion on  the
      facts of a particular case.


  53. Having carefully considered the terms of the 2015 Decision for myself,
      I conclude that it is  not  simply  an  after  the  event  attempt  to
      demonstrate a reasoning  process  which  was  not  described,  and  is
      unlikely to have taken place, at the  time  the  2013  Decisions  were
      taken. The reasoning in the 2015 Decision relating to the welfare  and
      interests of A3 displays a rigour of deliberation  and  analysis  that
      leads me to find that its author independently turned her mind to  the
      Respondent's section 55 duties,  and  to  the  relevant  material  put
      forward by the Applicants in relation to the discharge of such duties.



  54. Had I found the Respondent's consideration of the Immigration Rules in
      the 2015 Decision to have  been  lawful,  I  would  unhesitating  have
      concluded that she had lawfully discharged her section  55  duties  in
      the 2015 Decision, and that such lawful discharge would have  rendered
      academic the failings in  the  same  regard  in  the  2013  Decisions.
      However, this is not the  position.  A  lawful  consideration  of  the
      Applicants' applications under the Immigration Rules is  an  essential
      requirement, in this case, of the lawful discharge by  the  Respondent
      of her  section  55  duties.  For  the  reasons  detailed  above,  the
      Respondent has not lawfully  considered  the  Applicants  applications
      under the Immigration Rules and in my  conclusion  cannot,  therefore,
      have lawfully considered her section 55 duties.

Decision


  55. For the reasons given  above,  the  Applicants'  claims  for  judicial
      review succeed and I  quash  the  Respondent's  decisions  of  the  23
      October 2013.




