
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Ahmed (rule 17; PTA; Family Court materials) [2019] UKUT 00357 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 September 2019                          |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |

                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                HASEEB AHMED
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Jacobs, instructed by Bushra Ali Solicitors

(1) Where P is the respondent to the Secretary  of  State's  appeal  in  the
Upper Tribunal against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow  P's
appeal, P cannot give notice under rule 17 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008 so as to withdraw his appeal, since P has no appeal  in
the Upper Tribunal. In such a situation, the giving of notice under rule  17
to withdraw P's case will, if the Upper Tribunal  gives  consent,  have  the
effect of leaving the Secretary of State's  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
unopposed and therefore may well lead to a reasoned decision from the  Upper
Tribunal, setting aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

(2)  If an application by  a  party  for  permission  to  appeal  against  a
decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been granted by that  Tribunal,  but
the application was made late and time was  not  extended  by  the  granting
judge, the other party may raise  the  timeliness  issue  before  the  Upper
Tribunal, as described in Samir (FtT  permission  to  appeal:  time)  [2013]
UKUT 00003 (IAC), provided the Upper Tribunal has not reached a  substantive
decision. The issue may not, however, be raised  after  the  Upper  Tribunal
has reached such a decision. Rule 6 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier
Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014 means that  the  grant
of permission by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  to  be  treated  as  valid,
notwithstanding the  procedural  irregularity,  with  the  result  that  the
ensuing decision of the Upper Tribunal is, likewise, valid.

(3)  If a party intends to rely before the Tribunal  on  material  emanating
from proceedings in the Family  Court,  that  party  must  ensure  that  the
material can be  disclosed,  without  any  breach  of  restrictions  on  the
disclosure of such material. Failure to do so may amount to contempt of  the
Family Court. Judges in the Immigration  and  Asylum  jurisdiction  must  be
alert to this issue.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


A. INTRODUCTION

 1.  This  is  the  judgment  of  the  Tribunal,  to  which  we  have  both
    contributed.   Although  the  substantive   law   in   this   case   is
    jurisprudentially unremarkable,  the  procedural  aspects  are  another
    matter.

 2. The respondent, hereafter claimant, is a citizen of  Pakistan  born  in
    1986.  The claimant entered the United Kingdom in December  2010,  with
    entry clearance as a student.   Further  leave  in  that  capacity  was
    granted in 2012, to last until June 2014.  In February  2013,  however,
    that leave was curtailed.  The curtailment decision attracted  a  right
    of appeal but no appeal was lodged.

 3. In May 2014, the  appellant  submitted  an  application  for  leave  to
    remain, based upon his marriage to a British citizen,  present  in  the
    United Kingdom, with whom he had  had  a  child,  born  in  Bristol  in
    December 2013, who was also a British citizen.

B. THE SECRETARY OF STATE'S DECISION

 4. On 20 October 2014, the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  claimant's
    application.  Paragraph 7 of the decision observed that, in  order  for
    the claimant to be eligible for  consideration  for  limited  leave  to
    remain under Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules,
    the claimant must not be excluded on the grounds of  suitability  under
    Appendix FM S-LTR.1.1. - 3.1.  The reason why the  Secretary  of  State
    concluded that the claimant failed in this regard was because his  case
    fell for exclusion under S-LTR.2.2.  This applies where, whether or not
    to the applicant's knowledge:-

         "(a) false information,  representations  or  documents  have  been
             submitted in relation  to  the  application  (including  false
             information submitted to any person to obtain a document  used
             in support of the application); or

         (b)  there has  been  a  failure  to  disclose  material  facts  in
             relation to the application."

 5. Paragraph 8 of the decision stated that  Educational  Testing  Services
    (ETS) had confirmed to the Secretary of State that the claimant's  Test
    of English for the International Communication  (TOEIC)  Programme  had
    been  undertaken  by  deception  and,  as  a  result,  the   claimant's
    subsequent grant of leave, which was dependent upon him  having  passed
    that  test,  had  been  obtained  by  deception.   In  particular,  the
    Secretary of State took the view that "an anomaly  with  your  speaking
    test indicated the presence of a proxy test taker".

 6. The decision moved to  consideration  of  the  claimant's  spouse,  and
    whether his relationship with her qualified the claimant for  leave  to
    remain by reason of the "family life"  aspects  of  Appendix  FM.   The
    Secretary of State concluded that the claimant's spouse  did  not  meet
    the definition of "partner" in Appendix FM because - leaving aside  the
    fact that the claimant could not satisfy the  suitability  requirements
    of the Rules - the claimant had not shown that he and the  spouse  were
    in a genuine and subsisting relationship.

 7. The Secretary of State's decision then turned to the issue  of  whether
    the claimant was eligible for leave to remain under Appendix FM on  the
    basis of family life  as  a  parent.   Here,  the  Secretary  of  State
    concluded that the claimant had failed to adduce evidence to show  that
    he had a genuine and subsisting relationship  with  the  child.   As  a
    result, the Secretary of State concluded that the claimant  had  failed
    to show compliance with the requirements of E-LTRPT.2.3.  and  2.4.  of
    Appendix FM.

 8. Quite apart  from  the  earlier  findings  regarding  paragraph  276ADE
    (private life), the Secretary of State  considered  that  the  claimant
    failed to meet the substantive requirements of that provision.  Looking
    outside the ambit of the Rules, the decision stated that the  Secretary
    of State did not consider that leave to remain fell to be given to  the
    claimant by reference to Article 8  of  the  ECHR.   The  claimant  had
    attempted to obtain leave to remain by deception, which  was  a  factor
    weighing in the proportionality balance.

C.  THE CLAIMANT'S APPEAL TO THE FIRST-TIER TRIBUNAL

 9. The claimant appealed against the Secretary of State's  decision.   His
    appeal was heard at Newport on 31  July  2015  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge O'Rourke.  Having heard the claimant and  his  spouse  give  oral
    evidence, the judge concluded their evidence  was  "unsatisfactory  and
    unreliable".  The reasons were set out at paragraph 14 of the decision.
     In particular, the judge found that the evidence of the wife "was  not
    that of a wife keen to bolster her husband's appeal and to  secure  his
    continued residence  with  her.   Her  evidence  was  ...  evasive  and
    hesitant and in direct  conflict  with  the  contents  of  her  witness
    statement".  This, and other matters recorded by the judge, caused  her
    to "query whether she was under duress in attending to give evidence at
    this hearing".

10. Concerning the issue of whether the claimant had employed  a  proxy  to
    take his TOEIC test, the First-tier Tribunal Judge said as follows:-

         "There was insufficient evidence before me to decide whether or not
         the [claimant] had fabricated his TOEIC test.  The evidence was too
         generic and the  methodology  adopted  by  ETS  has  been  open  to
         challenge in recent cases.  Without more specific evidence, focused
         on the [claimant] I make no finding on this point."

11. The judge was, however, able to make a finding  regarding  whether  the
    relationship of the claimant and his spouse was genuine and subsisting.
     She found it was not; in particular because it was "clear to  me  that
    the  sponsor  certainly  does  not  regard  herself  as   in   such   a
    relationship".

12. The judge, however, allowed the appeal under the Immigration Rules, for
    the following reasons:-

         "17. In  respect  of  their  children,  it  is  accepted  that  the
             [claimant] is [H's] father.  There was no evidence  before  me
             to  indicate  that,  regardless  of   the   quality   of   the
             relationship between him and his wife and the  credibility  of
             his evidence generally that he did  not  have  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with his daughter and  indeed
             this issue  was  unchallenged  at  this  hearing.   Therefore,
             contrary to the [Secretary  of  State's]  decision,  paragraph
             EX.1(a) does apply in the [claimant's] case.  He has a genuine
             and subsisting parental relationship with a  child  under  the
             age of 18, who is a UK citizen and is resident in the UK.  Due
             to her age and the likelihood that her mother  firstly,  would
             not permit the child to be separated from her and the  child's
             step-brother and secondly would be very unlikely to  accompany
             the [claimant] to Pakistan, it  would  not  be  reasonable  to
             expect the child to leave the UK.  On that  basis,  therefore,
             the [claimant] meets the requirement of the Rules."

D.  SUBSEQUENT EVENTS

13. In September 2015, the Secretary of State  applied  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.   The  grounds
    contended that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had  erred  in  law  in
    finding that the Secretary of State had not discharged  the  burden  of
    proof in  demonstrating  that  this  [claimant]  used  deception.   The
    grounds submitted that  the  witness  statements  and  extract  from  a
    spreadsheet, filed by the Secretary of State, detailed extensively  the
    investigation undertaken by ETS in the claimant's case -

         "along with thousands of  other  applicants,  and  the  process  of
         identifying those tests found to be "invalid" ...  The  FTT  should
         have  had  due  consideration  to  the  specific   evidence   which
         identifies this [claimant]  as  an  individual  who  has  exercised
         deception,  together  with  the  witness  statement  outlining  the
         investigation process".

14. The grounds further submitted that the  claimant  "does  not  meet  the
    suitability requirements of Appendix FM of the Immigration  Rules.   As
    such, the [claimant's] application cannot succeed even  with  reference
    to EX.1".

15. On 12 January 2016,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  P  J  M  Hollingworth
    granted permission.  His reasons were as follows:-

         "An  arguable  error  of  law  has  arisen  in  relation   to   the
         construction placed by the Judge on the evidence submitted  by  the
         [Secretary of State] in  relation  to  the  issue  of  whether  the
         [claimant] had used deception."

16. The hearing before the Upper Tribunal was listed for 27 January 2017 in
    Newport.  On 19 January 2017, Bushra  Ali  Solicitors  wrote  to  Field
    House under the heading "Private & Confidential - Urgent".  The body of
    the letter read as follows:-

         "NOTICE TO WITHDRAW

         Please kindly be advised we have been instructed by the above named
         in this matter.  We have already sent to your office a signed  form
         of authority but send it through once again for ease of reference.

         Please find attached herewith a signed notice of withdrawal by  the
         above named requesting that the  hearing  of  27  January  2017  be
         vacated and the appeal be treated as withdrawn on  the  basis  that
         the above named is to  make  an  application  to  the  Home  Office
         seeking Leave to Remain based upon contact awarded  by  the  family
         court to him with his daughter.

         We await your urgent confirmation that the appeal has been  treated
         as withdrawn as only then will the application be submitted to  the
         Home Office.

         We thank you in advance for your assistance."

17. The obvious point about this letter was, of course, that  the  claimant
    could not be asking  for  his  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  be
    withdrawn.  The claimant had no such appeal.  It was the  Secretary  of
    State who had been given  permission  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    appeal against First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Rourke's decision  to  allow
    the appeal against the Secretary of State's refusal to grant  leave  to
    remain.

18. The Upper Tribunal, accordingly, treated the letter of 19 January  2017
    as an application under  rule  17  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 by the claimant to withdraw his case.  The  effect
    of that was that the Secretary of State's appeal  was  unopposed.   The
    Upper Tribunal therefore set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, on the grounds identified in the application  for  permission
    and grant of permission, and  substituted  a  decision  dismissing  the
    claimant's appeal against the Secretary of  State's  decision  refusing
    leave.

19. The claimant was unhappy  with  the  Upper  Tribunal's  decision.   His
    solicitors sought on his behalf to have  the  matter  reinstated  under
    rule 17(3), which led to the Upper Tribunal writing to  the  solicitors
    in May 2017 requesting confirmation that, in that event, it  needed  to
    be understood that the appeal would have  to  re-decided,  carrying  as
    that did the risk that the eventual decision "will be a reasoned one in
    the Secretary of State's favour".  On 25 August  2017,  the  solicitors
    wrote to say that their intention was to seek permission to  appeal  to
    the Court of Appeal against the decision that had been made on 20 March
    2017.

20. Permission to appeal was refused by the Upper Tribunal but, on  renewal
    to that court, it was  granted  in  November  2018.   By  consent,  the
    claimant's appeal was allowed and the matter was remitted to the  Upper
    Tribunal.  The court held that the Upper Tribunal  had  been  wrong  to
    treat the correspondence from the claimant's solicitors as a notice  of
    withdrawal and that, in any event, there was no  basis  for  the  Upper
    Tribunal to set aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision  allowing  the
    Secretary of State's appeal.

21. It is, of course, not our place to comment upon the Court  of  Appeal's
    decision.  It is, however, necessary to point out that the  unfortunate
    process we have just described stems from  the  claimant's  solicitors'
    letter of 19 January 2017.

22.  At the hearing on 18 September, we asked Mr Jacobs (who  had  drafted
    the grounds of appeal to the Court of Appeal) to explain what had  been
    meant by the letter of 19 January 2017 and what the Upper Tribunal  was
    being asked to do.  With admirable candour, Mr Jacobs responded that he
    did not have an answer to those questions.  Certainly, we are not aware
    of any statement from the solicitors which  might  shed  light  on  the
    matter.  The closest we get is this, from the statement of truth of the
    solicitor dated 11 April 2017:-

         "(22)    [The claimant] is in such a situation  whereby  he  has  a
                genuine and subsisting relationship with a British child and
                is enjoying contact with the child ... as a result of  which
                he wanted to proceed with making an application to the  Home
                Office seeking a right to remain on this basis.

         (23) The [claimant] understands  that  he  could  not  continue  to
                pursue an appeal and at the same time make an application to
                the Home Office as a  result  of  which  appeal  proceedings
                needed to be concluded.

         (24) He appropriately set out in his notice of withdrawal that  the
                reason why he was seeking to withdraw the appeal was because
                of his change in circumstances  and  contact  being  awarded
                with his British daughter  by  the  family  court.   He  has
                specifically explained that he wished to proceed with making
                an application to the Home Office on this basis."

23. Thus, the claimant's motivation  in  having  his  solicitor  write  the
    letter of January 2017 was to bring the current appeal  proceedings  to
    an end, which would enable him to make a fresh application for leave to
    the Secretary of State.  His solicitors, however, ought to have pointed
    out to the claimant that the Upper Tribunal could not, on  that  basis,
    itself bring the proceedings to an end.  Nor could the  Upper  Tribunal
    compel the Secretary of State to withdraw her appeal.  If  those  basic
    points had been appreciated, it is unlikely that the  Court  of  Appeal
    would have been troubled and much time and  (no  doubt)  expense  would
    have been saved.

E.  STATUS OF THE SECRETARY OF STATE'S APPLICATION FOR PERMISSION TO APPEAL

24. That was not, however, the only unusual procedural aspect of this case.
     In his skeleton argument, filed and served on 17  September  2019,  Mr
    Jacobs submitted, as a preliminary issue, that the Secretary of State's
    application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  out  of
    time and should, accordingly, not be admitted.   The  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Rourke was promulgated on  5  August  2015.
    The application, made to the First-tier Tribunal, was submitted  on  16
    September 2015.  That is outside the fourteen day time limit prescribed
    by the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum
    Chamber)  Rules  2014.   The  Secretary  of  State's  application   for
    permission contained no explanation for the delay.

25. Mr Jacobs cited rule 20 of the 2014 Rules:-

         "Late notice of appeal

         20.-(1)  Where a notice of appeal  is  provided  outside  the  time
                  limit in rule 19, including any extension of time directed
                  under rule 4(3)(a) (power to extend time), the  notice  of
                  appeal must include an application for such  an  extension
                  of time and the reason why the notice of  appeal  was  not
                  provided in time.

             (2)  If, upon receipt  of  a  notice  of  appeal,  the  notice
                  appears to the Tribunal to have been provided outside  the
                  time limit but does not  include  an  application  for  an
                  extension of time, the Tribunal must  (unless  it  extends
                  time of its own initiative) notify the person  in  writing
                  that it proposes to treat the notice of  appeal  as  being
                  out of time.

             (3)  Where the Tribunal  gives  notification  under  paragraph
                  (2), the person may by  written  notice  to  the  Tribunal
                  contend that-

                  (a)  the notice of appeal was given in time; or

                  (b)  time for providing the notice  of  appeal  should  be
                      extended,

                  and, if so, that person  may  provide  the  Tribunal  with
                  written evidence in support of that contention.

                  ...

             (4)  The Tribunal must decide any issue under this rule as  to
                  whether a notice of appeal was given in time,  or  whether
                  to extend the time for appealing, as a preliminary  issue,
                  and may do so without a hearing.

             (5)  Where the Tribunal makes a decision under  this  rule  it
                  must  provide  to  the  parties  written  notice  of   its
                  decision, including its reasons."

26. Mr Jacobs relied  upon  the  Upper  Tribunal  decision  in  Samir  (FtT
    permission  to  appeal:  time)  [2013]  UKUT  00003  (IAC),  in   which
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted by  a  judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal, where the application was out of time, but the
    judge did not extend time.  Applying the decision in Boktor  and  Wanis
    (late application for permission) Egypt [2011] UKUT  00442,  the  Upper
    Tribunal held that the grant of permission by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    had been conditional upon time being extended by that  Tribunal.   Such
    an extension could be granted at the hearing in the Upper Tribunal,  if
    the judge or judges of the Upper Tribunal re-constituted themselves  as
    First-tier Tribunal judges and decided, in all the circumstances,  that
    it was appropriate to extend time.

27.  In Samir, a Deputy Judge of the Upper  Tribunal  had  decided  (it  is
    assumed, as a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal) not to extend time  and
    he therefore declined to admit the application.  This  meant  that  the
    Secretary of State, as the disappointed party, had the  opportunity  of
    making an application for permission to the Upper  Tribunal,  which  he
    duly did.  The Upper Tribunal considered the application,  pursuant  to
    rule 21 of the Upper Tribunal Rules, paragraph (7)(b) of which provides
    that, in the circumstances with which the case was concerned, the Upper
    Tribunal "must  only  admit  the  application  if  the  Upper  Tribunal
    considers that it is in the interests of justice for it to do so".  The
    Upper Tribunal considered that it was not in the interests of  justice;
    and so there was no appeal pending before it.

28. The following passages from the decision in Samir contain  the  essence
    of the reasoning of the Upper Tribunal:-

         "18. We see no reason to depart from either the  reasoning  or  the
             decision of Judge Allen in  Boktor  and  Wanis.   The  present
             rules both  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  of  the  Upper
             Tribunal  made  clear  the  importance  attached   to   making
             applications in time; and the separate notion of the admission
             of applications on the grant of permission makes it clear that
             an out of time application has to go  separately  through  the
             process of being admitted before it is eligible for a grant of
             permission.  The only doubt we have  as  to  the  decision  in
             Boktor and Wanis is whether it is  correctly  described  as  a
             decision of the Upper Tribunal.


         19.  In our judgement it is clear from the Rules, and to a  limited
             extent also from the 2007 Act, that  it  is  intended  that  a
             party  whose  application  to  the  First-tier   Tribunal   is
             unsuccessful  should  have  the  opportunity  of   making   an
             application to the Upper Tribunal for permission to appeal  to
             it.  That that process applies even if the First-tier Tribunal
             refuse to  admit  the  application  because  it  was  late  is
             confirmed by Upper Tribunal rule 21(7), which we have set  out
             in paragraph 15 above.  It follows that the process set out by
             Judge Allen, in which a grant on  the  merits  is  treated  as
             conditional, subject to time being extended when the matter is
             brought to the Tribunal's attention, must be seen as  part  of
             the First-tier Tribunal process of considering the application
             for permission to appeal.  If the outcome of that process is a
             decision that the application should not be admitted,  because
             it was out of time  and  time  should  not  be  extended,  the
             applicant must have an opportunity to put his  case  again  to
             the Upper Tribunal.


         20.  After all, if the judge considering  the  application  to  the
             First-tier Tribunal had dealt with the issue of time  and  had
             refused to admit the application, there would be no doubt that
             the applicant could apply again to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   It
             cannot be that  the  applicant  is  deprived  of  a  level  of
             application simply  by  the  judge's  mistake  in  failing  to
             appreciate or deal with matters of time.


         21.  For these reasons, when a judge of the Upper Tribunal is faced
             with these issues, he will need to sit as a judge of the First-
             tier Tribunal to determine them.  Properly  interpreted,  that
             is clearly what Judge Allen was doing  (or  should  have  been
             doing) in Boktor and Wanis, and it must be what Judge Lever is
             to be interpreted as having done in the present case.  Despite
             the trappings of the Upper Tribunal, the decision he made  was
             the completion of the task begun by Judge Waumsley, which  was
             the consideration of the application for permission to appeal,
             made to the First-tier Tribunal."

29. The effect of Boktor and Wanis and Samir is that something that, on its
    face, purports to be a grant of permission, which is the jurisdictional
    prerequisite for being  able  to  bring  an  appeal  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal, is merely "conditional", in the sense that - as  is  apparent
    from paragraph 19 of  Samir  -  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  permission
    process  is  incomplete.   If  "when  the  matter  is  brought  to  the
    Tribunal's  attention",  the  First-tier  Tribunal   does   not   grant
    permission, then the Upper Tribunal lacks jurisdiction to consider  the
    appeal, by reference to the purported grant of permission by the First-
    tier Tribunal; and the only course open to the party  concerned  is  to
    make  a  renewed  application  for  permission,  direct  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

30. The pragmatic approach adopted by Boktor and Wanis and Samir, in  which
    the Upper Tribunal reconstitutes itself as the First-tier  Tribunal  to
    complete the process begun but not finished by the First-tier  Tribunal
    judge, may be a satisfactory approach, where the  Tribunal's  attention
    is drawn to the timeliness  issue  at  an  early  stage  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal  proceedings.   However,  it  raises   questions   where   the
    timeliness point is not raised until much later.  The  logic  of  these
    cases might suggest that, even if the point is raised after  the  Upper
    Tribunal has made a substantive decision, which may have been  appealed
    to the appropriate appellate court, its raising at any stage means  the
    issue will need to be adjudicated upon by the First-tier  Tribunal,  if
    the purported grant of permission is to be treated as valid.

31. Since Samir was decided, the Procedure Rules  of  the  Immigration  and
    Asylum Chamber of the First-tier Tribunal had been replaced by the 2014
    Rules.  Mr Jacobs drew attention to rule 20 (late  notice  of  appeal),
    quoted above.

32. At the hearing, the Upper Tribunal drew attention to rule 6(1)  of  the
    2014 Rules, which has no counterpart in the earlier Rules:-

         "6.-(1)  An irregularity resulting from a failure  to  comply  with
                 any requirement in these Rules, a practice direction  or  a
                 direction does not of itself render void the proceedings or
                 any step taken in the proceedings."

             (2)  If a party has failed to comply  with  a  requirement  in
             these Rules, a practice direction or a direction, the Tribunal
             may take such action as it considers just, which may include-

                  (a)  waiving the requirement;

                  (b)  requiring the failure to be remedied;

             ..."[1]




33. With the benefit of rule 6, it  is  possible  to  avoid  the  potential
    problem described in paragraph 30 above. The fact  that  permission  to
    appeal has been granted by the First-tier  Tribunal  without  extending
    time will not, of itself, affect the validity of the  grant.  It  will,
    however, be possible for the timeliness point to be  taken  before  the
    Upper Tribunal has reached a substantive decision on the appeal. If  it
    is, then the First-tier Tribunal (including, if  necessary,  the  Upper
    Tribunal reconstituting itself) will decide under rule 6(2) whether  to
    waive the requirement to extend time and, if not, whether  time  should
    be extended. Much will depend  upon  the  procedural  history  and  the
    knowledge and conduct of the parties. If the requirement is not  waived
    and time is not extended, then the outcome will be as it was in Samir.

34. Where the timeliness point is  not  taken  before  the  Upper  Tribunal
    reaches a substantive decision in the appeal, rule  6  means  that  the
    proceedings  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  including  the  grant   of
    permission, are to be treated  as  valid,  with  the  result  that  the
    ensuing decision of the Upper Tribunal is, likewise, valid.  It  cannot
    be compatible with the overriding objective of both Chambers' Procedure
    Rules for the party who did not secure  the  permission  to  raise  the
    timeliness point only after the substantive decision has been given. In
    order to argue his or her case in the Upper Tribunal, that  party  will
    have had access to the other  party's  application  and  grounds,  from
    which the timeliness point should have been apparent. Accordingly,  the
    Upper Tribunal's substantive decision is the point at which Boktor  and
    Wanis and Samir cease to have any application.

35. Returning to the present case, although the formal position is that the
    Upper Tribunal has yet to make a substantive decision (its earlier  one
    having been set aside by the Court of Appeal), in all the circumstances
    it would be wholly unconscionable  now  to  prevent  the  Secretary  of
    State's  appeal  from  being  substantively  determined  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  The claimant's present stance is at  odds  with  his  stance
    before this Tribunal hitherto, in which, as we have seen,  he  accepted
    that there was an appeal before the Upper Tribunal.  In particular,  it
    is wholly incompatible with his decision to appeal the Upper Tribunal's
    earlier decision to the Court of Appeal. The claimant has long been  in
    a position to take the timeliness point but has not done so.

36. As a result, even though the breach of the time limit by the  Secretary
    of State in 2015  was  significant  and  we  have  not  been  given  an
    explanation for it, we  have  no  hesitation  in  concluding  that  the
    claimant has waived any entitlement he may have to raise the timeliness
    point.

37. In order  to  avoid  the  procedural  disadvantages  of  reconstituting
    ourselves as the First-tier Tribunal, we treat the Secretary of State's
    application for permission to appeal as one made directly to the  Upper
    Tribunal.  We waive the relevant requirements of rule 21 of  the  Upper
    Tribunal Rules, so as to enable that application to  be  made;  and  we
    give permission to appeal,  with  this  decision  standing  as  written
    notice for the purposes of rule 22(2)(a).

F. DECIDING THE APPEAL

38. We are now able to turn to the question of whether there is an error of
    law in the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  O'Rourke,  such  that
    her decision should be set aside.

39. The judge clearly had an obligation  to  decide  whether  it  was  more
    likely than not that the appellant had engaged in deception in relation
    to his TOEIC test, the burden being on the Secretary of State to  prove
    that.  The judge, accordingly, could  not  validly  decline  to  decide
    whether or not the claimant had acted  in  that  manner  or  there  had
    otherwise been deception of  the  kind  envisaged  by  the  Immigration
    Rules.  As matters stand, this issue remains unresolved.

40. However, as Mr Clarke fairly acknowledged, the Secretary of State needs
    to show that that error on the part of the judge is one  that  properly
    requires her decision to be set aside.  It is,  accordingly,  necessary
    to examine paragraph 17 of her decision.

41. The Upper Tribunal held  in  Sabir  (Appendix  FM  -  EX.1.  not  free-
    standing) [2014] UKUT 00063 (IAC) that EX.1.  is  not  a  free-standing
    mechanism for granting leave, in the sense that, where leave is  sought
    as a  partner  and  the  applicant  fails  to  meet  the  "suitability"
    requirements of S-LTR, the applicant will not succeed, even  if  he  or
    she falls within the scope of EX.1.

42. Since it was the ETS issue which caused the Secretary of State to  take
    the view  that  the  suitability  requirements  were  not  met  by  the
    claimant, the judge's failure to make a finding on that issue  infected
    her conclusions in paragraph 17.  Nevertheless, as  Mr  Clarke  pointed
    out, the First-tier Tribunal Judge was required, when  looking  at  the
    claimant's Article 8 ground of appeal, to have regard  to  "the  public
    interest question" as defined  in  section  117A  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, as regards the  considerations  listed
    in section 117B.

43.  Section 117B(6) provides that:-

         "In the case of a person who is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and


             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom."

44. As we now know from KO (Nigeria) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department  [2018]  UKSC  53,  section   117B(6)   is   of   particular
    significance.   Where  paragraphs  (a)  and  (b)  are  satisfied,   the
    Secretary of State cannot point to the public interest as requiring the
    removal  of  the  person  concerned.   In  determining  whether   those
    paragraphs  are  satisfied  -  in  particular,  whether  it  would  "be
    reasonable to expect the child to leave"- the individual conduct of the
    person concerned does not play a part.  Nor is it relevant whether  the
    child would, in practice, leave the United Kingdom in the event of  the
    person's removal: AB (Jamaica)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2019] EWCA Civ 661.

45. In the light of her findings in paragraph  17,  regarding  the  largely
    analogous provisions of EX.1., it is manifest that the judge's decision
    to allow the appeal would have been  the  same,  if  she  had  gone  on
    specifically to look at section 117B(6).  We say this because there  is
    no challenge by the Secretary of State in the grounds to  the  findings
    of fact that underpinned the judge's conclusions in paragraph 17.

G. DISCLOSURE OF MATERIAL GENERATED IN FAMILY PROCEEDINGS

46. Finally, we must deal with an important matter which needs to be firmly
    borne  in  mind  by  practitioners  and  others  in   the   immigration
    jurisdiction.  Upon receipt of the  claimant's  bundle  for  the  Upper
    Tribunal hearing, it became evident that material in it  emanated  from
    proceedings involving the claimant in the Family Court in Bristol.   It
    appeared to us that at least some of the  relevant  documentation  fell
    within the ambit of section 12 of the  Administration  of  Justice  Act
    1960 and rule 12.73 of the Family Procedure Rules 2010; in which  case,
    its disclosure would be a contempt of court unless the Family Court had
    given permission.

47. The Upper Tribunal took  immediate  steps  to  ascertain  whether  such
    permission had been obtained.  Regrettably, Mr Jacobs  informed  us  at
    the hearing that it had not.  We wrote to the Designated  Family  Judge
    in Bristol, in order to bring the matter to his attention.  Although Mr
    Jacobs addressed us on the circumstances surrounding the disclosure, we
    do not consider that it would be appropriate to  record  them  in  this
    decision.

48. It is very important that judges in this jurisdiction are alert to  the
    matter and that they take all necessary steps when it arises.




DECISION


The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain an  error  of  law,
such as to require the decision to be set aside.  The Secretary  of  State's
appeal is, accordingly, dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.




                      Signed                     Date






                      The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                      President of the Upper Tribunal
                      Immigration and Asylum Chamber
-----------------------
[1] The corresponding provisions in the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
Rules 2008 are rule 7(1) and (2).

