
                                    [pic]

|Upper Tribunal                   |                                 |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber) |                                 |
|                                 |                                 |
|Das (paragraph 276B - s3C - application validity) [2019] UKUT 00354|
|(IAC)                                                              |


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 16 July 2019                  |                                 |
|                                 |.................................|
|                                 |......                           |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL

                                   Between

                             (1) tapan kumar das
                              (2) sudipta modak
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



(1) The validity of an application for leave to remain is to  be  determined
with reference to the  law  in  force  at  the  time  that  it  is  made  or
purportedly made.

(2) An application which was invalid according to the law in  force  at  the
relevant time cannot be rendered valid by a subsequent change in the law.

(3) There must be adherence to proper standards  of  appellate  advocacy  in
the Upper Tribunal. In the absence of a formal and  timeous  application  to
vary the grounds, professional advocates must expect to be confined to  the
grounds upon which permission was granted.

(4) When permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal is granted  following a
successful application to the Administrative Court under CPR 54.7A ('a  Cart
JR'), permission is granted  by  reference  to  the  grounds  to  the  Upper
Tribunal, not the grounds to the Administrative Court: Shah [2018]  UKUT  51
(IAC); [2018] Imm AR 707.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are a married couple of Bangladeshi nationality who were
    born on 1 April 1980 and 23 September 1987 respectively.   They  appeal
    against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Keith), dismissing
    their appeals against the respondent's refusal of  their  human  rights
    claims.


 2. The first appellant's application was for Indefinite  Leave  to  Remain
    ("ILR") under paragraph 276B of  the  Immigration  Rules.   The  second
    appellant (and their three year old  daughter)  applied  for  leave  to
    remain on family life grounds, seemingly anticipating that her  husband
    would be granted ILR and that their applications would be  assessed  in
    that light.  The respondent did not accept that the first appellant had
    accrued at least ten years of continuous lawful residence in the United
    Kingdom, however, and his application  was  accordingly  refused  under
    paragraph 276B(i)(a).  The  second  appellant's  application,  and  the
    application made by  their  daughter,  was  refused  in  light  of  the
    decision on the first appellant's case.

 3. Judge Keith agreed with the  respondent's  conclusion  under  paragraph
    276B of the Immigration Rules.  He found that the first  appellant  was
    not able to satisfy the requirements of 276B for the reasons  given  by
    the Secretary of State and he found that the appellants'  removal  from
    the United Kingdom would not be in breach of Article 8 ECHR.  In  order
    to understand the former conclusion, it is necessary  to  set  out  the
    salient parts of the first appellant's immigration history.


 4. The first appellant entered the United Kingdom on 18 January 2007.   He
    held entry clearance as a student which was valid  until  12  September
    2008.  On 11 September 2008, he attempted to make  an  application  for
    further leave to remain as a student.  He used the wrong form, however,
    and the application was rejected.  The respondent contacted him  on  11
    November 2008 and  he  subsequently  completed  the  correct  form  and
    submitted it to the respondent on 25 November 2008.   This  application
    was successful, and he was granted leave to remain from 5 March 2009 to
    30 November 2009.

 5. The first appellant secured four further periods of  leave  to  remain.
    The final period was due to end on 30  June  2017  but  the  respondent
    decided to curtail that leave so that it would expire on 29 June  2015.
    Before that date, the first appellant made an application for leave  to
    remain on human rights grounds.  That  application  was  refused.   The
    outcome  was  reconsidered  on  8  April  2016  and  the  decision  was
    maintained on 25 April 2016.  The appellant lodged a notice  of  appeal
    to the First-tier Tribunal against that decision on 9 May 2016  but  he
    failed to provide a fee for the appeal.   The  appeal  was  accordingly
    struck out on 1 July 2016.  On 28 July 2016, however,  the  appeal  was
    reinstated following representations  made  by  the  first  appellant's
    representatives.  The appeal was withdrawn on 10 January  2017,  before
    it could be heard by a judge of the FtT.

 6. The first appellant's application for ILR under paragraph 276B was made
    (or purportedly made) on 28 December  2016.   In  her  decision  of  28
    December 2017, the respondent concluded that the events in 2008,  which
    we have summarised at [4] above, broke the first appellant's continuous
    lawful residence.  She declined to exercise her discretion  in  respect
    of this gap because the first appellant had not  provided  any  grounds
    upon which she was prepared to do so.

 7. The appellants were represented  by  a  different  firm  of  solicitors
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  In the grounds of appeal before  Judge
    Keith, it was submitted that the first appellant had  been  assured  by
    the respondent in 2008 that his application for further leave would  be
    treated as if it had been 'in time' when he resubmitted  it  using  the
    correct form.  It was also submitted that the  respondent  should  have
    exercised her discretion in respect of the gap in autumn  2008.     The
    judge recorded that the central issue was agreed to be the gap  in  the
    first appellant's lawful residence between 12 September  2008  and  his
    application for leave to remain as a student,  which  was  subsequently
    granted on 5 March 2009: [3] and [14].  It was made  clear  that  there
    was a residual argument in relation to Article 8 ECHR in the event that
    the central issue was resolved in the respondent's favour: [16].

 8. Judge Keith analysed the evidence given by  the  first  appellant  with
    some care.  The evidence included a contemporaneous note which had been
    made by the first appellant on 18 November 2008, recording a  telephone
    call between him and  a  member  of  the  respondent's  staff.   Having
    considered that evidence, the judge did not accept that the  respondent
    would have assured the first appellant that his  application  would  be
    treated as 'in-time' when it was resubmitted using the correct  version
    of the form.  He found that the application which the  first  appellant
    had attempted to make in September 2008 was 'invalid and was treated by
    the respondent as such.': [36].  For reasons he gave at [37]-[39],  the
    judge did not consider there to be any breach  of  Article  8  ECHR  in
    returning the appellants and their daughter to Bangladesh.

 9. The appellants' former solicitors sought permission to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.  The application was  refused  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Hollingworth on 20 October 2018.  A renewed application was  made
    to the Upper Tribunal by a second set of representatives but  that  was
    refused by Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede on 6 January 2019.  Judge Kebede
    noted that  the  grounds  sought  to  invoke  various  aspects  of  the
    respondent's policies which had  not  been  brought  to  Judge  Keith's
    attention.  She concluded that he had  given  sustainable  reasons  for
    finding that the appellants could not meet the  Immigration  Rules  and
    that their removal would not breach Article 8 ECHR.

10. With the assistance of their current  representatives,  the  appellants
    made an application to the Administrative Court under CPR 54.7A.  On 25
    March 2019, Sir Stephen Silber granted permission to apply for judicial
    review.  The only reason given for that decision was that 'The  grounds
    reach the threshold for obtaining permission'.  In an order dated 2 May
    2019,  Master  Gidden  noted  that  neither  party  had   requested   a
    substantive  hearing  and  he  quashed  Judge   Kebede's   refusal   of
    permission.  On 29 May 2019,  therefore,  the  Vice  President  granted
    permission to appeal in light of the High Court's  decision,  reminding
    the parties that the Upper Tribunal's task was that set out in  s12  of
    the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.

11. We have thus far omitted any description  of  the  grounds  which  were
    presented to Judge Kebede or to Sir Stephen Silber.  We  have  done  so
    intentionally, and in light of the fact that counsel, who appeared  for
    the appellants before us, sought at the outset of  his  submissions  to
    focus his argument very specifically on one point.  He sought to submit
    that Judge Keith had  erred  in  his  assessment  of  the  respondent's
    contention that the appellant's September 2008 had  been  invalid.   He
    asked us to consider the chronology.  The first appellant  had  applied
    for further leave to remain on 11 September  2018.   He  had  used  the
    wrong form, in that he had used the version of form  FLR(S)  which  had
    been issued in April 2008, whereas he should have used the  version  of
    the form which had been issued in August 2008.  There  was  nothing  in
    the respondent's bundle, however, to support the assertion that she had
    written to the appellant stating  that  his  application  was  invalid.
    Counsel submitted  that  Judge  Keith  had  erred  in  relying  on  the
    respondent's assertion that there had been any such notice  when  there
    was no evidence in support of that assertion: MH (Pakistan) [2010] UKUT
    168 (IAC); [2010] Imm AR 658.  Citing Mirza [2016] UKSC  63;  [2017]  1
    WLR 85 and OS (Russia) [2012] EWCA Civ  357;  [2012]  1  WLR  3198,  he
    submitted that unless  there  was  proper  notice  of  invalidity,  the
    application was valid.  Even if it was de facto invalid,  he  submitted
    that it was not de jure invalid.  The burden  was  on  the  respondent,
    submitted counsel, to show that the application was invalid and she had
    failed to do so.  The significance of this was that the application  of
    11 September 2008 was to be treated as  valid  and  in-time,  with  the
    consequence that the first appellant had enjoyed  statutorily  extended
    leave under section 3C of  the  Immigration  Act  1971  throughout  the
    period in question.  As a result,  counsel  submitted  that  the  first
    appellant had enjoyed continuous leave between  from  January  2007  to
    January 2017  and  the  judge  of  the  FtT  had  erred  in  concluding
    otherwise.


12. We observed to counsel that these arguments did not feature at  all  in
    the grounds which had  been  presented  to  the  FtT,  the  UT  or  the
    Administrative  Court.   At  all  previous  stages,  the  grounds   had
    proceeded on an acceptance that there had been a gap in the appellant's
    lawful residence as a result of the problem  with  the  September  2008
    application.  There had been no application to vary  the  grounds,  nor
    had there been any notice to the Tribunal or the respondent that a  new
    point was to be taken.  In the circumstances, we put this case back  in
    the list to give counsel an opportunity to consider whether  he  wished
    to develop submissions on the grounds of appeal.

13. On reconvening,  counsel  submitted  that  there  had  been  no  formal
    concession made that the September 2008 application had  been  invalid;
    that the grounds for  judicial  review  in  any  event  contained  this
    'theme'; that the respondent had been on notice that this  point  might
    be in issue; and that the respondent's current approach to the  use  of
    incorrect forms demonstrated some leniency, which was relevant  to  the
    way in which the Tribunal  should  consider  the  point:  SF  (Albania)
    [2017] UKUT 120 (IAC); [2017] Imm AR 1003.

14. We asked counsel to consider  the  version  of  paragraph  34C  of  the
    Immigration Rules which had been in force  in  September  2008  and  to
    consider whether the stipulation that  an  application  which  did  not
    comply with paragraph 34A 'will be invalid and will not be  considered'
    might distinguish  the  situation  from  that  which  arose  under  the
    Biometric Regulations in Mirza.  Counsel  was  not  able  to  make  any
    submission in response.  We also asked counsel about two aspects of the
    chronology which we have set out at [4]  above.   Firstly,  whether  it
    could properly be said that an appeal was pending between the  date  on
    which it was lodged without payment of a fee and the date on  which  it
    was reinstated when the fee was received.  He was unable to  assist  us
    on that point.  Secondly, we asked whether the appellant could properly
    be said to have made a valid application  for  ILR  in  December  2016,
    given that his leave was said to be extended by operation of section 3C
    of the Immigration Act 1971 at  that  point.   Counsel  was  unable  to
    assist us with this point either, although he noted that the respondent
    had expressed no concern in her original decision about the  continuity
    of lawful residence in 2016.

15. In the circumstances, we indicated that we did not need  to  hear  from
    the Presenting Officer and that  the  appeal  would  be  dismissed  for
    reasons which would be given in writing.

Discussion

16.  It has recently been necessary for the Court of  Appeal  to  underline
    the importance of adherence to proper standards of  appellate  advocacy
    in immigration appeals.  It is not permissible, whether in  that  court
    or in the Upper Tribunal, for advocates to consider that  they  are  at
    liberty to advance any argument which occurs to them, whether or not it
    appears in the grounds of appeal and whether or not any notice  of  the
    argument has been given to the respondent  or  the  Upper  Tribunal.[1]
    The grounds of appeal frame the arguments which are to be advanced.  As
    Hickinbottom LJ said in Harverye [2018] EWCA Civ 2848, the grounds  are
    the well from which the argument must flow: [57].  And  as  Lewison  LJ
    stated in ME (Sri Lanka) [2018] EWCA Civ 1486, the arguments which  can
    be raised on appeal are limited by the  grounds  of  appeal  for  which
    permission has been granted: [22].  These observations apply with equal
    force  to  appellate  proceedings  before  the  Upper   Tribunal.    An
    application may be made to vary  the  notice  of  appeal  but,  in  the
    absence of such a notice, advocates should expect that scope  of  their
    argument will be restricted to the grounds upon  which  permission  was
    granted.


17. Judge Kebede's decision was quashed by the order made by Master Gidden.
     Permission to appeal was then granted  by  the  Vice  President.   The
    grounds upon which permission was granted were  obviously  those  which
    were presented originally to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  no  other  grounds
    having been advanced to the Upper Tribunal. Two points were advanced in
    those grounds.  Firstly, that Judge Keith  had  erred  in  failing  "to
    consider whether discretion should be exercised to disregard the  break
    in  the  First  Appellant's  lawful  residence".   Secondly,  that  the
    proceedings before the FtT had been  procedurally  unfair  because  the
    respondent  had  failed  to  bring  relevant  policy  guidance  to  the
    attention of the judge.  Neither of those grounds contain a glimmer  of
    the argument which counsel sought to advance before us, which was  that
    the application of September 2011  was  valid,  or  was  not  correctly
    classified as invalid in circumstances  in  which  the  respondent  had
    given no, or no adequate, notice of invalidity.  It  was  improper,  in
    these circumstances, for counsel  to  seek  to  advance  this  argument
    before us.  In any event, the point is wholly without  merit,  for  the
    following reasons.


18. It is accepted by the appellant that he submitted the wrong application
    form on 11 September  2008.   He  submitted  his  application  on  Form
    FLR(S), version 04/2008.  On 18 August 2008, however, a new version  of
    the form was issued.  This was version 08/2008, which was specified for
    use in applications made on or after that  date.   When  the  appellant
    came to make his application in mid-September 2008, it  was  the  newer
    version of the form which was to be used.

19. At the time that the appellant made this application,  the  Immigration
    Rules stated, at paragraph 34A(i), that an  application  must  be  made
    using the specified form.  Paragraph 34C of the Immigration  Rules  was
    inserted by HC321 on 29  February  2008.   From  that  date  until  its
    amendment on 9 July 2012, it provided as follows:


         Where an application or claim in connection  with  immigration  for
         which an application form is specified does  not  comply  with  the
         requirements in paragraph 34A, such application or  claim  will  be
         invalid and will not be considered.

20. Counsel sought to submit that the respondent had  not  given  notice  of
   the invalidity of the application, or  that  she  had  given  inadequate
   notice.  He submitted that the application was deemed to be valid  until
   such notice was provided.  He relied  upon  Mirza  in  support  of  that
   submission.  As we suggested to counsel, however, the decision in  Mirza
   is of no assistance to him.


21. The first two appellants before the Supreme Court had failed, in  making
   their applications for further leave  to  remain,  to  comply  with  the
   Immigration and Nationality (Fees) Regulations 2011, reg 37.  The  third
   appellant  had  failed  to  comply  with  the   Immigration   (Biometric
   Registration) Regulations 2008, reg 3.  In  respect  of  the  first  two
   appellants, who had failed to provide  the  requisite  fees  with  their
   applications for leave to remain, the Supreme Court held that regulation
   37 was unambiguous.  It provided  that  an  application  which  was  not
   accompanied by the specified fee was not validly made.   Lord  Carnwath,
   with  whom  the  other  Justices  agreed,  observed  at  [33]  that  "an
   application which is not validly made can have  no  substantive  effect"
   and could not engage section 3C of the 1971 Act as a result.

22. In respect of the  third  appellant,  who  failed  to  comply  with  the
   biometric  regulations,  the  position  was   different,   because   the
   requirement to enrol biometric information only arose at a later  stage,
   on  receipt  of  a  notice  from  the  respondent:   [36].    In   those
   circumstances, Lord Carnwath was unable to accept  that  the  subsequent
   failure to provide the information should be treated as  retrospectively
   invalidating the application from the  outset,  thereby  nullifying  the
   previous extension of her leave under section 3C: [37].  In  respect  of
   those regulations, the respondent had a power to treat  the  application
   as invalid and the applications only became invalid from the point  that
   notice was provided.


23. The appellant's  situation  is  materially  indistinguishable  from  the
   situation in which the first and second appellants  before  the  Supreme
   Court found themselves.  His application was invalid when it  was  made,
   or purportedly made, because that was the outcome mandated by  paragraph
   34C.  The respondent was not required to give notice in order to  render
   the application invalid.  OS (Russia), or indeed Anufrijeva [2003]  UKHL
   36; [2004] 1 AC 604, concern the different situation in which  effective
   notice of a substantive decision must be given before it can have  legal
   effect.  Here, the Immigration Rules stipulated at  the  time  that  the
   application of September 2008 was invalid when it was submitted, without
   any requirement of notice.  In those circumstances, neither the  absence
   nor the claimed inadequacy of the respondent's letter from November 2008
   is relevant.  It is accepted that the application was on the wrong form;
   it was therefore invalid and was not, contrary to counsel's  submission,
   capable of engaging section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971.

24. Counsel made one point which had featured in the grounds of appeal.   He
   submitted that the respondent was now more lenient to those  who  sought
   to make applications using an incorrect form.  That is indeed the  case.
   The transition to a  more  lenient  approach  began  with  amendment  to
   paragraph 34C in 2012.  To the version  we  have  reproduced  above  was
   added the following:


         Notice of invalidity will be given in  writing  and  deemed  to  be
         received on the date it is given, except where it is sent by  post,
         in which case it will be deemed to be received on  the  second  day
         after it was posted excluding any day which is not a business day.


25. The Immigration Rules were subsequently renumbered and it  is  currently
   paragraphs 34A-B which cover  Invalid  Applications.   Those  paragraphs
   provide as follows:


         34A. Subject to paragraph 34B, where an application  for  leave  to
         remain does not meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph  34,  it  is
         invalid and will not be considered.


         34B. (1) Where an application for leave to remain does not meet the
         requirements of paragraph 34(1)-(9), the  Secretary  of  State  may
         notify the applicant and give them one opportunity to  correct  the
         error(s) or omission(s) identified by the Secretary of State within
         the timescale specified in the notification.


         (2) Where an applicant does not comply  with  the  notification  in
         paragraph 34B(1), or with the requirements in  paragraph  34(G)(4),
         the application is invalid and will not be  considered  unless  the
         Secretary  of  State  exercises  discretion  to  treat  an  invalid
         application as valid and the requirements of  paragraph  34(3)  and
         (5) have been met.


         (3) Notice of invalidity will be given in  writing  and  served  in
         accordance with Appendix SN of these Rules.

26. These amendments are of no assistance to the appellant, however.  As  we
   have explained, the Immigration Rules in  force  at  the  relevant  time
   deemed the purported September 2008 application to be invalid.  That was
   determinative of the position at that date and  the  existence  of  more
   lenient Immigration Rules or policies at a later date cannot  alter  the
   position.  SF (Albania), which was cited but  not  produced  by  counsel
   before us, considered an entirely  different  situation,  in  which  the
   Upper  Tribunal  was  invited  (by  the  Secretary  of  State)  to  take
   cognisance of current  policy  and  current  facts  in  considering  the
   balancing exercise under Article 8 ECHR.  It is simply  illogical,  with
   respect to counsel and the  author  of  the  grounds,  to  suggest  that
   today's Immigration Rules could somehow be applied to the  consideration
   of events  which  occurred  when  a  different  version  was  in  force,
   particularly when there is no indication that the Rules should have such
   retrospective effect.


27. The respondent  has  a  published  policy  which  provides  guidance  to
   caseworkers on the correct approach to breaks in lawful  residence  such
   as this.  It is within the Long Residence guidance dated 3  April  2017.
   Page 15 of that guidance states that the period of overstaying is to  be
   calculated from the end of the last period of leave to enter  or  remain
   when an otherwise in-time application was invalid.  In  the  appellant's
   case, therefore, the period of overstaying was from 12  September  2008,
   when his leave came to an end, until 5 March 2009, when he  was  granted
   further leave to remain.  The relevant period is around five months.  In
   such circumstances, the guidance instructs caseworkers to consider  "any
   evidence of exceptional circumstances which prevented the applicant from
   applying within the first 28 days of overstaying".  The guidance  states
   that  threshold  is  high  but  could  include  delays  resulting   from
   unexpected or unforeseeable causes.  Serious illness, travel  or  postal
   delays or an inability to provide the necessary documents are  given  as
   examples.  The circumstances in this case  are  wholly  different.   The
   appellant chose to apply for further leave to remain on the  penultimate
   day of his extant leave and he used the wrong form in attempting to make
   that application.  There are no  exceptional  circumstances  which  even
   arguably fall within the guidance.


28. In relation to  the  events  of  2008,  we  conclude  as  follows.   The
   application which the appellant attempted  to  make  was  invalid  as  a
   result of paragraph 34C of the Immigration Rules as then in force.  That
   attempted application did not engage section 3C of the  Immigration  Act
   1971.  The respondent was not required to give notice of  invalidity  in
   order to bring about the consequences in the  two  preceding  sentences.
   Judge Keith did not err in  the  conclusion  that  he  reached  in  that
   regard.   The fact that the Immigration Rules are now more generous,  in
   affording an applicant an  opportunity  to  remedy  such  an  error,  is
   immaterial.  The respondent operates a policy  regarding  such  gaps  in
   lawful residence.  It was not drawn to the attention of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal but it would not  have  made  any  difference  to  the  judge's
   assessment.  We do not consider there to  be  any  legal  error  in  the
   decision of the First-tier Tribunal for these reasons.

29. There are additional aspects of the chronology which cause  us  concern.
   These form no part of our decision, which is premised on the  conclusion
   that the First-tier Tribunal did not err in law in  its  examination  of
   the events of 2008.  We are conscious of the  fact  that  the  appellant
   might consider making a further application for ILR under paragraph 276B
   in the future, however, and the observations which follow might assist a
   future decision maker in considering such an application.

30. We need not repeat the events of 2016 as we have set them  out  at  [5]-
   [6] above.  The first point concerns the application of  section  3C  of
   the Immigration Act 1971 during the period 1 July 2016 to 28 July  2016.
   As we have recorded above, the appellant's appeal was struck out on  the
   first of these dates, and was only reinstated  on  28  July  2016.   Our
   preliminary view, to which counsel had no substantive response, was that
   section 3C did not apply during  this  period,  since  no  appeal  could
   properly be said to be pending within the meaning of  that  section  for
   these four weeks.

31.  The  second  point  concerns  the  appellant's  ability  to  make   the
   application he made on 28 December 2016.  At that stage, it is agreed on
   all sides that his appeal to the First-tier Tribunal had been reinstated
   and was awaiting a hearing date.  If his leave was extended  by  section
   3C during that time, section  3C(4)  applied,  and  prevented  him  from
   making an application for variation of his leave to  remain  whilst  his
   leave was so extended.  As counsel observed, neither of these points was
   taken by the respondent before Judge Keith or before us but we  consider
   it appropriate to identify them, lest they are relevant for the future.

32. Counsel did not attempt to  submit  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
   erred in its concise treatment of Article  8  ECHR  insofar  as  it  was
   relied upon without reference to paragraph 276B.  He was right not to do
   so.  Without reference to paragraph 276B, it is unarguably proportionate
   to remove the appellants and their young daughter.  They will return  to
   Bangladesh as a family and there is no proper basis for contending  that
   such a course would give rise to unjustifiably harsh consequences.

33. In the circumstances, the First-tier Tribunal's decision shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The appeals are dismissed and the decision of the FtT stands.

No anonymity direction is made.

                                    [pic]
                                MARK BLUNDELL
                      Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)



















-----------------------
[1] Counsel has subsequently stated that he was specifically instructed  not
to apply, at the outset of the hearing, for an amendment of the grounds.

