
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

De Souza (Good Friday Agreement: nationality) [2019] UKUT 00355 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by video-link between Field House       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|and Laganside, Belfast                        |                              |
|On 10 September 2019                          |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |

                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                            JAKE PARKER DE SOUZA
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T McGleenan QC and Mr P Henry, instructed by
                  Crown Solicitor's Office
For the Respondent:    Mr R Lavery QC and Ms H Wilson, instructed by MSM
                  Law


The Belfast (or Good Friday) Agreement did not  amend  the  law  of  British
citizenship, as contained in the British Nationality Act 1981




                            DECISION AND REASONS

A. THE CLAIMANT'S APPLICATION AND THE SECRETARY OF STATE'S RESPONSE

 1. The respondent (hereafter referred to as the claimant) is a citizen  of
    the United States of America.  He is married to Mrs De Souza,  who  was
    born in Northern Ireland in 1987.

 2. At the time of Mrs De  Souza's  birth,  section  1(1)  of  the  British
    Nationality Act 1981 ("the BNA") provided (so far as applicable) that:-

         "A person born in the United Kingdom after commencement  ...  shall
         be a British citizen if at the time of  the  birth  his  father  or
         mother is -

         (a)  a British citizen; ..."

 3. It is common ground that, by reason  of  the  nationality  law  of  the
    Republic of Ireland, Mrs De Souza is also a citizen of that country.

 4. On 15 December 2015, MSM Law applied on behalf of the claimant for  him
    to be issued with a residence card, in confirmation  of  his  right  to
    reside in the United Kingdom, pursuant to European Union law, as  given
    effect by the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

 5.  The obligation of the Secretary of State to issue a residence card  to
    a family member was contained in regulation 17(1),  which  provided  as
    follows:-

         "17.- (1)     The Secretary of State must issue a residence card to
                 a person who is not an  EEA  national  and  is  the  family
                 member of a qualified person or of an EEA national  with  a
                 permanent  right  of  residence  under  regulation  15   on
                 application and production of -

                 (a)   a valid passport; and

                 (b)   proof that the applicant is such a family member."

 6. There is no dispute that the claimant satisfied regulation  7(1)(a)  of
    the 2006 Regulations, as he  was  the  spouse  of  Mrs  De  Souza.  The
    Secretary of State, however, refused the claimant's application because
    she considered that Mrs De Souza did not fall within the definition  of
    "EEA  national"  (which  also  governed  whether  she  could  meet  the
    definition of "a qualified  person"  in  regulation 6.   Regulation  2
    (General interpretation) defined an EEA national as follows:-

         "'EEA national' means a national of an EEA State who is not also  a
         British citizen".



B. THE REASON FOR THE WORDS "WHO IS NOT A BRITISH CITIZEN IN THE  DEFINITION
OF "EEA NATIONAL"

 7. The words "who is not also a British citizen" were  inserted  into  the
    2006 Regulations with effect from 16 October 2012.  This amendment gave
    effect to the decision of the Court of Justice of the European Union in
    McCarthy v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011] 3 CMLR  10
    (Case C-434/09).  Mrs McCarthy was a dual  British/Irish  national  who
    was born in and had always lived in the United Kingdom.  The CJEU  held
    that the Citizens Directive (to which, amongst other things,  the  2006
    Regulations were intended to give effect) did not enable Mrs McCarthy's
    spouse to be recognised as a family member  for  the  purposes  of  the
    Directive.  This was because:-

         "43. ... Directive 2004/38 is to be  interpreted  as  meaning  that
             that directive is not applicable to a Union  citizen  who  has
             never exercised his right of free  movement,  who  has  always
             resided in a Member State of which he is a national and who is
             also a national of another Member State."

 8. Mr McCarthy also sought to rely upon Article 21 of the  Treaty  of  the
    Functioning of the European Union but, here too, he was unsuccessful:-

         "56. ... Art 21 TFEU is not applicable to a Union citizen  who  has
             never exercised his right  of  free  movement,  who  has  also
             resided in a Member State of which he is a national and who is
             also a national of another Member  State,  provided  that  the
             situation of that citizen does not include the application  of
             measures by a Member State  that  would  have  the  effect  of
             depriving him of the genuine enjoyment of the substance of the
             rights conferred by virtue of his status as a Union citizen or
             of impeding the exercise of his right  of  free  movement  and
             residence within the territory of the Member States."

 9. At paragraph 54 of its judgment, the CJEU held that:-

          "The fact that Mrs McCarthy, in addition to being  a  national  of
         the United Kingdom, is also a national of  Ireland  does  not  mean
         that a Member State has applied measures that have  the  effect  of
         depriving her of the genuine enjoyment  of  the  substance  of  the
         rights conferred by virtue of her status as a Union citizen  or  of
         impeding the exercise of her right of free movement  and  residence
         within the territory of the Member States."



C. THE CLAIMANT'S POSITION

10. In the present case, the claimant takes no issue with the Secretary  of
    State's view that Mrs De  Souza's  position  is,  to  the  extent  just
    described,  analogous  with  that  of  Mrs  McCarthy.   The  claimant's
    position, however, is that, notwithstanding she was  born  in  Northern
    Ireland, she identifies only as Irish.  Accordingly, the claimant says,
    she satisfies the definition of "EEA national" in regulation 2 because,
    as a result of her self-identification, she  "is  not  also  a  British
    citizen".



D. THE BELFAST AGREEMENT

11. At the heart of the case for the  claimant  is  the  Belfast  (or  Good
    Friday) Agreement 1998.  The Belfast Agreement comprises  two  separate
    instruments.  The first is a multi-party agreement between both of  the
    Northern Ireland political parties who participated in the negotiations
    leading to it.  Annexed to the multi-party agreement  is  the  British-
    Irish Agreement.  This is a bi-lateral international  treaty,  executed
    by the governments of the United Kingdom and Ireland.

12. The following extracts from the multi-party agreement are of  relevance
    for present purposes:-

         "DECLARATION OF SUPPORT


         1.   We, the participants in the multi-party negotiations,  believe
             that the agreement we have negotiated offers a truly  historic
             opportunity for a new beginning.


         2.   The tragedies of the past have  left  a  deep  and  profoundly
             regrettable legacy of suffering.  We must never  forget  those
             who have died or been injured, and their families.  But we can
             best honour them through a fresh start,  in  which  we  firmly
             dedicate  ourselves  to  the  achievement  of  reconciliation,
             tolerance,  and  mutual  trust,  and  to  the  protection  and
             vindication of the human rights of all.

         ...

         CONSTITUTIONAL ISSUES

         1.   The participants endorse the commitment made  by  the  British
             and Irish Governments that, in a new  British-Irish  Agreement
             replacing the Anglo-Irish Agreement, they will:

             (i)  recognise the legitimacy of  whatever  choice  is  freely
                  exercised by a majority of the people of Northern  Ireland
                  with regard to its status, whether they prefer to continue
                  to support the Union with Great  Britain  or  a  sovereign
                  united Ireland;

             (ii) recognise that it is for the  people  of  the  island  of
                  Ireland  alone,  by  agreement  between  the   two   parts
                  respectively and without external impediment, to  exercise
                  their right of self-determination on the basis of consent,
                  freely and concurrently given, North and South,  to  bring
                  about a united Ireland, if that is their  wish,  accepting
                  that this right must be achieved and  exercised  with  and
                  subject to the agreement and consent of a majority of  the
                  people of Northern Ireland;

             ...

             (vi) recognise the birthright of all the  people  of  Northern
                  Ireland to identify themselves and be accepted as Irish or
                  British, or both, as they may so choose,  and  accordingly
                  confirm that their right to hold both  British  and  Irish
                  citizenship is accepted by both Governments and would  not
                  be affected by any future change in the status of Northern
                  Ireland.

             ... (our emphasis)

         DRAFT CLAUSES/SCHEDULES FOR INCORPORATION IN BRITISH
         LEGISLATION

         1. (1)   It  is  hereby  declared  that  Northern  Ireland  in  its
              entirety remains part of the United  Kingdom  and  shall  not
              cease to be so without the  consent  of  a  majority  of  the
              people of Northern Ireland voting in  a  poll  held  for  the
              purposes of this section in accordance with Schedule 1.

           (2)    But if the wish expressed by a majority in such a poll is
              that Northern Ireland should cease to be part of  the  United
              Kingdom and form part of a united Ireland, the  Secretary  of
              State shall lay before  Parliament  such  proposals  to  give
              effect to that wish as may be agreed  between  Her  Majesty's
              Government in  the  United  Kingdom  and  the  Government  of
              Ireland.

         2.   The Government of Ireland Act 1920 is repealed; and  this  Act
             shall  have  effect   notwithstanding   any   other   previous
             enactment."

13. The International Treaty between the governments of the United  Kingdom
    and Ireland contains the following:-

         "ARTICLE 1

         ...

         (vi) recognise the birthright of all the people of Northern Ireland
             to identify themselves and be accepted as Irish or British, or
             both, as they may so  choose,  and  accordingly  confirm  that
             their right to hold both  British  and  Irish  citizenship  is
             accepted by both Governments and would not be affected by  any
             future change in the status of Northern Ireland.

         ...

         The British and Irish Governments declare that it  is  their  joint
         understanding that the term "the people  of  Northern  Ireland"  in
         paragraph (vi) of Article  1  of  this  Agreement  means,  for  the
         purposes of giving effect to this provision, all  persons  born  in
         Northern Ireland and having, at the time of their birth,  at  least
         one parent who is  a  British  citizen,  an  Irish  citizen  or  is
         otherwise entitled  to  reside  in  Northern  Ireland  without  any
         restriction on their period of residence." (our emphasis)






 E. THE NORTHERN IRELAND ACT 1998



14. Certain provisions  of  the  two  instruments  comprising  the  Belfast
    Agreement were given domestic United Kingdom legislative effect in  the
    Northern Ireland Act 1998.  The interpretation of the 1998 Act fell for
    consideration in Robinson v Secretary of State for Northern Ireland and
    Others [2002] UKHL 32.

15. At paragraph 3 of his opinion in that case, Lord Bingham said:-

         "3.  The Northern Ireland Act 1998 was  enacted  to  implement  the
             Belfast Agreement, as the long title to the  Act  and  section
             3(1) make clear.  The purpose of the Act (so far  as  relevant
             to this appeal) is to provide for the restoration of  devolved
             government in Northern Ireland but on  a  basis  significantly
             different from that provided under the 1920 Act.  There is  to
             be a new Northern Ireland Assembly. There are  also  to  be  a
             First Minister and Deputy First Minister ("FM" and "DFM"). And
             there are to be up to ten Ministers, acting as  the  political
             heads of Northern Ireland departments.  But in respect of each
             of these key elements the Act provides mechanisms  to  prevent
             the exercise of power by either of the two  main  communities,
             unionist and nationalist, to the exclusion of the other."

16. In Robinson, the House had to construe the provisions of section 16  of
    the 1998 Act.  This provided that the Assembly "shall, within a  period
    of six weeks beginning with its first meeting, elect from  amongst  its
    members the First Minister and the deputy  First  Minister".   As  Lord
    Bingham noted at paragraph 6, however, section 16 "leaves an  important
    question unanswered: what was to happen if the six week period  expired
    and no FM and DFM had been elected?".  Lord Bingham held:-

         "10. The 1998 Act, as already noted, was passed  to  implement  the
             Belfast  Agreement,  which  was  itself  reached,  after  much
             travail, in  an  attempt  to  end  decades  of  bloodshed  and
             centuries of antagonism.  The solution  was  seen  to  lie  in
             participation by the unionist and nationalist  communities  in
             shared political institutions, without precluding (see section
             1 of the Act) a popular decision at some time in the future on
             the ultimate political status of Northern Ireland.   If  these
             shared institutions were to deliver the benefits  which  their
             progenitors intended, they had to have  time  to  operate  and
             take root.
         11.   The  1998  Act  does  not  set  out  all  the  constitutional
             provisions applicable to Northern Ireland, but it is in effect
             a constitution.  So to categorise the Act is  not  to  relieve
             the courts of  their  duty  to  interpret  the  constitutional
             provisions in issue. But the provisions  should,  consistently
             with  the  language  used,  be  interpreted   generously   and
             purposively,  bearing   in   mind   the   values   which   the
             constitutional provisions are intended to embody.
         ...
         12.  It would no doubt be possible, in theory at least, to devise a
             constitution in which all political contingencies would be the
             subject of predetermined mechanistic rules to  be  applied  as
             and when  the  particular  contingency  arose.   But  such  an
             approach would not be consistent with ordinary  constitutional
             practice in Britain. There are of course certain fixed  rules,
             such as those governing the maximum duration of parliaments or
             the period for which the House of Lords may delay the  passage
             of legislation.  But matters of potentially  great  importance
             are left to the judgment either of political leaders  (whether
             and when to seek a dissolution, for instance) or, even if to a
             diminished  extent,  of  the  crown  (whether   to   grant   a
             dissolution).  Where constitutional arrangements retain  scope
             for the exercise of political judgment they permit a  flexible
             response to differing and unpredictable events in a way  which
             the application of strict rules would preclude.
         13.  All  these  general  considerations  have  a  bearing,  in  my
             opinion, on the statutory provisions  at  the  heart  of  this
             case.
         ..."
17. Lord Bingham's  conclusion,  with  which  the  majority  of  the  House
    concurred, was that the Assembly had the power to make a valid election
    for the two officers in question,  even  though  the  six  week  period
    prescribed under section 16(8) had expired.

18. Agreeing with Lord Bingham, Lord Hoffmann held:-

          33. Mr Larkin QC, in the course of his admirable argument for the
             appellant, politely but firmly reminded  your  Lordships  that
             your function was  to  construe  and  apply  the  language  of
             Parliament and not merely  to  choose  what  might  appear  on
             political grounds to be the most convenient solution.   It  is
             not for this House, in its judicial capacity, to say that  new
             elections   in   Northern   Ireland   would   be   politically
             inexpedient.  Mr Larkin cited Herbert Wechsler's famous Holmes
             Lecture, Towards  Neutral  Principles  of  Constitutional  Law
             ((1959) 73 Harvard LR 1).  My  Lords,  I  unreservedly  accept
             those principles.  A  judicial  decision  must,  as  Professor
             Wechsler said (at p.  19)  rest  on  "reasons  that  in  their
             generality and their neutrality transcend any immediate result
             that is involved."  But I think that the construction which  I
             favour satisfies those requirements.  The long  title  of  the
             Act is "to make new provision for the government  of  Northern
             Ireland for the purpose of implementing the agreement  reached
             at multi-party talks on Northern  Ireland...".   According  to
             established principles of  interpretation,  the  Act  must  be
             construed against the background of the political situation in
             Northern Ireland and the principles laid down by  the  Belfast
             Agreement for a new start.  These  facts  and  documents  form
             part of the admissible background for the construction of  the
             Act just as much as the Revolution,  the  Convention  and  the
             Federalist  Papers  are  the  background  to  construing   the
             Constitution of the United States."



F. THE APPEAL

19. In the present case, the position of the the claimant is that the  1998
    Act is a "constitutional" statute that overrides the words  enacted  by
    Parliament in section 1 of the  BNA.   Mrs  De  Souza's  constitutional
    right to identify only as Irish means that she cannot be treated  under
    United Kingdom law as British.

20. The Secretary of State did not accept this argument.  On appeal to  the
    First-tier Tribunal, however,  it  found  favour  with  the  First-tier
    Tribunal which, following a hearing  in  Belfast  on  29  August  2017,
    allowed the claimant's appeal under the 2006 Regulations.  In doing so,
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge placed weight on an  unreported  decision
    of the Upper Tribunal, without (it seems)  having  any  regard  to  the
    restrictions  on,  and  requirements  relating  to,  the  citation   of
    unreported decisions, contained in Practice Direction 11.

21. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted by that Tribunal
    on 3 May 2018.  The judge who granted permission  considered  that  the
    Secretary of State's grounds were "eminently arguable".



G. JURISDICTIONAL AND OTHER ISSUES

22. Before going any further, it is necessary to  deal  with  an  issue  of
    jurisdiction.  In his submissions, Mr McGleenan QC contended  that  the
    claimant did not have a  right  of  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision to refuse to issue him with a residence card.

23.  Reliance is placed on Article 26(3) of  the  2006  Regulations,  which
    provides:-

         "(3) If a person ... claims to be ... the family member ...  of  an
             EEA national he may not appeal under these Regulations  unless
             he produces-

             (a)  ... a passport; and

             (b)  either-

                  (i)  an EEA family permit;

                  (ia) a qualifying EEA State residence card;

                  (ii) proof that he is the family member or relative of  an
                      EEA national; or

                  ..."

24. The Secretary of State's position is that the  claimant  did  not,  and
    could not, provide proof that  he  is  the  family  member  of  an  EEA
    national because Mrs De Souza does not fall within  the  definition  of
    such a person in regulation 2.  Mr Lavery QC, by contrast, asserts that
    this submission is circular in nature and that the claimant's  case  is
    that, for the reasons we have  described,  he  is  married  to  an  EEA
    national.

25. On this issue, we agree with  Mr  Lavery  QC.   The  plain  purpose  of
    regulation 26(3) is to preclude an appeal where the evidence  submitted
    does not, on its face, amount to proof of the claim being made.   Thus,
    where an individual asserts that he or she is the family  member  of  a
    person who plainly falls within the definition of "EEA  national,"  the
    individual needs to put forward evidence to show that  this  is,  as  a
    matter of fact, the position.  Regulation 26(3) cannot  be  invoked  by
    the Secretary of State to close down the argument before an independent
    tribunal that the individual is, as a matter of law,  entitled  to  say
    that he or she is married to a person who falls within  the  definition
    of an "EEA national".  Were the position otherwise, much of the purpose
    of the 2006 Regulations, in giving a right of appeal,  would  be  lost,
    with the result that a person in the position of the  present  claimant
    would be required to resort to judicial review, in order to  make  good
    his case.  It cannot have been the legislature's intention in  enacting
    the 2006 Regulations.

26. The Upper Tribunal had previously raised the question whether the  2006
    Regulations  govern  the  present  proceedings,  or  whether  they  are
    governed by the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2016.
    Given that we have found a right of appeal lay, in the present case, to
    the First-tier Tribunal under  the  2006  Regulations,  the  effect  of
    paragraph 3 of Schedule 4 to the 2016 Regulations is to make  the  2006
    Regulations the governing instrument, notwithstanding  that  they  were
    otherwise revoked by the 2016 Regulations.

27. It is common  ground  that  the  sole  ground  of  appeal  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision in the present case is that the Secretary
    of State's  decision  breaches  the  claimant's  rights  under  the  EU
    treaties in respect of residence in the United Kingdom (paragraph 1  of
    Schedule 1 to the 2006 Regulations, as amended).



H. DECIDING THE SUBSTANTIVE QUESTION

28. The British-Irish Agreement is, on any view,  an  international  treaty
    between the governments of the  United  Kingdom  and  the  Republic  of
    Ireland.  Even  if  we  assume  that  the  legal  significance  of  the
    provision regarding "the birthright  of  all  the  people  in  Northern
    Ireland to identify themselves and be accepted as Irish or British,  or
    both" has the reach for which the claimant contends, its  existence  in
    an international treaty, whilst binding in international law, does  not
    thereby make it binding under the domestic law of the United Kingdom.

29. In JH Rayner (Mincing Lane) Ltd v  Department  of  Trade  and  Industry
    [1990] 2 AC 418, the House of Lords (per Lord Oliver) held:-

         "It is axiomatic that municipal courts have not and cannot have the
         competence to adjudicate upon or to enforce the rights arising  out
         of  transactions  entered  into  by  independent  sovereign  states
         between themselves on the plane  of  international  law.  That  was
         firmly established by this House in Cook v. Sprigg [1899] A.C. 572,
         578, and was succinctly and convincingly expressed in  the  opinion
         of the Privy Council delivered by Lord Kingsdown  in  Secretary  of
         State in Council of India v. Kamachee Boye Sahaba  (1859)  13  Moo.
         P.C.C. 22, 75:

             "The transactions of independent states between each other are
             governed by other  laws  than  those  which  municipal  courts
             administer: such courts have neither  the  means  of  deciding
             what is right, nor the power of enforcing any  decision  which
             they may make."

         On the domestic plane, the power of the Crown to conclude  treaties
         with  other  sovereign  states  is  an  exercise   of   the   Royal
         Prerogative,  the  validity  of  which  cannot  be  challenged   in
         municipal law: see Blackburn v. Attorney-General  [1971]  1  W.L.R.
         1037. The Sovereign acts.

             "throughout the making of the treaty and in relation  to  each
             and every of its stipulations in her sovereign character,  and
             by her own inherent authority; and, as in making  the  treaty,
             so in performing the treaty, she  is  beyond  the  control  of
             municipal law, and her acts are not to be examined in her  own
             courts:"  Rustomjee v. The Queen (1876) 2 Q.B.D. 69,  74,  per
             Lord Coleridge C.J."

         That is the first of the underlying principles. The second is that,
         as a matter of the constitutional law of the  United  Kingdom,  the
         Royal Prerogative, whilst it embraces the making of treaties,  does
         not  extend  to  altering  the  law  or  conferring   rights   upon
         individuals or depriving individuals of rights which they enjoy  in
         domestic law without the intervention of Parliament.  Treaties,  as
         it is sometimes expressed, are not self-executing.  Quite simply, a
         treaty is not part of English law unless  and  until  it  has  been
         incorporated into the law by legislation.  So  far  as  individuals
         are concerned, it is res inter alios acta from  which  they  cannot
         derive rights and by which they cannot be  deprived  of  rights  or
         subjected to obligations; and it is  outside  the  purview  of  the
         court not only because  it  is  made  in  the  conduct  of  foreign
         relations, which are a prerogative of the Crown, but also  because,
         as a source of rights and obligations, it is irrelevant."



| |                                                                       | |

30. More recently, in R (Miller) v Secretary of State [2018] AC  61  [2017]
    UKSC 5, the Supreme Court reiterated Lord  Oliver's  statement  of  the
    law:-

         "(e) The effect of treaties on the domestic law of the UK

         32.  The general rule that the conduct of international  relations,
             including the making and unmaking of treaties, is a matter for
             the Crown in exercise of its prerogative powers arises in  the
             context of the basic constitutional principle to which we have
             referred at para  25  above,  that  the  Crown  cannot  change
             domestic law by any exercise of its prerogative  powers.   The
             Crown's prerogative power to conduct  international  relations
             is regarded as wide and as being outside the  purview  of  the
             courts  precisely  because  the  Crown  cannot,  in   ordinary
             circumstances, alter domestic law by using such powers to make
             or unmake a treaty.  By making and unmaking treaties the Crown
             creates legal effects on the plane of international  law,  but
             in doing so it does not and cannot change  domestic  law.   It
             cannot without the intervention of Parliament confer rights on
             individuals or deprive individuals of rights." (our emphasis)

31. The point being made in these cases is  an  important  one.   It  would
    infringe Parliamentary sovereignty if, by entering into a treaty with a
    foreign state, the executive branch could thereby change  the  domestic
    law of the United Kingdom, without recourse to Parliament.

32.  There is nothing in the 1998  Act  or  anywhere  else  in  the  United
    Kingdom's statute book that  amounts  to  domestic  legislation  giving
    effect to Article 1(6) of the British-Irish  Agreement  or,  we  should
    also note, the corresponding provision in the multi-party agreement.

33. The fact that this is so is, we consider, of considerable significance,
    when it comes to examining  the  submissions  made  on  behalf  of  the
    claimant.  The 1998 Act gave effect in domestic  law  to  many  of  the
    elements of the Belfast Agreement; in particular, those relating to the
    scheme of devolved governance for Northern Ireland.  The 1998 Act  also
    placed into domestic  law  certain  commitments  in  the  British-Irish
    agreement, such as the guarantee of no  change  to  the  constitutional
    position, without the consent of the people of Northern Ireland.

34. Against this background, the claimant faces a profound difficulty.   In
    his oral submissions, Mr Lavery QC suggested that there was,  in  fact,
    no need for the 1998 Act expressly to amend section 1 of the BNA on the
    basis that section 1 was capable of being interpreted consistently with
    the Belfast Agreement.

35. That is, with respect, not a submission that can find favour.   On  the
    contrary, in the skeleton argument prepared by  Mr  Lavery  QC  and  Ms
    Wilson, it is suggested that section 1 of the BNA requires to  be  read
    in the following way,  if  it  is  to  be  compatible  with  the  self-
    identification principles to which we have already referred:-

         "1 - (1) A person born in the United Kingdom after commencement ...
                shall [if they consent to identify as  such]  be  a  British
                citizen if at the time of the birth his father or mother  is
                -

                (a)    a British citizen; or

                ..."

36. Even assuming that this amendment would apply only  to  those  born  in
    Northern Ireland, it would  represent  a  radical  departure  from  the
    existing law of British nationality.  To make citizenship by  birth  in
    the United Kingdom (or any part of it) dependent on  consent  raises  a
    host of difficult issues.

37. Amongst these is the point in time at which consent would be  required.
    It cannot rationally be contended that an infant, for example, would be
    expected to give consent.  But, even if it were  assumed  that  consent
    becomes a prerequisite only once a  person  had  achieved  the  age  of
    majority, there remain questions as to whether, and, if so, how, such a
    person would be expected to signify  consent.  A  person's  nationality
    cannot depend in law on an  undisclosed  state  of  mind,  which  could
    change from time to time, depending on how he or she felt.

38. These examples of the problems inherent  in  a  system  of  nationality
    based on consent make it plain that the omission from the 1998  Act  of
    anything  touching  upon  the   issues   of   self-identification   and
    nationality was entirely deliberate on the part of the  United  Kingdom
    Parliament. The omission cannot be explained on the  basis  that  there
    was no need to amend the BNA because it could be  construed  compatibly
    with Article 1(iv)/(vi), without Parliament having  to  spell  out  the
    necessary amendments.

39.  The omission also underscores the  correctness  of  the  Secretary  of
    State's submission that, properly construed,  Article  1(iv)/(vi)  does
    not, in fact, involve giving the  concept  of  self-identification  the
    meaning for which the claimant argues.  If the parties  to  the  multi-
    party agreement and the governments of Ireland and the  United  Kingdom
    had intended the concept of self-identification necessarily to  include
    a person's ability to reject his or her Irish or  British  citizenship,
    it is inconceivable that the provisions would not have dealt with  this
    expressly.  By the same token, it is equally inconceivable that the far-
    reaching consequences for British nationality law would not  have  been
    addressed by the 1998 Act.

40. Before leaving  this  particular  issue,  we  agree  with  the  written
    submissions of Mr McGleenan QC and Mr Henry that, if Article 1(iv)/(vi)
    needs to be construed as preventing the United Kingdom from  conferring
    British citizenship on a person born in Northern Ireland, at the  point
    of birth, the inescapable logic is that  Ireland  cannot  confer  Irish
    citizenship on such a person at that point either.  The result is  that
    a person born in Northern Ireland is born stateless.  That would  be  a
    breach  of  both  countries'  international  obligations   to   prevent
    statelessness. It is not conceivable that the two governments  intended
    such a result.

41. The claimant attempted to draw support from a  principle  of  statutory
    interpretation, whereby the courts  will  tend  to  interpret  domestic
    statutory law in such a  way  as  to  be  compatible  with  the  United
    Kingdom's international treaty obligations. In Salomon v  Commissioners
    of Customs and Excise [1967] QB 116, the Court of Appeal held,  obiter,
    that if it had been necessary to do so in order to construe the Customs
    and Excise Act 1952, the court would have been obliged, on the  grounds
    of international comity,  to  take  judicial  notice  of  the  European
    Convention on the Valuation of Goods for  Customs  Purposes  1950.   Mr
    Lavery QC  also  drew  attention  to  the  proposition  in  Bennion  on
    Statutory Interpretation (6th Edition), which reads:-

         "Section 270 Municipal law should conform to international law

         It is a principle of legal policy that the municipal law  (that  is
         the  law  of  the  individual  state)  should  conform  to   public
         international law.  The court, when considering, in relation to the
         facts of the instant case, which of the opposing  constructions  of
         the enactment would  give  effect  to  the  legislative  intention,
         should  presume  that  the  legislator  intended  to  observe  this
         principle."

42. It is important to appreciate the limits of this principle.  It is  not
    to be regarded as a back-door  way  of  circumventing  the  fundamental
    duality principle, set out above, whereby international treaties do not
    operate domestically, save to the extent that Parliament  has  ordained
    that they should.  The fact that the 1998 Act gave effect to aspects of
    the Belfast Agreement - and that Robinson shows the 1998 Act is  to  be
    regarded as "constitutional" in nature - does not give  us  licence  to
    read into the 1998 Act  provisions  which  Parliament  simply  did  not
    include on a subject (nationality) with which it does not deal.

43. A similar point falls to be made in response to the claimant's reliance
    in this regard upon Robinson itself.  It is  one  thing  to  engage  in
    judicial creativity in construing a provision such as section 16 of the
    1998 Act, by reference to the Belfast Agreement. It is quite another to
    conclude that the 1998 Act has impliedly amended a  central  pillar  of
    nationality law, in a way that remains unclear but which  on  any  view
    has potential serious consequences,  including  for  the  international
    obligations of Ireland and the United Kingdom under the  Convention  on
    the Reduction of Statelessness.

44. Reliance was placed by Mr Lavery QC and Ms Wilson upon the judgment  of
    the Divisional Court in Thoburn v Sunderland City  Council  and  Others
    [2002] 3 WLR 247;  [2002]  EWHC  195  (Admin);  the  so-called  "Metric
    Martyrs" case. In Thoburn Laws LJ  rejected  the  submission  that  the
    Weights and Measures  Act  1985  had  impliedly  amended  the  European
    Communities  Act  1972.   Laws  LJ  held  that  the  1972  Act  was   a
    "constitutional statute", in the sense that it  conditioned  the  legal
    relationship between citizens and state in  some  general,  overarching
    manner or enlarged or diminished the scope of  what  were  regarded  as
    fundamental constitutional rights. If an  Act  is  to  be  regarded  as
    constitutional in this sense, the court would ask whether it  had  been
    shown that the  legislature's  actual  intention,  as  opposed  to  its
    imputed constructive or presumed intention, was to affect  the  alleged
    repeal (paragraphs 60 to 63).

45. Laws LJ concluded as follows:-

         "64. This development of the common  law  regarding  constitutional
             rights, and as I would say constitutional statutes, is  highly
             beneficial.  It gives us most of the  benefits  of  a  written
             constitution, in which fundamental rights are accorded special
             respect.  But it preserves the sovereignty of the  legislature
             and  the  flexibility  of  our  uncodified  constitution.   It
             accepts  the  relation  between  legislative   supremacy   and
             fundamental rights is not fixed or brittle: rather the  courts
             (in interpreting statutes, and now, applying the HRA) will pay
             more or less deference to the  legislature,  or  other  public
             decision-maker, according to the subject in hand.  Nothing  is
             plainer than that this benign development involves, as I  have
             said, the recognition of the ECA as a constitutional statute."

46.  We  do  not  consider  that  Thoburn  advances  the  claimant's  case.
    Accepting that the 1998 Act is a "constitutional" Act means,  according
    to Laws LJ's dictum, that the 1998  Act  cannot  be  amended  by  later
    legislation, other than expressly.  There  is,  however,  no  corollary
    that a "non-constitutional" Act, such as the BNA (if one assumes it  to
    be of this nature) can be overridden  or  re-written  in  the  way  the
    claimant contends.

47. Mr Lavery QC and Ms Wilson point out that, on one of  the  webpages  of
    the Northern Ireland Administration, there is  a  passage  which  says:
    "people born in Northern Ireland can choose  to  be  British  citizens,
    Irish citizens or both". This webpage is not, however, an authoritative
    source of law. For the reasons we have given, it must  be  regarded  as
    wrong.

48. We turn to Article 8 of the ECHR.  Although  this  is  not  a  discrete
    ground of appeal, we accept that if the operation of  section  1(1)  of
    the BNA as regards Mrs De Souza is such as to  violate  her  Article  8
    rights, then section 3 of the Human Rights  Act  1998,  which  requires
    legislation to be read and given effect in a  way  that  is  compatible
    with her Convention rights (so far as possible to do so), might have  a
    bearing on how one should interpret  section  1(1).   In  other  words,
    section 3 is a further potential interpretative tool that, the claimant
    says, requires section 1(1) to be read in the way described above.

49. In Ghaidan v Godin-Mendoza [2004] 2 AC 557; [2004] UKHL 30,  the  House
    of Lords invoked section 3 of the Human Rights Act  1998  in  order  to
    construe paragraph 2(2) of schedule 1 to the Rent Act 1977 as extending
    to same sex partners, as well as "spouses", in order to eliminate  what
    otherwise would be a discriminatory effect of the provision.

50. Lord Nicholls held that:-

         "30. ... the interpretative obligation decreed by section 3  is  of
             an unusual and far-reaching character.  Section 3 may  require
             a court to depart from the unambiguous meaning the legislation
             would   otherwise   bear.   In   the   ordinary   course   the
             interpretation of legislation involves seeking  the  intention
             reasonably  to  be  attributed  to  Parliament  in  using  the
             language in question.  Section 3  may  require  the  court  to
             depart from this legislative intention, that is,  depart  from
             the intention of the Parliament which enacted the legislation.
               The  question  of  difficulty  is  how  far,  and  in   what
             circumstances, section 3 requires a court to depart  from  the
             intention of the enacting  Parliament.   The  answer  to  this
             question  depends  upon  the  intention   reasonably   to   be
             attributed to Parliament in enacting section 3.

         31.  On this the first point to be  considered  is  how  far,  when
             enacting  section  3,  Parliament  intended  that  the  actual
             language of a statute, as distinct from the concept  expressed
             in that language, should be determinative.   Since  section  3
             relates to the 'interpretation' of legislation, it is  natural
             to focus attention initially  on  the  language  used  in  the
             legislative  provision  being  considered.   But  once  it  is
             accepted that section 3 may  require  legislation  to  bear  a
             meaning  which  departs  from  the  unambiguous  meaning   the
             legislation would otherwise bear,  it  becomes  impossible  to
             suppose Parliament intended that the operation  of  section  3
             should depend critically upon the  particular  form  of  words
             adopted  by  the  parliamentary  draftsman  in  the  statutory
             provision  under   consideration.    That   would   make   the
             application of section 3 something of a semantic lottery.   If
             the draftsman chose to express the concept  being  enacted  in
             one form of words, section 3 would  be  available  to  achieve
             Convention-compliance.  If he chose a different form of words,
             section 3 would be impotent

         32.  From this the conclusion which seems inescapable is  that  the
             mere fact the language  under  consideration  is  inconsistent
             with a Convention-compliant meaning does not of itself make  a
             Convention-compliant   interpretation    under    section    3
             impossible.  Section 3  enables  language  to  be  interpreted
             restrictively or expansively.  But section 3 goes further than
             this. It is also apt to require a court to read in words which
             change the meaning of the enacted legislation, so as  to  make
             it Convention-compliant.  In other  words,  the  intention  of
             Parliament in enacting  section  3  was  that,  to  an  extent
             bounded only by what is 'possible', a  court  can  modify  the
             meaning, and  hence  the  effect,  of  primary  and  secondary
             legislation."

51.  Assuming,  for  the  moment,  that  Mrs  De  Souza's  right  to  self-
    identification is an aspect of her private life, protected  by  Article
    8, the claimant submits that the interference caused by section 1(1) of
    the BNA is not proportionate to the legitimate public end  sought.   In
    this regard, the claimant seeks to categorise the legitimate public end
    as avoiding statelessness.  He points out that Mrs De Souza  would  not
    be stateless,  if  she  is  legally  regarded  as  not  having  British
    citizenship, since she is a citizen of Ireland.

52. There are a number  of  profound  difficulties  with  this  submission.
    First, we reiterate that this appeal is about whether the  decision  of
    the Secretary of State is contrary to the United Kingdom's  obligations
    under the EU treaties. It is well-established that EU law does not,  as
    such, seek to regulate the way in which a member state  determines  who
    should, or should not, be one of its citizens. The question of who is a
    British citizen is, thus, a matter of United Kingdom domestic law.

53.    Secondly,  in  considering  whether  an   ECHR   signatory   state's
    nationality law may constitute a disproportionate interference  with  a
    person's rights under the ECHR, it is necessary to examine the  aim  of
    the law. Here, the legitimate aim in question  includes  not  only  the
    prevention of statelessness.  It extends to the need to  have  a  clear
    and coherent mechanism for being able to establish whether a person is,
    or is not, a citizen.  As we have seen, a system of  citizenship  based
    upon consent of the kind for which the claimant  contends  simply  does
    not work.

54. In our view, the present system  enshrined  in  the  BNA  represents  a
    proportionate way of achieving the legitimate public end, not  only  of
    avoiding statelessness but also of maintaining  a  clear  and  coherent
    system of nationality law.  The element  of  consent  is  addressed  by
    section 12 of the BNA:-

         "12. Renunciation

         (1)  If any British citizen of full age and capacity makes  in  the
             prescribed manner a declaration  of  renunciation  of  British
             citizenship, then, subject to subsections  (3)  and  (4),  the
             Secretary  of  State  shall  cause  the  declaration   to   be
             registered.

         (2)  On the registration of a declaration made in pursuance of this
             section the person who made it shall cease  to  be  a  British
             citizen.

         (3)  A declaration made by a person in pursuance  of  this  section
             shall not be registered  unless  the  Secretary  of  State  is
             satisfied  that  the  person  who  made  it  will  after   the
             registration have or acquire some citizenship  or  nationality
             other than British citizenship; and if that  person  does  not
             have any such  citizenship  or  nationality  on  the  date  of
             registration and does not acquire  some  such  citizenship  or
             nationality within six months from that date, he shall be, and
             be deemed to have remained, a British citizen  notwithstanding
             the registration.

         (4)  The Secretary  of  State  may  withhold  registration  of  any
             declaration made in pursuance of this section if  it  is  made
             during any war in which Her Majesty may be engaged in right of
             Her Majesty's government in the United Kingdom.

         (5)  For the purposes of this  section  any  person  who  has  been
             married [or has formed a civil partnership] shall be deemed to
             be of full age."

55. Mrs De Souza objects to any suggestion that she might avail herself  of
    section 12 by making a  declaration  of  renunciation  of  her  British
    citizenship.  This is because she does not consider  herself  to  be  a
    British citizen and does not wish to acknowledge that she is, in  order
    to be able to renounce that status.  For the  reasons  we  have  given,
    however, as a matter of law, Mrs De Souza is,  at  present,  a  British
    citizen at the current time.  Whilst we fully appreciate  her  strength
    of feeling on this matter, it is  not  disproportionate  in  Article  8
    terms for her nevertheless to be required to give notice of revocation,
    if she wishes only to be a citizen of Ireland.

56. There is, we are informed, a fee of �200 to  be  paid.   We  have  not,
    however, been told that that represents a material barrier to  her  use
    of section 12 or that it is otherwise  disproportionate  in  Article  8
    terms, for the Secretary of State to levy this sum.

57.  Accordingly,  since  section  1(1)  of   the   1981   Act   does   not
    disproportionately interfere with Mrs De Souza's Article 8  rights,  it
    is not possible to invoke the interpretative  principles  contained  in
    section 3 of the Human Rights Act 1998, in construing section  1(1)  of
    the BNA.



I. FINAL POINT

58. An important final point needs to be made.  Nothing  in  this  decision
    brings  into  question  the  past   and   continuing   importance   and
    constitutional significance of the Belfast Agreement to the  people  of
    Ireland and the United Kingdom. On the contrary, our task has  been  to
    ascertain what the parties to that Agreement intended by way of Article
    1(iv)/(vi).


J. CONCLUSION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains the making of an  error  on
a point of law.  We set that decision aside and  substitute  a  decision  of
our own, dismissing the  claimant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
Secretary of State to refuse to issue him with a residence permit.

We wish to record our gratitude to Counsel  for  the  helpfulness  of  their
written and oral submissions and to all those responsible for preparing  the
appeal  and  the  authorities  bundles,  which  have  been  of  considerable
assistance to us.




                           Signed                     Date




                           The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                           President of the Upper Tribunal
                           Immigration and Asylum Chamber
