
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

DC (trafficking: protection/human rights appeals) Albania [2019] UKUT 00351
(IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 June 2019                                |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH


                                   Between

                                     DC
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Chakmakjian, Counsel, instructed by
     Kilby Jones Solicitors LLP

For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Interpreter:  Mr S Pashoja (Albanian)


    In the light of the judgment of Flaux LJ in Secretary of State for  the
    Home Department v MS (Pakistan) [2018]  EWCA  Civ  594  and  subsequent
    decisions of the Upper Tribunal and Administrative  Court,  a  tribunal
    deciding a protection or human rights appeal,  which  concerns  alleged
    trafficking within the scope of the Council  of  Europe  Convention  on
    Action against  Trafficking  in  Human  Beings  and  decisions  of  the
    Competent Authority (CA) under the United Kingdom's  National  Referral
    Mechanism, should proceed as follows:

         (a)   In  a  protection  appeal,  the   "reasonable   grounds"   or
         "conclusive grounds" decision  of  the  CA  will  be  part  of  the
         evidence that the tribunal will have  to  assess  in  reaching  its
         decision on that appeal, giving the CA's decision such weight as is
         due, bearing in mind that the standard of proof applied by  the  CA
         in  a  "conclusive   grounds"   decision   was   the   balance   of
         probabilities.

         (b) In a human rights appeal, a finding by the tribunal that the CA
         has failed to reach a rational decision on  whether  the  appellant
         has been the victim of trafficking, such  as  to  be  eligible  for
         leave to remain in the United Kingdom for that  reason  alone,  may
         lead the tribunal to allow the human rights appeal,  on  the  basis
         that  removing  the  appellant   at   this   stage   would   be   a
         disproportionate interference with the appellant's Article  8  ECHR
         rights. This scenario is, however, of narrow ambit and is  unlikely
         to be much encountered in practice.

         (c) In a human rights appeal, the question  whether  the  appellant
         has been the victim of trafficking may be relevant to the issue  of
         whether the appellant's removal would breach the ECHR,  even  where
         it is not asserted there is a trafficking-related risk of  harm  in
         the country of proposed return and irrespective of what is said  in
         sub-paragraph (b) above: e.g. where the  fact  of  trafficking  may
         have caused the appellant physical or psychological harm. Here,  as
         in sub-paragraph (a) above, the CA's decision on  past  trafficking
         will be part of the evidence to be assessed by the tribunal.






                            DECISION AND REASONS


A. INTRODUCTION

 1. This is the re-making of the decision in the appellant's appeal against
    the refusal on 2 December 2017 by the  respondent  of  the  appellant's
    protection and human rights claims.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, which had allowed the appellant's appeal by a decision  dated
    3 October 2018, was set aside in its entirety by Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Gill in a decision dated 11 April 2019.  That decision,  in  which  the
    appellant is referred to as "DJ", is annexed to this one.

 2. In refusing the appellant's claims, the respondent  accepted  that  the
    appellant was a citizen of Albania and that her  claimed  identity  was
    correct.  The respondent, however,  rejected  the  assertion  that  the
    appellant had been the victim of sex trafficking and that she had  been
    domestically abused by her father.  The refusal letter  drew  upon  the
    appellant's asylum interview record, a letter from her  representatives
    of 13 February 2017 and a letter from what was said to be a  doctor  in
    Albania dated 18 September 2015.  From these, the respondent noted that
    the appellant claimed to be a member  of  a  particular  social  group;
    namely, women who had been trafficked.  Her father  used  to  beat  the
    appellant when he was drunk and the doctor's letter said she  had  been
    mistreated by her family from 2009 to 2014.

 3. In May 2011, the appellant said she met a man whom  we  shall  call  B,
    with whom she began a relationship which lasted until  August  of  that
    year.  When the appellant attempted to end the  relationship,  B  began
    blackmailing her to work as a prostitute.  He threatened  to  show  her
    family a sex video of the appellant that he had secretly made.

 4.  On 26 August 2011, B came to the appellant's family home to  take  her
    away.  B informed the appellant's father about the  appellant  being  a
    prostitute, at which her father threw B from a balcony  and  then  beat
    the appellant, who woke up at the home of her uncle, to find  that  she
    had been treated by a doctor.  She stayed at her uncle's from then  on,
    occasionally going home to visit her mother.   During  this  time,  the
    appellant worked as a prostitute for B.

 5. In August 2015, B took the appellant to Italy by car for  the  purposes
    of prostitution. In Italy, the appellant met  a  client  of  B,  called
    Lorenzo, who arranged her escape, using false documents.   Lorenzo  and
    the appellant travelled to France and then to Belfast, via Dublin.  The
    appellant was detained in  Belfast,  attempting  to  take  a  ferry  to
    Scotland.

 6. The appellant told the respondent that she feared  persecution  from  B
    because he had forced her to work as a prostitute.  She also feared ill-
    treatment and persecution from her father "because he is  an  alcoholic
    and beat you generally ... and/or he is aware of your  situation  as  a
    prostitute and  will  kill  you  because  of  this"  (decision  letter,
    paragraph 20).

 7. As we have already said, the decision stated that the appellant was not
    accepted to be the victim of trafficking.  That is plain from paragraph
    44, which reads: "Not accepted -  You  are  a  victim  of  trafficking"
    (original  emphases).   At  paragraph  45,  the  reason  given  by  the
    respondent for this conclusion was that the appellant had been referred
    to the Competent Authority (CA) under the National  Referral  Mechanism
    (NRM), which has the function of  identifying  victims  of  trafficking
    under the Council of Europe Convention on Action against Trafficking in
    Human Beings.  Paragraph 45 of the refusal letter stated that  the  NRM
    (sic; presumably the CA was meant), having considered  the  appellant's
    claim and all the available evidence, was of the "opinion that you  are
    not a victim of trafficking.  The reasons for this decision  have  been
    outlined in their conclusive decision  letter  dated  08  August  2016.
    Therefore in light of the NRM response, it is  not  accepted  that  you
    have been trafficked".

 8. At paragraph 60, however, the letter stated that "as previously  noted,
    it is accepted you were a victim of trafficking".  On this  basis,  the
    appellant's case  was,  accordingly,  assessed  by  the  respondent  by
    reference to the relevant country guidance on the  risk  on  return  to
    Albania of victims of trafficking: TD  and  AD  (Trafficked  Women)  CG
    [2016] UKUT 00092 (IAC) and AM and BM  (Trafficked  Women)  Albania  CG
    [2010] UKUT 80.

 9.  Applying that country guidance to the  appellant's  circumstances,  as
    the respondent considered them to be, the respondent concluded that the
    appellant would not be at real  risk  of  serious  harm  on  return  to
    Albania, as someone who had been the victim  of  trafficking.   Amongst
    the factors considered were the appellant's level of education  (having
    completed school at age 18 and started university) and  the  fact  that
    the appellant would be returning with an illegitimate  child,  born  in
    the United Kingdom.  It is clear from  paragraph  65  of  the  decision
    letter that the respondent considered  the  father  of  the  child  was
    Lorenzo; in any event, the respondent took the position that the  child
    would be able to call on its father for support in Albania.

10. The respondent also considered that the age of the appellant (23 at the
    date of decision) meant that she was not in the prominent risk category
    for re-trafficking, albeit that the Upper Tribunal had  found  that  it
    was "not unusual for trafficked women to be older".

11. On a proper reading  of  the  refusal  letter,  we  consider  that  the
    respondent, having concluded that the appellant had not shown that  she
    had been a victim of  trafficking,  nevertheless  considered  what  the
    position might be, if she had been trafficked.



B. TRAFFICKING DECISIONS AND APPEALS AGAINST REFUSALS  OF  HUMAN  RIGHTS  OR
PROTECTION CLAIMS

12. Before turning to the  re-making  of  the  appellant's  appeal,  it  is
    necessary to address the matter raised in Upper Tribunal  Judge  Gill's
    decision of 11 April 2019.  At paragraph 40, she identified -

         "... a need for general guidance to be given on the approach to  be
         taken  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  or  the  Upper  Tribunal   in
         determining appeals brought on protection grounds in  which  it  is
         alleged that the appellant has been trafficked but where there  has
         been a negative "Conclusive Grounds" decision [of the CA] which has
         not been challenged in judicial review proceedings".

13. We received helpful submissions from the representatives on this issue.
     In particular, Mr Chakmakjian provided  a  skeleton  argument  dealing
    with the authorities, to which we shall turn in a moment.  Overall,  we
    accept much of Mr Chakmakjian's analysis, which has  helped  to  inform
    the discussion which follows.

14. Before going any further, it  is  necessary  to  set  out  in  somewhat
    greater detail the legal framework  that  we  mention  in  paragraph  7
    above.




(a) Legal framework

15. On 17 December 2008, the United Kingdom ratified the Council of  Europe
    Convention on Action Against Trafficking in  Human  Beings,  which  had
    come into force in 2009. The purpose of the Convention  is  to  prevent
    and combat trafficking in human beings; to identify and protect victims
    of  trafficking  and  to  safeguard  their  rights;  and   to   promote
    international co-operation against trafficking.

16. Article 10 of the Convention provides as follows:

         "Each party shall adopt such legislative or other measures  as  may
         be necessary to identify victims as  appropriate  in  collaboration
         with other Parties and relevant support organisations.  Each  party
         shall ensure that, if the  competent  authorities  have  reasonable
         grounds to believe that a person has been the victim of trafficking
         in human  beings,  that  person  shall  not  be  removed  from  its
         territory until the  identification  process  as  a  victim  of  an
         offence provided for in Article 18  of  this  Convention  has  been
         completed by the competent authorities and  shall  likewise  ensure
         that the person receives the assistance provided for in Article 12,
         paragraphs 1 and 2."

17. It can be seen from Article 10 that there is a preliminary analysis  to
    be conducted in determining whether  a  person  who  is  liable  to  be
    removed from the United  Kingdom  is  a  victim  of  trafficking.  This
    requires a determination of  whether  the  competent  authorities  have
    "reasonable grounds to  believe  that  a  person  has  been  victim  of
    trafficking". If the CA decides that there are  no  reasonable  grounds
    for so believing, the Convention imposes no further impediment to  that
    person's  removal.  But  if  it  is  determined  that  there  are  such
    reasonable grounds, it is necessary for the CA to proceed to  a  second
    stage, which involves a substantive determination of whether the person
    is a victim of trafficking.

18. If, at the end of that second stage,  the  CA  determines  conclusively
    that the person is not  a  victim  of  trafficking,  then,  again,  the
    Convention will pose no further  impediment  to  removal.  But  if  the
    conclusive decision is that the person is a victim, the Convention does
    not require the victim to be given the right  to  live  in  the  United
    Kingdom. What Article 14 requires is that a renewable residence  permit
    shall be issued to the victim in  two  particular  situations:  (i)  to
    enable the victim to co-operate with the authorities for  the  purposes
    of criminal  proceedings  or  investigation;  and  (ii)  where  the  CA
    considers it necessary for the victim to stay  in  the  United  Kingdom
    owing to his or her personal situation.

19.  The  Convention  is  an  unincorporated  international  treaty,  whose
    provisions have not found their  way  into  any  primary  or  secondary
    legislation in the United Kingdom; nor even into the immigration rules.
    As a result, the issue of the  United  Kingdom's  compliance  with  the
    Convention is a matter of government policy and practice:  Ahmed  v  HM
    Treasury [2010] UKSC 2. However, although the Convention is not a free-
    standing source of rights, the respondent's policy is to give effect to
    the Convention and it will be an error of law for the respondent not to
    take that policy into account: AS (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2013] EWCA  Civ
    1469.

20. The way in which the United Kingdom gives  effect  to  its  obligations
    under the Convention is, therefore, through the  respondent's  domestic
    policies.  The  NRM  provides  a  non-statutory  framework  for  victim
    identification and support. The  NRM  is  designed  to  facilitate  co-
    operation and information-sharing between the different  agencies  that
    may be involved in a trafficking case, in order to identify victims and
    provide them with advice, accommodation, protection  and  support.  The
    respondent has also published guidance on the functions of the CA. This
    guidance is intended to help the CA decide whether  a  person  referred
    under the NRM is a victim of trafficking.

21. There is no right of appeal against  a  negative  "reasonable  grounds"
    decision or against a negative "conclusive grounds" decision. The  only
    means of challenge is judicial review. The test is the  well-known  one
    of rationality (aka Wednesbury unreasonableness).

22. The guidance to the CA states  that  the  issue  to  be  decided  in  a
    "reasonable grounds" decision is whether it is "reasonable to  believe"
    a person is a victim of trafficking, on the information then available.
    The guidance  describes  this  as  a  "relatively  low  threshold".  By
    contrast, the standard of proof that the CA is to  apply  in  making  a
    "conclusive grounds" decision is the balance  of  probabilities.  In  R
    (MN) v Secretary of State for the Home Department and the  Aire  Centre
    [2018] EWHC 3268 (Admin), to which  we  shall  return  in  due  course,
    Farbey J held  that  the  balance  of  probabilities  was  the  correct
    standard.

23. In deciding a protection claim or an appeal against the refusal of such
    a claim, in which the issue is whether a person's fear  of  persecution
    or other serious harm  is  well-founded,  the  respondent  or  tribunal
    applies the so-called lower standard of  proof  of  a  "real  risk"  or
    "reasonable likelihood": R (Sivakumaran) v SSHD [1987] UKHL 1.



(b) Case law

24. There are four authorities to consider: Secretary of State for the Home
    Department v MS (Pakistan) [2018] EWCA Civ 594, AUJ (Trafficking  -  no
    conclusive grounds decision) Bangladesh [2018] UKUT 200 (IAC), ES  (s82
    NIA 2002; negative NRM (Albania) [2018] UKUT 335 (IAC)  and  R  (MN)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department, The Aire Centre intervening
    [2018] EWHC 3268 (Admin).




    Secretary of State for the Home Department v MS (Pakistan) [2018]  EWCA
    Civ 594

25. In this case, the  Court  of  Appeal  was  required  to  determine  the
    lawfulness of decision of the Upper Tribunal,  which  had  allowed  the
    claimant's appeal on the basis that,  although  the  claimant  had  not
    established a real  risk  of  serious  harm  if  returned  to  Pakistan
    (whether by reason of re-trafficking or otherwise),  the  claimant  had
    not received a lawful decision from the CA in respect of his  claim  to
    have been trafficked to the United Kingdom from Pakistan.

26.  Flaux LJ gave the only reasoned judgment  of  the  Court.  The  appeal
    which the Upper Tribunal allowed had been brought under the  provisions
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, as they were prior
    to the extensive amendments made by  the  Immigration  Act  2014.   The
    claimant had appealed against a decision of the  respondent  that  fell
    within section 82(2)(g) of the 2002 Act; namely, a decision  to  remove
    the claimant from the United Kingdom  under  the  powers  contained  in
    section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum 1999.  Under section 84(1)  of
    the 2002 Act, as then in force, the claimant could appeal  against  the
    removal decision on the ground that that decision  was  unlawful  under
    section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 (84(1)(c)) or that the  decision
    was "otherwise not in accordance with the law" (section 84(1)(e).

27. Flaux LJ considered that what the  Upper  Tribunal  had  done  was  "to
    engage in a complete re-determination of the issues as to  whether  the
    respondent was trafficked and to reach a decision that he was,  despite
    having failed to identify any specific respect in which  the  decisions
    of the authority were open to a Wednesbury challenge"  (paragraph  77).
    Flaux LJ held that this approach was wrong in law.  The Upper  Tribunal
    was bound by the authority of the Court of Appeal in AS  (Afghanistan),
    which held that a tribunal hearing an appeal against a removal decision
    as described in section 82(2)(g) of the 2002 Act could  reach  its  own
    conclusion whether an appellant had been  trafficked,  only  where  the
    decision of  the  CA  was  found  by  that  tribunal  to  be  perverse:
    paragraphs 23 to 26, 69 to 71 and 77.



(c) The ambit of MS (Pakistan)

28. A good deal of  the  uncertainty  about  the  role  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal in dealing with  decisions  of  the  CA
    that  has  arisen  since  MS  (Pakistan)  results  from  a  failure  to
    appreciate the proper ambit of Flaux LJ's judgment. At no point did  he
    hold that a tribunal deciding an appeal under  the  2002  Act  (whether
    before or after the 2014 amendments to the  appellate  regime)  is  not
    permitted, for the purposes of determining that appeal,  to  reach  its
    own conclusions, applying the lower standard of proof, on  whether  the
    appellant has been the victim of trafficking.  What the Court was doing
    in MS (Pakistan)  was  to  identify  the  circumstances  in  which  the
    tribunal can directly critique a "reasonable  grounds"  or  "conclusive
    grounds" decision.

29. As we have seen, the Convention requires the United Kingdom, along with
    other signatory states, to act in a positive manner towards  those  who
    are victims of  trafficking.   The  respondent  gives  effect  to  that
    requirement (which is not directly enforceable in United  Kingdom  law)
    by means of policies which, if not followed, will give rise  to  public
    law liability, as AS (Afghanistan) explains. For example, a person  who
    has been adjudged by the CA to  be  a  victim  of  trafficking  may  be
    granted discretionary leave to remain in the United Kingdom, even where
    he or she  does  not  qualify  "for  other  leave  such  as  asylum  or
    humanitarian   protection"   (Home    Office:    Discretionary    leave
    considerations  for  victims  of  modern  slavery  -  Version  2.0  (10
    September 2018)).

30. In allowing the claimant's appeal in MS (Pakistan), the Upper  Tribunal
    was deciding an appeal which, under the relevant legislation, had to be
    allowed if the Upper Tribunal found the removal decision  was  "not  in
    accordance with the law". Insofar as that issue turned upon whether the
    respondent had acted in accordance with her  policies  on  trafficking,
    Flaux LJ held that the question for the Upper Tribunal was not  whether
    it would have reached a different decision than  the  CA  did  on  this
    issue but, rather, whether the CA's decision was irrational. The  Court
    of Appeal's conclusion was, therefore, a paradigm instance of the well-
    established  legal  position,  which   leaves   the   formulation   and
    implementation of policy to government,  not  the  judiciary,  provided
    that  the  government  does  not  act  in  a  way  that  is  Wednesbury
    unreasonable.

31. Under the present appellate regime, there is no longer a requirement to
    allow an appeal where a decision is "not in accordance with  the  law",
    in the sense just described. It is, however,  still  possible  for  the
    same considerations to impact upon a  so-called  human  rights  appeal;
    that is to say, an appeal brought under section 84(2) of the  2002  Act
    on the ground that the decision to refuse a person's human rights claim
    is unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 (whereby it is
    unlawful for a public authority to act in a way  that  is  incompatible
    with a right contained in the European Convention on Human  Rights).  A
    refusal of a human rights claim is a refusal of a person's  claim  that
    to remove him or her from the United Kingdom  or  to  require  them  to
    leave would be unlawful under section 6: see section 113  of  the  2002
    Act.

32. Provided a person has a private or family life  that  is  protected  by
    Article 8(1) of the ECHR, he or she can bring a human rights appeal  on
    the basis that it would be a disproportionate interference  with  their
    enjoyment of that right to remove  them  from  the  United  Kingdom  or
    require them to leave. In deciding what is proportionate, the  tribunal
    will be required to give weight to the importance  of  maintaining  the
    respondent's system of immigration controls. But where  the  respondent
    has failed to follow her  own  policies  relating  to  the  Trafficking
    Convention, which impact upon  whether  and  in  what  circumstances  a
    person might be given leave to remain as a victim of  trafficking,  the
    weight to be given to the  respondent's  side  of  the  proportionality
    balance may, depending  on  all  the  circumstances,  be  significantly
    reduced.

33. Accordingly, if one takes the scenario in MS (Pakistan) of a person who
    had no well-founded fear of future  harm  in  Pakistan,  a  "conclusive
    grounds" decision that is found by the tribunal to  have  been  reached
    irrationally may well lead to the tribunal  deciding  that  removal  at
    this  stage  would  be  a  disproportionate   interference   with   the
    appellant's Article 8 rights. It will, not, however,  be  possible  for
    the tribunal to reduce the weight to be given  to  immigration  control
    merely because the tribunal would have decided the historic trafficking
    matter differently from the CA. It is also important to  emphasise  the
    narrow ambit of this scenario. There will, for example, be no practical
    scope for it where the appellant succeeds  in  a  protection  claim  or
    where, as we go on to say at paragraph 44 below,  the  fact  of  having
    been trafficked is a matter that  impacts  directly  on  Article  8  by
    reason of its physical or psychological consequences on the  appellant.
    Nor is it likely to avail an appellant who, on the evidence now  before
    the tribunal, is bound to be refused discretionary  leave  pursuant  to
    Article 14 of the Convention, even if the policy were  to  be  properly
    applied.   Moreover,  as  the  underlined  words  above  indicate,  the
    tribunal will merely be  finding  that,  because  of  the  respondent's
    failure to follow her policy, removal would  only  be  disproportionate
    before the respondent has been able to rectify that  failure.  For  all
    these  reasons,  we  doubt  that  this  scenario   will   be   commonly
    encountered.

34. By contrast, in an appeal against the refusal  of  a  protection  claim
    under section 82(1)(a) of the 2002  Act,  the  assessment  of  risk  on
    return, whether in terms of the Refugee Convention or Article 3 of  the
    ECHR, is for  the  tribunal  to  determine.  To  the  extent  that  the
    resolution of this "protection appeal" involves making findings of fact
    as to whether the appellant has been the  victim  of  trafficking,  the
    tribunal must assess all the evidence, applying the lower  standard  of
    proof. The fact that the CA may have  reached  a  negative  "reasonable
    grounds" or "conclusive grounds" decision will be part of the  evidence
    that the tribunal will have to assess, giving it such weight as is  due
    (and, of course, bearing in mind that the standard of proof applied  in
    a "reasonable grounds" decision was the relatively low one described in
    paragraph 22 above, whereas in a "conclusive grounds" decision, it  was
    was the balance of probabilities).

35. If the tribunal considers that, on the  evidence  before  the  CA,  the
    latter could not rationally have reached the conclusion it did, then no
    weight will be afforded to the CA's conclusions. But, even if the  CA's
    negative decision was impeccable, it will not thereby be  determinative
    of the protection appeal. Not only is it  perfectly  possible  for  the
    tribunal to conclude that it is reasonably  likely  the  appellant  was
    trafficked,  even  though  the  CA  has  found,  on  the   balance   of
    probabilities in its "conclusive grounds" decision, that the  appellant
    was not; the tribunal may well have before it  evidence  that  was  not
    available to the CA.

36.  Where the CA has made a positive "conclusive grounds"  decision,  this
    will point strongly in the appellant's favour in the protection appeal,
    given the higher standard of proof applied by the CA in coming to  that
    decision. But, again, it will not  necessarily  be  determinative.  The
    evidence before the tribunal may, for example, show that the  appellant
    has lied because it has subsequently emerged he  was  fingerprinted  in
    Greece at a time when, according to the  appellant's  account,  he  was
    being trafficked in Afghanistan.

37. Once one appreciates the distinction between  the  tribunal's  task  in
    assessing risk on return  in  a  protection  appeal  and  its  task  in
    deciding whether the respondent has applied her policies regarding  the
    Trafficking Convention, the true ambit of Flaux  LJ's  judgment  in  MS
    (Pakistan) stands revealed and we can turn to the cases that  have  had
    to grapple with it.




(d) Upper Tribunal cases

AUJ (Trafficking - no conclusive grounds decision)  Bangladesh  [2018]  UKUT
    200 (IAC)

38. The first part of the headnote to AUJ reads as follows:-


         "(i) If a person ("P") claims that the fact of being trafficked  in
             the past or a victim of modern slavery gives rise  to  a  real
             risk of persecution in  the  home  country  and/or  being  re-
             trafficked or subjected to modern slavery in the home  country
             and/or that it has had such an  impact  upon  P  that  removal
             would be in breach of protected human rights, it will be for P
             to establish the relevant facts  to  the  appropriate  (lower)
             standard of proof and the judge should made findings  of  fact
             on such evidence."

39. Although this part of the headnote derives from paragraph 63(1) of  the
    Upper Tribunal's decision, where the hypothesis was that there had,  in
    fact, been no "conclusive grounds" decision of the CA, we consider that
    the headnote is correct, as a general proposition,  whether  there  has
    been a "conclusive grounds" decision or not.  If  there  has,  and  the
    decision of the CA is that the appellant  has  not  been  a  victim  of
    trafficking, then, as we have said, that will be part  of  the  factual
    matrix that the fact-finding tribunal  will  assess,  in  reaching  its
    overall  conclusion  on  whether  or  not  there  is  a  real  risk  of
    persecution or other serious harm to the appellant, in the event of his
    or her removal from the United Kingdom.  As we have  already  attempted
    to explain, there is here  no  question  of  the  tribunal  deciding  a
    protection appeal being bound to accept a  "reasonable  grounds"  or  a
    "conclusive grounds" decision, unless that  decision  is  shown  to  be
    perverse.

40. For this reason, the passage in the respondent's decision letter in the
    present case  to which we have made reference in paragraph 7 above  was
    wrong.  The respondent (like the tribunal on appeal) has to  apply  the
    lower standard of proof when considering risk on return,  as  to  which
    the question whether the appellant had previously been  trafficked  was
    clearly relevant.

41. The second part of the headnote in AUJ also derives from  paragraph  63
    of the decision:-


        "(ii) If P does not advance any such claim in the  statutory  appeal
             but adduces evidence  of  being  trafficked  or  subjected  to
             modern slavery in the past, it will be a question of  fact  in
             each case (the burden being on P  to  the  lower  standard  of
             proof) whether  the  Secretary  of  State's  duty  to  provide
             reparation, renders P's removal in  breach  of  the  protected
             human rights."

42. In this regard, it is important to note what the Upper Tribunal said at
    paragraph 59 of the decision in AUJ:-


         "59. Mr Franco's submission, that as the Secretary of State had not
             complied  with  the  policy  to  refer  potential  victims  of
             trafficking or modern slavery to the Competent  Authority  the
             appellant was "entitled" to look to the First-tier Tribunal to
             make the findings that the  Competent  Authority  should  have
             made, is simply misconceived because it ignores the fact  that
             the two bodies have separate functions and  jurisdiction,  the
             question before the  First-tier  Tribunal  being  confined  to
             deciding whether the appellant's removal would be in breach of
             the United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee  Convention
             or whether it would be in breach of his protected rights under
             the ECHR."

43. Paragraph 59 is important.  It is consistent with the  judgment  in  MS
    (Pakistan) in that, as we have seen, an assertion  that  the  appellant
    should not be removed because of an alleged failure of  the  respondent
    to apply her policy responsibilities that  flow  from  the  Trafficking
    Convention can be advanced before the tribunal only if the respondent's
    decision-making (or absence thereof) through the CA is perverse.   That
    remains so, notwithstanding that the appeal in  the  present  case  was
    brought under the post-2014 Act appellate regime.  The Court of  Appeal
    in MS (Pakistan) was fully aware of the changes  brought  by  the  2014
    Act: see paragraphs 18 and 19 of the judgment.   There  is  nothing  in
    that judgment to show that the Court was of the view that  the  present
    regime rendered otiose the Court's judgment in AS (Afghanistan).

44. That said, the question of whether an appellant has been  a  victim  of
    trafficking may well be relevant to the discrete issue of  whether  the
    appellant's removal would  breach  the  ECHR,  even  where  it  is  not
    asserted that there is a trafficking-related risk of  serious  harm  in
    the country of return and irrespective of any issue as to whether there
    has been a failure to abide by the respondent's  policies  relating  to
    the Trafficking Convention.  This is the important point being made  in
    paragraph 63(2) of AUJ.  For example, the fact of being trafficked  may
    have caused physical or  psychological  harm  to  the  appellant,  with
    consequent medical needs that  may  require  to  be  addressed  by  the
    tribunal; in particular, as part of an Article 8 claim.




ES (s82 NIA 2002; negative NRM) Albania [2018] UKUT 335 (IAC)

45. In this case, the Upper Tribunal held that a decision made by the CA on
    the balance of probabilities is  not  "of  primary  relevance"  to  the
    determination of an asylum appeal.

46. Again, that conclusion is plainly correct.   At  paragraph  24  of  its
    decision, however, the Upper Tribunal based its reasoning on  the  fact
    that both AS (Afghanistan) and MS (Pakistan) were  concerned  with  the
    previous appellate regime.  But, as we have  already  explained,  those
    cases have relevance to the present regime. The key distinction is  not
    the difference in regimes but that mentioned in paragraph 37 above.




(e) Administrative Court

R (MN) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  and  the  Aire  Centre
[2018] EWHC 3268 (Admin)

47. This case involved a judicial review of a decision taken by the CA that
    the claimant was not a victim of trafficking.  The  claimant  contended
    that the CA had applied the balance of probabilities in its assessment,
    when it should have applied the lower  standard  of  proof  (reasonable
    likelihood), which pertains in international protection  cases  in  the
    tribunal.

48. Farbey J rejected the claim.  At  paragraph  43,  she  found  that  the
    Secretary of State was entitled to set the standard as the  balance  of
    probabilities.  This was the standard of proof "that is well recognised
    in domestic law.  It is simple to state.  It reflects the CA's task  at
    the conclusive stage, which is to decide whether or not a person  is  -
    as a matter of fact - a victim of trafficking".

49. Farbey J then turned to the principle of  non-refoulement.   Here,  the
    claimant's argument was that applying the higher standard of  proof  in
    trafficking cases might  put  the  United  Kingdom  in  breach  of  its
    international obligation of non-refoulement.

50. In a useful analysis of the relevant case law, Farbey J  rejected  this
    submission:-

         "45. The principle of non-refoulement is essentially the  principle
             of international law that a State will not expel an individual
             to a country where he or  she  is  at  risk  of  serious  ill-
             treatment such as (but not limited  to)  torture  or  loss  of
             liberty.  The duty of non-refoulement extends to refugees  who
             are those with 'well-founded  fear  of  being  persecuted  for
             reasons  of  race,  religion,  nationality,  membership  of  a
             particular  social  group  or  political   opinion'   (Refugee
             Convention;  article  1A(2)).  The  duty  itself  arises  from
             article 33(1) of the Refugee Convention which states:

                  'No Contracting State shall expel or return ("refouler") a
                  refugee in any  manner  whatsoever  to  the  frontiers  of
                  territories where his life or freedom would be  threatened
                  on account of his race, religion, nationality,  membership
                  of a particular social group or political opinion'.

         46.  In deciding whether a person satisfies the refugee definition,
             the Secretary of State must consider whether that  person  has
             demonstrated a reasonable degree of likelihood that he or  she
             would be  persecuted  in  the  country  of  origin  (Regina  v
             Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department,   Ex   parte
             Sivakumaran [1988] AC 958).  That standard has become known as
             the 'lower standard of proof' and I shall refer to it as such.



         47.  The lower standard of proof in asylum cases is not a matter of
             policy but of law.  It arises from the  proper  interpretation
             of the Refugee Convention (Sivakumaran at  998G).   An  asylum
             claimant  must  demonstrate  'well-founded   fear   of   being
             persecuted'.  The words 'well-founded' in  their  nature  mean
             something less than the degree of certitude that a party  must
             demonstrate in civil litigation.  In deciding whether a person
             has well-founded fear, the Secretary of State does not  assess
             the person's past or present situation but must consider  what
             might happen to the person if expelled to his or  her  country
             of origin (Sivakumaran at 993D).  The issues for  a  decision-
             maker under the Refugee Convention are 'questions not of  hard
             fact but of evaluation' (Karanakaran v Secretary of State  for
             the Home Department [2000] 3 All ER at 477a).  They involve  a
             prospective analysis of risk which is 'a matter of degree  and
             judgment' (Sivakumaran at 996E-F) apt to be expressed in terms
             of  likelihood  rather  than  established  fact.   The   lower
             standard is also consistent with the 'relative gravity of  the
             consequences  of  the  court's  expectation  being  falsified'
             (Sivakumaran at 994H citing Regina v Governor  of  Pentonville
             Prison, Ex parte Fernandez [1971] 1 WLR 987 per  Lord  Diplock
             at p.994).  It is consistent with the duty of anxious scrutiny
             which arises from the threat to life or liberty that may arise
             from a flawed decision (Sivakumaran at 997A  citing  Regina  v
             Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Bugdaycay
             [1987] AC 514, 537).  The lower standard  ensures  the  United
             Kingdom's compliance with  its  international  obligations:  a
             risk-based  precautionary  approach  recognises  the  inherent
             difficulty of predicting future events and so helps to  ensure
             that the United Kingdom does not refoule refugees (Karanakaran
             at 469f-g).

         48.   The  application  of  the  Sivakumaran  standard   has   been
             considered by  the  courts  in  a  number  of  well-known  and
             important cases. In Kaja v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
             Department [1995] Imm AR 1, the  Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal
             (as it then was)  held  that  there  was  no  distinct  divide
             between (on the one hand) proof of present or  past  facts  on
             which an asylum claim was based and (on the other hand)  proof
             of future risk.  The assessment of whether a person has  well-
             founded fear of being persecuted is a one-stage process  which
             treats all relevant evidence in the same way.  In applying the
             Sivakumaran standard, the decision-maker  will  need  to  take
             into account all  evidence  to  which  some  credence  may  be
             attached, even if it is not probably true.  This approach does
             not mean that there should be a more ready acceptance of  fact
             as established as more likely than not to have  occurred.   It
             does however create a  more  positive  role  for  uncertainty,
             which is as applicable to evidence of past events  as  to  any
             other evidence.  In short, there is no 'probabilistic cut-off'
             because 'everything capable of having  a  bearing  has  to  be
             given the weight, great or little, due to it' (Karanakaran  at
             479d).  The lower standard is the single  applicable  standard
             across all questions of fact."

51. Beginning at paragraph  55,  Farbey  J  examined  the  relationship  of
    trafficking decisions with decisions regarding risk of serious harm  on
    return:-

         "55. ...A decision that someone has been trafficked can be relevant
             to the question whether he is at risk of  being  re-trafficked
             on return to his country of origin (MS Pakistan at [83]).   To
             this extent, the trafficking decision may  be  relevant  to  a
             prospective analysis of risk in the asylum process.   However,
             ECAT 'is intended to give victims  of  trafficking  particular
             protection  and  assistance'  (PK  (Ghana)  at   [56]).    The
             Secretary of State is under no legal obligation to  merge  one
             process with the other.

         56.  The distinction between the United Kingdom's obligations under
             ECAT and its non-refoulement obligations is reflected  in  the
             Secretary of State's policies about  the  grant  of  leave  to
             enter or remain.  The policy of granting  discretionary  leave
             to victims of  trafficking  states  that  it  is  intended  to
             provide an additional  ground  for  remaining  in  the  United
             Kingdom 'based on...individual circumstances' where the victim
             does  not  qualify  for  other  leave  'such  as   asylum   or
             humanitarian protection'.  The policy is not a substitute for,
             or  an  addition  to,  the  United  Kingdom's  non-refoulement
             obligations.

         ........

         57.  The only remedy against a negative conclusive grounds decision
             is judicial review.  Appeals to the FTT  and  onwards  to  the
             Upper Tribunal should not be used  as  a  forum  for  indirect
             challenges to trafficking decisions which do not have the same
             status as adverse asylum decisions (MS  (Pakistan)  at  [81]).
             While the question of whether a person has been trafficked may
             be relevant to whether he or she  may  be  expelled  from  the
             United Kingdom, the two questions are different.

         59.  Mr Lewis submitted that MS (Pakistan) means that if the CA has
             determined certain factual matters in the trafficking context,
             it is not open  to  the  Tribunal  to  reconsider  those  same
             matters in the context of an asylum appeal.  The  Tribunal  is
             bound on the facts by the  CA's  assessment  of  the  evidence
             underpinning a trafficking claim - even if  those  same  facts
             are part of an  asylum  claim  or  an  article  3  claim.   Ms
             Harrison QC submitted that, if the ratio of MS (Pakistan)  has
             the reach for which Mr Lewis  contends,  the  Tribunal  on  an
             asylum appeal would be bound by the  CA's  factual  assessment
             made on the balance of probabilities  rather  than  the  lower
             standard which the Tribunal is bound to apply  in  the  asylum
             sphere.  That would  create  what  Ms  Harrison  QC  called  a
             'protection gap'.

         60.  In my judgment, Ms Harrison QC's submissions on this point are
             to be preferred.  I  do  not  accept  that  the  Court  in  MS
             (Pakistan) was intending such a radical departure  from  well-
             established principle as Mr Lewis's submissions  would  imply.
             The judgment in MS (Pakistan) was limited  to  issues  arising
             under ECAT. It did not make any change to the function of  the
             Tribunal in asylum or article 3 cases; nor did it  change  any
             aspect of the standard of proof in those cases, with which  it
             was not concerned.


         61.  The Court in MS  (Pakistan)  was  concerned  with  a  Tribunal
             decision which had held that MS, as a victim  of  trafficking,
             had been entitled to certain benefits under ECAT and that,  by
             reason of errors in the CA's trafficking decision, there was a
             prohibition against  removing  MS  from  the  United  Kingdom.
             However, the question of asylum was not before  the  Court  of
             Appeal. By that time MS's protection claim, based on the  risk
             of  re-trafficking,  had  fallen  away:  on  this  issue,  the
             Tribunal  had  found  against  MS  on  the  facts.  Flaux   LJ
             recognised (at [81]) that a decision  that  someone  has  been
             trafficked can be  relevant  to  future  risk  in  the  asylum
             context, but it was not that part of the Tribunal's  reasoning
             which the Court of Appeal impugned.

         62.  The Court's conclusion was (at [88]) that the  Upper  Tribunal
             had 'effectively substituted itself' for the CA in relation to
             matters under ECAT which  cannot  fall  for  consideration  on
             appeal.  That conclusion does not touch the  question  of  the
             standard of proof in asylum and article  3  claims.   It  does
             mean that appellants before the tribunal who seek to  rely  on
             specific obligations under ECAT will get short shrift.

         63.  In my judgment, the appropriate standard for the assessment of
             a claim to have been trafficked will depend on the legal issue
             to which it is relevant.  If the issue  is  whether  a  person
             will suffer persecution under the Refugee Convention  or  ill-
             treatment prohibited by article 3  ECHR,  the  lower  standard
             will apply.  If the issue is whether a person has the specific
             rights available to victims of  trafficking  under  ECAT,  the
             standard has been rationally set by the Secretary of State  as
             the balance of probabilities.  I am fortified in  taking  this
             issue-based approach by RM (Sierra Leone) v Secretary of State
             for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 541 at [35] (cited  in
             AS (Guinea) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  and
             another  [2018]  EWCA  Civ  2234  at  [55]).   In  that  case,
             Underhill LJ applied an issue-based approach to  the  standard
             of proof to be applied in determining a person's  nationality.
             He  held  that  the  same  question  may   require   different
             standards, depending on whether it was relevant to  an  asylum
             claim or some other claim.

         64.  In principle, it is possible that the Secretary of  State  may
             reject a trafficking claim on the balance of probabilities but
             accept the same evidence in  an  asylum  claim  on  the  lower
             standard.  I doubt that the different standard  would  make  a
             practical difference in every case.  It would be  unlikely  to
             make a difference in the present case, where the claimant  has
             at every stage  been  disbelieved.  Nevertheless,  the  United
             Kingdom's non-refoulement obligations mean that the  Secretary
             of State must have systems in place  to  determine  an  asylum
             claim on the lower standard, even if the  CA  has  rejected  a
             similar claim for the purpose of ECAT.  I  would  be  straying
             beyond the issues in this case if I were  to  comment  on  the
             Secretary of State's asylum processes on which I  did  not  in
             any event hear submissions.  The claimant's asylum  claim  has
             been rejected and her appeal failed.  She seeks to challenge a
             subsequent decision on her trafficking  claim  and  I  am  not
             concerned with the risks of returning her to Albania."

52. Although we  have  necessarily  had  to  address  in  more  detail  the
    relationship between trafficking issues and appeals under the 2002 Act,
    we would respectfully adopt what is said  by  Farbey  J  in  the  above
    paragraphs.



(f) Summary

53. Before proceeding to analyse the appellant's case, it may be useful  to
    summarise our analysis of the relationship between decisions of the  CA
    pursuant to the  Trafficking  Convention  and  decisions  of  tribunals
    deciding protection and human rights appeals:

         (a)   In  a  protection  appeal,  the   "reasonable   grounds"   or
         "conclusive grounds" decision  of  the  CA  will  be  part  of  the
         evidence that the tribunal will have  to  assess  in  reaching  its
         decision on that appeal, giving the CA's decision such weight as is
         due, bearing in mind that the standard of proof applied by  the  CA
         in  a  "conclusive   grounds"   decision   was   the   balance   of
         probabilities: paragraphs 34 to 36 above.

         (b) In a human rights appeal, a finding by the tribunal that the CA
         has failed to reach a rational decision on  whether  the  appellant
         has been the victim of trafficking, such  as  to  be  eligible  for
         leave to remain in the United Kingdom for that  reason  alone,  may
         lead the tribunal to allow the human rights appeal,  on  the  basis
         that  removing  the  appellant   at   this   stage   would   be   a
         disproportionate interference with the appellant's Article  8  ECHR
         rights. This scenario is, however, of narrow ambit and is  unlikely
         to be much encountered in practice: paragraphs 30 to 33 above.

         (c) In a human rights appeal, the question  whether  the  appellant
         has been the victim of trafficking may be relevant to the issue  of
         whether the appellant's removal would breach the ECHR,  even  where
         it is not asserted there is a trafficking-related risk of  harm  in
         the country of proposed return and irrespective of what is said  in
         sub-paragraph (b) above: e.g. where the  fact  of  trafficking  may
         have caused the appellant physical or psychological harm. Here,  as
         in sub-paragraph (a) above, the CA's decision on  past  trafficking
         will be part of the  evidence  to  be  assessed  by  the  tribunal:
         paragraph 44 above.




C. RE-MAKING THE DECISION IN THE APPELLANT'S CASE

(a) The appellant's evidence

54. We can now turn to the re-making of the appellant's appeal.   We  heard
    oral evidence from the appellant.   We  treated  her  as  a  vulnerable
    witness.  Both representatives were reminded of their  responsibilities
    in this regard.  In particular, we emphasised (and  ourselves  bore  in
    mind) that the appellant might be recounting incidents of  a  traumatic
    nature.  She was offered the opportunity of taking  breaks  during  her
    evidence and availed herself of this.  We also explained the importance
    of simplifying questions.  In the event, we were fully  satisfied  that
    the appellant was able fully to put her case  to  us.   There  were  no
    difficulties in the appellant understanding the interpreter,  and  vice
    versa.

55. As well as the interview record and other materials referred to in  the
    respondent's decision, we have had  regard  to  the  first  and  second
    witness  statements  of  the  appellant  and  to  the  other  materials
    contained in the bundle  prepared  for  the  hearing.   A  Home  Office
    evidence bundle had been filed on 14 May 2019, pursuant  to  directions
    that we gave on 7 May 2019.   The  appellant  responded  with  a  third
    witness statement dated 28 May 2019.  We have  had  regard  to  all  of
    this. We  have  applied  the  lower  standard  of  proof  described  in
    paragraph 23 above.

56. At the hearing, Mr Chakmakjian submitted a medical history relating  to
    the appellant, comprising a printout from her surgery of visits to  her
    GP.  It  also  recorded  her  visits  to  the  Accident  and  Emergency
    Department in March 2017.  She had been referred  for  counselling  and
    had been prescribed medication.  She was, however, unable  to  complete
    her counselling sessions as there were  no  spaces  available  to  look
    after her son and she was worried that taking medication would stop her
    being a good mother.  Her  son  was  born  in  3  December  2016.   The
    appellant says that this was a result of a "one-night stand" with a man
    whom she asserts to be a British citizen  but  of  whose  identity  she
    claims to be otherwise unaware.

57. The appellant adopted her witness statements and was tendered for cross-
    examination.  She confirmed her signatures on documentation adduced  by
    the Home Office, showing that the appellant had agreed for her  details
    to be entered into the NRM system.

58. The appellant was asked about the letter said to come from a doctor  in
    Albania, dated  18  September  2015.   According  to  the  translations
    supplied, this recorded that one

        "Zeqir Dukaj, a medical doctor, declare that today on 26.08.2009,  I
       was called by Mr [IS] maternal uncle of  [DC]  born  ...  [1994].   I
       urgently attended the house ... to give the first aid to [her] as her
       family had used physical violence on her and she was in a very severe
       psychological state" [sic].

59. The letter goes on to say that from that time the appellant sought  the
    doctor's

        "assistance on several occasions and I have given her the  necessary
       medications as she fell into depression.  She was being mistreated by
       the family from time to time and would be expelled  from  the  family
       home in a serious condition".

60. The letter ends as follows:-

         "From 2009 until 2014 she  was  mistreated  continuously;  she  was
         scared to come to the hospital as  her  family  would  follow  here
         there.  The only safe place she had was her maternal uncle's  house
         ...  He was there for her, and I attended her medically every  time
         I was called."

61. Asked how she had obtained this letter, the appellant said  she  wanted
    to provide evidence and sought  assistance  in  this  regard  from  her
    uncle.  That was the last contact she had had with him.  She could  not
    remember when that last contact had been.  She had ceased contact owing
    to problems with her father.  She did not have the fax record  relating
    to the letter having been sent by fax to her solicitor's office.

62. The appellant then said that she had been asked by  her  uncle  not  to
    contact him because of  the  medical  condition  of  her  mother.   The
    appellant's father would cause problems for her mother if he found  out
    about her contact with her uncle.

63. Asked why she had not said in her  statements  that  contact  with  her
    uncle had ended, she said she could not remember why.   She  could  not
    remember if she had told her solicitor.

64. The appellant said that her uncle lived  about  a  fifteen-minute  walk
    from her mother and father's house.  The town in which they live  is  a
    small one.  Her uncle did not know that  she  had  been  working  as  a
    prostitute in Albania.

65. The appellant was asked why, in her asylum interview  record,  she  had
    not mentioned living with her uncle.  She said no one had asked her  if
    she had been doing so.  She then said she had told the interviewer that
    she had been living with her uncle.  Asked why this had not  found  its
    way into the interview record, the appellant said she did not know  why
    and that the interpreter had not been from her area.

66. It was put to her that this  was  the  first  time  she  had  mentioned
    problems  with  interpretation  at  her  interview.   Indeed,  in   her
    statement, she stated that she wished to rely upon the contents of  the
    interview record.  The appellant said no one had explained  the  record
    to her and she had just been asked to sign it.  It was put to her  that
    she was still relying on the record in 2018.  Eventually, the appellant
    said she did not know why the matter had not been raised earlier.

67. At questions 175 and 176 of the interview  record,  the  appellant  had
    said that she continued to live at home,  following  B  coming  to  her
    house to attempt to take her for prostitution.  The  appellant  replied
    that the interviewer and interpreter had not understood  her  properly.
    Again, she was asked why she had not raised the issue of interpretation
    until the present hearing, to which she replied that she  was  here  in
    court.

68. It was put to her that in her second witness statement she had said she
    was living with her  uncle  after  her  father  had  "kicked  her  out"
    following the incident with B, so it had been possible to challenge the
    interview.  She said that she had been suffering  from  depression  and
    was scared.

69. The appellant said she would visit her mother at the family  home  when
    her father was not there.  She visited always in  the  company  of  her
    uncle and as far as she recalled her father  was  not  there  when  she
    visited.  It was put to her that in her second  witness  statement  she
    said that her father was "often too drunk or asleep".  She  said  that,
    as far as she remembered, she  might  have  said  this.   She  had  not
    encountered her father during those visits.  The bar had been below the
    family home.

70. Asked why she had risked going to the home when her father was present,
    the appellant said that her mother had meant the world to  her.   Asked
    if she could not have met at her uncle's house, the appellant said that
    her mother was ill in bed most of the time.  She had not met her father
    in the years when she had been with her uncle but had seen him.

71. The appellant was asked about the doctor's letter, which asserted  that
    between 2009 and 2014 she was mistreated continuously.   The  appellant
    said she did not understand the question.  The appellant then said that
    the doctor's letter was about mistreatment that she had suffered  as  a
    result of working as a prostitute.  She could not remember if, in  that
    time, anyone from her father's house had come  to  her  uncle's  house.
    The uncle and her father had lots of problems  with  each  other.   She
    thought that her father had "maybe" known that she was living with  her
    uncle.

72. The appellant was asked why she could stay so long with her uncle,  and
    yet he remained unaware she was working as  a  prostitute  during  that
    time.  It was put to her that the town was a small one.  She said  that
    perhaps the uncle had been aware; she did not know.

73. The appellant then took the opportunity for a short break.

74. Resuming cross-examination, Mr Jarvis asked about whether the appellant
    had scars on her body.  She said she has a scar  on  her  hand  from  a
    knife that her father had used to cut her.  She did  not  know  whether
    the scar was, in fact, caused by a knife or from a broken window during
    the disturbance involving B.

75. The appellant said her prostitution went on most of the time, including
    whilst she was at school.  She would lie to her uncle and say that  she
    was going to school.  She would also  leave  around  1  a.m.   On  most
    occasions she would say that she was going  with  friends.   She  would
    leave quietly without noticing.

76.  The appellant then said that she had, in fact,  administered  sleeping
    tablets and administered these to the uncle and  his  family  in  their
    food  and  drink.   The  uncle  had  a  wife  and  two  children.   She
    administered these drugs to the entire family,  but  not  every  night.
    She administered the drugs whenever B asked her to do this.  Asked  how
    often she drugged the family, the appellant said that  it  had  been  a
    long time and she was trying to get  rid  of  these  memories.   B  had
    bought the pills for her at a pharmacy.

77. The appellant was asked why she had never mentioned any of this before.
     She replied that she was not asked.

78. She was asked about the Home Office evidence, which indicated that  the
    appellant had earlier travelled to Italy in 2014.  She agreed that  she
    had done so and had returned by air.  She had made the excuse  she  was
    going on a school trip.

79. She was asked why she had not mentioned this trip to Italy before.  She
    replied that she had just been asked when she had  last  left  Albania.
    She had gone to the passport office in her town in order to obtain  the
    passport.  Asked if anyone had observed this in her small  town,  given
    that she was very young, the appellant said that people might have done
    but  that  she  was  studying  at  university.   She  had  enrolled  in
    university in 2012 but could not go that year because of  the  problems
    she had experienced.  She had used her birth certificate and  documents
    to enrol.

80.  It was put to her that she had said she had needed her passport to  do
    so.  The appellant then said that the lack of a passport  was  why  she
    had  not  enrolled.   By  the  time  she  had  obtained  the   relevant
    documentation, it was too late.  She had been asked to enrol in 2012 by
    B to cover the fact that she was working for him as a prostitute.

81. The appellant was asked whether it was plausible that in a  small  town
    no one had noticed that she was not going to  school.   She  said  that
    people might have told her uncle and he might have found out everything
    and that was why he did not want her to contact him anymore.

82. The appellant was asked about her journey to the  United  Kingdom  with
    Lorenzo.  She said that since he  had  been  removed  from  the  United
    Kingdom, she had had no contact with him.  She had seen no reason to do
    so.  This was despite the  fact  that  he  had  helped  her  to  escape
    prostitution, on her account.  The  appellant  accepted  that  she  had
    called  Lorenzo  her  fianc,  when  encountered  by  the   immigration
    authorities in Belfast.  This had been a mistake on her part.   Lorenzo
    had paid for her false documents in Italy and for her trip to  Belfast.
    She had chosen not to tell him that  she  was  alright  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  She thought that Lorenzo might  have  wanted  a  relationship
    with her but she did not wish this.  He had not subsequently  tried  to
    contact her.

83. The appellant was asked about her NRM statement.  She  said  that  this
    was not her document.  She was asked why she  had  not  challenged  the
    CA's  conclusive  grounds  decision  that  she  was  not  a  victim  of
    trafficking.  The appellant said that  she  was  waiting  for  a  final
    decision, which only came in December 2017.

84. The appellant was asked about  the  position  of  B  in  Albania.   The
    appellant's account was that after the altercation with her  father,  B
    had his name removed from the police record about the  incident.   This
    was at the intervention of an uncle, who used to work for  the  police.
    She was asked why B would be concerned to have his  name  removed  from
    the police record if he had fallen from a balcony.  It was put  to  the
    appellant that B was said by her in her  second  witness  statement  to
    have connections with the police.  However,  at  question  100  of  the
    interview record, the appellant said she did not know if  he  had  such
    connections.  The appellant replied that he might have had  connections
    but she did not know.

85. Asked about her son, the appellant said she did not know  the  identity
    of his father but, from what the father had told her, he  was  British.
    He might have lied about his name.

86. There was re-examination.



(b) Our assessment of the evidence

87. The credibility of the appellant's account is of  great  importance  in
    determining whether she is  entitled  to  international  protection  or
    whether her removal would violate Article 8 of the ECHR.  In making our
    findings, we have had regard to  the  potential  vulnerability  of  the
    appellant; particularly if she may have suffered serious  harm  in  the
    past.  We have had regard to her medical records and to the  fact  that
    she gave birth in the United Kingdom, at a  time  when  her  claim  was
    unresolved.

88. We have also made our credibility  assessment  against  the  background
    that, as is  evident  from  the  country  guidance  case  law  and  the
    materials produced by the respondent and by other countries'  agencies,
    trafficking of women in  Albania  for  prostitution  abroad  remains  a
    problem, albeit that it may not be as  prevalent  today  as  previously
    (including when the appellant said she encountered  her  difficulties).
    We also make our findings by  reference  to  the  background  evidence,
    which indicates that domestic abuse remains widespread in Albania  and,
    as the respondent's fact-finding mission of  November  2017  found,  is
    "seemingly not defined by class or education".

89. We have, nevertheless, reached the firm conclusion that  the  appellant
    is not a witness of truth and there is not a reasonable  likelihood  of
    any material part of her account being true.  The  appellant  presented
    as an intelligent and somewhat self-assured young woman  whose  account
    fell apart under cross-examination and who was, as a result, reduced to
    making things up as she went along, saying whatever she  thought  might
    best serve her interests.

90. The most striking incidence is the  appellant's  assertion,  in  cross-
    examination, that she had been able to live  with  her  uncle  and  his
    family for several years, whilst engaging regularly in prostitution  by
    night and day, as a result of  administering  sleeping  drugs  to  that
    family  on  a  regular  basis.   Nowhere  does  this  feature  in   the
    appellant's interview record or her written statements.  It  is  wholly
    unbelievable that, were it true, the appellant would not have mentioned
    it to those advising her, if not to the respondent.  We  conclude  that
    it is a blatant lie.

91. The appellant has been inconsistent in respect of the important  matter
    of whether, after the  alleged  incident  between  B,  her  father  and
    herself, she remained living in the family home.   Mr  Chakmakjian,  in
    closing submissions, pointed to the appellant's answer to question  169
    of the interview, where she said that in 2015 (sic)  when  her  parents
    found out about her prostitution, what happened  was  "Nothing  I  just
    left my father threw me out and they didn't accept me anymore".  It is,
    nevertheless, manifest that, later in the interview, the appellant  was
    categoric that she continued to live at home after the incident with B.
     In any event, its own terms, the answer to question 169 is problematic
    for the appellant, in that it contradicts her account  that,  when  her
    father found out about her prostitution as a result of  B's  visit,  he
    attacked B and the appellant.

92. The account of the appellant spending several  years  with  her  uncle,
    whilst working as a prostitute, lacks  credibility.   We  have  already
    referred to the drugging allegation.  Quite apart from  that,  however,
    it beggars belief that the appellant's activities would not  have  come
    to the attention of the uncle and his family  that  the  appellant  was
    regularly  engaged  in  prostitution,  rather  than  attending  to  her
    education.

93.  It is also not credible that the appellant's father would not  realise
    where the appellant had gone, given the proximity of the uncle's  house
    to his and the fact that both were  living  in  a  small  town.   That,
    however, is how the appellant's  account  has  evolved;  although  this
    account now stands in stark contrast to  the  assertions  made  in  the
    doctor's letter of 18 September 2015 that, for  some  five  years,  the
    appellant "was mistreated continuously".  The letter is plain that this
    mistreatment was at the hands of "the family".  In order  to  reconcile
    these serious problems with her evidence, the appellant  was  compelled
    in cross-examination to assert that the mistreatment referred to by the
    doctor was as a result of her work as a  prostitute.   Again,  that  is
    something which we find the appellant decided to make up.

94. It is also not believable that the appellant forgot about  or  did  not
    consider it necessary to mention the trip she  made  to  Italy,  before
    returning by air.  If the trip to Italy had, in  truth,  been  for  the
    purposes of prostitution at the instigation of B, the  appellant  could
    be expected to have mentioned it in her statements.

95. The appellant has  also  been  materially  inconsistent  regarding  the
    position of B.  Under cross-examination, it emerged that she really had
    no valid reason to consider that B had influence with the  police.   On
    the contrary, the fact that B was worried about  whether  there  was  a
    police record concerning him supposedly being  thrown  over  a  balcony
    does not chime with him being a powerful player in the  locality,  able
    to control corrupt police.  Nor does  it  chime  with  the  appellant's
    apparent assertion in cross-examination, that B had to be helped by  an
    uncle of the appellant, who used to work for the police.

96. So far as the NRM  statement  is  concerned,  we  take  account  of  Mr
    Chakmakjian's submission that little or no weight should  be  given  to
    this as it was not produced by the appellant and we  do  not  know  who
    wrote it or in what circumstances.

97. The statement is, however, noteworthy in that it  reveals,  as  do  the
    answers at interview to which we have  referred,  that,  following  her
    exposure as a prostitute, her father started treating  [the  appellant]
    "badly and with disrespect".

98. The statement also is at odds with the appellant's account in  that  it
    says that her ex-boyfriend, presumably B, disappeared from the scene in
    August 2014 and that it was her fianc, Lorenzo, who was  a  person  of
    whom her family disapproved.  The statement also records the  appellant
    as saying that her father  "had  close  connections  in  most  European
    countries", which was why she and Lorenzo decided to come to the United
    Kingdom.

99. We have decided to give the document some weight  because  the  account
    recorded in it is reflected in the conclusive grounds  decision,  which
    was given to the appellant.  There, we see that the person who we  have
    referred to as Lorenzo (but may also be known by the  name  of  Dorian)
    was the person of whom the appellant's father disapproved and that:-

         "Both you and [Lorenzo/Dorian] indicated you were  in  a  long-term
         relationship together on arrival in the country ... Given that your
         paid representatives sought to add Dorian as a  dependant  on  your
         asylum claim, this is considered  to  cast  doubts  on  your  later
         allegations that he was not your fianc and indeed that is not even
         his genuine identity details."

100. The conclusive grounds  decision  specifically  noted  the  appellant's
    change in her claim but said that  "It  is  considered  it  is  clearly
    recorded what you said at that time" and that the "details relating  to
    your family members are consistent to those provided at  a  later  date
    ...  As such it is considered you have  given  different  accounts  and
    that have been internally inconsistent in your account".

101. The appellant had an opportunity to challenge  the  conclusive  grounds
    decision but did not do so.  Further and in any event,  she  could  but
    did not deal with this issue in her witness statements.

102. Irrespective of the above,  we  consider  that  the  problems  we  have
    identified regarding the appellant's evidence as to what happened after
    her alleged exposure to her father as a prostitute are, in  themselves,
    such as to compel the finding that the appellant cannot be believed  as
    to any material aspect of her account.

103. We find that the appellant has failed to show a  reasonable  likelihood
    that she is on bad terms with her father.  Even if she were,  there  is
    no reasonable likelihood of the  appellant  being  without  substantial
    familial support in her home town, in the shape of her  uncle  and  his
    family.  Such are the problems with the appellant's credibility that we
    do not find she has shown it is reasonably likely that she worked as  a
    prostitute in Albania or abroad.  Even if she did, she  has  not  shown
    that this led to any significant familial disapproval.

104. We do not believe the appellant's attempt to  paint  Lorenzo/Dorian  as
    someone whom she, in  effect,  used,  in  order  to  reach  the  United
    Kingdom.  It is, in our view, highly likely that he and  the  appellant
    were in the genuine relationship that they claimed to be, when speaking
    to the respondent's officers in Belfast.

105. Given that the appellant has failed to make out any relevant aspect  of
    her account, to the lower standard, we must assess  her  on  the  basis
    that she would be a single mother with a very young child, returning to
    Albania, where she has family who have not been  shown,  to  the  lower
    standard, to be hostile towards her.

106.  On the basis of our findings, the appellant would  not  need  to  seek
    any form of shelter.  She would have familial support  within  Albania.
    She is also relatively highly educated, having left school  at  18  and
    begun (although not completed) university education in journalism.  She
    is suffering from stress, as the medical records make  clear,  but  her
    medical position is nowhere near the point where she  can  successfully
    assert that she would be unable to seek  work  in  Albania  to  support
    herself and her son, even if she were to receive no assistance from her
    family.

107. We have had regard to what is said in  the  country  guidance  and  the
    country materials regarding attitudes in Albania towards  illegitimacy.
    The fact that illegitimacy carries a greater  social  stigma  than  in,
    say, Western Europe, is a factor that we bear in mind.  In the light of
    our findings, however, it has not been shown that  this  issue,  either
    alone or cumulatively, would have any material bearing upon the ability
    of the appellant and her child to lead satisfactory lives in Albania.

108. In conclusion, the appellant  has  failed  to  show  that  there  is  a
    reasonable likelihood that, if  removed,  she  would  suffer  treatment
    contrary to the Refugee Convention or Article 3 of the ECHR.

109. So far as Article 8 is concerned, there is no  credible  evidence  that
    the appellant has any family life in the  United  Kingdom,  other  than
    with her small child.  There is no  evidence  that  the  appellant  has
    formed any protected family life here.

110. There is  a  paucity  of  evidence  regarding  the  child.   There  is,
    however, nothing to show that his best interests  would  be  served  by
    anything other than being where his mother will be.  In  the  light  of
    our findings, that would be in Albania.




D. DECISION

111. The appeal is dismissed on both protection and human rights grounds.










Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






                      Signed                     Date: 30 August 2019








                      The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                      President of the Upper Tribunal
                      Immigration and Asylum Chamber



                                    ANNEX

                                    [pic]

|Upper Tribunal                       |                                     |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)     |                                     |
|the immigration Acts                                                        |
|Heard at:|Field House               |        |Decision promulgated         |
|On       |9 April 2019              |                   |                   |
|Before                                                                      |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Gill                                                   |
|                                                                            |
|Between                                                                     |
|           |The Secretary of State for the Home Department    |Appellant    |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|           |                                                  |Respondent   |
|           |Miss DJ                                           |             |
|           |(ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)                        |             |

                                  Anonymity


I make a direction under r.14(1) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008 prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any  matter  likely
to lead members of the public to identify the original appellant,  Miss  DJ.
No report of these proceedings shall directly or  indirectly  identify  her.
This direction applies to both the appellant and to the respondent  and  all
other persons. Failure to comply with this direction could lead to  contempt
of court proceedings.
I make this direction because Miss DJ alleged in her appeal that she  was  a
victim of trafficking.
The parties at liberty to apply to discharge this order, with reasons.

Representation:

For the appellant:          Mr  D  Clarke,  Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
                 Officer.
For the respondent:    Mr J Trussler, of Counsel, instructed by Kilby  Jones
                       Solicitors LLP.

                           Decision and Directions


 1. The Secretary of State  has  been  granted  permission  to  appeal  the
    decision of Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Wright  (hereafter  the
    "judge") who, in a decision promulgated on 26 October 2018 following  a
    hearing on 27 September 2018, allowed the appeal of Miss DJ  (hereafter
    the "claimant"), a national of Albania born in August 1994,  against  a
    decision of the respondent of 2 December 2017 to refuse her claim of 16
    September 2015 for refugee and humanitarian  protection.  The  decision
    also refused the claimant's  Article  8  claim.  The  reasons  for  the
    Secretary of State's decision are given in the decision letter dated  2
    December 2017 (hereafter the "Decision Letter").

 2. The claimant's grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal raised  her
    asylum and humanitarian protection claims and her rights under Articles
    2 and 3 of the 1950 European Convention for  the  Protection  of  Human
    Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (ECHR). There was no mention of Article
    8.

 3. The judge found (at para 37) that "[the claimant] was at real risk or a
    substantial likelihood of persecution were  [she]  to  be  returned  to
    Albania and in sufficiency [sic] of state protection". At para 38,  she
    said she allowed the appeal but did not indicate the ground  of  appeal
    upon which the appeal was allowed. However,  it  is  evident  from  her
    finding at para 37 that she allowed the appeal on  asylum  grounds.  In
    her assessment of the case  (at  paras  32-36),  she  did  not  mention
    humanitarian protection or Articles 2, 3 or 8 of the ECHR.

Immigration history

 4. The claimant claimed to  have  left  Albania  on  24  August  2015  and
    travelled by car to Milan, Italy, where she said she stayed  for  about
    two weeks. She then  travelled  to  France  followed  by  Dublin.  From
    Dublin, she travelled to the United Kingdom, arriving  on  8  September
    2015 on which date she was served with  form  RED.0001  as  an  illegal
    entrant. On 16 September 2015, she claimed asylum.

 5. On 21 September 2015,  the  claimant  was  referred  to  the  Competent
    Authority ("CA") under the National Referral Mechanism ("NRM").  On  23
    September 2015, the CA made a positive "Reasonable  Grounds"  decision.
    On 8 August 2016, the CA reached a "Conclusive Grounds" decision,  that
    the claimant was not a victim of  trafficking.  The  claimant  did  not
    judicially review this decision.

 6. The Secretary  of  State  then  refused  her  asylum  claim  which  she
    appealed, as stated above.

Basis of claim

 7. The following summary is based on paras 17-20 of the judge's decision:

 8. The claimant claimed that in May to August 2011, she met an  older  man
    who I shall refer to as "B". She began a sexual relationship with  him.
    The nature of  their  relationship  changed  and  he  forced  her  into
    prostitution, by blackmailing her with a video she was unaware  he  had
    taken of them having sex. On one occasion, B went to her house and  her
    father became aware that she had been in a sexual relationship with  B.
    Her father beat her unconscious. He threw B from the balcony. She  woke
    up at her uncle's house. B then forced her into prostitution. He forced
    her to work as a prostitute in Italy.

 9. The claimant said she was at risk of persecution in Albania due to  the
    fact that she had been trafficked to Italy; she was sexually exploited;
    her father had disowned her; and she is a now  a  single  mother  of  a
    child who will be seen as an illegitimate child in Albania.



The judge's decision

10. The judge heard submissions as to  the  approach  she  should  take  in
    relation to the "Conclusive Grounds" decision pursuant to the  judgment
    of the Court of Appeal in MS (Pakistan) [2018] EWCA  Civ  594  and  the
    Upper Tribunal's decision in AUJ (Trafficking - no  conclusive  grounds
    decision)  Bangladesh  [2018]  UKUT  00200  (IAC).   The   respondent's
    representative stated that he was content for the judge to  decide  the
    claimant's substantive asylum claim (para 10). The judge decided to  do
    so, applying the lower standard of proof applicable  to  asylum  claims
    (para 16 of the decision).

11. In view of the submissions of Mr Clarke at the hearing before me, it is
    necessary to quote paras 32-37 of the judge's decision. These read:

         "Findings and conclusions

         32.  The Tribunal has undertaken a credibility assessment  of  [the
             claimant's] evidence. It has  scrutinised  that  evidence.  In
             doing so, it have used  the  tools  of  internal  credibility,
             external credibility,  plausibility,  coherence,  consistency,
             and then stood back and judged the matter in  the  round.  The
             relevant authorities, authorities referred to by  the  parties
             and any guidance  have  been  considered.  The  documents  the
             Tribunal  was  taken  to  have  been  reviewed.  There  is  no
             requirement for corroboration in  asylum  cases;  however  the
             evidence requires anxious scrutiny. Not all matters considered
             are referred to in this judgment; however that is not  to  say
             they were not fully examined or analysed.

         33.  The Tribunal has regard to Lord Neuberger's comments in  HK  v
             SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1037:

                   [I]n  many  asylum  cases,  some,  even  most,  of   [the
                 claimant's] story may seem  inherently  unlikely  but  that
                 does not mean that it is untrue.  The  ingredients  of  the
                 story, and the story as a  whole,  have  to  be  considered
                 against the available country evidence and reliable  expert
                 evidence, and other familiar factors, such  as  consistency
                 with what [the claimant] has said before,  and  with  other
                 factual evidence (where there is any).'

         34.  [The Secretary of State] has not undermined  [the  claimant's]
             case, other than to discount it due to  inconsistencies.  [The
             claimant's] account of her time in Albania and Italy  and  her
             oral evidence, on the applicable burden of proof was accepted.
             Where [the Secretary of State]  says  it  has  evidence  which
             undermines [the claimant's] account, it has not been  produced
             or disclosed.

         35.  In considering TD & AD (Trafficked women) (CG) v  SSHD  [2016]
             UKUT 00092 (IAC), [the  claimant's]  particular  circumstances
             are she is vulnerable as she  now  has  a  child  and  is  not
             married. As [the claimant] said, any assistance  in  terms  of
             shelters is supportive not protective and even if she is  able
             to  avail  herself  of  such  assistance,  that  will  further
             stigmatise her and open her up to  being  exposed  to  further
             forced sexual servitude and she  now  has  a  young  child  to
             consider. Whilst in view of her child's age (and  taking  into
             account his best interests) in theory it would be possible for
             him to relocate to Albania; were he  to  do  so,  that  causes
             additional problems for [the claimant].

         36. It is noted that re-trafficking (in the form of  being  forced
             into compulsory sexual servitude) is a reality. That factor is
             compounded by the existence of [the claimant's] son and it  is
             clearly in his best  interests  for  him  to  remain  in  this
             country, when there is a risk upon return for  [the  claimant]
             and a lack sufficiency of protection for her and therefore for
             him, were she to be returned to Albania. It is  also  accepted
             that [the claimant] lacks a support network.

         37.  As such, there is a real risk or a  substantial  likelihood-of
             persecution were [the claimant] to be returned to Albania  and
             in sufficiency [sic] of state protection."

The Secretary of State's grounds and submissions

12. The Secretary of State's grounds may be summarised as follows:

    (i)  (Ground 1) The judge had failed to make a finding  as  to  whether
         the claimant had been trafficked and therefore failed to resolve  a
         material fact.

    (ii) (Ground 2) If it is considered that the judge had, by implication,
         found that the claimant was a victim of trafficking, she failed  to
         provide adequate reasons for such a finding.

    (iii)    (Ground 3) The judge reversed the burden  of  proof  when  she
         said at para 34 that the Secretary of State had not undermined  the
         claimant's case or had failed to provide evidence  that  undermined
         the claimant's case.

    (iv) (Ground 4) The judge misdirected herself  in  law  by  failing  to
         follow the guidance  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  MS  (Pakistan)
         pursuant to which she was not entitled to go behind the  conclusion
         of the CA on the claimant's trafficking claim.

13. By an amended skeleton argument dated 17 January 2019, the Secretary of
    State stated, in reliance upon paras 55-63 of the judgment of Farbey  J
    in R (MN) v SSHD [2018] EWHC 3268 (QB), that he no longer  relied  upon
    Ground 4.

Submissions

14. I informed the parties that  I  would  decide  whether  the  judge  had
    materially erred in law and whether her decision should be set aside by
    considering only grounds 1, 2 and 3. However, in  the  event  that  the
    judge's decision was set aside, the Upper Tribunal would wish  to  hear
    submissions at the resumed  hearing  on  the  correct  approach  to  be
    followed  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  Upper  Tribunal   in
    determining asylum claims which include a claim that an individual  has
    been trafficked, in view of the judgments in AUJ,  ES  (s82  NIA  2002;
    negative NRM) Albania [2018] UKUT 00335 (IAC) and MN. I emphasised that
    this would not arise if I concluded that the judge had  not  materially
    erred in law as contended in grounds 1, 2 and/or 3.

15. Mr Clarke amplified on the  grounds,  taking  me  through  the  judge's
    decision. He drew my attention to the fact that the Decision Letter and
    the Secretary of State's representative at the hearing before the judge
    raised specific credibility issues which I  will  refer  to  below  and
    which, in his submission, the judge did not engage with or resolve.  He
    submitted that the judge's reasons were confined to para  34.  At  para
    33, the judge referred to and quoted from HK. At  para  34,  the  judge
    reversed the burden of proof. This is then followed by  para  35  which
    concerns the risk on return and para 36 which concerns  the  claimant's
    circumstances in Albania as a single mother of an  illegitimate  child.
    At para 37, the judge set out her conclusion.

16. Mr Clarke submitted that it is therefore clear that the judge  had  not
    made a clear finding that the claimant had been  trafficked  and  that,
    even if  it  is  considered  that  she  had  made  such  a  finding  by
    implication on account of  the  fact  that  she  had  referred  to  the
    claimant being re-trafficked, she had failed to give adequate reasons.

17. In response, Mr Trussler submitted that the judge's  reasons  were  not
    confined to para 34. She stated at para 32 that she had undertaken  her
    credibility assessment having scrutinised the evidence using the  tools
    she described in that paragraph.  She  said  she  had  applied  anxious
    scrutiny to the evidence. At para 33, she said  she  had  in  mind  the
    judgment in HK.

18. Mr Trussler asked me to bear in mind that the  Decision  Letter  was  a
    very lengthy document. He submitted that the fact that  the  judge  had
    not dealt with each and every point raised in the Decision Letter  does
    not undermine her findings of fact.

19. Mr Trussler referred me to the final sentence  of  para  34  where  the
    judge had stated that the Secretary of State had  stated  that  he  had
    evidence to undermine the claimant's account but had failed to  produce
    it. This was a reference  to  the  fact  that  a  previous  hearing  in
    February 2018 had been adjourned in order to enable  the  Secretary  of
    State to produce documents which he had failed to produce.

20. Mr Trussler submitted that the judge had plainly undertaken  a  careful
    assessment of the  evidence.  The  claimant  had  submitted  a  witness
    statement which she adopted  at  the  hearing  before  the  judge.  The
    claimant was cross-examined at the hearing. The judge had believed  her
    evidence. She was entitled to accept her  evidence.  Interference  with
    her decision would not be justified.

21. I reserved my decision.

Assessment

22. Whilst it is correct that the judge did not state, in terms,  that  she
    found that the claimant had been trafficked, I am satisfied that it  is
    implicit from her reasoning that she did find  that  the  claimant  had
    been trafficked. As Mr Clarke submitted, it  is  clear  from  both  the
    Decision Letter  and  the  submissions  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
    representative before the judge, that the Secretary of  State  did  not
    accept that the claimant had been  trafficked.  Accordingly,  when  the
    judge said at para 34 that "[The claimant's] account  of  her  time  in
    Albania and Italy and her oral evidence, on the  applicable  burden  of
    proof was accepted", she could only have meant that  she  accepted  the
    claimant's account.

23. I have therefore concluded that ground 1 is not established.

24. It is clear from the Decision Letter and the  judge's  summary  of  the
    submissions of the Secretary of State's representative at  the  hearing
    before  her  that  specific  credibility  issues  were  raised  on  the
    Secretary of State's behalf. By way of example:

    (i)  Para 47 of the Decision Letter took issue with the credibility  of
         the claimant's evidence given that she had said that  she  had  not
         told the hospital  in  Albania  where  she  was  treated  what  had
         happened to her because (she said) no one had asked her.

    (ii) Para 48 of the Decision  Letter  noted  an  inconsistency  in  the
         claimant's accounts, in that, she had said in her witness statement
         that her family had disapproved of her fianc when  she  introduced
         him and that her father had threatened to kill her if she continued
         with the relationship whereas she made no mention of her fianc  or
         being threatened by her father at her interview.

    (iii)    At para 49, the Secretary of State noted a discrepancy between
         the claimant's account at question 169 of her interview  that  when
         her parents found out about her dealings with B, she just left  her
         home because her father threw  her  out  and  did  not  accept  her
         anymore whereas at questions 243-245, she said that her father  had
         beaten her up so badly that she did not remember what happened  and
         that she woke up at her uncle's home with a doctor over her head.

    (iv) At para 50 of the Decision Letter, the Secretary of  State  stated
         that the claimant's account at question 255 of her  interview  that
         she returned  home  to  see  her  mother  after  the  incident  was
         inconsistent with her fear of returning to Albania because  of  her
         father's abuse.

    (v)  As noted at para 21 of the  judge's  decision,  the  Secretary  of
         State's representative drew attention to the fact that the claimant
         had not submitted any medical evidence to support  her  claim  that
         she had sustained injuries.

25. There is simply no mention at  all  in  the  judge's  decision  of  any
    credibility point raised on the Secretary of State's behalf.

26. I entirely agree with Mr Trussler that judges are not obliged  to  deal
    with each and every aspect of a party's case. Indeed, I have noted that
    the judge said in the final sentence of para 32 that "Not  all  matters
    considered are referred to in this judgment; however that is not to say
    they were not fully examined or analysed".

27. However, the judge completely failed to deal with or  engage  with  any
    aspect of the Secretary of State's case. She explained, at para 32, the
    principles she  said  she  had  applied  in  assessing  the  claimant's
    evidence but her reasons for accepting the  claimant's  account  are  a
    complete mystery and known only to her.

28. Just as it would be wholly  unacceptable  for  a  judge  to  reject  an
    claimant's  account  without  giving  any  reasons  whatsoever,  it  is
    unacceptable for a judge  to  accept  an  account  without  giving  any
    reasons whatsoever when the Secretary  of  State  has  raised  specific
    points concerning the individual's credibility.

29. I stress that this is not a case  of  a  judge  who  has  engaged  with
    certain aspects of the Secretary of State's  reason  for  disputing  an
    appellant's credibility but a case of a judge wholly failing to  engage
    with any part of the Secretary of State's case.

30. I am therefore satisfied that ground 2 is established. The  failure  to
    give any reasons at all for accepting  the  appellant's  account  is  a
    material error  such  that  it  justifies  setting  aside  the  judge's
    decision on this ground alone, leaving aside ground 3.

31. I am also satisfied that ground 3 is established. It is clear from para
    34 of the judge's decision that she did reverse the  burden  of  proof.
    Again, this is in itself a  material  error,  such  that  it  justifies
    setting aside the judge's decision on this ground alone, leaving  aside
    ground 2.

32. For the above reasons, I set aside the  decision  of  Judge  Wright  to
    allow the claimant's appeal. Her summary of the evidence at paras 17-20
    of her decision stands as the record of the evidence she heard.

33. I agreed with the parties that, if the judge's decision was set  aside,
    the  claimant's  appeal  would  be  heard  de  novo.  This  means  that
    credibility will need to be re-assessed. The grounds  that  are  to  be
    decided are the grounds that were before the First-tier Tribunal in the
    appeal before the judge. As I said  at  para  2  above,  there  was  no
    mention of Article 8 in the claimant's grounds of appeal to the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  Notwithstanding  the  fact  that  the  Decision  Letter
    considered her Article 8 claim, her grounds of appeal raised her asylum
    and humanitarian protection claims and her rights under Articles 2  and
    3 of the ECHR only.

34. Although the judge said at para 12 of her decision:

         "12. It was agreed  the  issue  to  be  determined  was  does  [the
             claimant] fall within the Refugee Convention and Article 3? In
             addition  there  are  Article  8  and  s.55  of  the  Borders,
             Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009  consideration  [sic]  in
             respect  of  [the  claimant's]  son  (born  in   the   UK   on
             [xx]/12/2016) and what is in his best interests".

    there was no application for permission to amend the grounds of  appeal
    to the First-tier Tribunal to include Article 8 of the ECHR.

35. Accordingly, the appeal that was brought to the First-tier Tribunal did
    not raise Article 8.

36. Further and in any event, there was no application by the  claimant  to
    cross-appeal the decision of the judge  on  the  ground  that  she  had
    failed to decide her Article 8 claim. Upon the Secretary of State being
    granted permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, it is reasonable to
    expect the claimant to have made such an application to cross-appeal if
    she had wished to contend that  the  judge  had  erred  by  failing  to
    determine Article 8. There was no such application to  cross-appeal  at
    the hearing before me, nor did Mr Trussler mention  Article  8  at  any
    point.

37. It follows  therefore  that  the  re-making  of  the  decision  on  the
    claimant's appeal will  be  limited  to  her  asylum  and  humanitarian
    protection grounds of appeal and  (in  relation  to  her  human  rights
    grounds of appeal) her claims under Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR.

38. I turn to decide whether the decision on the claimant's  appeal  should
    be re-made in the First-tier Tribunal or  in  the  Upper  Tribunal.  Mr
    Trussler and Mr Clarke submitted that the appeal should be remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal in view of the fact that the claimant's  appeal
    was allowed by the judge.

39. As is clear from the judge's decision,  submissions  were  made  as  to
    whether the judge should following the judgment of the Court of  Appeal
    in MS (Pakistan) and the Upper Tribunal in AUJ. In the  period  between
    the date of the hearing before the judge (27 September  2018)  and  the
    date that her decision was promulgated (26  October  2018),  the  Upper
    Tribunal published the decision in ES. The judgment of Farbey J in  MN,
    which was delivered on 29 November 2018, is not binding  on  the  Upper
    Tribunal strictly speaking, whereas the Court of Appeal's  judgment  in
    MS (Pakistan) is binding.

40. It is therefore a need for general guidance to be given on the approach
    to be taken by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  or  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
    determining appeals brought  on  protection  grounds  in  which  it  is
    alleged that the appellant has been trafficked but where there has been
    a negative "Conclusive Grounds" decision which has not been  challenged
    in judicial review proceedings. In the absence of  such  guidance,  the
    judge deciding this appeal in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  the  next
    occasion would be faced with having to decide for  himself  or  herself
    the approach that should be followed.

41. We have therefore decided that the decision on  the  claimant's  appeal
    should be re-made in the Upper Tribunal so that such  general  guidance
    can be given.

     Directions to the parties

(1)  The Tribunal will provide an interpreter in the  Albanian  language  at
    the hearing. If an interpreter in another language is required,  either
    instead of or in addition to an interpreter in the  Albanian  language,
    she must notify the Tribunal of the language(s) in which an interpreter
    is required, no later  than  5  days  from  the  date  on  which  these
    Directions are sent to the parties.

(2)  No later than 5 days from the date on which these Directions  are  sent
    to the parties, the claimant to notify the Tribunal of  the  number  of
    witnesses who will give evidence.

(3)  Any evidence the claimant seeks to rely upon  (including  any  evidence
    that was previously served) must be served no later than 1 May 2019 and
    must be served on the Upper  Tribunal  in  triplicate.  The  claimant's
    bundle must include:

      a.  Witness statements of the evidence to be called  at  the  hearing,
         which will stand as the examination-in-chief of the witnesses.


      b.  A paginated and indexed bundle of all documents to be relied  upon
         at  the  hearing.  Essential  passages  must  be  identified  in  a
         schedule, or highlighted.


      c.  A skeleton argument, identifying all relevant  issues  and  citing
         relevant authorities,  and  dealing  with  the  issue  for  general
         guidance described at paras 39-40 of this decision.


      d.  A chronology of events.



[pic]
Signed                                  Date: 11 April 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill

