
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

MA (Cart JR: effect on UT processes) Pakistan [2019] UKUT 00353 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 July 2019                               |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |

                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                     MR C.M.G. OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT

                                   Between

                                     MA
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Dr S. Chelvan, instructed by Farani Taylor
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

(1) Where the decision of the Upper Tribunal to refuse permission to  appeal
against the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is  quashed  by  the  High
Court, following the grant of permission in a "Cart" judicial  review  under
CPR 54.7A, the Upper  Tribunal's  ability  to  grant  permission  to  appeal
without a hearing depends upon the Upper Tribunal being able to  understand,
from the High Court's grant of permission in the judicial review,  what  led
the Court to conclude that the requirements of CPR 54.7A(7) were satisfied.

(2) If the Upper Tribunal lists an application for permission to appeal  for
an oral  hearing,  following  the  quashing  of  a  refusal  to  grant  such
permission, the appellant will need to ensure that the  Upper  Tribunal  and
the respondent have all  the  relevant  materials  in  connection  with  the
"Cart" judicial review, which may bear on the issue  of  whether  permission
to appeal should now be granted.

(3) This will be particularly important where the  case  for  the  appellant
has materially changed from what it was when  the  Upper  Tribunal  received
the application for permission to appeal. In  such  a  scenario,  the  Upper
Tribunal will be unable to discern the potential point at  issue  merely  by
revisiting the original grounds of application for permission to appeal.

(4) The requirement in CPR 54.7A, that there must be shown to  be  something
arguably legally wrong with the way in which the Upper Tribunal reached  its
decision in response to the grounds of application that were before  it,  is
important. If it is not observed, there  is  a  serious  risk  of  a  "Cart"
judicial review being seen as  a  third  opportunity  for  an  appellant  to
perfect grounds of challenge to the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision,  when
Parliament has ordained that there should be no more than two.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


A.  "CART" JUDICIAL REVIEW: CPR 54.7A

 1. This is the decision of the Upper Tribunal, to which both  of  us  have
    contributed.  It raises a number of issues  regarding  the  nature  and
    consequences of a challenge under CPR 54.7A by means of judicial review
    of a decision of the Upper Tribunal not to grant permission  to  appeal
    to that tribunal against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. A decision of the Upper Tribunal  to  refuse  to  grant  permission  to
    appeal is an "excluded decision" for the purposes of section 11 of  the
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007.   Accordingly,  the  only
    means of challenging such a decision is  by  way  of  judicial  review.
    Following the decision of  the  Supreme  Court  in  Cart  v  the  Upper
    Tribunal [2011] UKSC 28, the Civil Procedure Rules 1998 were amended by
    the insertion of Rule 54.7A (Judicial review of decisions of the  Upper
    Tribunal).  Rule  54.7A  provides  a  mechanism  for  challenging  such
    decisions, which, in a number of respects,  differs  procedurally  from
    the way in which other judicial reviews are brought under brought under
    Part 54.

 3. CPR 54.7A(7) provides as follows:

         "(7) The court will give permission to proceed only if it considers
             -
             (a)  that there is an arguable case, which has a reasonable
                  prospect of success, that both the decision of the Upper
                  Tribunal refusing permission to appeal and the decision of
                  the First Tier Tribunal against which permission to appeal
                  was sought are wrong in law; and
             (b)  that either -
                  (i)  the claim raises an important point of principle or
                      practice; or
                  (ii) there is some other compelling reason to hear it."
 4. Although the Upper Tribunal is the defendant in  such  proceedings,  in
    practice the Tribunal normally adopts what  might  be  described  as  a
    neutral position.  There is nothing unusual in this.  The same approach
    is routinely taken by other judicial and quasi-judicial  bodies,  which
    are faced with judicial reviews of their decisions.

 5. A particular feature of CPR 54.7A is that, where  permission  to  apply
    for judicial review  is  granted,  unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  an
    interested party requests there to be a hearing,  within  a  prescribed
    period, the court "will make a final  order  quashing  the  refusal  of
    permission without a further hearing" (54.7A(9)(b)).  The power to make
    such an order may be exercised by a Master of the Administrative  Court
    (54.7A(10)). In practice, a  hearing  is  rarely  requested,  with  the
    consequence that  the  grant  of  permission  routinely  leads  to  the
    quashing of the decision to refuse permission to appeal.



B. CONSEQUENCES OF A SUCCESSFUL "CART" JUDICIAL REVIEW

 6. That leaves the application for permission outstanding before the Upper
    Tribunal. If it appears from the High Court's grant  of  permission  in
    the "Cart" judicial review that there is an arguable error  of  law  in
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, then the Upper  Tribunal  will
    usually grant permission without a hearing and the resulting appeal  in
    the Upper Tribunal will be dealt with in  the  normal  way.  The  Upper
    Tribunal's ability to act in this manner, however, depends on its being
    able to understand, from the High Court's grant of permission, what led
    the Court to conclude the requirements of CPR 54.7A(7) were  satisfied.
    As we shall see, that was not possible in the present case.




C. THE PROCEEDINGS IN THE FIRST-TIER TRIBUNAL

 7. The appellant, a citizen of Pakistan, appealed against the respondent's
    refusal of the appellant's protection claim.  The appellant's case  was
    that, if returned to Pakistan,  he  would  face  persecution  or  other
    serious ill-treatment, as a gay man.

 8. The appellant's appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Aujla  for
    hearing on 11 September 2018.  The appellant did  not  give  evidence.
    The  judge  was  informed  by  the  appellant's  solicitor   that   the
    appellant's psychiatrist had said the appellant was  not  fit  to  give
    such evidence.  The appellant's partner, however, gave oral evidence.

 9. In determining the appeal, Judge Aujla stated that  he  had  considered
    the written and oral evidence "in particular the psychiatric report  by
    ... Dr Catherine King ...".  The judge then said  that  he  had  "taken
    into account the guidance  [of]  the  Supreme  Court  in  HJ  (Iran)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2010] UKSC 31.

10. At paragraph 45, Judge Aujla stated that:-

         "45. ... the issue before me is whether or not the Appellant  would
             choose to live as a homosexual openly after his  returning  to
             Pakistan.  If I find that he would live openly, he would be at
             risk, and the appeal would be allowed.   Equally,  if  I  find
             that he would live discreetly as a homosexual and  the  reason
             for that was  to  avoid  persecution  and  ill-treatment,  the
             appeal would again be allowed.  However, if I  find  that  the
             Appellant would live discreetly because that was  the  way  he
             was, and not to avoid persecution or ill-treatment, the appeal
             on asylum grounds would be dismissed."

11. At paragraph 48 Judge Aujla said he had:-

         "...  no  difficulty  in  finding  that  the  Appellant  kept   his
         homosexuality [discreet] in Pakistan not to  avoid  persecution  or
         ill-treatment but that was the way  he  was.   Although  he  was  a
         homosexual, he was happily living  in  a  heterosexual  environment
         with his wife and children ...  I therefore find that the Appellant
         would not live openly as  a  homosexual  if  he  were  returned  to
         Pakistan."

12.  The  judge  went  on  to  find  that  the  appellant  would  keep  his
    homosexuality discreet "as he had done previously for 25 years, not  to
    avoid persecution or ill-treatment but that was the way  he  was".  For
    this reason, Judge Aujla concluded, at paragraph 49, that the appellant
    had not shown he would be at real risk of persecution  if  returned  to
    Pakistan.

13. The judge then turned to the  appellant's  mental  health  issues.   He
    stated at paragraph 51 that he had "very carefully considered and taken
    into account the enormous amount of medical evidence placed before  me,
    most importantly the psychiatric report dated 23 May 2018  prepared  by
    Dr Catherine King".  The judge concluded that, although  the  appellant
    had been diagnosed with paranoid schizophrenia and was  in  receipt  of
    appropriate medication for that condition, treatment (albeit not to the
    same level as in  the  United  Kingdom)  would  be  available  for  the
    appellant if returned to Pakistan.  The appellant  also  had  "a  large
    circle of family members in Pakistan who should be able to provide  him
    with help and support" (paragraph 53).

14. Having made his findings, the judge dismissed the appellant's appeal on
    both asylum and human rights grounds.



D. SEEKING PERMISSION TO APPEAL TO THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

15. The appellant, through Duncan Lewis Solicitors, sought permission  from
    the First-tier Tribunal to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  against  Judge
    Aujla's decision.  The appellant's grounds, settled by Counsel (not  Dr
    Chelvan), were, first, that there  were  "errors  on  risk  on  return;
    failure to consider the material evidence in caselaw  on  an  appellant
    living discreetly  as  a  homosexual".   The  grounds  contended  that,
    contrary to Judge Aujla's conclusion that  there  was  no  evidence  to
    suggest  the  appellant  lived  discreetly   in   Pakistan   to   avoid
    persecution, there was a large amount of such  evidence  "contained  in
    the appellant's interview records".   Passages  from  the  respondent's
    interview records with the appellant were then set out.  Ground 1  made
    no reference at all  to  the  appellant's  paranoid  schizophrenia,  in
    connection with  the  question  of  whether  the  appellant  had  lived
    discreetly in Pakistan.

16. Ground 2 was entitled "Fundamentally Flawed Approach to Risk on  Return
    owing to Appellant's Mental Health".  In this regard, it was  submitted
    that Judge Aujla had been wrong to find that the appellant  could  seek
    support from  his  family,  following  return.   It  was  also  "simply
    incorrect" for the judge to have stated that there was no  evidence  as
    to the medical treatment available in Pakistan.  On the contrary, a CPI
    on Medical and Health Care Issues dated August 2018 had been submitted,
    which, it was said, showed the  paucity  of  facilities  available  for
    treatment of mental illness in Pakistan.

17. Ground 3 submitted that there had been "incorrect approach to Article 8
    ECHR".  The ground did  not,  however,  materially  elaborate  on  that
    contention.

18. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  refused  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Lever on 18 December 2018.  Judge Lever considered  that
    Judge Aujla had "noted" the appellant's extensive  immigration  history
    in the United Kingdom and that "whilst the appellant was present at the
    hearing he chose not to give  evidence".   So  far  as  HJ  (Iran)  was
    concerned, Judge Lever said that Judge Aujla had  set  out  "succinctly
    ... the questions that needed to be answered.   The  judge  gave  clear
    reasons why he found there was no real risk to the appellant.   He  was
    entitled to reach that decision".

19. As regards ground 2, relating to the appellant's mental  health,  Judge
    Lever considered it "clear  the  judge  had  carefully  considered  the
    evidence.  The fact that he dealt sparingly with reciting that evidence
    is not an error".  Likewise, Judge Aujla had taken a  "proper  approach
    to A8 in this case and was entitled to conclude as he did".

20. The grounds of appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  settled  by  the  same
    Counsel as had drafted those considered  by  Judge  Lever  and,  again,
    filed by Duncan Lewis Solicitors, were, in all underlying respects, the
    same as those put to the First-tier Tribunal.  Criticism  was  made  of
    Judge Lever's alleged failure to engage with aspects  of  the  grounds.
    It was also submitted that the reason the appellant did not  give  oral
    evidence was because he was adjudged unfit to do so.

21. On 6 February 2019, Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Warr refused permission
    to appeal.  Judge Warr concluded that Judge Aujla had properly directed
    himself  "when  considering  the  issue  of  risk  on  return  and  his
    conclusion was reached on a full  overview  of  the  evidence  and  was
    properly reasoned".  Judge Warr concluded that Judge  Aujla's  decision
    had been "a thoughtful one, guided by the relevant authorities such  as
    HJ (Iran) v Secretary of State [2010] UKSC 31".

22. So far as mental health was concerned, Judge Warr concluded that  Judge
    Aujla "makes it clear that he had considered all  the  material  before
    him including the medical evidence and in particular  the  availability
    of mental health facilities in Pakistan".  At  paragraph  51  of  Judge
    Aujla's decision, he had confirmed that  he  had  carefully  considered
    "most importantly" Dr King's psychiatric report and  that  Judge  Aujla
    was aware that the reason the  appellant  did  not  give  evidence  was
    "because he was unfit" to do so.



E. THE APPELLANT'S "CART" JUDICIAL REVIEW

23.  Duncan Lewis Solicitors applied under  CPR  54.7A  for  permission  to
    bring judicial review to challenge Judge Warr's refusal  of  permission
    to appeal.  We have not seen those grounds.  We were informed they were
    settled by the same Counsel who had produced the  grounds  accompanying
    the  applications  for  permission  to  appeal  against  Judge  Aujla's
    decision.

24. We have also not seen any of  the  materials  that  accompanied  Duncan
    Lewis's judicial review application.  It appears, however, that amongst
    these materials was a report  of  Dr  Catherine  King,  concerning  the
    appellant, dated 30 August 2018.   No  reference  to  that  report  was
    contained in the applications for permission to appeal, although it pre-
    dated the hearing and, thus, both applications.

25. From the materials with which we have now been supplied,  we  see  that
    the judicial review application and accompanying materials went  before
    Her Honour Judge Alice Robinson, sitting as a Deputy High Court  Judge.
    In her order of 8 April 2019, the Deputy Judge  noted  that  Dr  King's
    report of 30 August 2018 was of significant relevance to  the  question
    of whether the appellant, if returned to Pakistan, would be  likely  to
    be discreet as to his sexuality, because  the  report  suggested  that,
    regardless of whether the appellant  had  been  discreet  in  the  past
    because (to use Judge Aujla's phrase) "that was the way  he  was",  the
    appellant's paranoid schizophrenia would, in  fact,  prevent  him  from
    doing so.  The report of 30 August 2018 was, therefore, troubling.   It
    recorded Dr King's conclusion that the  appellant  "would  be  poor  at
    being discreet about  his  homosexuality  if  returned  because  he  is
    extremely fearful and convinced that there is a  conspiracy  to  expose
    his sexuality.  He becomes violent and  aggressive  when  he  is  under
    perceived threat and is likely to struggle to control his responses".

26. The Deputy Judge observed that Judge Aujla's  decision  suggested  that
    "no account was taken of the psychiatric evidence, that  by  virtue  of
    his mental illness, the claimant would not be able to be discreet about
    his homosexuality".  She noted that it was not clear if the  report  of
    30 August 2018 was before the First-tier Tribunal  and  that  it  would
    seem odd for Judge Aujla to have said that he had considered  "all  the
    medical evidence", in particular the report of Dr King of 23 May  2018,
    "when the 30 August report is more detailed and up-to-date".

27. The Deputy Judge concluded that "this goes to the heart  of  the  case,
    whether the claimant would live discreetly in Pakistan because, if not,
    it was uncontroversial his appeal should be allowed".  She ordered  the
    claimant to provide a copy of the asylum interview within  7  days  and
    the defendant to serve summary grounds of defence, also within 7  days,
    which "should address this point, and any others the  defendant  wishes
    to deal with".

28. When the Deputy Judge's order reached the appellant, Duncan Lewis  were
    no longer acting for him.  Instead, Farani Taylor Solicitors  had  been
    instructed.  They, in turn, instructed Dr  Chelvan  who,  on  10  April
    2019, drafted a response on behalf of the appellant to the order  of  8
    April 2019.

29. Dr Chelvan was able to confirm, by reference to  the  bundle  that  had
    been produced for the hearing  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  that  Dr
    King's reports of both 23 May and 30 August 2018 had been  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.

30. The application for judicial review then came before His  Honour  Judge
    McKenna, sitting as a Deputy High Court judge, on 25  April  2019.   He
    granted the claimant/appellant "permission  to  rely  on  supplementary
    grounds" before saying as follows:-

         "Permission is hereby granted.

         Observations: The Applicant has demonstrated a reasonable  prospect
         of success in establishing that  both  the  FTT  and  the  UT  made
         serious legal errors and the claim crossed  the  threshold  on  the
         basis of compelling reason."




F. PARTICULAR ISSUES

31.  Judge McKenna's decision tells the reader  nothing  useful  about  why
    permission  was  granted.   The  actual  reasons  why   the   stringent
    requirements of CPR 54.7A(7) were found to  be  met  should  have  been
    contained in the order.  The fact that they were not led to  the  Upper
    Tribunal finding itself  unable  to  grant  permission,  following  the
    subsequent quashing of Judge Warr's refusal  of  permission  to  appeal
    (see paragraph 5 above).

32. As we have said, where it  is  apparent  from  the  decision  to  grant
    permission on a "Cart" judicial review that an arguable  error  of  law
    exists in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, the Upper Tribunal's
    practice is to grant permission to appeal,  without  more  ado.   Here,
    however, since the decision was opaque, that course could not be taken.

33. Where, as here, the Upper Tribunal does not grant permission, following
    the grant by a High Court of a "Cart" judicial  review  and  subsequent
    quashing of the permission decision of the Upper Tribunal, the  parties
    will be sent a notice of hearing which (again, as in the present  case)
    makes it plain that the purpose of the hearing is to decide whether  to
    grant permission to appeal.  The appellant will need to ensure that the
    Tribunal and the respondent have all the relevant  materials  filed  in
    connection with the "Cart" judicial review, which  may  bear  upon  the
    issue of whether permission to appeal should now be granted.

34.  This will be particularly important where, as in the present case, the
    case for the appellant has materially changed from what it was when the
    Upper Tribunal received the application for permission  to  appeal.  In
    such a scenario, the Upper Tribunal  will  be  unable  to  discern  the
    potential point at issue merely by revisiting the original  grounds  of
    application for permission to appeal.

35. In Shah ('Cart' judicial review: nature and consequences)  [2018]  UKUT
    51, the Upper Tribunal pointed out that the process authorised  by  CPR
    54.7A involves a challenge to the lawfulness of  the  Upper  Tribunal's
    decision to refuse permission to appeal. Not only must there  be  shown
    to be an arguable error in the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal;
    there must also be something arguably legally wrong  with  the  way  in
    which the Upper Tribunal  reached  its  decision  in  response  to  the
    grounds of application that were before it.

36. The second requirement is important. If it is not observed, there is  a
    serious risk of  a  "Cart"  judicial  review  being  seen  as  a  third
    opportunity for an appellant to perfect grounds  of  challenge  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision, when Parliament has ordained in section
    11 of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 that there  should
    be no more than two.

37. In the present case, the  grounds  of  application  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal simply did not raise the issue that was
    identified by Judge Robinson, when she  was  provided  with  Dr  King's
    report of 30 August 2018;  namely,  whether  the  appellant's  paranoid
    schizophrenia  would  prevent  him  from  being  discreet  as  to   his
    sexuality, even if his true desire was to be so,  irrespective  of  any
    fear of persecution. Instead, the ground dealing with  the  appellant's
    mental health  was  concerned  solely  with  critiquing  Judge  Aujla's
    findings regarding support from the appellant's family in Pakistan  and
    the availability of medical treatment in that country, which  were  the
    findings the Judge considered it necessary to make in relation  to  the
    psychiatric evidence.

38. In those circumstances, the question arises how the High Court came  to
    the  decision  to  grant  permission  in  the  "Cart"  judicial  review
    proceedings. The answer, which emerges only after we were provided with
    some of the materials that had been placed before  the  High  Court  in
    those proceedings, including, importantly, Dr Chelvan's response of  10
    April 2019 to Judge Robinson's order, is that her  order  identified  a
    potential ground of challenge to  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
    which, although not presented to the First-tier Tribunal or  the  Upper
    Tribunal, nevertheless would have a "strong prospect  of  success",  if
    the report of 30 August had been before Judge Aujla: see AZ  (error  of
    law; jurisdiction; PTA practice) Iran [2018] UKUT 245,  paragraphs  61-
    70.

39.  When it became apparent that this report had been before Judge  Aujla,
    the appellant had a very strong  likelihood  of  persuading  the  Upper
    Tribunal that Judge Aujla had overlooked or at  least  failed  to  give
    reasons for rejecting a crucial piece of evidence that bore directly on
    the appellant's claim to be at real risk of persecution, if returned to
    Pakistan. Furthermore, Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Warr was in error in
    not identifying that point, since the bundle of documents placed before
    Judge Aujla, were, it seems, before Judge  Warr  when  he  reached  his
    decision to refuse permission to appeal.

40. It is necessary to make one final procedural point. If, as a result  of
    "Cart" judicial review proceedings, the grounds for contending that the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in  law  have  changed,  compared  with
    those that were before  the  Upper  Tribunal  when  it  made  its  (now
    quashed) decision, the appellant  will  need  to  apply  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal for permission to amend his or her grounds of  permission,  in
    order to be able to rely  upon  the  grounds  advanced  in  the  "Cart"
    judicial review.  The fact that such grounds have found favour  in  the
    High Court does not mean those grounds automatically become the grounds
    of challenge to the First-tier Tribunal's decision.



G. THE APPELLANT'S APPEAL IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

41. Dr Chelvan, accordingly, was required by us to apply for permission  to
    amend the grounds settled by his colleague,  as  considered  by  Deputy
    Upper Tribunal Judge Warr.  In the  circumstances,  Mr  Kotas  did  not
    oppose the application and we decided, in the  circumstances,  that  it
    should be granted.

42. The Upper Tribunal was then in a position to  engage  with  the  matter
    that lies at the  heart  of  this  case;  namely,  the  effect  of  the
    appellant's mental illness upon his ability to be discreet,  as  a  gay
    man in Pakistan.

43. Having heard  submissions  on  the  amended  grounds,  we  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal on  them.   We  therefore  turn  to  the
    substantive appeal which, with agreement of the parties, we went on  to
    address at the hearing on 24 July.




(a) The appellant's history

44. The appellant was born in January 1968.  He made  a  number  of  visits
    from Pakistan to the United Kingdom in the period 2003-2006.  After his
    entry in 2006, he did not leave at the end of his leave on 12  February
    2007.  He has remained in the United Kingdom without leave ever since.

45. In 2010 he was arrested and  in  subsequent  proceedings  convicted  of
    identity and false representation offences and sentences to 12  months'
    imprisonment.  He then claimed asylum.  His asylum claim was refused on
    14 December 2010 and a deportation order made against him the same day.

46. The appellant appealed against the refusal of his  asylum  claim.   His
    appeal was dismissed by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal was  refused.
    He then became appeal rights exhausted (and so  removable)  on  3  June
    2012.  He failed to report in accordance with  the  conditions  of  his
    bail and was recorded as an absconder from 15 May 2012  until  his  re-
    detention on 5 January 2016.  He claimed asylum again on 20 April 2017.
     That claim was refused on 7 September 2017  and  the  appellant  again
    appealed.

47. Judge Aujla writes at paragraph 20 that "both representatives confirmed
    that the appeal [before him] was against the making of the  deportation
    order made on 14 December 2010 [because] the  previous  appeal  against
    the deportation order having been dismissed, the deportation order  was
    still in force".   The  representatives  were  incorrect.   The  appeal
    before Judge Aujla was an appeal under section 82(1)(a) and (b) of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended)  against  the
    refusals of the appellant's protection and human  rights  claims.   The
    appeal against the deportation order, made  when  such  an  appeal  was
    available,  had  failed.   The   present   appeal   carried   potential
    consequences for the respondent's decision  to  refuse  to  revoke  the
    deportation order, implicit in the refusals of the appellant's  claims,
    but the appeal was limited by statute to that we have  set  out  above.
    Nothing turns on this, however: the Judge was, and  we  are,  concerned
    with the content of the appellant's claim.




(b) The appellant's claim and appeal

48. The appellant's claim is based on his homosexuality, his mental health,
    and his private and family life.  When the appellant first came to  the
    United Kingdom he had a wife in Pakistan; he has had  six  children  by
    her.  But his evidence was that he had known from about the age  of  13
    or 14 that he "liked men", and since his arrival in the United  Kingdom
    he had lived openly as a gay man.  He had divorced his wife in 2008. He
    had met his partner (a national of Pakistan with  indefinite  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom) in 2013 and entered a  relationship  with
    him: they were married on 11 July 2017.  He feared persecution as a gay
    man in Pakistan, if he lived there as openly gay; if he  concealed  his
    sexual  identity  that  would  be  solely  because  of  the   risk   of
    persecution.

49. The appellant's claim, and appeal, are also put under articles 3 and  8
    of  the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights  and  the   associated
    paragraphs of the Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules, HC 395 (as
    amended).  The appellant invokes the private life he has  developed  in
    the United Kingdom  over  many  years,  and  the  family  life  he  has
    developed  with  his  partner.   Further,  the  evidence  is  that  the
    appellant is severely mentally ill, which raises  two  further  issues:
    the first is that it is said that he would not in Pakistan have  access
    to sufficient arrangements for his care; the second is that  separation
    from his partner would have  considerable  impact  because  the  latter
    contributes greatly to his care.  (This argument  feeds  to  an  extent
    into the asylum claim.   It  might  be  said  that  the  partner  would
    obviously be able to accompany the appellant to Pakistan because of his
    own nationality.  But that  would  mean  their  continuing  their  life
    together, so exposing them both to persecution for homosexuality).

50. The respondent accepts that the appellant is gay and is in a homosexual
    relationship with his partner.  He  also  accepts  that  the  appellant
    would be at risk of persecution if he lived openly  as  a  gay  man  in
    Pakistan.  He notes, however, that when the appellant was previously in
    Pakistan he had gay relationships and was apparently in no  danger:  he
    confirmed, in connection with his visit visas,  that  he  had  no  fear
    arising from living in Pakistan; and he had stated in interview that he
    would not be at risk because nobody would  know  he  was  gay.   Taking
    these facts in conjunction with the  appellant's  immigration  history,
    the respondent declined to believe that the true position now was  that
    the appellant would live openly gay in Pakistan or that any  motivation
    for discretion would be the fear of persecution.

51. In relation to the human rights claims, the respondent noted  that  the
    appellant's relationship was entered into and developed when there  was
    a deportation order  in  force.   The  appellant  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Rules and had not shown why he  should  be  granted
    leave despite failing to meet  the  requirements  of  the  rules.   The
    appellant appeared not to be receiving, or  in  need  of,  any  medical
    treatment that he could not receive in Pakistan.

52. As we have earlier noted, Judge Aujla  heard  oral  evidence  from  the
    appellant's partner.  The appellant  did  not  give  oral  evidence;  a
    psychiatric report before the Tribunal indicated that he was  unfit  to
    do so.

53. After considering the evidence,  the  authorities  cited  to  him,  and
    submissions, Judge Aujla decided as follows.   First,  and  essentially
    agreeing with the respondent on this point, he  found  that  given  the
    appellant's history, including specifically his history in Pakistan, he
    had failed on the evidence to show that he would live as openly gay  in
    Pakistan  or  that  any  discretion  would  be  motivated  by  fear  of
    persecution.  Secondly, in relation to his mental health, the  evidence
    simply did not show that the appellant would  have  any  difficulty  in
    receiving whatever treatment or help he needed in  Pakistan.   Thirdly,
    Judge Aujla did not regard article 8 as even engaged,  given  that  the
    relationship  was  formed  in  the  circumstances  it  was   and   "the
    Immigration Rules [are] a complete code  in  deportation  cases".   He,
    therefore, as we have said, dismissed the appeal.




(c) The law

54. We have referred a number of times in the course  of  setting  out  the
    history of this appeal to the concepts of living openly as a  gay  man,
    discretion, and discretion  motivated  by  fear  of  persecution.   For
    completeness, although the principles are well-known,  we  should  cite
    the authority for them.  For present purposes we need go into  no  more
    detail that to set out the following from the judgment of  Lord  Rodger
    JSC (with whom Lord Walker, Lord Collins and Sir John Dyson (as he then
    was) agreed) in HJ (Iran):

         "82. When an applicant applies for asylum on the ground of a  well-
             founded fear of persecution because he is  gay,  the  tribunal
             must first ask itself whether it is satisfied on the  evidence
             that he is gay,  or  that  he  would  be  treated  as  gay  by
             potential persecutors in his country of nationality.

             If so, the  tribunal  must  then  ask  itself  whether  it  is
             satisfied on the available evidence that gay people who  lived
             openly would be  liable  to  persecution  in  the  applicant's
             country of nationality.

             If so, the tribunal must go on to consider what the individual
             applicant would do if he were returned to that country.

             If the applicant would in fact  live  openly  and  thereby  be
             exposed to a real risk of persecution, then  he  has  a  well-
             founded fear of persecution - even if he could avoid the  risk
             by living "discreetly".

             If, on  the  other  hand,  the  tribunal  concludes  that  the
             applicant  would  in  fact  live  discreetly  and   so   avoid
             persecution, it must go on to ask itself why he would do so.

             If the tribunal concludes that the applicant would  choose  to
             live discreetly simply because that was how he  himself  would
             wish to live, or because of social pressures, e g, not wanting
             to distress his parents or embarrass  his  friends,  then  his
             application should be rejected. Social pressures of that  kind
             do not amount to persecution and the Convention does not offer
             protection against them. Such a  person  has  no  well-founded
             fear of persecution because, for reasons that have nothing  to
             do with any fear of persecution, he himself chooses to adopt a
             way of life which means that he is not in fact  liable  to  be
             persecuted because he is gay.

             If, on the other hand, the tribunal concludes that a  material
             reason for the applicant living discreetly on his return would
             be a fear of the persecution which would follow if he were  to
             live openly as a gay man, then, other things being equal,  his
             application should be accepted. Such  a  person  has  a  well-
             founded fear of persecution. To reject his application on  the
             ground  that  he  could  avoid  the  persecution   by   living
             discreetly would  be  to  defeat  the  very  right  which  the
             Convention exists to protect - his right to  live  freely  and
             openly as a gay man without fear of persecution. By  admitting
             him to asylum and allowing him to live freely and openly as  a
             gay man without fear of persecution, the receiving state gives
             effect to that right by affording the  applicant  a  surrogate
             for the protection  from  persecution  which  his  country  of
             nationality should have afforded him."



(d) The appellant's case to be in need of international protection

55. In the light of the principles set out in HJ Iran at paragraph 82,  and
    by frequent reference to them, Dr Chelvan addressed us at  some  length
    on his submission that the appellant's discretion about  his  sexuality
    would be motivated solely by the  fear  he  has  of  persecution.   His
    diagnosis as a paranoid schizophrenic  demonstrated,  in  Dr Chelvan's
    view, that his actions would be motivated by fear.

56. We should not be understood to accept those submissions, or  to  accept
    that such a diagnosis of itself assists in determining whether a person
    has the 'well-founded fear' that needs to be established at each  stage
    of the determination of a refugee or human rights claim.  The  position
    as it appears to us (and as belatedly adopted by Dr Chelvan in his oral
    submissions) is in this case comparatively clear.

57.  The  appellant  is  mentally  very  ill.   Dr  King,  an   experienced
    psychiatrist working for units in the London  Boroughs  of  Camden  and
    Islington, knows the appellant well, having had access to his notes and
    having interviewed him on seven occasions in the period 2017-2019.  She
    describes the appellant as "one  of  our  most  unwell  and  vulnerable
    patients".  She  reports  that  the  appellant  has  severe  delusions,
    including fears of light fittings and other  electrical  components  in
    his flat.  He believes that there is a network of people observing  him
    and who are ready to expose  his  life,  including  his  sexuality,  to
    public view.  He is floridly psychotic.  His psychotic symptoms distort
    his reality.  He cannot be relied upon to act consistently.   He  would
    be "poor at being discreet about his homosexuality" because of his fear
    of the conspiracy to expose him, and because he becomes violent when he
    perceives he  is  under  threat  and  would  struggle  to  control  his
    responses: he sees accidental or incidental occurrences as  threats  to
    which he needs to respond.

58. All of this comes from the report of 30 August 2018 which, as  we  have
    established, was before Judge Aujla, but which  he  did  not  expressly
    mention in his decision, instead, referring expressly only to Dr King's
    earlier and much less significant report of 23 May 2018  (paragraph  51
    of the decision). Although there are passages in paragraph  52  of  his
    decision which appear to indicate that Judge Aujla was there  referring
    to what Dr King had said in her report of 30 August, concerning support
    networks, he did not engage with the important passage at paragraph 7.8
    regarding the appellant's ability (or otherwise) to be discreet.

59. This failure cannot be laid at the door of Ms Head, the  solicitor  who
    represented the appellant at the hearing. On the contrary, at paragraph
    39,  Judge  Aujla  recorded  Ms  Head's  submissions,   including   the
    contention that "the psychiatrist had stated that the appellant did not
    have the capacity to be discreet".  As we have  said,  that  contention
    was not engaged with in the Judge's treatment of the report,  where  he
    confined himself to the psychiatric care and  treatment  the  appellant
    needs now and would need on return to Pakistan.

60. It is this feature of the report of 30 August,  however,  in  our  view
    accurately summarised by Ms Head, that  is  in  our  judgment  crucial.
    There is, as Mr Kotas accepted before us, no reason to doubt  it.   The
    question of any reasons for the appellant's discretion does  not  arise
    in this case.  Nor, realistically, does any question about  whether  he
    would wish (or choose) to be discrete.  The position is that  he  is  a
    homosexual man who because of his  quite  exceptionally  severe  mental
    condition,  well-attested  by  medical  opinion  not  subject  to   any
    challenge, will be unable to maintain a life of discretion whatever his
    wishes would be.

61. For these reasons, given that it is accepted that he would be  at  risk
    of persecution if openly gay in Pakistan, the appellant has established
    that he has  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution.   That  conclusion
    emerges from unchallenged evidence before the First-tier Tribunal.   It
    appears to us that Judge Aujla erred in law by  failure  to  take  into
    account the relevant matter, that the psychiatrist, whose  opinions  he
    accepted, had indicated  that  the  appellant  would  not  be  able  to
    maintain discretion.

(e) Decision

62. We set aside his decision and substitute a decision allowing the appeal
    on protection (Refugee Convention) grounds.  In the circumstances we do
    not need to consider the other issues raised.




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




                      Signed                     Date



                        30 September 2019






                      The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                      President of the Upper Tribunal
                      Immigration and Asylum Chamber



