
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Wilson (NIAA Part 5A; deportation decisions) [2020] UKUT 00350(IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House by Skype                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 November 2020                            |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              AKIM TYLER WILSON
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Childs, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis &
                  Co Solicitors

(A) section 117D(2)(b)(ii): "caused serious harm"

The current case law on "caused  serious  harm"  for  the  purposes  of  the
expression "foreign criminal" in Part 5A of the 2002 Act can  be  summarised
as follows:

    (1)  Whether P's offence is "an offence that has caused  serious  harm"
         within section 117D(2)(c)(ii) is a matter for the judge to  decide,
         in all the circumstances, whenever Part 5A falls to be applied.

    (2)  Provided that  the  judge  has  considered  all  relevant  factors
         bearing on that question; has not had regard to irrelevant factors;
         and has not reached a perverse decision, there will be no error  of
         law in  the  judge's  conclusion,  which,  accordingly,  cannot  be
         disturbed on appeal.

    (3)  In determining  what  factors  are  relevant  or  irrelevant,  the
         following should be borne in mind:

         (a)  The Secretary of State's  view  of  whether  the  offence  has
             caused serious harm is a starting point;

         (b)  The sentencing remarks should be carefully considered, as they
             will often contain valuable information; not least what may be
             said about  the  offence  having  caused  "serious  harm",  as
             categorised in the Sentencing Council Guidelines;

         (c)  A victim statement adduced in the criminal proceedings will be
             relevant;

         (d)  Whilst the Secretary of State bears the burden of showing that
             the offence has caused serious harm,  she  does  not  need  to
             adduce evidence from the victim at a hearing before the First-
             tier Tribunal;

         (e)  The appellant's own evidence to the First-tier Tribunal on the
             issue of seriousness will usually  need  to  be  treated  with
             caution;

         (f)  Serious harm can involve physical, emotional or economic  harm
             and does not need to be limited to an individual;

         (g)  The mere potential for harm is irrelevant;

         (h)  The fact that a particular type of offence  contributes  to  a
             serious/widespread problem is not sufficient;  there  must  be
             some evidence that the actual offence has caused serious harm.




B. Deportation decisions and human rights appeals

(1) In a human rights appeal, the decision under appeal is  the  refusal  by
the Secretary of State of a human rights claim; that is to say, the  refusal
of a claim, defined by section 113(1) of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
Asylum Act 2002, that removal from the United Kingdom or  a  requirement  to
leave it would be unlawful under section 6 of the 1998 Act.  The  First-tier
Tribunal is, therefore, not deciding an appeal against the decision to  make
a deportation order and/or the decision that removal of the  individual  is,
in the Secretary of State's view,  conducive  to  the  public  good.  It  is
concerned only with whether removal etc in consequence  of  the  refusal  of
the human rights claim is contrary to section 6  of  the  Human  Rights  Act
1998. If Article 8(1) is engaged, the answer to  that  question  requires  a
finding on whether removal etc  would  be  a  disproportionate  interference
with Article 8 rights.

(2) The Secretary of State's decisions under the Immigration Act  1971  that
P's  deportation  would  be  conducive  to  the  public  good  and  that   a
deportation order should be made in respect of P would have to  be  unlawful
on public law grounds before that anterior  aspect  of  the  decision-making
process could  inform  the  conclusion  to  be  reached  by  the  First-tier
Tribunal in a human rights appeal.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

A. OVERVIEW

 1. The Secretary of State  appeals  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Kainth who, following a hearing at Harmondsworth  on  16
    December  2019,  allowed  the  appeal  of  the  respondent  (hereafter,
    claimant) against  the  refusal  by  the  Secretary  of  State  of  the
    claimant's human rights claim.  That refusal  occurred  on  5  November
    2018.  It followed representations made by the claimant, pursuant to  a
    notice served on him under section 120 of the Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act  2002,  in  consequence  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision on 19 September 2018 to make a deportation order in respect of
    the claimant.

 2. Having heard evidence from the  claimant  and  other  witnesses,  Judge
    Kainth found that the claimant had not been  convicted  of  an  offence
    that  had  "caused  serious  harm",  within  the  meaning  of   section
    117D(2)(c)(ii) of the 2002 Act.  The  conviction  in  question  was  in
    respect of the offence of  possessing  a  blade/pointed  article  in  a
    public place, for which the  claimant  was  sentenced  to  six  months'
    imprisonment, to run  consecutively  with  a  period  of  five  months'
    imprisonment for breach of a suspended sentence.  For  the  reasons  we
    shall give, Judge Kainth was not wrong in law to reach  his  conclusion
    on the "serious harm" issue.

 3. As a result of his finding on this  issue,  the  judge  held  that  the
    Secretary of State's decision to make a deportation order in respect of
    the claimant was "not in accordance with the law".   Since  deportation
    would, according to the judge, be unlawful, any attempt to  remove  the
    claimant from the United Kingdom, pursuant to  the  deportation  order,
    would necessarily represent a disproportionate  interference  with  the
    claimant's rights under Article 8 of the  ECHR.   Having  reached  that
    conclusion, Judge Kainth ended his decision by saying that he had  "not
    gone on to consider Article 8 in light of  my  above  findings  or  the
    exceptions to deportation or the provisions  as  contained  within  the
    amended, Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, section  117A  -
    section 117D" (paragraphs 28  and  30).  As  we  shall  explain,  Judge
    Kainth's approach here was legally erroneous.







B.  THE APPELLANT AND HIS CRIMINALITY

 4. The appellant is a citizen of St Lucia, born in 1996.  He  entered  the
    United Kingdom in either 2000 or 2002, in order to  visit  his  father.
    He had leave to enter as a  visitor  for  six  months.   In  2006,  the
    claimant was granted discretionary leave to  remain  until  June  2008.
    The leave was subsequently extended to June 2011.

 5. In May 2018, the appellant  was  convicted  of  the  offence  described
    above.  In passing sentence, HHJ Canavan referred to the fact that  the
    claimant had twice breached his suspended sentence order, which related
    to an offence of affray in respect of which the claimant was  convicted
    and sentenced in 2016.  In May 2017,  the  claimant  had  committed  an
    offence of criminal damage; but the suspended  sentence  was  (wrongly)
    not activated at that time.

 6. The judge's sentencing remarks continued as follows:-

         "What was your response to the second opportunity that you had been
         given?  It was, essentially, to  go  out  and  commit  yet  another
         offence and, in many ways, the most serious offence that  you  have
         committed in your relatively young life, you being 22 years of age,
         because, on 24 April, you went out in possession of a  lock  knife.
         A knife you knew you were not entitled to have.

         The dangers of knife crime are all too obvious to all of us.   You,
         in particular, because of your  unfortunate  family  circumstances,
         can hardly say that you are unaware of the consequences  of,  often
         young, men carrying knives and using them or having  them  used  on
         them in public places.

         Every day, it seems, on television, we see sad  tales  of  families
         torn apart, of lives wrecked, by the use of unlawful knives on  our
         streets.  That is why carrying a knife in  a  public  place  is  so
         serious.

         In your case, it is made even worse by the fact that was your third
         breach of the suspended sentence ...

         I take into  account  your  guilty  plea  at  the  first  available
         opportunity ..."

 7. HHJ Canavan's observation that the claimant could not have  unaware  of
    the consequences of men carrying knives is explained at paragraph 22 of
    Judge Kainth's decision.  The judge accepted the claimant's evidence -

          "that he was carrying the lock knife because he was fearful  after
          his uncle (husband of Ms  Goodman)  was  stabbed  and  his  cousin
          having been threatened.  Ms Goodman  in  her  evidence  before  me
          explained that her family were trying to remove a gang  of  people
          from selling drugs from their  building.   Her  evidence  was  not
          challenged."










C.  LEGISLATION

 Immigration Act 1971

 8. Section 3(5) of the Immigration Act 1971 identifies who  is  liable  to
    deportation:-

         "(5) A person who is not a British citizen is liable to deportation
             from the United Kingdom if-

             (a)  the Secretary  of  State  deems  his  deportation  to  be
                  conducive to the public good; or

             (b)  another person to whose family he belongs is or has  been
                  ordered to be deported."

 9. Section 3(6)  makes  provision  for  liability  to  deportation,  where
    certain persons who are  not  British  citizens  are  convicted  of  an
    offence.

10. Section 5 sets out the  procedure  for  deportation,  along  with  some
    related provisions.  Section 5(1) provides:-

         "(1) Where a person is under section 3(5) or (6)  above  liable  to
             deportation, then subject to the following provisions of  this
             Act the Secretary  of  State  may  make  a  deportation  order
             against him, that is to say an order requiring  him  to  leave
             and prohibiting him from entering the United  Kingdom;  and  a
             deportation order against a person shall invalidate any  leave
             to enter or remain in the United Kingdom given him before  the
             order is made or while it is in force."

11. Section 5(3) restricts the power to make a deportation order in respect
    of a family member, in certain circumstances.



 Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002

12. Part 5A of the 2002 Act is entitled "Article  8  of  the  ECHR;  public
    interest considerations".  Section 117A explains when Part 5A applies:-

         "(1) This Part applies where a court or  tribunal  is  required  to
             determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-

             (a)  breaches a person's right  to  respect  for  private  and
                  family life under Article 8, and

             (b)  as a result would be unlawful  under  section  6  of  the
                  Human Rights Act 1998.

         (2)  In considering the public  interest  question,  the  court  or
             tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

             (a)  in all cases, to the  considerations  listed  in  section
                  117B, and

             (b)  in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals,
                  to the considerations listed in section 117C.

         (3)  In subsection (2), "the public interest  question"  means  the
             question of whether an interference with a person's  right  to
             respect for private and family life is justified under Article
             8(2)."

13. Section 117B contains a number of public interest considerations, which
    are applicable in all cases.   These  include  the  consideration  that
    little weight should be given to  a  private  life  or  a  relationship
    formed with a qualifying partner, where the same is  established  by  a
    person at a time when  they  are  in  the  United  Kingdom  unlawfully.
    Little weight should be given to a private life established by a person
    at a time when that person's immigration status is precarious  (section
    117B(4) and (5)).

14.  Section 117B(6) states that in a case of a person who is not liable to
    deportation, the public interest does not require that person's removal
    where he or she has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with
    a qualifying child; and it would not be reasonable to expect the  child
    to leave the United Kingdom. Definitions of  "qualifying  partner"  and
    "qualifying child" are to be found in section 117D.

15. Section 117C contains "additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
    foreign criminals".  The deportation of foreign criminals is stated  to
    be in the public interest.  In the case of a foreign criminal  who  has
    not been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,
    the public  interest  requires  deportation  unless  certain  specified
    exceptions apply.  These are set out in section 117C(4) and (5).

16. As well  as  defining  "qualifying  partner"  and  "qualifying  child",
    section 117D contains this definition of "foreign criminal":-

         "(2) In this Part, "foreign criminal" means a person-

             (a)  who is not a British citizen,

             (b)  who has been  convicted  in  the  United  Kingdom  of  an
                  offence, and

             (c)  who-

                  (i)  has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of  at
                      least 12 months,

                  (ii) has been convicted of  an  offence  that  has  caused
                      serious harm, or

                  (iii)    is a persistent offender."




 Immigration Rules

17. The Immigration Rules on deportation are contained in Part 13 of HC 395
    (as amended) Paragraph 396 provides as follows:-

         "396.    Where a person is liable to  deportation  the  presumption
             shall be that the public interest requires deportation.  It is
             in the public interest to deport where the Secretary of  State
             must make a deportation order in accordance with section 32 of
             the UK Borders Act 2007."

18. Paragraph 397 provides:-

         "397.    A deportation order will  not  be  made  if  the  person's
             removal pursuant to the order would be contrary  to  the  UK's
             obligations under the Refugee Convention or the  Human  Rights
             Convention.  Where deportation would not be contrary to  these
             obligations, it will only be in exceptional circumstances that
             the public interest in deportation is outweighed."

19.  Paragraphs  A398  to  399D  apply  to  foreign  criminals  liable   to
    deportation.  The expression "foreign criminal" is not defined  in  the
    Immigration Rules.  Paragraphs 398, 399 and 399A broadly  reflect  what
    is to be found in section 117C of  the  2002  Act.   Paragraph  398(c),
    however, refers to a person whose deportation is said to  be  conducive
    to the public good and in the public interest "because, in the view  of
    the Secretary of State, their offending has caused serious harm or they
    are a persistent offender who shows  a  particular  disregard  for  the
    law".

20. It will be seen that the Immigration Rules make  reference  to  the  UK
    Borders Act 2007.  That Act operates by reference  to  the  deportation
    provisions in the 1971 Act.



  UK Borders Act 2007

21. Section 32 of the 2007 Act provides as follows:-

         "32. Automatic deportation

         (1)  In this section "foreign criminal" means a person-

             (a)  who is not a British citizen,

             (b)  who is convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence, and

             (c)  to whom Condition 1 or 2 applies.




         (2)  Condition 1 is that the person is sentenced  to  a  period  of
             imprisonment of at least 12 months.

         (3)  Condition 2 is that-

             (a)  the offence is specified by order  of  the  Secretary  of
                  State  under  section   72(4)(a)   of   the   Nationality,
                  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002   (c.   41)   (serious
                  criminal), and

             (b)  the person is sentenced to a period of imprisonment.

         (4)  For the purpose of section 3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971
             (c. 77), the deportation of a foreign criminal is conducive to
             the public good.

         (5)  The Secretary of  State  must  make  a  deportation  order  in
             respect of a foreign criminal (subject to section 33).

         (6)  The Secretary of State may not revoke a deportation order made
             in accordance with subsection (5) unless-

             (a)  he thinks that an exception under section 33 applies,

             (b)  the application for revocation is made while the  foreign
                   criminal is outside the United Kingdom, or

             c)   section 34(4) applies.

         (7)  Subsection (5) does not create a private right  of  action  in
             respect of consequences of non-compliance by the Secretary  of
             State."

22. Section 33  provides  for  exceptions  to  the  propositions  that  the
    deportation of a foreign criminal is conducive to the public  good  and
    that the Secretary of State must make a deportation order in respect of
    such a person.  For  our  purposes,  the  relevant  provisions  are  as
    follows:-

         "33. Exceptions

             (1)  Section 32(4) and (5)-

                  (a)  do not apply  where  an  exception  in  this  section
                      applies (subject to subsection (7) below), and

             ...

             (2)  Exception 1 is where removal of the foreign  criminal  in
                  pursuance of the deportation order would breach-

                  (a)  a person's Convention rights, or

                  (b)  the United Kingdom's obligations  under  the  Refugee
                      Convention.

                  ...

         (7)  The application of an exception-

                  (a)  does not prevent the making of a deportation order;

                  (b)  results in it being assumed neither that  deportation
                      of the person concerned is conducive  to  the  public
                      good nor that it is not conducive to the public good;
                      but section 32(4) applies despite the application  of
                      Exception 1 or 4."

D.  CASE LAW ON "CAUSED SERIOUS HARM"

LT (Kosovo) and another v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2016]
EWCA Civ 1246

23. It is now necessary to refer to the relevant case law on what is  meant
    by " caused serious harm".  In LT (Kosovo) and another v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 1246, the Court of Appeal
    was concerned with the expression, as found in paragraph  398(c).   The
    issue in both of the appeals before the court was whether an offence of
    supplying a Class A drug fell within the category of  offences  causing
    "serious harm" within the meaning of paragraph  398(c),  regardless  of
    the particular circumstances of the offending.

24. Laws LJ, giving the judgment of the court, held that:-

         "18. There is clearly no rule of law which requires every  instance
             of supply of a Class A drug to be treated as  causing  serious
             harm for  the  purpose  of  deportation  decisions,  certainly
             nothing in the text of paragraph 398(c).  Nor however,  in  my
             judgment, does the rule exclude from its ambit  a  case  where
             such a view is taken. Nor again is 398(c) limited to the  case
             where the sentenced passed does  not  apparently  reflect  the
             gravity  of  the  offending.   I  would  reject   Mr   Sedon's
             submission to the contrary.  Serious harm is  not  defined  in
             the Rules."

25. At paragraph 21, Laws LJ disagreed with any suggestion that the  First-
    tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal -

         "were bound by the Secretary of State's opinion as to serious harm:
         such a conclusion would nullify the right of appeal and  reduce  it
         to a residual Wednesbury review [1948] 1  KB  223,  whereas  it  is
         elementary that the right of appeal to the FTT is on the merits ...
         That position is not shifted by the reference in  paragraph  398(c)
         to the Secretary of State's view.  That feature of the language  of
         the rule cannot, in my judgment, deprive the  appellants  of  their
         rights to a merits appeal."

26. However, Laws LJ pointed out that this was -

         "not to say that the reference to the Secretary of State's view  is
         of no significance.  The Secretary of State is the primary decision-
         maker.  She has a constitutional responsibility to  make  judgments
         as to the force of the public interest in deportation cases.   That
         circumstance has to be balanced against the appellants' right to  a
         merits appeal.  In my judgment, that is to be done by requiring the
         tribunals in a paragraph 398(c) case,  while  considering  all  the
         facts  put  before  them,  to  accord  significant  weight  to  the
         Secretary of State's view of "serious harm".  They are  not  to  be
         bound by it, but they are to treat it an important relevant factor.
          I should add that I cannot see that this approach is  in  any  way
         undermined by the new provisions in  section  117C  and  D  of  the
         Nationality, Immigration & Asylum Act  2002,  to  which  Mr  Seddon
         referred this morning."

27. Laws LJ continued:-

         "23. In LT's case the Secretary of State's deportation decision of
             7 August 2013 had this:


                  "It is considered that paragraph 398(c)  applies  in  your
                  client's case as he was  convicted  of  a  drugs  offence,
                  namely supplying a Class A drug.  It is the  view  of  the
                  Home Secretary that  all  drugs  offences  are,  by  their
                  nature, serious offences."


         24.  As to that, I can well see that the proposition that all drugs
             offences are by their nature serious may be questionable,  but
             what matters here is the Secretary of State's  undoubted  view
             that supplying Class A  drugs  causes  serious  harm.   In  my
             judgment, that is a perfectly reasonable view, though Mr Sedon
             would not have it so.  He submitted today that  the  Secretary
             of State would have to provide narrative  reasons  for  taking
             such a view; reasons  which  would  demonstrate  a  particular
             expertise.  I do not agree. It is a matter of social and moral
             judgement. The Secretary  of  State  with  her  constitutional
             responsibilities is entitled to take the overall view she  did
             and express it as she has.  She was entitled to take that view
             in both of these cases.  Her doing so was not repugnant to her
             extant policy."



SC (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018]  EWCA  Civ
929

28. The Court of Appeal returned to the construction of "serious  harm"  in
    SC (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018]  EWCA
    Civ 929.  Unlike LT (Kosovo), which involved appeals determined by  the
    First-tier Tribunal under the appellate regime as  it  was  before  the
    changes made by the Immigration Act 2014, SC  (Zimbabwe)  was  directly
    concerned with Part 5A of the 2002 Act, as inserted by  the  2014  Act.
    McCombe LJ, giving the judgment of the court, disagreed with the  final
    sentence in paragraph 21 of the judgement of Laws LJ:-

         "19. The LT case was  concerned  solely  with  the  application  of
             paragraph 398 (c) of the Rules.  With  respect  to  the  short
             obiter dictum in the last sentence of the passage just quoted,
             I do not agree.  It seems to me to be quite  clear  that  once
             the matter comes before a tribunal or a court, what has to  be
             applied is s.117D(c) of the Act. The words of  that  provision
             are the words which Parliament has chosen  to  enact,  without
             more.  The three elements of that paragraph of the  subsection
             are in clear terms and do not require any gloss to be put upon
             them by the reference to the Rules.  The view of the Secretary
             of State or indeed of a judge in sentencing remarks may be  of
             assistance to a tribunal  or  court  in  deciding  whether  an
             offence has caused serious harm or whether an  offender  is  a
             persistent offender, but I do not see that the statutory words
             compel any particular weight to be given to the  Secretary  of
             State's view on either in the assessment.  I would, therefore,
             reject Mr Pilgerstorfer's first submission."

29. At paragraph 26, McCombe LJ reiterated the point as follows:-

         "26. ... I would also reject [Mr Pilgerstorfer's]  submission  that
             s.117D(2)(c) requires a court or tribunal,  in  applying  that
             provision, to attribute "significant weight" to the  Secretary
             of State's anterior view that paragraph 398(c)  of  the  Rules
             had been satisfied for the purposes of  her  own  decision  to
             make a deportation order in the first place.  ..."



R (Yasir Mahmood) and others v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
[2020] EWCA Civ 717

30. In June 2020, the Court of Appeal handed  down  judgment  in  R  (Yasir
    Mahmood) and others v Upper Tribunal (Immigration and  Asylum  Chamber)
    and Secretary of State for the Home Department [2020] EWCA Civ 717.

31. Beginning at  paragraph  34,  McCombe  LJ  dealt  with  the  expression
    "serious harm" in section 117D(2)(c):-

         "34.  Various  issues  arise  as  to  the  interpretation  of  this
             provision; but a number of preliminary points can be made.


         35.  First, the  three  categories  in  subsection  (2)(c)  have  a
             potential to overlap.  Plainly an offender who has received  a
             sentence of more than 12 months may have done  so  because  he
             committed an offence which caused serious harm.   Equally,  an
             offender who persistently  offends  is  likely  to  receive  a
             longer sentence (and more than 12 months) because  of  a  poor
             antecedent history.


         36.  Second, the provision  must  be  given  its  ordinary  meaning
             informed by its context.  The three categories  must  be  read
             together.  This is more than simply a conventional approach to
             statutory interpretation.  It is plain, for example, from  the
             structure of the provision  that  an  offender  who  has  been
             sentenced to a term of less than 12 months for an offence  may
             nevertheless be treated as a 'foreign criminal' if the offence
             caused serious harm; and that  'serious  harm'  will  only  be
             relevant when the sentence for an  offence  is  less  than  12
             months.  This throws light on what may be  encompassed  by  an
             offence which causes serious harm. While  it  is  possible  to
             think of offences which,  despite  causing  the  most  serious
             harm, would not typically attract an immediate prison sentence
             of at least 12 months (causing death by careless driving is an
             example), in general paragraph (c)(ii) is not  concerned  with
             the most serious kind of harm which  comes  before  the  Crown
             Court.


         37.  Third, Mr Biggs drew our attention to s.32(1)-(5)  of  the  UK
             Borders Act 2007 ('UKBA 2007'). Section 32(3)  provides  that,
             where an offender is sentenced to imprisonment for an  offence
             specified by the Secretary of State by  order,  a  deportation
             order may be made under s.5(1) of the IA 1971.  His submission
             was   that   allowing   the   'serious   harm'   test    under
             s.117D(2)(c)(ii) to be satisfied where a given type of offence
             has been committed, merely because of a perceived  generalised
             harm caused by such offending, would 'trespass into territory'
             covered by s.32(3) of the UKBA.  We  are  not  persuaded  that
             there is any merit in this argument.  Section  32(3)  has  not
             been brought into legislative  effect  and  the  Secretary  of
             State has not made any order as envisaged; and Part 5A of  the
             NIAA 2002  was  introduced  so  as  to  provide  a  structured
             approach to  the  issue  of  deporting  foreign  criminals  by
             reference to rights under article 8 of the ECHR."

32. With respect to the Court of Appeal, it does not appear  its  statement
    that  section  32(3)  of  the  2007  Act  had  not  been  brought  into
    legislative effect is correct; nor that the Secretary of State has  yet
    to make any  order  under  section  72(4)(a)  of  the  2002  Act.   The
    important point, however, is that made in the last part  of  the  final
    sentence of paragraph 37  of  the  judgment.   Section  117A  precisely
    defines the circumstances in which Part  5A  has  application.   It  is
    where a court or tribunal is determining whether a decision made  under
    the Immigration Acts breaches a person's Article 8 rights and so  would
    be unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.   In  such  a
    circumstance, the  court  or  tribunal  must  have  regard  to  certain
    considerations when considering "the public interest  question",  which
    will be when the court or tribunal  is  conducting  a  "proportionality
    balancing exercise" under Article 8(2).  As we shall see, although that
    exercise, conducted in the course of an appeal against a refusal  of  a
    human rights claim, may determine whether the Secretary  of  State  can
    remove someone  who  is  liable  to  deportation,  it  is  conceptually
    separate from the issue of the legality of the making of a decision  to
    deport.

33. McCombe LJ continued as follows:-

         "39. So far as the  word  'caused'  is  concerned,  the  harm  must
             plainly be causatively linked to the offence.  In the case  of
             an offence of violence, injury will be caused to the immediate
             victim and possibly others.  However, what matters is the harm
             caused by the particular offence.   The  prevalence  of  (even
             minor) offending may cause serious harm to society,  but  that
             does  not  mean  that  an  individual  offence  considered  in
             isolation has done so.  Shoplifting, for  example,  may  be  a
             significant social problem, causing serious economic harm  and
             distress to the owner of a modest corner shop; and a thief who
             steals a single item of low value may contribute to that harm,
             but it cannot realistically be said that such a  thief  caused
             serious harm himself, either to the owner  or  to  society  in
             general.  Beyond this, we are doubtful  that  a  more  general
             analysis of how the law approaches causation in  other  fields
             is helpful.


         40.  As to 'harm', often it will be clear from the  nature  of  the
             offence that harm has been caused. Assault Occasioning  Actual
             Bodily Harm under s.47 of the Offences Against the Person  Act
             1861 is an obvious example.


         41.  Mr Biggs argued on behalf of Mahmood that  the  harm  must  be
             physical or psychological harm to an  identifiable  individual
             that is identifiable and quantifiable.  We see no good  reason
             for interpreting the provision in this way. The  criminal  law
             is designed to prevent harm that  may  include  psychological,
             emotional or economic harm.   Nor  is  there  good  reason  to
             suppose a statutory intent to limit the harm to an individual.
              Some crimes, for example,  supplying  class  A  drugs,  money
             laundering, possession of firearms, cybercrimes,  perjury  and
             perverting the course of public  justice  may  cause  societal
             harm.  In most cases the nature of the harm will  be  apparent
             from the nature of the offence itself, the sentencing  remarks
             or from victim statements.  However, we agree with  Mr  Biggs,
             at least to this extent: harm in this context does not include
             the potential for harm or an  intention  to  do  harm.   Where
             there is a conviction for a serious  attempt  offence,  it  is
             likely that the sentence will be more than 12 months.


         42.  The adjective 'serious' qualifies the extent of the harm;  but
             provides  no  precise  criteria.   It  is  implicit  that   an
             evaluative judgment has to be made in the light of  the  facts
             and circumstances of the offending.  There can be  no  general
             and all-embracing test of seriousness.  In some cases, it will
             be a straightforward evaluation and  will  not  need  specific
             evidence of the extent of the harm; but in every case, it will
             be for the tribunal to evaluate the extent of the harm on  the
             basis of the evidence that is  available  and  drawing  common
             sense conclusions."

34. At paragraph 44, Simon LJ disagreed with the view  of  Laws  LJ  in  LT
    (Kosovo) that the Sentencing Council's Definitive Guidelines  were  not
    of assistance:-

         "That may be putting the matter too high, since the  characteristic
         of an offence as  causing  'serious  harm'  within  the  Sentencing
         Council Definitive Guidelines may be referred to in the  sentencing
         remarks which are likely to be of assistance. On  the  other  hand,
         the fact that the offence  is  not  characterised  as  one  causing
         'serious harm' for sentencing purposes [under the Criminal  Justice
         Act 2003 and its definition  of  "serious  harm"]  is  plainly  not
         determinative of the issue that arises under s.117D(2)(c)(ii)."

35. Having held that the burden is on the Secretary of State to prove  each
    element of section 117B(2)(c)(ii)  to  the  civil  standard,  Simon  LJ
    examined what this might mean in practice:-

         "51. Mr Biggs argued that the Secretary of  State  must  prove  the
             case against  the  offender  by  adducing  specific  items  of
             evidence that would include, if the seriousness  of  the  harm
             were in issue, evidence from the victim.   We  see  no  proper
             basis for this argument. In many  cases,  a  victim  statement
             will be put before the sentencing judge.  This  will  describe
             the impact caused by  the  offence  as  at  the  date  of  the
             statement.  A victim statement adduced in criminal proceedings
             has  the  status  of  evidence  which  a  defendant   has   an
             opportunity to challenge  before  sentence  is  passed  (R  v.
             Perkins  [2013]  2  Cr.  App.  R.  (S)  72).   There   is   no
             justification  for  allowing  a  second  such  opportunity  in
             proceedings before the FtT.  In cases where the  Secretary  of
             State relies on the causing of serious harm alone for treating
             an offender as a  'foreign  criminal',  we  would  expect  the
             sentencing remarks (if available) and the victim statement (if
             it exists) to form part of the Secretary of  State's  evidence
             before the tribunal.  However, we recognise that in many cases
             a victim or those less directly affected by  a  crime  may  be
             reluctant to make a statement as to the  harm  endured  by  an
             offence, and no proper conclusions can be drawn from the  lack
             of such a statement.


         52.  The suggestion that a victim of  crime  should  have  to  give
             evidence of the effect of that crime before a  tribunal,  with
             the prospect of cross-examination  by  or  on  behalf  of  the
             perpetrator can be rejected outright: not least because of the
             potential for causing additional harm to a victim.


         53.  While an offender  may  choose  to  give  evidence  about  the
             underlying criminality, the FtT will be aware that  this  will
             not necessarily be the whole, or even a truthful, picture.  As
             the tribunal observed at �43 in the case of  Mahmood,  it  had
             heard about the circumstances of the offending, 'as  described
             by the Appellant.'"

36. At paragraph 55, Simon LJ agreed with the conclusion in  SC  (Zimbabwe)
    that the statutory words do not compel  any  particular  weight  to  be
    given to the Secretary of State's view as to  whether  an  offence  has
    caused "serious harm".  However:-

         "56. ...  The views of the Secretary of State are a starting  point
             and the reasoning of a decision letter may be compelling;  but
             ultimately the issues that arise under  s.117D(2)(c)(ii)  will
             be a matter for the FtT.  Provided the tribunal has taken into
             account all relevant  factors,  has  not  taken  into  account
             immaterial factors and has reached a conclusion which  is  not
             perverse, its conclusion will not give rise to  an  actionable
             error of law."

37. Some insight into  how  these  principles  apply  in  practice  can  be
    discerned from McCombe LJ's analysis of the case of  Estnerie,  one  of
    the linked appeals in R (Mahmood).  Estnerie had committed offences  of
    being in possession of false identity documents and seeking  to  obtain
    leave to remain by deception.  The First-tier Tribunal concluded  that,
    in order for an offence to cause serious harm, it was not necessary  to
    identify individual victims.  The Upper Tribunal agreed.   So  did  the
    Court of Appeal; but with this important rider:-

         "66. No doubt each offence of this nature contributes to a  serious
             and perhaps widespread  problem.   However,  the  issue  under
             s.117D(2)(c)(ii) is whether the offender has been convicted of
             'an offence' which has caused serious harm.  We accept that an
             individual offence of this sort can be said to  cause  serious
             harm, but there has to be some evidence that it has  done  so.
             The decision letter refers to the undermining of the integrity
             of the revenue and benefits system,  banking  and  employment,
             and  even  national  security;  but  there  was   insufficient
             evidence that these offences, even if aggregated, had such  an
             effect.  These offences usually result in  a  prison  sentence
             because identity fraud is regarded as a  serious  matter;  but
             that cannot, of itself, be enough to satisfy  the  requirement
             of causing 'serious harm'."

38. In order to surmount this difficulty, the Secretary of  State  filed  a
    respondent's notice  with the Court of Appeal, contending that, on  the
    facts found by the First-tier  Tribunal,  Estnerie  was  a  "persistent
    offender", which made him a "foreign criminal"  by  reason  of  section
    117D(2)(c)(iii).  The Court of Appeal took account of the  respondent's
    notice and dismissed Estnerie's appeal on  the  basis  that  he  was  a
    persistent offender.




E. CRIMINALITY: ARTICLE 8 ECHR CASES (VERSION 8.0)

39. The Secretary of State's document: Criminality: Article  8  ECHR  cases
    (version 8.0 - 13 May 2019) has this to say about "serious harm":-

         "It is at the discretion of  the  Secretary  of  State  whether  he
         considers an offence to have caused serious harm.

         An offence that has caused 'serious harm' means an offence that has
         caused serious physical  or  psychological  harm  to  a  victim  or
         victims, or that has  contributed  to  a  widespread  problem  that
         causes serious harm to a community or to society in general.

         The foreign criminal does  not  have  to  have  been  convicted  in
         relation to any serious harm which  followed  from  their  offence.
         For example, they  may  fit  within  this  provision  if  they  are
         convicted of a lesser offence because it cannot  be  proved  beyond
         reasonable doubt that they were guilty of  a  separate  offence  in
         relation to the serious harm which resulted from their actions.

         Where a person has been convicted of one or more violent, drugs  or
         sex  offences,  they  will  usually  be  considered  to  have  been
         convicted of an offence that has caused serious harm."



F. THE DECISION OF THE FIRST-TIER TRIBUNAL

40. We can now return to the decision of the judge in the present case.  At
    paragraph 13, Judge Kainth summarised the  grounds  of  appeal.   These
    contended that the claimant's removal would "interfere with his Article
    8 rights.  As well as having a British partner, he has a  son  and  his
    partner is currently pregnant.  He has extended family members  in  the
    United Kingdom.  He has no family in St Lucia".

41. The claimant was said to be  apologetic  and  "there  was  very  little
    chance of a repetition of past  behaviours  because  he  had  learnt  a
    solitary  [sic]  lesson  from  his  recent  period  of   incarceration"
    (paragraph 14).  It was also submitted that he could rely upon  section
    117C(4)(a) of the 2002 Act, in that he had been  lawfully  resident  in
    the United Kingdom for most of his life; that  he  had  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with a qualifying partner/qualifying child; and
    that the effects of his deportation on the partner and child  would  be
    unduly harsh (paragraph 15).

42. As we have noted, the judge heard oral evidence from the claimant,  his
    aunt, his father and his current partner.  He  also  heard  submissions
    from Ms Childs, Counsel for  the  claimant.   She  submitted  that  the
    offence which had given rise to the decision to deport was not one that
    caused "serious harm".  Judge Kainth engaged with  this  submission  in
    some detail:-

         "21. I have considered very carefully the sentencing remarks of  HH
             Judge Canavan with respect to the knife offence;

                  "It was, essentially to go  out  and  commit  yet  another
                  offence and in many ways, the most  serious  offence  that
                  you have committed in  your  relatively  young  life,  you
                  being 22 years, because on 24th April,  you  went  out  in
                  possession of a lock knife.  A knife you knew you were not
                  entitled to have.  The dangers of knife crime are all  too
                  obvious to all of us.  You, in particular because of  your
                  unfortunate family circumstances, can hardly say that  you
                  are unaware  of  the  consequences  of,  often  young  men
                  carrying knives and using them or having them used on them
                  in public places.  Every day, it seems, on television,  we
                  see sad tales of families torn apart, of lives wrecked, by
                  the use of unlawful knives on our streets.   That  is  why
                  carrying a knife in a public place is so serious.   ...  I
                  take into account your guilty plea at the first  available
                  opportunity ..."

         22.  Although the learned judge made reference to the  impact  upon
             communities with respect to knife crime, one should not forget
             that the knife in possession  of  the  appellant  was  a  lock
             knife.  It was  not  brandished,  waived  [sic]  or  shown  to
             anybody.  The appellant volunteered possession  of  the  knife
             when he was spoken to by the police.  It was  not  an  offence
             that caused physical or psychological harm.   It  is  not  the
             prosecution's case that the knife was used offensively or that
             it was ever shown to members of  the  public.   I  accept  the
             appellant's explanation that he was carrying  the  lock  knife
             because he was fearful after his uncle (husband of Ms Goodman)
             was stabbed and his cousin having been threatened.  Ms Goodman
             in her evidence before  me  explained  that  her  family  were
             trying to remove a gang of  people  from  selling  drugs  from
             their building.  Her evidence was not challenged.

         23.  It would appear from the sentencing remarks of  Judge  Canavan
             that she was unimpressed  with  the  fact  the  appellant  had
             breached the terms of a suspended sentence on  no  fewer  than
             three occasions.  Had it not  been  for  those  breaches,  the
             judge commented,

                  "Mr Ali, on your behalf, has sought to persuade  me  that,
                  somehow, I ought to give you another opportunity.   But  I
                  am afraid to say, Mr Wilson, had your compliance with  the
                  order been better from July of last year, there might have
                  been some merit to that suggestion ..."

         24.  In order to obtain some guidance with respect  to  whether  or
             not the index offence is one that causes serious harm, I  have
             considered  the  sentencing  Counsel's  guidelines  on  bladed
             articles and offensive weapons.  When determining the  offence
             category,  there  are  a  number  of  factors   listed.    The
             appellant's offence comes within culpability A, because by the
             very nature of the lock knife it is a bladed article.  On  the
             question of harm, it does not come within category  1  because
             the offence was not committed at a school or other place where
             vulnerable people  are  likely  to  be  present,  it  was  not
             committed in prison, it was  not  committed  in  circumstances
             where there was a risk of serious disorder  or  serious  alarm
             and distress.  It could therefore be classified as culpability
             A, category 2 with a starting point of six months' custody and
             with a category range of three months to one  year's  custody.
             That is before credit  for  a  guilty  plea  and  taking  into
             account  one's   individual   personal   circumstances.    The
             aggravating feature as acknowledged by the Judge was the  fact
             the appellant was on a suspended sentence.  Had he not been on
             a suspended sentence, there is  scope  in  the  light  of  the
             Judge's comments for a non-immediate custodial sentence  which
             had it been  imposed  would  mean  that  it  would  have  been
             unlikely  the  respondent  would  have  initiated  deportation
             proceedings.

         25.  There was no attempt by the appellant  to  conceal/dispose  of
             the item.

         26.  Whilst I acknowledge that the sentencing judge was well within
             her powers to make the observations that  she  did  about  the
             impact upon knife crime, it has not  been  asserted  that  the
             appellant was going to use the item found in  his  possession.
             The impact upon communities with respect to knife crime cannot
             be elevated by way of  risk  unless  it  is  deemed  to  be  a
             prevalent offence in a designated neighbourhood.  In order for
             that to apply, there would need to be  an  official  statement
             with respect to prevalence in order to an offence to attract a
             higher level of punishment.  I have considered the case of  SC
             (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 99 where at paragraph 19 the
             court held that the statutory  words  "serious  harm"  do  not
             compel any particular weight to be given to  the  respondent's
             view.

         27.  After  very  careful  scrutiny  of  the  evidence,  with  some
             reluctance, I conclude that the offence  of  possession  of  a
             bladed article does not amount to  serious  harm  because  the
             circumstances of the offence are  unique  to  this  particular
             appellant and his very close family members."

43. In the light of his conclusion that the offence was not one that caused
    "serious harm", Judge Kainth then dealt with the appeal as follows:-

         "28. Because I have accepted that the appellant has  not  committed
             an offence that has caused serious harm, then the decision  of
             the respondent  is  not  in  accordance  with  the  law.   The
             deportation order should not have been issued and it would  be
             disproportionate to remove the appellant from the jurisdiction
             of the United Kingdom.  In arriving at this conclusion, I take
             into account the decision in Childs (sic) (human rights appeal
             - scope) [2018] UKUT 00089 (IAC):

                  "(58)    So far as concerns the requirements addressed  in
                        question (3) that the interference be in accordance
                        with  the  law,  both   Strasbourg   and   domestic
                        authority suggests that the  question  whether  the
                        proposed interference  (here,  deportation)  has  a
                        proper basis in  domestic  law,  including  whether
                        that law is accessible to the person concerned  and
                        foreseeable as  to  its  effect  (see  Egab  v  Her
                        Majesty's Advocate [2017] UKSC 25,  paragraph  25).
                        In the present case, the law of  deportation  under
                        the 1971 Act read with the UK Borders Act  2007  in
                        the case  of  foreign  criminals,  satisfies  these
                        requirements.

                  (59) The issue therefore, is what  effect  Judge  Malone's
                        finding on the application of Section 7 of the 1971
                        Act had on question (5); that is to say, on whether
                        the interference would be  proportionate.   As  the
                        judge found, the proper application of the  law  on
                        deportation meant that the claimant was entitled to
                        rely upon the statutory  exemption  in  Section  7.
                        Since, on the facts found, any hypothetical attempt
                        by the Secretary of State to  deport  the  claimant
                        would be unlawful, that hypothetical action on  the
                        part  of  the  Secretary  of  State  would,   quite
                        obviously,     represent     a     disproportionate
                        interference  with  Article   8   rights   of   the
                        claimant."

         29.  The appellant is fully aware as to how close he  has  come  to
             being  deported.   He,  together  with  his  witnesses,   gave
             credible evidence that he  has  learnt  a  very  valuable  and
             solitary lesson from his recent  period  of  imprisonment  and
             that the scope of repetition is far removed than before.

         30.  I have not gone on to consider Article 8 in light of my  above
             findings or the exceptions to deportation or the provisions as
             contained within the  amended,  Nationality,  Immigration  and
             Asylum Act 2002, Section 117A-Section 117D."



G. THE SECRETARY OF STATE'S APPEAL

44. The  Secretary  of  State  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
    permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  against  Judge  Kainth's
    decision.  The grounds contended that Judge Kainth had erred in law  in
    concluding that the events of possessing a bladed/pointed article in  a
    public place had not caused serious harm.   Whether  the  claimant  had
    intended to use the lock knife or simply carrying it out of  fear  was,
    the Secretary of State submitted, of limited  relevance.   The  grounds
    pointed to the remarks of the sentencing judge, who, as we  have  seen,
    had spoken of "sad tales of families torn apart, of lives  wrecked,  by
    the use of unlawful knives on our streets.   That  is  why  carrying  a
    knife in a public place is so serious".   It  was  submitted  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal should be "slow  to  go  behind  the  finding  that
    carrying a knife in a public place is 'so serious'".  Judge Kainth  had
    failed to consider the potential for serious harm, had the  police  not
    intervened when they did.

45. On 27 January 2020,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  granted  permission  to
    appeal.  Judge Shimmin considered it "arguable that the judge has  made
    a material misdirection of law in respect of the definition of  serious
    harm and, furthermore, has failed to give adequate reasoning".

46. In a skeleton argument on behalf of the Secretary of State,  filed  and
    served in February 2020, Mr Tan relied upon SC (Zimbabwe) as  authority
    for the proposition that the sentencing remarks may be of assistance to
    a tribunal or court in deciding whether an offence has  caused  serious
    harm.  It was not clear what weight, if any, Judge Kainth had given  to
    these.

47. Paragraphs 9 and 10 of Mr Tan's skeleton argument read as follows:-

         "9.  Whilst not set out in the grounds for  permission  to  appeal,
             the FTTJ has allowed the appeal on the basis "the decision  of
             the respondent  is  not  in  accordance  with  the  law.   The
             deportation order should not have been issued ..."  [28].   At
             [30] the FTTJ fails to make a consideration under  Article  8.
             It is submitted that the FTTJ has erred by allowing the appeal
             on  the  basis  that  the  deportation  decision  was  not  in
             accordance with the law.

         10.  The appeal is one made under the provisions in section  82  of
             the 2002 Act following amendment by the Immigration Act  2014.
             As such, the only decision which could be under  challenge  in
             this case is the decision  to  refuse  the  Appellant's  human
             rights claim.  That could only be appealed on the  basis  that
             "the decision" (i.e. the decision to refuse the  human  rights
             claim) is unlawful under section  6  Human  Rights  Act  1998.
             Having failed to conduct a consideration  and  proportionality
             assessment under Article 8, that being the issue in the appeal
             is a material error.  It is submitted that this is  'Robinson'
             obvious point, and on that basis  the  decision  of  the  FTTJ
             cannot stand."

48. In a document dated 2 November 2020, Mr Tan made an application to vary
    the Secretary of State's grounds.  As well as seeking an  amendment  to
    encompass paragraphs 9 and 10 of  his  skeleton  argument  of  February
    2020, Mr Tan's application sought to permit the Secretary of  State  to
    contend that Judge Kainth erred in law in not finding that the claimant
    was also a "persistent offender" within the  meaning  of  section  117D
    and, accordingly, a foreign criminal in any event.

49. At the hearing on 3 November, Ms Childs objected to the application  to
    amend.  Mr Tan had sought to support the application in respect of  the
    "persistent offender" amendment by attaching a record compiled  by  the
    Presenting  Officer  who  had  appeared  before  Judge  Kainth.    This
    suggested that the Presenting Officer had  submitted  to  Judge  Kainth
    that the appellant was a persistent offender.

50.  Ms  Childs  informed  us  that  this  did  not  correspond  with   her
    recollection of the hearing.   Furthermore,  the  Presenting  Officer's
    note is at complete  variance  with  paragraph  10  of  Judge  Kainth's
    decision, in which he stated: "the respondent did not suggest that  the
    appellant  was  a  persistent  offender  notwithstanding   he   has   5
    convictions encompassing 7 offences".

51. We declined to permit Mr Tan to amend the Secretary of State's  grounds
    in order to encompass the "persistent  offender"  issue.   It  was,  at
    best, not apparent that this had been  advanced  before  Judge  Kainth.
    The matter was not prefigured in Mr Tan's skeleton argument of February
    2020.

52. We did, however, permit the amendment regarding the judge's  conclusion
    that his finding on the "serious harm" issue meant that  the  Secretary
    of State's decision was not in accordance with the law; such  that  the
    decision was, for that reason, a disproportionate interference with the
    claimant's Article 8 rights.  Ms Childs accepted that  permitting  this
    amendment would not take the claimant by surprise.  She had  been  able
    to engage with it in her written submissions of  24  April  2020.   The
    issue is, furthermore, in our view one of some general significance.



H. DISCUSSION

(a) "caused serious harm"

53. The current case law on "caused serious harm" for the purposes  of  the
    expression "foreign criminal" in  Part  5A  of  the  2002  Act  can  be
    summarised as follows (drawing predominately from the judgment of Simon
    LJ in R (Mahmood and others):-

    (1)  Whether P's offence is "an offence that has caused  serious  harm"
         within section 117D(2)(c)(ii) is a matter for the judge to  decide,
         in all the circumstances, whenever Part 5A falls to be applied.

    (2)  Provided that  the  judge  has  considered  all  relevant  factors
         bearing on that question; has not had regard to irrelevant factors;
         and has not reached a perverse decision, there will be no error  of
         law in  the  judge's  conclusion,  which,  accordingly,  cannot  be
         disturbed on appeal.

    (3)  In determining  what  factors  are  relevant  or  irrelevant,  the
         following should be borne in mind:

         (a)  The Secretary of State's  view  of  whether  the  offence  has
             caused serious harm is a starting point;

         (b)  The sentencing remarks should be carefully considered, as they
             will often contain valuable information; not least what may be
             said about  the  offence  having  caused  "serious  harm",  as
             categorised in the Sentencing Council Guidelines;

         (c)  A victim statement adduced in the criminal proceedings will be
             relevant;

         (d)  Whilst the Secretary of State bears the burden of showing that
             the offence has caused serious harm, she  does   not  need  to
             adduce evidence from the victim at a hearing before the First-
             tier Tribunal;

         (e)  The appellant's own evidence to the First-tier Tribunal on the
             issue of seriousness will usually  need  to  be  treated  with
             caution;

         (f)  Serious harm can involve physical, emotional or economic  harm
             and does not need to be limited to an individual;

         (g)  The mere potential for harm is irrelevant;

         (h)  The fact that a particular type of offence  contributes  to  a
             serious/widespread problem is not sufficient;  there  must  be
             some evidence that the actual offence has caused serious harm.

54. Having identified these propositions, we need  to  apply  them  to  the
    findings of Judge Kainth.  At paragraph 21 of his decision,  the  judge
    set out the passage from HHJ Canavan's  sentencing  remarks,  regarding
    the dangers of knife crime and the reasons why carrying a  knife  in  a
    public place is "so serious".  There follow the important  findings  in
    paragraph 22 (see paragraph 42 above).

55. The Secretary of State criticises Judge Kainth for  going  "behind  the
    finding of the sentencing judge that carrying a knife in a public place
    is "so serious"" and that he "limited the assessment to an  absence  of
    physical or psychological harm", failing "to consider the potential  of
    serious harm had  the  police  not  intervened".   Thus,  Judge  Kainth
    "failed to consider the offending holistically and as contributing to a
    societal problem as highlighted by the sentencing judge".

56. We do  not  find  that  these  criticisms  have  force.   Applying  our
    synthesis of the binding case law on  the  meaning  of  "cause  serious
    harm", it is apparent that Judge Kainth  had  regard  to  all  relevant
    circumstances.  In setting out the remarks of the sentencing  judge  at
    paragraph 21 of his decision, and in what he said at the  beginning  of
    paragraph 22, Judge Kainth was well aware of the reason that Parliament
    has seen fit to criminalise the possession of a  bladed  article  in  a
    public  place.   In  doing  so,  Parliament  intended  to  reduce   the
    prevalence of crimes of violence  involving  knives,  by  criminalising
    their possession, in certain circumstances.

57.  As we have seen, however, in order for the offence to  be  categorised
    as one that has "caused serious harm", there must be some evidence that
    actual harm has been caused.  In the case of the claimant, Judge Kainth
    was entitled to find that no such harm had ensued.   The  claimant  had
    not brandished the knife.  Whilst the claimant's  explanation  was,  of
    course, not a valid mitigation of the offence  of  possession  -  since
    carrying a knife for the avowed purpose of self-defence is part of  the
    problem that the criminalisation of knife  possession  is  intended  to
    address - it was not an irrelevant factor in the judge's assessment  of
    whether the offence had "caused serious harm" for the purposes of  Part
    5A of the 2002 Act.

58. At paragraph 24, Judge Kainth had regard to "the  Sentencing  Counsel's
    [sic] guidelines of bladed articles and offensive weapons".   He  noted
    that the offence came within category A for culpability "because by the
    very nature of the lock knife it is a bladed article".  So far as  harm
    was concerned, the claimant's offence did not come  within  category  1
    "because the offence was not committed at a school or other place where
    vulnerable people are likely to be present, it  was  not  committed  in
    prison, it was not committed in circumstances where there was a risk of
    serious disorder or serious alarm  and  distress".   We  consider  that
    Judge Kainth was entitled to have regard to those matters.  Whilst  the
    claimant's possession of a knife plainly carried the risk of harm, were
    the claimant to have encountered those whom he alleged to  fear,  Judge
    Kainth was in our view entitled to regard such a risk as not  amounting
    to actual harm, or as contributing to actual harm.

59. At paragraph 26 of his decision, Judge  Kainth  was  referring  to  the
    sentencing guidance regarding prevalence.  This guidance provides that,
    in order for the prevalence of an offence to play a  material  part  in
    the sentencing exercise, evidence needs to be provided to the court  by
    a responsible body or  by  a  senior  police  officer.   Even  if  such
    material is provided, a  sentencer  will  only  be  entitled  to  treat
    prevalence as an aggravating factor if satisfied that the level of harm
    caused in a particular  locality  is  significantly  higher  than  that
    caused elsewhere; that the circumstances can properly be  described  as
    exceptional; and that it is just  and  proportionate  to  increase  the
    sentence for such a factor in  the  particular  case  being  sentenced.
    Otherwise, sentencing will, in any event, take  account  of  collective
    social  harm,  with   offenders   being   normally   sentenced   by   a
    straightforward application of the guidelines without  aggravation  for
    the fact that their activity contributed to  a  harmful  social  effect
    upon a neighbourhood or community.

60. We conclude that, in  saying  what  he  did  at  paragraph  26  of  his
    decision, Judge Kainth was aware of the fact that  "prevalence"  could,
    in theory, be relevant to his  assessment  of  whether  the  claimant's
    offence had "caused serious harm".  It might be said that the  guidance
    on prevalence, with its reference to "a harmful social  effect  upon  a
    neighbourhood or community" supports the Secretary of State's criticism
    of paragraph 22 of  the  decision,  where  the  judge  concentrated  on
    whether the claimant's offence had caused  "physical  or  psychological
    harm".  In our view, however, such criticism remains  misplaced,  since
    Judge  Kainth's  conclusion  accords  with  paragraph  53(3)(h)  above,
    whereby the contribution of an  offence  to  a  serious  or  widespread
    problem is not sufficient; there needs to be  some  evidence  that  the
    offence has caused  serious  harm  (see  paragraphs  41  and  66  of  R
    (Mahmood)).

61. For these reasons, we conclude that Judge Kainth did not err in law  in
    concluding that the claimant's offence was not  one  that  had  "caused
    serious harm", so as to make the claimant a "foreign criminal" for  the
    purposes of Part 5A of the 2002 Act.



(b) The relationship between Part 5A and deportation decisions

62. The remaining question, upon which  we  gave  the  Secretary  of  State
    permission to amend her grounds, is whether Judge Kainth erred  in  law
    in the use he made of that finding, in  paragraphs  28  to  30  of  his
    decision.  As we have seen, Judge Kainth concluded that his finding  on
    serious harm meant that the decision of the Secretary of State "is  not
    in accordance with the law.  The deportation order should not have been
    issued and it would be disproportionate to remove the  [claimant]  from
    the jurisdiction of the United Kingdom"  (paragraph  28).   Because  of
    that conclusion, Judge Kainth did not "consider Article  8  ...  within
    the amended, Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, section 117A-
    Section 117D" (paragraph 30).

63. In this jurisdiction, it is often dangerous for a judicial  fact-finder
    to decide that he or she can deploy a "short cut", so as to  avoid  the
    exercise inherent in Article 8(2) of deciding  whether  removal  of  an
    individual would be a disproportionate interference with the Article  8
    rights of the latter and/or some other person or persons.  Such is  the
    case here.  Judge Kainth fell into legal error at paragraphs 28  to  30
    of his decision.

64. In order to understand why this is so, it is  necessary  to  return  to
    section 3(5) of the 1971 Act.  As we have seen, this  provides  that  a
    person who is not a British citizen is liable to deportation if (in our
    case) the Secretary of State deems his deportation to be  conducive  to
    the public good.  In  her  decision  of  19  September  2018,  that  is
    precisely what the Secretary of State decided.   Having  described  the
    claimant's conviction for possession of a knife and his three  previous
    convictions for four offences between December 2016 and July 2017,  the
    Secretary of State said: "as result of your criminality  the  Secretary
    of State deems your deportation to be conducive to the public good  and
    as such you are liable to deportation under section 3(5)(a) ...".

65. It will be observed that, in reaching that conclusion, the Secretary of
    State did not purport to categorise the claimant  as  someone  who  had
    committed an offence that caused serious harm.  Even if  she  had  done
    so, however, the Secretary of State's decision  would,  in  any  event,
    only be susceptible of challenge on "Wednesbury" grounds.

66. The significance of the Secretary of State concluding that  a  person's
    deportation is conducive to the public  good  was  highlighted  by  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal in EO (Deportation appeals:  scope  and
    process) Turkey [2007] UKAIT 00062.  At paragraph 31, the AIT said  the
    following:-

         "Contrary to what might be supposed, it is  clear  throughout  that
         the liability to deportation does not arise  from  an  individual's
         misconduct.  It arises from the Secretary of State taking a view: a
         person is liable to deportation under s3(5)(a) if the Secretary  of
         State deems his deportation to be conducive to the public good.  In
         cases of this sort, therefore, the first stage is  the  process  by
         which the Secretary of State decides that a person's deportation is
         conducive to the public good.  It is that decision of the Secretary
         of State which renders the individual liable to deportation."

67. Since EO was decided, the UK Borders Act 2007 provides  for  "automatic
    deportation" in the case of a person who is a  "foreign  criminal",  as
    defined in section 32(1) to (3).  Section 32(4) provides that  for  the
    purpose of section 3(5)(a) of  the  1971  Act,  the  deportation  of  a
    foreign criminal is conducive to the public  good.   In  such  a  case,
    therefore, the Secretary of State is not  required  to  reach  her  own
    decision on that matter in a  particular  case.   Furthermore,  section
    32(5) provides that the Secretary of  State  must  make  a  deportation
    order in respect of a foreign criminal, subject to  the  exceptions  in
    section 33.  None of this,  however,  impacts  upon  the  Secretary  of
    State's continuing  ability  to  deem  a  person's  deportation  to  be
    conducive to the public good, thereby  making  that  person  liable  to
    deportation.

68. The distinction between the  Secretary  of  State's  power  to  deem  a
    person's deportation to be conducive to the public  good,  because  the
    Secretary of State considers that their offending  has  caused  serious
    harm or that they are a persistent offender, and the task of the First-
    tier Tribunal in determining an appeal against the Secretary of State's
    decision to  refuse  a  human  rights  claim  by  a  person  liable  to
    deportation, is evident from SC (Zimbabwe).  As set out in paragraph 29
    above, in paragraph 26  of  his  judgment  in  that  case,  McCombe  LJ
    rejected the submission of Counsel for the Secretary of State that:

        "s.117D(2)(c)  requires  a  court  or  tribunal,  in  applying  that
       provision to attribute  "significant  weight"  to  the  Secretary  of
       State's anterior view that paragraph 398(c) of  the  Rules  has  been
       satisfied for the purposes of her own decision to make a  deportation
       order in the first place" (our emphasis).

    There is no suggestion there or, indeed,  elsewhere  in  the  Court  of
    Appeal authorities mentioned above, that a finding  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, in a human  rights  appeal,  that  an  individual  is  not  a
    "foreign criminal" for the purposes of Part 5A of the  2002  Act  means
    the Secretary of State's "anterior" decision under section 3(5)(a)  and
    section 5 of the 1971 Act must, without more, be treated as unlawful.

69. The reason for that is plain.  Section 117A of the 2002 Act  delineates
    the scope or application of Part 5A.  Subsection (1) explains that Part
    5A applies where a court or tribunal is required to determine whether a
    decision made under the Immigration Acts breaches Article 8  and  would
    as a result be unlawful.  In an  appeal  under  section  82(1)(b),  the
    decision in question is the refusal by the  Secretary  of  State  of  a
    human rights claim; that is to say, the refusal of a claim, defined  by
    section 113(1), that removal from the United Kingdom or  a  requirement
    to leave it would be unlawful under section 6 of  the  1998  Act.   The
    First-tier Tribunal is, therefore, not deciding an appeal  against  the
    decision to make a deportation order and/or the decision  that  removal
    of the individual is, in the Secretary of State's  view,  conducive  to
    the public good. It is concerned  only  with  whether  removal  etc  in
    consequence of the refusal of the human rights  claim  is  contrary  to
    section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998. If Article 8(1) is engaged, the
    answer to that question requires a finding on whether removal etc would
    be a disproportionate interference with Article 8 rights.

70. As was established by the House of Lords in Huang v Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department [2007] UKHL 11, on an appeal of this kind,  the
    First-tier Tribunal must itself  strike  the  proportionality  balance,
    rather than leaving that matter to the Secretary of State, subject only
    to a Wednesbury challenge.  Part 5A is intended to guide the First-tier
    Tribunal in that exercise.  The fact that, in doing so, the  First-tier
    Tribunal must decide for itself whether the  individual  is  a  foreign
    criminal within the meaning of section 117D(2) will, of course,  inform
    the Tribunal's conclusion on whether the refusal of  the  human  rights
    claim is, or is not, unlawful  and,  accordingly,  whether  the  appeal
    should be allowed or dismissed.  There is, however, nothing in Part  5A
    that requires  or  permits  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  extend  that
    exercise to the  anterior  deportation  decisions  with  which  we  are
    concerned.

71. At paragraph 28 of his decision, Judge Kainth purported to rely upon  a
    decision of the Upper Tribunal that is, in fact, called Charles  (human
    rights appeal - scope) [2018] UKUT 89 (IAC).  That  decision,  however,
    underscored the point that a human rights appeal can be determined only
    through the provisions of the ECHR; usually Article 8.  In Charles, the
    Upper Tribunal found that, because of the date on  which  the  claimant
    entered the United Kingdom, the claimant was exempt from deportation by
    reason of section 7 of the 1971 Act.  Since deportation was  the  means
    by which the Secretary of State proposed to remove  the  claimant,  the
    fact that she had no legal power to do  so  was  relevant  in  deciding
    whether removal would be a disproportionate interference with Article 8
    rights.

72. By the same token, in  the  present  case,  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decisions that the claimant's deportation would  be  conducive  to  the
    public good and that a deportation order should be made in  respect  of
    him, would have to be  unlawful  on  public  law  grounds  before  that
    anterior  aspect  of  the  decision-making  process  could  inform  the
    conclusion to be reached by the First-tier Tribunal in the human rights
    appeal.  To reiterate, such unlawfulness  is  not  established  by  the
    judge's conclusion for the purposes of Part 5A of the 2002 Act that the
    individual is not a "foreign criminal" within the  meaning  of  section
    117D(2).

73. Ms Childs submitted that, even if Judge Kainth had fallen into error at
    paragraphs 28 to 30 of his decision, that error was not material.   Had
    the judge gone on to make an Article 8 proportionality  assessment,  Ms
    Childs submitted it was inevitable that the assessment would  have  led
    to the allowing of the claimant's appeal.

74. We are unable to agree.  The fact that, on the finding  of  the  judge,
    section 117C would not apply does not mean that the claimant  would  be
    bound to succeed.  Paragraph 396 of the Immigration Rules says:-

         "Where a person is liable to deportation the presumption  shall  be
         that the public interest requires deportation."

75. It is, therefore, for the claimant to rebut that presumption.  In order
    to do so, a finding is needed on the effect of deportation, not only on
    the claimant but also on members of his family in the  United  Kingdom.
    Judge Kainth made no  findings  on  these  issues.   He  also  made  no
    findings on the considerations  set  out  in  section  117B.   In  that
    regard, we observe that section 117B(6)  cannot  assist  the  claimant,
    since he is a person who is liable to deportation.

76. Accordingly, we find that there is an error of law  in  Judge  Kainth's
    decision, such that that decision should be set  aside,  save  for  the
    finding that the claimant's offence of having a knife/bladed article in
    a public place did not cause serious harm within the meaning of Part 5A
    and that the claimant is, accordingly, not to be treated as  a  foreign
    criminal for the purposes of that Part.  For the reasons we have given,
    the contention that the  claimant  is  a  persistent  offender  is  not
    available to the  Secretary  of  State,  as  an  alternative  means  of
    invoking section 117C.

77. In view of the nature and extent  of  the  fact-finding  that  will  be
    required in order to re-decide the matter, we have concluded  that  the
    appeal should be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Since  Judge
    Kainth  has  not  undertaken   the   task   of   deciding   where   the
    proportionality balance should lie; and given the nature of  the  error
    of law which has caused us to set aside his decision, we conclude  that
    it is appropriate to remit the case to Judge Kainth.  The parties  will
    need to adduce evidence as to the up-to-date position, as it  bears  on
    the Article 8 issue.



I. DECISION

The Secretary of State's appeal is allowed. The decision of  the  First-tier
Tribunal is set aside, subject to what is said in paragraph 76  above.   The
case is remitted  to  Judge  Kainth  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  its
reconsideration, on that basis.  If it is  not  reasonably  practicable  for
Judge Kainth to hear the case, another First-tier Tribunal judge may do  so,
on the same basis.

No anonymity direction is made.




                      Signed   Mr Justice Lane        Date: 19 November
                      2020






                      The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                      President of the Upper Tribunal
                      Immigration and Asylum Chamber
