
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


            Marghia (procedural fairness) [2014] UKUT 00366 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 26 June 2014                               |                             |
|Delivered orally                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                    THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE HADDON-CAVE
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Miss Tamar Marghia

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Hopkin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms M Malhotra, Counsel

The common law duty of fairness is essentially  about  procedural  fairness.
There is no absolute  duty  at  common  law  to  make  decisions  which  are
substantively "fair". The Court will not interfere with decisions which  are
objected to as being substantively unfair, except the decision  in  question
falls foul of the Wednesbury test i.e. that no reasonable decision-maker  or
public body could have arrived at such a decision.
It is a matter  for  the  Secretary  of  State  whether  she  exercises  her
residual discretion. The exercise of such residual  discretion,  which  does
not appear in  the  Immigration  Rules,  is  absolutely  a  matter  for  the
Secretary of State and nobody else, including the  Tribunal  -  Abdi  [1996]
Imm AR 148.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Chamberlain dated and promulgated on 15 April
    2014 whereby the judge allowed an appeal by  the  Claimant  Miss  Tamar
    Marghia against a decision of the Secretary of State dated 12  December
    2013 refusing the claimant leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
    Student on the grounds that the Secretary of State  was  not  satisfied
    that the claimant qualified for leave under part 6A of the  Immigration
    Rules. In the same decision letter the claimant  was  notified  that  a
    decision had been made to remove the claimant under Section 47  of  the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 2. The brief facts were these. The Claimant came to the United Kingdom  as
    a  Tier  4  (General)  Student  Migrant  under  paragraph  245  of  the
    Immigration Rules. The claimant's visa  expired  on  4  December  2013.
    Shortly before the expiry of that visa, the claimant had found  another
    course at the Docklands Academy London which was due to commence on  16
    December 2013. As the judge held, the start date of  16  December  2013
    was one of the main reasons that the claimant had chosen the course  at
    the Docklands Academy London.

 3. The Claimant stated in her evidence that the course  was  suitable  for
    her "according to conditions such as the beginning date". Unfortunately
    for the Claimant, subsequently the Docklands Academy London changed the
    date for the start of the course from 16 December 2013  to  13  January
    2014.  The Docklands Academy London then issued the CAS letter for  the
    claimant.

 4. It is apparent from the judgment at paragraph 11, that the  change  was
    made due to Christmas.  The Docklands Academy  London  explained  in  a
    further letter that it was their change  which  had  disadvantaged  the
    claimant through no fault of her own.

 5. The problem for the claimant was that the change in date meant that she
    fell outside the relevant requirements of the Rules and  in  particular
    paragraph 248ZX(i) which required the course which was the  subject  of
    the new CAS letter to begin no more than 28 days after  the  expiry  of
    her previous visa. The mathematics are such that  the  new  start  date
    meant that the course in question at the Docklands Academy  London  was
    scheduled to start more than 28 days after the expiry of the claimant's
    previous visa on 4 December 2013, namely about fourteen days later than
    the 28 day window.

 6. In the Determination and Reasons  Judge  Chamberlain  considered  these
    matters and the fact that the claimant had only learnt on  25  February
    2013 that the course date had been changed, (i.e. only nine days before
    her visa expired) and clearly had sympathy for the claimant. The  judge
    said this:

         "15. I find that the respondent is under a common law duty  to  act
             with fairness. I find that she had not been fair  in  refusing
             the claimant's application.  I find that the claimant was  not
             at fault..."

 7. In the grounds of appeal the Secretary of State argues that  the  judge
    had found that the Secretary of State had not acted with "fairness" but
    had not explained the reasons for that finding.

 8. Ms Malhotra for the claimant, doing her  level  best  for  her  client,
    submitted that the decision of the Secretary of State dated 12 December
    2013 was unfair because (a) if one took away eight days or so  for  the
    Christmas period, the gap between the 28  day  window  allowed  by  the
    Rules and the commencement of the course with the new date was 'only  a
    handful of days' and (b) as the judge found it was not the fault of the
    claimant that she had found herself in this predicament.

 9. The problem with that submission (as Ms Malhotra accepted) is  that  it
    fails to use the word "fairness" in its correct sense.  The "common law
    duty to act with fairness", which the judge refers to in  paragraph  15
    of the Determination and Reasons, is the common law duty of a decision-
    maker or a public body to make decisions in a  manner  which  is  fair,
    i.e. the common law duty of fairness is about  procedural  fairness  in
    this context. There is, however, no absolute duty at common law to make
    decisions which are substantively "fair". The Court will only interfere
    with administrative decisions which are unfair in  this  second,  i.e.,
    substantive,  sense  where  they  can  be  shown   to   be   Wednesbury
    unreasonable, i.e. that no reasonable  decision-maker  or  public  body
    could have arrived at such a decision.

10. Ms Malhotra and the Judge erroneously use the term  "fairness"  in  the
    second, substantive sense. It is not suggested, however (nor  could  it
    be) that the decision in question was Wednesbury unreasonable. It was a
    matter for the Secretary of State as to whether or  not  she  exercised
    any residual discretion to permit the Claimant to have a further Tier 4
    visa notwithstanding her clear inability to meet the criteria  set  out
    in the Rules. That exercise of such residual discretion, which does not
    appear in the Rules, is absolutely a matter for the Secretary of  State
    and nobody else, including the court (see Abdi [1996] Imm AR 148).  The
    Court should not have sought to impose its own  view.  This  trespassed
    upon the proper functions of the executive.  Nor  could  there  be  any
    suggestion of any procedural unfairness in this  case.  The  mere  fact
    that the judge in question may have had sympathy for  the  claimant  or
    regarded the substantive decision of the Secretary of State as "unfair"
    is not to point.

11. This was a case in which the Rules were crystal-clear and  the  failure
    to meet the breach of the Rules was manifest. It was therefore open  to
    the Secretary of State to  make  the  decision  that  she  did  in  her
    decision letter of 12 December 2013, the claimant having failed to meet
    the requirements of paragraph 245ZX(i) of the  Immigration  Rules.  The
    judge erred in law and we set aside the decision and re-make it.

12. Mr Hopkin for the Secretary of State has very fairly mentioned the fact
    that the claimant is subject to a Section 47 removal order and referred
    to the fact that Article 8 was the subject of some  discussion  in  the
    judgment. It is, however, apparent that Article 8 was  not  pleaded  in
    the grounds of appeal against the original decision of the Secretary of
    State dated 12 December 2013 and therefore is not before us. Even if it
    had been pleaded in the context of a Tier 4 Student it is difficult  in
    this case to see any grounds for an Article 8 argument in this case  in
    any event. No further submissions were made by Ms Malhotra.

13. For the above reasons, the appeal by the Secretary of State is allowed.
    The appeal by the claimant against the decision  of  the  Secretary  of
    State dated 12th December 2013 is dismissed.

Conclusion

The  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  erred  in  law  and  we  set   aside   the
determination to be re-made.
The appeal by the Secretary of State is allowed.
The appeal by the claimant against the decision of  12th  December  2013  is
    dismissed.




Signed                                  Date 23rd July 2014


Mr Justice Haddon-Cave

