
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

         VHR (unmeritorious grounds) Jamaica [2014] UKUT 00367 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 10 July 2014                               |                             |
|Delivered orally                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                    THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE HADDON-CAVE
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                                     VHR
                       (Anonymity direction in force)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Chelvan, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer



Appeals should not  be  mounted  on  the  basis  of  a  litany  of  forensic
criticisms of  particular  findings  of  the  First  Tier  Tribunal,  whilst
ignoring the basic legal test which the appellant has to meet.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Trevaskis sitting at Newport with Dr J O de Barros,  promulgated  on  7
    April 2014. The First-tier Tribunal dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal
    against a decision by the Secretary  of  State  to  make  an  automatic
    deportation order triggered by the appellant's conviction for  wounding
    committed in July 2010. The deportation order was made  on  2  December
    2013 pursuant to Section 32(5) of the United Kingdom Borders Act 2007.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica who was born in 1973.  He  claims
    to have entered the United Kingdom in December  2001.  He  applied  for
    leave to remain but was removed as an overstayer  in  August  2004.  In
    2005 he applied for entry clearance and re-entered the  United  Kingdom
    in August 2005. In 2008 he applied for indefinite leave  to  remain  as
    the spouse of a settled person, which was granted in September 2008.

 3. He is the father of various children in the UK, the third of which  was
    born in November 2010, C, whose mother is an Irish national, RB, who is
    his current partner.

 4. On 29 July 2010 the appellant committed a  section  18  wounding,  i.e.
    wounding with intent to do grievous bodily harm. He was convicted on 15
    December 2011 and sentenced to four years' imprisonment. The sentencing
    judge, His Honour Judge Roach, sitting at  Bristol  Crown  Court,  said
    this:

         "The wounding is serious, plainly.   Serious  because  you  used  a
         knife which you had on you and serious because  the  injuries  that
         the victim received are significant. That man is  left-handed.   He
         has loss of sensation now in his hand.  He cannot make a fist.   He
         cannot use it properly. The prognosis is uncertain but  I  sentence
         you on the basis that he will regain the use of his hand."

 5. The judge concluded that the starting point for the sentence  was  four
    and a half years reduced by six months for the appellant's  late  plea.
    The appellant served two years in prison and was  released  in  January
    2014. He was then subject to an automatic deportation order as set  out
    above.

 6. Mr Chelvan, who appears today  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  in  this
    appeal, puts aside the majority of the previous grounds of  appeal  and
    argues this appeal on the basis of three grounds. He submits in essence
    that the First-tier Tribunal (a) had not referred to salient  parts  of
    the evidence, in particular the evidence of the appellant's partner and
    the appellant's partner's mother, (b) had not taken into account  other
    evidence put forward by the appellant as regards the  strength  of  the
    "bond" of the appellant with his disabled son C, and (c) had failed  to
    give sufficient reasons for its decision such as to  give  uncertainty,
    as Mr Chelvan put it, to the decision and the reasons for it.

 7. In our judgement, the problem  with  Mr  Chelvan's  approach  and  this
    appeal is that he has sought to comb through the judgment as if it  was
    a statute and pick bits here and there out of context  whilst  ignoring
    the  overall  findings  of  the  Determination  and  Reasons  and   the
    conclusions.

 8. We see these sorts of manufactured appeals quite  often  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal and deprecate them. It is not necessary for judges to  record,
    analyse, rehearse and repeat the entire interstices  of  the  evidence.
    The task of the First-tier Tribunal is to make reasoned findings on the
    key issues in the case and a clear decision.

 9. Mr Chelvan has  with  some  tenacity  and  skill,  it  might  be  said,
    subjected these Determination and Reasons to forensic  criticism  which
    in our judgement is quite unwarranted and unreal. We highlight the  key
    paragraphs of the Determination and Reasons in order to demonstrate the
    vacuity of Mr Chelvan's artificial criticisms.

10.  First,  in  paragraphs  16  to  20  the  Tribunal  recorded  in   some
    considerable detail the evidence of the  appellant's  partner  and  her
    mother. It did  so  fairly.  This  was  in  the  course  of  a  lengthy
    recitation of the evidence in paragraphs 2 to 21 of  the  Determination
    and Reasons.

11.  Second,  after  then  setting  out  the  respondent  and   appellant's
    submissions in considerable detail, together  with  the  relevant  case
    law, the Tribunal said this under the heading DETERMINATION:

         "35. We have considered all the evidence presented  to  us  by  the
             respondent and the appellant, both in their respective bundles
             and as presented to us at the hearing."

12. Third, the Tribunal then went on to state the relevant test in  a  case
    of automatic  deportation,  (which  is  a  test  that  Mr  Chelvan  has
    essentially sought to ignore) namely the need to demonstrate  that  the
    exception under section 33 of the UK Borders Act 2007 applies, viz that
    section 32(4) and (5) do not apply as an exception in this section.  At
    no stage during Mr Chelvan's submissions did he properly  grapple  with
    that threshold. He confined himself to rummaging around  in  the  lower
    branches of the evidence to say  airily  that  the  findings  had  been
    unfair, unsupported or not explained in the reasons, etc.

13. Fourth, a key passage in the Determination and Reasons is to  be  found
    in paragraph 37. This was in the context of  the  Regulations  and  the
    findings regarding the relationship of the appellant with  his  partner
    RB. The Tribunal found that the relationship between the appellant  and
    RB was not a durable one so that the appellant did not  qualify  as  an
    extended family member. The Tribunal went on to say this:

         "The only period of cohabitation was from January  2014  until  the
         date of hearing; the appellant retained his own flat until  he  was
         forced to give it up as a result of being imprisoned;  he  said  he
         had no plans to  marry  her;  he  has  effectively  been  providing
         babysitting services since [C] was born, at first on a non-resident
         basis, and latterly on a residential basis because he lost his  own
         flat, and needed an address for bail purposes on his release."

14. Mr Chelvan argued that this finding was  in  the  context  of  the  EEA
    Regulations and, therefore, the Tribunal should have gone on  later  in
    the Determination and Reasons to consider the appellant's  relationship
    with C afresh. We disagree.  This was plainly a general finding by  the
    Tribunal, which went to the heart of this  case,  (a)  in  the  general
    family context, (b) in the context of the relationship with RB and  (c)
    in the context of  the  relationship  between  the  appellant  and  his
    children including C.  What  is  abundantly  clear  from  this  central
    finding  is  that  the  Tribunal  concluded  that  the  appellant   was
    essentially opportunistic, had no plans to marry RB, he had mainly been
    providing effectively babysitting services on a  non-residential  basis
    and the only reason that he then cohabited was  because  he  needed  an
    address for bail purposes on his release.

15. When we come to consider the concluding findings later in the  judgment
    it is clear that this central finding was one which the Tribunal had at
    the forefront of its mind.

16. Fifth, at paragraph 39 of the Tribunal's Determination and Reasons  the
    Tribunal set out in some detail the sentencing remarks of  the  learned
    sentencing judge. Mr Chelvan  sought  to  criticise  the  Tribunal  for
    referring to the  sentencing  remarks  without  quoting  the  following
    finding of the sentencing judge:

         "I accept you are a caring family man.  I accept  that  your  young
         son is devoted to you and has his own difficulties and will be hurt
         by the separation from you..."

17. We do not think that that criticism of  the  Tribunal  is  in  any  way
    justified, or, frankly, sensible. We note that in the relevant copy  of
    the sentencing remarks which we have in our papers before us, the  very
    sentence which we have quoted is one which was actually highlighted  by
    the Tribunal itself who clearly, as is apparent from  paragraph  39  of
    the judgment itself, had read the entire sentencing remarks  and  taken
    them on board.

18. Sixth, at paragraph 47  under  the  heading  of  "best  interests"  the
    Tribunal said this:

         "It has not been suggested that the children should not continue to
         live with their  mothers.  If  the  appellant  is  deported,  their
         contact with him will  continue  by  indirect  means  using  modern
         communication methods. There will be some loss of  help  with  care
         for the children, particularly [C], but there is no  evidence  that
         this  will  have  insurmountable  adverse  consequences  for  them.
         Having regard to their ages they are all focused on their  mothers.
         We repeat our finding that the appellant and  [RB]  are  not  in  a
         durable relationship; therefore it follows that we do not find that
         there is a close and genuine bond between them; neither do we  find
         that  his  deportation  will  sever  a   genuine   and   subsisting
         relationship between parent and child EB (Kosovo) SSHD [2008]  UKHL
         41.  The appellant has demonstrated a lack of ability to commit  to
         one  relationship  for  any  length  of  time,  and   his   current
         relationship is based upon only three months' cohabitation.  We  do
         not find that he has demonstrated a level of commitment to  any  of
         his children."

19. Mr Chelvan submits that this paragraph amounted to an illegitimate leap
    to conclusions without  reference  to,  or  taking  into  account,  the
    evidence before the Tribunal. We disagree. The  Tribunal  had  recorded
    expressly at paragraph 37 that  it  had  considered  all  the  evidence
    presented to it in the case, and it is plain from paragraph 37 that the
    Tribunal came to clear and cogent conclusions on the central  issue  in
    the case which was the relationship between the appellant and RB and  C
    in what was said to be a family context.

20. The Tribunal's central finding that the manifest lack of commitment  of
    the appellant to  RB  and  his  inability  to  commit  himself  to  any
    relationships for any length of time obviously fundamentally undermines
    the appellant's argument that he had a  commitment  or  a  bond  of  an
    enduring nature towards C.

21. Seventh, the Tribunal went on in paragraph 48 to consider  the  general
    questions regarding the appellant and his family and private  life  and
    said this:

         "48. The appellant has family in Jamaica  (see  above);  he  is  40
             years old and has no medical issues and so  will  be  able  to
             establish himself in Jamaica, find work and a place  to  live.
             In the short term we find that he can stay  with  his  mother.
             He has not shown any evidence of ties to the  UK,  other  than
             his claims to family life or lives; he has not worked for  any
             sustained period and has not shown that he has established any
             private life."

    Mr Chelvan criticised this paragraph of  the  Tribunal's  Determination
    and Reasons as well and submitted that it was  'perverse'  because  the
    appellant had demonstrated some private life.

22. It is true that the  evidence  shows  that  the  appellant  had  formed
    relationships with a number of women and had  children  whilst  in  the
    United Kingdom with those women. However, as put to Mr Chelvan,  it  is
    quite clear that what the Tribunal was effectively saying is  that  the
    appellant had not established any sufficient private life to be of  any
    real relevance in this case.

23. Deportation is recognised by the authorities as having the  unfortunate
    effect that families, whether close or not close, will be  split.   The
    panel in this case considered all the evidence, as they said, and  gave
    anxious scrutiny to the  key  issues  about  the  true  nature  of  the
    relationship of the appellant with RB and C. The weight to be given  to
    the evidence was a matter  for  them.  The  concluding  proportionately
    finding, which was one which Mr Chelvan also ignored,  is  that  to  be
    found in paragraph 52 which reads as follows:

         "Having undertaken the balancing exercise required  to  assess  the
         proportionality of the respondent's  decision,  we  have  concluded
         that the need for the deportation of the  appellant  outweighs  the
         consequences for him personally.  He has committed a  very  serious
         offence  of  violence,  and  received  a  sentence  reflective   of
         society's condemnation of  such  crime,  particularly  involving  a
         knife and causing considerable suffering  to  the  victim.  To  the
         extent that the deportation  decision  will  break  up  any  family
         relationships which the appellant may have formed in the  UK,  that
         is an inevitable, and in this case necessary,  consequence  of  his
         actions."

24. Mr Chelvan has failed at all stages to grapple with the  relevant  test
    which the Tribunal was having to consider, namely  whether  there  were
    circumstances in this case such as to enable a finding to be made  that
    one or more of the section 33 exceptions applied. Instead, he subjected
    the decision to a tedious litany of forensic criticisms  of  particular
    sentences or paragraphs. This is not how appeals should be mounted.  As
    McCombe LJ in VW (Sri Lanka) [2013] EWCA Civ  522  said:  "Regrettably,
    there is an increasing tendency in immigration cases, when a First-tier
    Tribunal Judge has given a judgment explaining why  he  has  reached  a
    particular decision, of seeking to burrow out  industriously  areas  of
    evidence that have been less fully dealt with than others and  then  to
    use this as a basis for saying the judge's decision is  legally  flawed
    because it did not deal with a particular matter  more  fully.   In  my
    judgement, with respect, that is no basis on which to sustain a  proper
    challenge to a judge's finding of fact".

25. For all these reasons, this appeal is refused.

Decision

   There is no material error of law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
   decision. The determination shall stand.


Anonymity


   The First-tier Tribunal made no order pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of  the
   Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules  2005.   We  make  that
   order pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
   Rules 2008 to protect the identity of the child C.


Signed                                  Date


Mr Justice Haddon-Cave

