
IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

R (on the application of Islam and Pathan) v Secretary of State for the
Home Department (Tier 2 licence-revocation-consequences) [2017] UKUT 00369
(IAC)

                                                                 Field House
                                                                      London


                                                       Heard on: 16 May 2017

                                   Between

                      THE QUEEN (on the application of)
                                SHIFUL ISLAM
                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
                                 and Between

                         IMRANKHAN MAHMDIQBAL PATHAN
                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN
                               - - - - - - - -

For Mr Islam: Mr B Malik, instructed by Londonium Solicitors on behalf of
                  the Applicant.
For the Respondent:     Mr A Payne, instructed by the Government Legal
                  Department

For Mr Pathan:    Mr A Jafar instructed via Direct Access on behalf of the
                  Applicant
For the Respondent:    Mr A Payne, instructed by the Government Legal
                  Department


Unlike the situation for Tier 4 applicants, a person whose sponsor's Tier  2
licence was revoked for non-compliance with the  Immigration  Rules  is  not
entitled to challenge a decision not to provide him/her with a period of  60
days in which to secure an alternative sponsor. Patel [2011] UKUT 211 (IAC)
distinguished.
                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                       APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                                  JUDGMENT

                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -


1.   These two linked cases raise a common issue which makes it  appropriate
    for there to be one decision relating to that issue which is applicable
    equally to each  applicant.   Insofar  as  there  are  specific  points
    relating to either applicant they will be dealt with separately at  the
    close of the determination under headings applicable to each of them.

2.   The central issue in this case is whether an immigration applicant  who
    has applied to the Secretary of State for leave  to  remain  under  the
    Tier 2 (General) Migrant category of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  has
    submitted a certificate of sponsorship from their  sponsoring  employer
    which is valid at the time the  application  is  made  is  entitled  to
    challenge the respondent's decision not to provide them with  a  period
    of 60 days in which to secure an alternative sponsor, in  circumstances
    where the sponsor's Tier 2 licence was revoked for non-compliance  with
    the Immigration Rules.

3.   Mr Islam was granted leave to enter the United  Kingdom  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student on 25 September 2009, and  that  leave  was  extended
    from the initial period elapsing on 30 June 2011 to 4 August 2012.   On
    25 August 2012 he was granted leave to remain as a Tier  1  (Post-Study
    Work) Migrant until 25 August 2014.  On 23 August 2014 he  submitted  a
    Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) application which was refused on 8 December  2014
    and a subsequent appeal was dismissed.

4.   On 1 February 2016 he applied for the  role  of  "Business  Development
    Manager" in an  Indian  restaurant  and  relied  on  a  certificate  of
    sponsorship issued by Tamarind (South West) Limited trading as Viceroy.
     The respondent had concerns as to whether the role  of  the  applicant
    was genuine and as a consequence of enquiries being  made  the  sponsor
    licence of Viceroy was revoked on 21 April 2016.  The refusal  decision
    in the applicant's case was 7 June 2016 on the basis that  he  did  not
    satisfy the requirements of paragraph 245HD(f) of the Immigration Rules
    since the certificate of sponsorship had  been  cancelled  due  to  the
    sponsor having had its Tier 2 licence revoked.

5.   Subsequently on 16 June 2016 the  applicant  submitted  a  request  for
    administrative review and as a consequence of  this  the  decision  was
    maintained on 6 July 2016.  Proceedings were  issued  following  a  PAP
    letter and response, on 13 September 2016.

6.   Mr Pathan was granted leave to enter the United Kingdom  as  a  Tier  4
    dependent partner on 7 September 2009, with leave to  remain  until  31
    December 2012.  That leave was extended  subsequently  until  30  April
    2014.  On 30 January 2013 he submitted  an  application  as  a  Tier  2
    (General) Migrant, relying on a certificate of  sponsorship  issued  by
    Submania Limited and was granted leave to remain until 15 October 2015.
     On 2 September 2015 he submitted a further Tier  2  application  again
    relying on a  certificate  of  sponsorship  issued  by  Submania.   The
    respondent had concerns as to whether the post on offer was  a  genuine
    vacancy, the application was put on hold  awaiting  the  outcome  of  a
    sponsor visit and subsequently on 4 February 2016 Submania was informed
    that its sponsor licence had been  suspended  and  it  was  invited  to
    submit representations within twenty working days.  No  representations
    were made and the licence was revoked on 7 March 2016.  On 7 June  2016
    the applicant's application  was  refused  because  the  CoS  had  been
    cancelled on account of Submania having had its Tier 2 licence revoked.
     An administrative review was sought on 14 June 2016 and refused  on  7
    July 2016.  Thereafter the proceedings were issued.

7.   There was some discussion at the outset about the further decisions  in
    each case which had been issued by the respondent.  It was agreed  that
    I would address what may conveniently in shorthand  be  called  the  60
    days' issue and hear submissions on that alone since if the  appellants
    were unsuccessful in their challenge to the main  decisions  then  that
    would render any challenge to the subsequent decisions academic.

8.   The essence of the argument put forward on behalf  of  both  applicants
    is that it is irrational for the Secretary of State not to provide Tier
    2 applicants with a 60 day period  in  which  to  find  an  alternative
    sponsor.  Their applications  for  leave  to  remain  were  refused  on
    account  of  the  sponsor  losing  its  Tier  2  licence  whilst  their
    applications were under consideration.  In particular the  argument  is
    based on the decision of the Upper Tribunal in Patel [2011]  UKUT  211.
    In this case a Tier 4 applicant  had  been  refused  further  leave  to
    remain as his sponsor had  been  removed  from  the  list  of  approved
    sponsors and he therefore had no sponsorship letter capable of  earning
    him points under the points-based system.  It was held  that  what  was
    required to give  effect  to  the  principle  of  fairness  was  for  a
    direction to be given that the fresh decision was not to be made for  a
    period of  60  days  from  the  date  of  the  reasons  decision  being
    transmitted to the parties to enable the appellant to  obtain  a  fresh
    sponsorship letter that was current and enable his existing application
    to be varied to include study at the institution set  out  in  the  new
    sponsorship letter.

9.   In summary the  argument  on  behalf  of  the  applicants  is  that  an
    immigration applicant is entitled under the  common  law  to  have  the
    Immigration Rules applied to him in a way that adheres to principles of
    fairness.  Reliance is placed on what was said by the Court  of  Appeal
    in Q [2003] EWCA Civ 364, that decision relying also on what  had  been
    said by Lord Mustill in Doody [1994] 1 AC 531 at  560.   It  is  argued
    that whether the principle of fairness had to be applied identically or
    differently depends on the context  of  the  legal  and  administrative
    system in question and that  the  Immigration  Rules  fall  within  the
    definition of the legal and administrative system for the  purposes  of
    Doody.

10.  As regards what was said in Patel, emphasis was placed on paragraph  22
    where it was said that where the applicant  is  both  innocent  of  any
    practice that led to loss of the sponsorship status and ignorant of the
    fact of such loss of status, it seemed to the Tribunal that common  law
    fairness and the principle of treating applicants  equally  meant  that
    each should have an equal opportunity  to  vary  their  application  by
    affording them a reasonable  time  with  which  to  find  a  substitute
    college on which to base their application for an extension of stay  to
    obtain the relevant qualification.  It was noted that in curtailment of
    leave cases the express Home Office policy was to afford a period of 60
    days for such an application to be made, and that period was thought to
    be equally appropriate to the case of refusal of leave.  This was based
    on the principle of fairness.  It was clear that the Home  Office  knew
    that it had suspended the college in question in January  2010  but  no
    one else knew this.  The applicant could not  have  known  subsequently
    that the college's status as an approved sponsor was revoked before his
    application for an extension of stay was decided.  It was  said  to  be
    obviously unfair for the Secretary of State  to  revoke  the  college's
    status after the application had been made  when  it  was  an  approved
    sponsor and not to inform the  applicant  of  such  revocation  nor  to
    afford him an opportunity to vary  the  application.   This  would  not
    apply where the applicant had not been  a  bona  fide  student  at  the
    college or where he had participated in the practices that  might  have
    led the college to lose its sponsorship status  or  where  he  had  had
    actual knowledge of the  termination  of  the  college's  status  as  a
    sponsor.

11.  It was argued that on the one hand fairness dictated that students  who
    had been refused following revocation  of  their  education  provider's
    education sponsor licence should be treated the same as students  whose
    leave had  been  curtailed  and  also  that  it  was,  with  particular
    reference to the instant case, obviously unfair  of  the  Secretary  of
    State to revoke the college's status after  the  application  had  been
    made when it was an approved sponsor and not to inform the applicant of
    such  revocation  and  not  afford  him  an  opportunity  to  vary  the
    application.  It was argued by Mr Malik and Mr Jafar that  this  second
    strand in the Patel ratio was supported in EK (Ivory Coast) [2014] EWCA
    Civ 1517, where it was held that the  principle  of  fairness  did  not
    extend to requiring the Secretary of State to afford an  applicant  who
    had applied for leave to remain under Tier 4 an opportunity to  correct
    an administrative error made  by  her  education  provider  whereby  it
    cancelled her Confirmation of Acceptance of Studies letter owing to  an
    administrative error.  The principle of fairness was said to apply only
    to decisions within the Secretary of State's control.   It  was  argued
    that this reasoning applied equally across to the situation of  Tier  4
    applicants.  This was on the basis that revocation by the Secretary  of
    State of a sponsorship licence in circumstances where the applicant  is
    unaware of that revocation without affording a 60 day period  of  grace
    is unfair.  In addition it  was  argued  that  there  are  no  material
    differences between the two categories as defined and therefore it  was
    unlawful not to apply the  Patel  principle  to  Tier  2  cases.   Both
    categories were set out in part 6A of the Immigration  Rules,  the  PBS
    section,  both  categories  made  reference  to  Appendix  A   of   the
    Immigration Rules and under paragraph 245HD of  the  Immigration  Rules
    some applicants already in the United Kingdom under Tier 4 were part of
    the limited category of applicants  entitled  to  "switch"  to  Tier  2
    without having to leave the United Kingdom  to  seek  entry  clearance.
    Also it was argued to be clear from the respondent's own description of
    the certificate of sponsorship that it was analogous  to  an  education
    sponsor licence.

12.  On behalf of the respondent it is argued that the Patel  principle  has
    been considered only in the context of Tier 4 applicants, in cases such
    as EK (Ivory Coast), and in Kaur  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  13  where  it  was
    confirmed that there was no general  obligation  on  the  Secretary  of
    State to give notice to an applicant for leave to remain or to the Tier
    4  sponsor  that  she  considers  there  to  be  a  deficiency  in  the
    Confirmation  of  Acceptance  for  Studies  before  making  an  adverse
    decision on that basis.  It was noted that it had  been  said  in  Kaur
    that the points-based system was designed  to  achieve  predictability,
    administrative simplicity and certainty and did so at  the  expense  of
    discretion, that is to say it was prescriptive.   The  consequence  was
    that failure to comply with all its detailed requirements would usually
    lead to a failure to earn the points in question and thus refusal.

13.  Also reference was made to Raza [2016] EWCA Civ 36 where  it  was  held
    that fairness did not require a 60 day grace period to be granted to  a
    Tier 4 applicant whose application had  been  made  out  of  time.   In
    addition Mr Payne on behalf of the Secretary of State  argued  that  it
    was relevant to bear in mind when considering Patel that there  was  no
    system of administrative review in 2010.  He also argued  that  it  was
    wrong in Patel to say that no fresh application made  after  a  refusal
    could be considered, as it was the case then and until recently that  a
    person would have 28 days in which to make an application.  The  period
    since late last year was fourteen days.  It was also wrong  to  say  at
    the end of paragraph 22 that in curtailment cases express  Home  Office
    policy was to afford 60 days had such an application to  be  made.   In
    fact it was a  maximum  of  60  days  so  if  a  person  had  60  days'
    outstanding leave they would have  that  period  in  which  to  make  a
    further application but if they only had one day left  on  their  leave
    then they would only have one day in which to make an application.   It
    was not a matter of an equal opportunity as referred to at paragraph 23
    in Patel but in fact a person who was given 60 days under  Patel  would
    be better off than a person whose leave had been curtailed  where  they
    had less than 60 days' leave remaining.  Also if a person's  leave  was
    curtailed they did not have a right to administrative review.  Mr Payne
    argued that the same mistake was made in paragraph 16 in Raza, in  that
    a person's status would not be transformed  from  lawful  resident   to
    unlawful overstayer, but they would have the previously 28 days and now
    fourteen days' opportunity to make an application.

14.  Part of the respondent's argument was to make comparisons  between  the
    objectives underlying Tier 4 and Tier 2, and this was  supplemented  by
    witness statements attached to the detailed grounds, from a Mr Jackson,
    a Senior Executive Officer in the Migration Policy Unit which  is  part
    of the Immigration and Border Policy Directorate, and Ms Buzzeo who  is
    an Assistant Director and the Head of the Employment Route Casework and
    Premium  Customer  Service  Team  responsible  for   the   Work   Study
    Sponsorship Routes within UK Visas and Immigration.  It  is  argued  by
    the respondent, based at least in part  on  these  witness  statements,
    that the objective of Tier 4 is to provide those who wish to  study  in
    the United Kingdom access to appropriate educational  institutions  and
    to regulate demand from prospective students, stating that students are
    service consumers who wish to attend educational courses for which they
    pay for the course provided, and the Tier  4  sponsor  is  the  service
    provider and provides the courses and at  times  the  accommodation  in
    return for a fee.  Tier 4 is based  on  a  high  volume,  over  200,000
    prospective students applying for courses each year with  around  1,200
    sponsors, and the decision to permit a high volume of  Tier  4  student
    applicants reflects the wider social benefits to resident students  and
    to the UK economy.  It  is  noted  that  Tier  4  students  as  service
    consumers will spend funds purchasing  a  service  and  are  likely  to
    invest significant time and money to study the relevant course, and  in
    the circumstances a student who is  refused  further  leave  to  remain
    before having completed his or her course or series  of  courses  risks
    losing the full benefit of the time and money invested.  This  will  be
    equally true whether the leave is curtailed mid course  or  refused  in
    relation to an application made to complete  further  courses.   It  is
    said that this potential prejudice falls to be considered in the  wider
    context of the objectives of Tier 4, namely to facilitate large numbers
    of genuine students to study at educational institutions in the  United
    Kingdom.  It is seen as a  risk  that  Tier  4  applications  might  be
    discouraged if there is a pattern of  genuine  students  being  prevent
    from completing courses, and that  this  is  contrary  to  the  Tier  4
    objectives  of  promoting  access  to  educational  establishments  for
    genuine students. Reference is made to the ease with which students are
    able to find alternative  sponsors  as  courses  offered  by  different
    colleges are often similar when students are often  to  switch  college
    with relative ease and without losing the benefit of the  studies  they
    have undertaken, especially when they are able to transfer  any  course
    credits they have already built up.

15.  It is said that in contrast the Tier 2 route  is  led  by  demand  from
    prospective employers in areas of skills shortage and it is the sponsor
    who is the service consumer who needs an applicant to fill a particular
    skilled vacancy where no resident worker can be found.   The  applicant
    therefore is the service supplier providing the labour in return for  a
    salary.  It is said that the objective of Tier 2 is  to  provide  entry
    into the United Kingdom which is strictly limited to  persons  who  are
    genuinely needed to do a particular job which cannot  be  filled  by  a
    resident worker and for this reason the Tier 2 system  is  designed  to
    operate in a way that promotes the use of resident workers and prevents
    migrant   workers   from   displacing   resident   workers   from   job
    opportunities.  It is said that the criteria in Tier 2 are designed  to
    match a specific worker with a specific vacancy and a specific company,
    there is an annual cap on the number  of  Tier  2  applicants,  Tier  1
    applicants can no longer be granted leave to remain for the purpose  of
    looking for work and the criteria for securing Tier 2 entry  and  leave
    to remain are regularly being modified to encourage  further  employers
    to use  resident  workers,  thereby  reducing  the  number  of  Tier  2
    applicants.

16.  In comparing the two tiers therefore, it is argued  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent that in contrast to Tier 4, the presence of Tier  2  workers
    does not further the wider social and political objectives of promoting
    the employment of resident workers, and since  Tier  2  applicants  are
    service users whereas Tier 4  applicants  are  service  providers,  the
    consequences of refusal of leave are very different in that  whereas  a
    Tier 4 applicant risks being denied the service  he  has  acquired  the
    Tier 2 applicant loses the possibility of providing  further  services.
    While the impact of refusal of leave on  a  Tier  2  applicant  may  on
    occasions be harsh, the fact remains that they do not lose the earnings
    for the work they have  already  carried  out  and  have  obtained  the
    primary benefit they could expect to receive by reason of the grant  of
    leave to remain to fill a specific role of a specific employer.   There
    is no reason to consider that another labour market  gap  exists  which
    cannot be filled by  a  resident  worker  and  for  which  the  Tier  2
    applicant would be suitable, in contrast  to  the  relative  ease  with
    which Tier 4 students can find alternative sponsors.  It is said to  be
    desirable in terms of the wider objectives for Tier 4  students  to  be
    able to complete their education, that the objective of encouraging  UK
    businesses to employ resident workers is  not  advanced  by  permitting
    Tier 2 applicants to remain in the UK looking for other jobs and indeed
    allowing migrants to stay in the UK to look for jobs is contrary to the
    Secretary of State's deliberate decision to remove this route of  entry
    into the United Kingdom.

17.  It is also said that a further significant difference between  the  two
    types of applicant is that students sign up to general courses  whereas
    the job offer made to a Tier 2 applicant is  based  around  a  specific
    match or a specific job between employer and applicant and hence it  is
    reasonable to consider  that  the  relationship  between  employer  and
    employee is closer than that between college and student and  therefore
    reasonable  to  expect  employees  to  have  a  greater  awareness   of
    activities by the sponsor which  are  likely  to  lead  to  a  loss  of
    sponsorship status, particularly when they relate  to  the  role  being
    offered to the applicant.

18.  On behalf of the applicants it is argued that none of the  respondent's
    points in relation to the differences between Tier 4 and  Tier  2  have
    any substance.  It is argued that even if the underlying assertions are
    accepted as correct they do not disturb the strong  similarity  between
    the position of Tier 4 and  Tier  2  applicants  for  the  purposes  of
    fairness.  Matters such as the suggestion that  students  are  consumer
    PBS applicants as opposed to merely ordinary  PBS  applicants  did  not
    form part of the reasoning behind the elaboration of the  principle  of
    fairness in Patel nor that they were present in large numbers  or  able
    to switch  sponsors  easily  which  in  any  event  was  argued  to  be
    contentious, but it was simply a matter  that  they  had  been  treated
    unfairly because their sponsors' licences had, unbeknown to them,  been
    revoked by the Secretary of State.  In particular it  was  argued  that
    the fact that Tier 4 students  are  consumers  with  respect  to  their
    education providers is completely incidental to the  relationship  with
    the Secretary of State as is the case with Tier 2 applicants.  Also  it
    is argued that the number of applicants in fact assists  the  applicant
    given the greater number of Tier  4  applicants  in  relation  to  whom
    potentially 60 day grace period letters would have to be written.  Also
    it is argued that the contention there  is  a  significant  operational
    impact of a 60 day grace period is squarely at odds with the dictum  of
    what was said by the Upper Tribunal in Patel to  the  effect  that  the
    potential cost of imposing a duty having to inform an applicant that  a
    college was no longer sponsored did not diminish the duty to act fairly
    or the way in which the duty was discharged in that case.

19.  It is also argued on behalf of the applicants that there is no  primary
    evidence to support the contention that there is a higher personal cost
    for Tier 4 applicants, bearing in mind  that  Tier  2  applicants  also
    incur significant personal and financial costs in  making  applications
    and that they are likely to be older and  with  dependent  spouses  and
    children.  Also with regard to the implication  of  the  argument  that
    there is an inconsistency between a large number of  Tier  2  employees
    and the objective of trying to  ensure  that  local  businesses  employ
    resident workers that offering Tier 2 applicants a 60 day grace  period
    would lead to a proliferation of the number of Tier 2 migrants  ignored
    the fact that there was an annual limit of 20,700 on the number of Tier
    2 visas.

20.  A further point concerned the so-called  Patel  cycle,  in  respect  of
    which the respondent argued that there was some evidence of a number of
    cases where people took advantage of the 60 day Patel period  to  apply
    to college after college and when the college lost its certificate  had
    the 60 day period in which to make a further application and again  and
    again.  It was argued on behalf of the  applicants  that  this  was  in
    effect inviting the Tribunal to conclude that Patel  and  therefore  EK
    were wrongly decided and that in any event the argument was  not  based
    on evidence.

21.  The witness statement of Mr Jackson sets out the purposes  behind  Tier
    2.   He  notes  that  Tier  2  is  designed  around  the  principle  of
    sponsorship and the purpose of filling  specific  labour  market  needs
    under the route being designed to be  demand  led  by  employers.   The
    government's policy is noted as being one of reducing net migration, as
    a consequence of which Tier 1 (General) and Tier  1  (Post-Study  Work)
    categories were closed and around the same time the limit of 20,700 was
    imposed on Tier 2 which increased  the  skills  threshold  and  English
    language requirement to improve selectivity.

22.  Mr Jackson in his statement notes the 60 day provision with  regard  to
    curtailment which enables a migrant whose leave is  curtailed  if  they
    cease working for their sponsor or the sponsor  loses  its  licence  to
    enable him in a 60 day period starting from the  date  of  decision  to
    curtail leave to sort out his affairs and make  arrangements  to  leave
    the United Kingdom or submit an application for leave to remain  either
    in Tier 2 with another sponsor or in another immigration category.   It
    is said that however seeking another Tier 2 sponsor is not the specific
    reason for the existence of the 60 day provision.

23.  Mr Jackson also notes the decision in Patel and the fact that the  Tier
    4 policy guidance gives effect to the decision in Patel, but  there  is
    no corresponding provision in the published  Tier  2  policy  guidance.
    The point is made that in contrast to a person  whose  leave  has  been
    curtailed, an applicant who is making an application for further  leave
    is considered to be in a fundamentally different position.  It is  said
    that they have no expectation that their stay  will  continue  and,  as
    such, can reasonably be expected to have taken  steps  to  ensure  that
    their affairs are in order should their  application  be  refused.   In
    contrast to those with  existing  leave,  the  possibility  that  their
    application will not be granted cannot be said to be unexpected.  It is
    noted that in such a case if the person still  has  extant  leave  that
    leave will continue until its expiry date.  If the leave expired  while
    the application was under  consideration,  the  applicant's  status  is
    protected under section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971 until such  time
    as the applicant exhausts their  rights  to  immigration  review.   The
    Immigration Rules also allow for a further application to be made up to
    fourteen days after these rights are exhausted.  It is said that  given
    this a further 60 day provision is considered unnecessary.  This, it is
    said, contrasts with  the  negative  actions  involved  in  curtailment
    involving the taking away of existing leave until  there  are  only  60
    days left which is said to be wholly different from giving an applicant
    an extra 60 days which they would otherwise not have had.

24.  With regard to the Patel cycle to which I referred above,  it  is  said
    in  Mr  Jackson's  statement  that  it  is  not  merely  a  theoretical
    possibility that a pattern of applicants in  precisely  that  situation
    has been identified.   The  respondent  has  considered  extending  the
    application of the Patel principles to Tier 2  but  does  not  consider
    this to be either necessary  or  appropriate  given  the  fundamentally
    different relationship between applicant and sponsor and the purpose of
    granting leave as between Tier 4 and Tier 2.  The Tier 4 route  is  led
    by demand from prospective students, the applicant  being  the  service
    consumer and by contrast under Tier 2 the route is led by  demand  from
    prospective employers.  These are points which I  have  set  out  above
    earlier in the context of  the  submissions  that  were  made.   It  is
    relevant in this regard also to  note  what  is  said  in  Ms  Buzzeo's
    statement about the operational impact of implementing a 60  day  grace
    period for Tier 2 applicants which she says would be significant.   She
    set out her reasons why this would be  so  including  writing  to  each
    affected applicant setting out why the  CoS  is  no  longer  valid  and
    specifying a timeframe and associated requirements for securing further
    leave on the basis  of  a  new  CoS  from  a  different  sponsor.   New
    processes would need to be established to ensure that these cases  were
    handled correctly and promptly on  the  expiry  of  the  60  day  grace
    period.   This  was  a  point  also  emphasised  by  Mr  Payne  in  his
    submissions that there would be an extra burden on the system in  terms
    of having to set out new procedures and new systems and that it was not
    a point that was answered simply by Mr Malik's  argument  that  because
    the numbers would be less than in relation to Tier 4, the impact  would
    be less.  In my view it is necessary to take seriously what is said  by
    Ms Buzzeo that the potential administrative burden of  operating  a  60
    day grace period is substantial.  Having said that I bear in mind  what
    was said in Patel about the importance of fairness in relation  to  and
    in contrast to operational difficulties.

25.  It is right in my view as was set out in Mr Payne's skeleton  argument,
    to begin by recalling the legal framework behind the  decision.   I  do
    not propose to set out the relevant provisions of the Immigration Rules
    but rather to concentrate on the legal framework.  It is  important  at
    the outset to recall that this is an application  for  judicial  review
    based on contended irrationality in the respondent's decision in  these
    cases.  Mr Payne placed weight on such matters as the emphasis  in  the
    leading case of Associated Provincial Picture Houses Ltd in  Wednesbury
    Corporation [1948] 1 KB 223 that if a public authority is to  be  found
    to have acted unreasonably the court can only investigate  its  actions
    with a view to seeing if it has taken into account matters  that  ought
    not to be considered or disregarded matters that ought to be taken into
    account.  Unreasonableness was not made out merely  because  particular
    judges might think that a decision went further  than  was  prudent  or
    necessary or  convenient  or  because  it  was  not  accompanied  by  a
    qualification or an exception some  judges  might  think  ought  to  be
    there.   Of the relevant powers given  to  a  Minister  responsible  to
    Parliament the court was even less  willing  to  intervene  a  fortiori
    where the Rules and questions  before  Parliament  were  subject  to  a
    process akin to a negative resolution.   It is clear from MM  (Lebanon)
    [2017] UKSC 10 noting what had been said by the House of Lords in Huang
    [2007] UKHL 11 that there is in general administrative desirability  of
    applying known Rules, so that a system of immigration control is to  be
    workable, predictable, consistent and fair as between one applicant and
    another.  The particular context of this is Article 8 but it does in my
    view have some relevance to the proper approach to my consideration  of
    the issues in this case.  Undue deference is clearly inappropriate, but
    regard must be had to the views of the decision maker  in  an  area  of
    policy such as this.

26.  I must bring these matters together.  In my view, for both  policy  and
    operational reasons, the respondent's decision not to extend the 60 day
    grace period on Tier 4 cases to Tier 2 cases  is  a  rational  one.   I
    accept that there are material distinctions  which  the  respondent  is
    justified in drawing between Tier 4 and  Tier  2.   In  particular  the
    relationship between the applicant and the sponsor and the purposes  of
    granting leave are significantly different in each case.  I do not read
    Patel as requiring in effect that its ratio in the context of Tier 4 is
    directly applicable to Tier 2 cases.  It is clear from that  and  other
    decisions that  fairness  is  essentially  context  driven,  and  I  am
    persuaded that the different context identified by the  respondent  for
    Tier 2 cases is such as to justify not extending the 60 day  policy  to
    those cases.  There are clearly different policy objectives.  The  Tier
    4 objective is to provide persons who  wish  to  study  in  the  United
    Kingdom access to appropriate education at institutions and to regulate
    demand from prospective students, whereas the purpose behind Tier 2  is
    to meet demand from prospective employers in areas of  skills  shortage
    with applicants who can fill  particular  skilled  vacancies  where  no
    resident worker can be found.  There is materiality in the  distinction
    drawn by the respondent between the applicant in a Tier 4 case who is a
    service consumer and the applicant in a Tier 2 case who is the  service
    supplier.  A Tier 4 applicant may or may not have completed a level  of
    study when a further application is made.  In some instances  therefore
    I accept they may be in the same position as a Tier 2 applicant who has
    been able to do the job for which they obtained the visa.  There may in
    some cases therefore be an equivalence of inability to do a new  course
    or take on a new job but that in my mind is not a material  distinction
    such  as  to  indicate  irrationality  in  the  respondent's  decision.
    Inevitably there are going to be points of coincidence between the  two
    systems, but equally I consider there are proper and clear  matters  of
    material difference between the two which I  have  set  out  above.   I
    think there is also some merit to the point made by Mr  Payne  that  it
    may be relatively easy for a Tier 4  student  to  find  an  alternative
    sponsor, whereas it is difficult to see how, even in a 60 day period  a
    Tier 2 applicant would be  able  to  find  another  labour  market  gap
    existing which could not be filled by a resident worker.  I also attach
    some weight to what is said about the logistical  problems,  identified
    at paragraph 17 of Ms Buzzeo's statement, that would arise if a 60  day
    grace period were to be implemented for  Tier  2  applicants.   Clearly
    there would be significant operational difficulties, including the need
    to establish new processes involving  significant  storage,  management
    and review elements.  A reasonable expectation of the Tier 2  applicant
    when granted leave is limited to working  in  a  specific  role  for  a
    specific employer whereas a student may, although as I have said  above
    I accept  not  necessarily,  wish  to  do  further  studies  and  their
    investment in the time they have been studying may  well  be  adversely
    affected if they are unable to take advantage of a  60  day  period  in
    which to find another college.

27.  I conclude therefore that the respondent's decision in these  cases  is
    a rational one, and that it was not unlawful for her not to afford a 60
    days period to the applicants in order to seek to obtain further Tier 2
    employment.

28.  In relation to the other decisions that  were  made,  in  each  case  a
    supplemental decision concerning each applicant dated 5 April 2017,  as
    noted at the start of this decision, I reach no  conclusions  on  those
    matters  since  it  was  common  ground  that   the   judicial   review
    applications are disposed of by  my  decision  on  the  60  day  point.
    ~~~~0~~~~








