
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Sleiman (deprivation of citizenship; conduct) [2017] UKUT 00367 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 May 2017                                 |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                            MOHAMMED SAID SLEIMAN

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Yeo, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

In an appeal against a  decision  to  deprive  a  person  of  a  citizenship
status,  in  assessing  whether  the  appellant  obtained  registration   or
naturalisation "by means of" fraud, false representation, or concealment  of
a material fact, the impugned behaviour must be  directly  material  to  the
decision to grant citizenship.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Lebanon, born on 5 May 1985.  He  claimed
    asylum in May 2004, using his correct name but with a date of birth  of
    9 March 1987. He was refused asylum but granted discretionary leave  to
    remain ("DLR"), as an unaccompanied minor, until 8 March 2005.

 2. Before the expiry of his DLR he made an application for  further  leave
    to remain. That application was outstanding for five  years,  according
    to the respondent's latest decision dated 1 December 2015,  which  also
    states that because the application was outstanding for that period  he
    was granted indefinite leave to remain ("ILR"). That grant of  ILR  was
    on 4 May 2010, apparently under the 'Legacy' scheme. On 19 July 2011 he
    was granted British Citizenship.

 3. Again, according to the respondent's decision of 1  December  2015,  in
    2013 the appellant travelled to Hong Kong  where  he  was  arrested  on
    suspicion of money laundering and his British passport was surrendered.
    It is not necessary to recite  further  the  circumstances  surrounding
    those  events.  Suffice  to   say,   according   to   the   appellant's
    representatives at the time, the appellant then travelled to China  and
    contacted the British embassy. He  provided  a  copy  of  his  Lebanese
    passport which had the different, and now claimed,  date  of  birth  of
    1985. He obtained an emergency travel document and then  came  back  to
    the UK.

 4. It was during the course of those events  that  his  correct,  and  the
    previous incorrect, date of birth was discovered, or as  the  appellant
    would say, volunteered by him.

 5. The 1 December 2015 decision was a decision to deprive the appellant of
    his British Citizenship on the basis that it was obtained fraudulently,
    the appellant having relied on the incorrect date of birth at the time.

 6. The appellant appealed against the decision and his appeal came  before
    a First-tier Tribunal Judge ("the FtJ") at a hearing  on  23  September
    2016, whereby the appeal was dismissed.

 7. The appeal before the Upper Tribunal was originally listed to be  heard
    on 23 March 2017  but  was  adjourned  to  allow  for  the  appellant's
    representatives to amend the grounds of appeal to include reliance on a
    Home Office file note that referred to the appellant having  given  two
    dates of birth but stating that his age was irrelevant to the grant  of
    ILR under the Legacy scheme. The further background to  the  appeal  is
    best illustrated with reference to the FtJ's decision.

    The decision of the FtJ

 8. In terms of the applicable legal framework, the FtJ said  that  it  was
    clear from the decision in  Deliallisi  (British  Citizen:  deprivation
    appeal: Scope) [2013] UKUT 439 (IAC) that the  Tribunal  must  consider
    whether the discretion exercised by the  respondent  should  have  been
    exercised differently, including involving considerations  relating  to
    Article 8 of the ECHR. He stated that removal of the appellant  is  not
    an  automatic  consequence  of  deprivation  of  citizenship,  but  the
    reasonably  foreseeable   consequences   of   deprivation   should   be
    considered. He also stated that he took into account that  even  though
    the appellant previously had indefinite leave to remain, he  would  not
    automatically be entitled to that status again if his  citizenship  was
    revoked.

 9. The FtJ also referred to the cases of Arusha and  Demushi  (deprivation
    of citizenship - delay) [2012] UKUT 80 (IAC) and Secretary of State for
    the Home Department v RK (Algeria) [2007]  EWCA  Civ  868,  the  latter
    decision dealing with the issue of delay in decision-making.

10. In his findings, he assessed the respondent's assertion  that  had  the
    appellant not misled the respondent as to his age, there was likelihood
    that he would never have been granted British Citizenship. He noted  at
    [34] that it was not in dispute but that the appellant provided a  date
    of birth of 9 March 1987 and  confirmed  that  date  of  birth  at  all
    material times. It was accepted by the parties that his correct date of
    birth is 5 May 1985.

11. He summarised the respondent's case as being that if the appellant  had
    given his correct date of birth, that would have  made  him  22  months
    older and accordingly, he would not have been granted DLR  in  response
    to his asylum claim. He would have been subject to removal to  Lebanon.
    The  appellant  had  later  re-confirmed  his  date  of  birth  in  his
    application for British Citizenship.

12. The FtJ found that the respondent was correct to conclude that  if  the
    appellant's real date of birth had been known when his asylum claim was
    refused, he would not have been granted DLR. That was because he  was,
    in reality, not a child but an adult. The "clear reality" was that  the
    appellant had been able to 'upgrade' his leave to ILR.

13. He further found that the appellant may or may not have been removed to
    Lebanon, but he would have been liable to  removal  to  Lebanon  as  an
    adult who was a failed asylum seeker. The FtJ noted  that  it  was  not
    contended by either party that at the time of  the  refusal  of  asylum
    there was any policy in place whereby citizens of Lebanon were  granted
    leave because of their nationality and the circumstances in Lebanon. He
    found that whether or not the appellant would have been removed  was  a
    matter of conjecture which was not relevant to  his  findings  in  that
    connection.

14. At [36] the FtJ referred to the appellant having said that he  had  had
    an intention to take action to correct  his  date  of  birth,  but  the
    reality was that he did not do so. He had had the opportunity to  bring
    to the UK authorities' attention the fact  of  his  incorrect  date  of
    birth at any time after he was initially granted status, but did not.

15. He said that he found it particularly significant and serious  that  in
    applying for British  Citizenship  the  appellant  took  no  action  to
    correct the date of birth he had  previously  given,  although  at  all
    stages he knew that he had given an incorrect date of birth.  He  noted
    section 1 of the application form for  naturalisation,  signed  by  the
    appellant and dated 28 April 2011, in which he once  again  stated  his
    date of birth to be 9 March 1987. That  incorrect  date  of  birth,  he
    said, perpetuated a significant incorrect detail  in  relation  to  the
    appellant.

16. The  FtJ  went  on  to  conclude  that  in  failing  to  bring  to  the
    respondent's attention  the  fact  that  he  had  previously  given  an
    incorrect date of birth, the appellant had  continued  to  mislead  the
    respondent. Having initially misrepresented his date of birth, which as
    an adult at the time he had no reason to do, it would  appear  that  he
    had taken no action to correct the record when he was granted ILR.  The
    key act of deception and fraud on the part of the appellant was when he
    made his initial claim. He did not accept that he picked that  date  of
    birth "at random", particularly as to  the  year.  He  found  that  the
    appellant had deliberately sought to portray himself as a minor in  the
    belief that that would have reduced the likelihood  of  his  return  to
    Lebanon if his asylum claim was unsuccessful.

17. At [38] he stated that he took into account the circumstances  as  they
    existed at the time of the hearing before him.  He  accepted  that  the
    appellant was in a relationship with a  partner,  from  whom  he  heard
    evidence and whose evidence he found to be credible. He found that  the
    appellant's partner is a British Citizen and they are a family unit.

18. He went on to state however; that there are no  removal  directions  in
    place and accordingly it was not appropriate to consider Article  8  in
    terms  of  potential  removal.  He  concluded  that   the   foreseeable
    consequences of deprivation of citizenship would not make the  decision
    disproportionate.

19. The FtJ referred at [39] to the respondent's  Nationality  Instructions
    (NI's) in particular at paragraph 55.7. He  concluded  that  the  false
    representations had had a direct bearing on the grant  of  citizenship,
    the appellant having portrayed himself as being younger than he was. He
    found that  had  the  correct  date  of  birth  been  provided  on  the
    citizenship application form the respondent would have been entitled to
    "take a view" on the decisions previously  taken.  He  regarded  it  as
    "highly significant" that the appellant  had  been  able  to  make  his
    citizenship application because he had been obtained ILR.  That  status
    was a consequence, he said, of  the  original  decision  to  grant  the
    appellant DLR on the basis that at the date of the asylum  decision  he
    had been a minor.

20. The FtJ did not find therefore, that the respondent's discretion should
    have been  exercised  differently  and  there  was  no  breach  of  the
    appellant's human rights.

    The grounds and submissions

21. The grounds of appeal in relation to the FtJ's decision, to  summarise,
    contend that the appellant's deception was not material to the grant of
    ILR and therefore, the grant of citizenship. The appellant was  granted
    ILR on the basis that his was a 'Legacy' case.  The  vast  majority  of
    migrants granted leave under the Legacy scheme are thought to have been
    without leave and to have been failed asylum seekers.

22. In addition, it is asserted that the FtJ erred at [38] of his  decision
    in failing to consider the reasonably foreseeable consequences  of  the
    decision to  deprive  the  appellant  of  his  citizenship.  Unlike  in
    Deliallisi, no assurance was given to the appellant that  he  would  be
    permitted to remain and the assumption must be therefore that he is  to
    be removed. The fact that removal directions had not been set  is  said
    to be irrelevant.

23. The appellant's skeleton argument refers to the NI's at Chapter  55  to
    suggest that the behaviour must be directly material to the decision to
    grant citizenship. Likewise, in relation to the words of section  40(3)
    of the British Nationality Act 1981 ("the 1981 Act").

24. The respondent had conceded that the appellant's age was irrelevant  to
    the grant of ILR and that the grant was because of Home  Office  delay.
    Even if the correct approach is a "but for" approach,  the  appellant's
    appeal should succeed because it is not at all clear that he would have
    been removed, and/or that the age he claimed materially assisted in his
    remaining in the UK.

25. The NI's at paragraph 55.7.4 are relied on, given that it was  said  to
    have been the delay on the part of the Home Office  which  led  to  the
    grant of ILR under the Legacy scheme, and thus to citizenship.

26. It is further contended in the appellant's skeleton argument  that  the
    previous cases on nullity or deprivation under s.40 (3) of the 1981 Act
    (and under  s.20  of  the  British  Nationality  Act  1948),  to  which
    reference is made, all involve direct causation rather than a 'but for'
    approach.

27. Even on a 'but for' approach it is suggested that it is not clear  that
    the appellant's misrepresentation led to the grant of citizenship.  The
    appellant may  or  may  not  have  remained  in  the  UK  but  for  his
    misrepresentation as to his age. Relevant considerations  are  said  to
    include the fact that it was unlikely in practice  that  the  appellant
    would have been removed given the small number of removals: in 2004  it
    is said that there were 18 removals to  Lebanon  and  146  claims  from
    Lebanese nationals. Further, the appellant's  misrepresentation  as  to
    his age "bought" him a short period of leave between 30 June 2004 and 8
    May 2005. The appellant had applied to extend his leave on 1 March 2005
    and his application should have been refused within a  reasonable  time
    of the application having been made. The appellant qualified under  the
    Legacy scheme because of the delay by the Home Office, and  the  Legacy
    exercise was intended to grant status to  failed  asylum  seekers  with
    long residence, lawful or unlawful.

28. It is argued therefore, that the respondent's delay "broke the chain of
    causation". Reference is also made to the respondent's  file  notes  to
    the effect that the reason for the grant of ILR was the  delay  on  the
    part of the Home Office  and  that  the  appellant's  claimed  age  was
    irrelevant.

29. As to 'foreseeable consequences', the FtJ's approach  was  contrary  to
    authority. Removal directions are not a precondition to a consideration
    of Article 8. The appellant remains a British Citizen as no deprivation
    order had as yet been made or served. The respondent's decision  was  a
    notice of intention to make a deprivation order. No removal  directions
    could be set until a deprivation order had been made.

30. Mr Yeo's  oral  submissions  were  to  like  effect.  Although  it  was
    submitted that it is not clear from the respondent's  decision  whether
    it is fraud, false representation or concealment  of  a  material  fact
    (under s.40(3)(a), (b), or (c)) that is relied  on,  it  was  confirmed
    that no point was taken on that issue.

31. It was repeated that the case notes and the  deprivation  notice  state
    that age was irrelevant to the decision to grant  ILR.  In  Deliallisi,
    the level of deception was much worse and the deception led directly to
    naturalisation. Other cases are nullification cases in respect of which
    there was an important distinction.

32. The 2004 decision letter (refusing asylum) was predicated on the asylum
    claim being true. It is not the case that his claim  was  found  to  be
    fraudulent. It was concluded that he  could  in  any  event  return  to
    Lebanon.

33. The respondent's written submissions rely on the 'rule 24' response. It
    is argued that the FtJ's decision was free from any error  of  law.  He
    had been entitled to conclude that had the appellant  not  deliberately
    misled the respondent as to his date of birth he would  not  have  been
    granted DLR and would have been liable to removal to Lebanon; likewise,
    that the appellant deliberately attempted to mislead the respondent  in
    the application for further leave to remain and in the application  for
    British Citizenship.

34. The appellant's naturalisation was obtained by means of fraud or  false
    representation given that he deliberately misled  the  respondent  into
    granting him leave as a minor. That allowed him to make a further leave
    to remain application instead of being removed as a failed adult asylum
    seeker.  The  application  for  naturalisation   also   contained   the
    misrepresentation as to his date of birth. Thus, the naturalisation was
    obtained by false representation.

35. In relation to what seemed to be an argument to  the  effect  that  the
    appellant's level  of  deception  was  not  severe  enough  to  justify
    deprivation  of  his  citizenship,  the  evidence  suggested  that  the
    appellant had been and would have continued to  be  untruthful  in  his
    dealings with the  respondent  had  he  not  been  caught  out  by  his
    "questionable" dealings in Hong Kong. Those activities led to him being
    imprisoned and being required to submit his Lebanese  passport  to  the
    authorities there.

36. Mr Melvin also relied on the written arguments. It was  submitted  that
    the original asylum  claim  did  not  engage  the  Refugee  Convention.
    Furthermore, without the initial deception he would not have been  able
    to make the application for further leave to remain.  It  may  be  that
    there are cases where  the  deception  is  much  worse  but  there  was
    nevertheless deception in this case.

37. As to the statistics in relation to removals to Lebanon in  2004,  this
    is a matter that the FtJ had considered at [35]. The 'but for' argument
    falls away on the facts of this case.

38. As to the 'foreseeable consequences' argument, the decision  Ahmed  and
    Others  (deprivation  of  citizenship)  [2017]  UKUT  118   (IAC),   in
    particular at [31], suggests that it is not an error of law for a judge
    not to take into account  human  rights  considerations.  Even  if  the
    reasonably foreseeable consequences of deprivation  of  citizenship  do
    need to be  looked  at,  that  would  not  involve  a  full  Article  8
    assessment.

39. In reply, Mr Yeo referred  to  [41]  and  [42]  of  Ahmed  and  Others.
    Although it is said in the guidance at (v) of that  decision  that  the
    Secretary of State's deprivation of citizenship policy confers  a  wide
    margin of appreciation on the decision maker,  it  was  submitted  that
    such is not clear from the decision itself.

40. Although  the  FtJ  expressed  a  conclusion  on  the  consequences  of
    deprivation in this case, there was no  weighing  up  of  the  relevant
    factors, for example the  length  of  the  appellant's  residence,  his
    family links or the inherent importance of citizenship.

    Conclusions

41. The decision to deprive the appellant of his  British  citizenship  was
    made under s.40 of the 1981 Act. S.40 provides as follows:


         "40. Deprivation of citizenship


         (1)  In this section a reference to a person's 'citizenship status'
             is a reference to his status as -


             (a)  a British citizen


             (b)  a British overseas territories citizen,


             (c)  a British Overseas citizen,


             (d)  a British National (Overseas),


             (e)  a British protected person, or


             (f)  a British subject.


         (2)  The Secretary of State may by order  deprive  a  person  of  a
             citizenship status if the Secretary of State is satisfied that
             deprivation is conducive to the public good.


         (3)  The Secretary of State may by order  deprive  a  person  of  a
             citizenship status which  results  from  his  registration  or
             naturalisation if the Secretary of State is satisfied that the
             registration or naturalisation was obtained by means of -


             (a)  fraud,


             (b)  false representation, or


             (c)  concealment of a material fact.


         (4)  The Secretary of State may not make an order under  subsection
             (2) if he is satisfied that the  order  would  make  a  person
             stateless.


         (5)  Before making an order under this  section  in  respect  of  a
             person the Secretary of State must  give  the  person  written
             notice specifying -


             (a)  that the Secretary of State has decided to make an order,


             (b)  the reasons for the order, and


             (c)  the person's right of appeal under  section  40A  (1)  or
                  under  section  2B  of  the  Special  Immigration  Appeals
                  Commission Act 1997.

         (6)  Where a person acquired a citizenship status by the  operation
             of a law which applied to him because of his  registration  or
             naturalisation  under  an  enactment  having   effect   before
             commencement, the Secretary of State may by order deprive  the
             person of the citizenship status if the Secretary of State  is
             satisfied that the registration or naturalisation was obtained
             by means of -


             (a)  fraud,


             (b)  false representation, or


             (c)  concealment of a material fact."

42. The essential rationale for the respondent's decision  to  deprive  the
    appellant of his British citizenship can be  seen  from  the  following
    paragraphs of the decision letter:

         "19. Your FLR application was  granted  under  legacy  due  to  the
             length of time the application was outstanding; your  age  was
             irrelevant, however, you  were  only  able  to  make  the  FLR
             application as you had been granted  DL  on  the  basis  of  a
             fraudulent asylum claim. The  subsequent  grant  of  ILR  LOTR
             enabled you to make an application  for  naturalisation  as  a
             British Citizen.

         20.  The crux of this deprivation  argument  is,  if  you  had  not
             deceived the Home Office by making yourself  appear  to  be  a
             minor when  you  applied  for  asylum,  you  would  have  been
             returned to Lebanon when your asylum was refused and you would
             not then have been in the  United  Kingdom  to  submit  a  FLR
             application, and  would  not  have  met  the  requirements  to
             naturalise as a British Citizen.

         21.  This deception was directly material to you being granted  DL,
             ILR LOTR and subsequent BC and as  such  deprivation  of  your
             British citizenship is appropriate on these grounds.

         22.  Although you have suggested your rights under Article 8 of the
             European Convention on Human Rights will be  breached  if  you
             are deprived of citizenship, this cannot be the  case  in  the
             absence of a decision or directions for your removal from  the
             UK."

43. Chapter 55 of the NI's is headed "Deprivation and  Nullity  of  British
    citizenship". Paragraph 55.7 states as follows:



    "55.7 Material to the Acquisition of Citizenship

         55.7.1 If the relevant facts, had they been known at the  time  the
         application for citizenship was considered, would have affected the
         decision to grant citizenship via  naturalisation  or  registration
         the caseworker should consider deprivation.

         55.7.2 This will include but is not limited to:

          ( Undisclosed convictions or other information  which  would  have
         affected a person's ability to meet the good character requirement

         ( A marriage/civil partnership which is  found  to  be  invalid  or
         void, and so would have affected a person's  ability  to  meet  the
         requirements for section 6(2)

         ( False details given in  relation  to  an  immigration  or  asylum
         application, which led to that status being given to a  person  who
         would not otherwise have qualified, and so would  have  affected  a
         person's ability  to  meet  the  residence  and/or  good  character
         requirements for naturalisation or registration

         55.7.3  If  the  fraud,  false  representation  or  concealment  of
         material fact did not  have  a  direct  bearing  on  the  grant  of
         citizenship, it will  not  be  appropriate  to  pursue  deprivation
         action.

         55.7.4 For example, where a person acquires ILR under a  concession
         (e.g. the family ILR concession) the fact that we  could  show  the
         person  had  previously  lied  about  their  asylum  claim  may  be
         irrelevant. Similarly, a person may use a different  name  if  they
         wish (see NAMES in the General Information section of Volume  2  of
         the Staff Instructions): unless it conceals criminality,  or  other
         information relevant to an assessment of their good  character,  or
         immigration history in another identity it is not material  to  the
         acquisition  of  ILR  or  citizenship.  However,  before  making  a
         decision not to deprive, the caseworker should ensure that relevant
         character checks are undertaken in relation to the  subject's  true
         identity to ensure that the false information provided to the  Home
         Office was not used to conceal  criminality  or  other  information
         relevant to an assessment of their character.

44. I should also refer to the following paragraph which appears under  the
    subheading "Complicit":

         "55.7.8.3 However, where a minor on reaching the age of 18 does not
         acquire ILR or other leave automatically and submits an application
         for asylum or other form of leave which maintains  a  fraud,  false
         representation or concealment of material fact which  they  adopted
         whilst a minor, they should be treated as complicit."

45. As can be seen from s.40(3) of the 1981  Act,  the  three  'contenders'
    that form the basis  of  a  decision  to  deprive  a  person  of  their
    citizenship  are  fraud,  false  representation  or  concealment  of  a
    material fact. The NI's provide a definition of them as follows:

         "55.4.1 "False representation" means  a  representation  which  was
         dishonestly made on the applicant's part i.e. an  innocent  mistake
         would not give rise to a power  to  order  deprivation  under  this
         provision.

         55.4.2  "Concealment  of  any  material   fact"   means   operative
         concealment i.e. the concealment practised by  the  applicant  must
         have had a direct bearing on the decision to register  or,  as  the
         case may be, to issue a certificate of naturalisation.

         55.4.3 "Fraud" encompasses either of the above."

46. In relation to the cases to which I was  referred,  R  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department, Ex parte Parvaz Akhtar [1981]  1  QB  46
    was  a  decision  under  s.20  of  the  British  Nationality  Act  1948
    (deprivation  of  citizenship  obtained  by  fraud),  and  involved   a
    challenge to the legality of detention. The applicant had claimed to be
    the son of a British Citizen, but an immigration officer concluded that
    he was in fact the son of someone else, who was not a British  Citizen.
    It was accepted that the Secretary of State had reasonable grounds  for
    believing that the applicant was an illegal entrant, and the  applicant
    had failed to prove that he was the person identified who was  entitled
    to be registered as a British Citizen.

47. Similarly, in R v Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex  Parte
    Sultan  Mahmood  [1980]  3  WLR  312  CA,  the  applicant  had  secured
    registration as a British Citizen in the name of someone who  had  died
    and his British citizenship was found to be a nullity.

48. Arusha and Demushi concerned deprivation on the  basis  that  the  main
    appellant had obtained British citizenship by fraud, the  Secretary  of
    State contending that  he  was  Albanian  rather  than  Kosovan  as  he
    claimed.

49. In Hysaj & Ors v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA
    Civ 1195 the court said the following:

      "57. Mr Knafler submits  that  the  implied  fraudulent  impersonation
         limitation  upon  the  Secretary  of   State's   power   to   grant
         citizenship, assuming it  exists,  does  not  have  application  in
         relation to the  appellants'  cases.  This  is  because  when  they
         applied to be naturalised  as  British  citizens  they  did  so  by
         relying principally on their identity as  persons  with  valid  ILR
         status. Mr Knafler says that it was this  that  was  the  effective
         cause of their obtaining naturalisation, since it was the  fact  of
         having ILR which enabled them to satisfy the condition in paragraph
         1(2) (c) of Schedule 1 to  the  1981  Act  when  they  applied  for
         naturalisation. He contends that there was no mistake regarding the
         relevant identity of the appellants when they were granted  British
         citizenship: they really were the people who held the ILR status on
         which they relied to support their applications (admittedly, in the
         case of Mr Bakijasi, in a name other than his true name).

       58.     I  reject  this  argument  as  well.  It  involves  a  wholly
         unpersuasive  focus  on  one  narrow  aspect  of   the   case   for
         naturalisation put forward by each appellant when he applied to the
         Secretary of State and ignores both the fraudulent impersonation by
         the  appellants  to  acquire  ILR  in  the  first  place  and   the
         continuation of that fraudulent pretence which they perpetrated  in
         order to induce the Secretary of State to grant them citizenship.

      1. As I have already explained, the implied limitation  identified  in
         Sultan Mahmood  reflects  the  general  presumptions  in  statutory
         interpretation  reviewed  in  Welwyn  Hatfield  BC,  including  the
         presumption that Parliament does not intend a criminal fraudster to
         be able to benefit from his fraud. The  implied  limitation  cannot
         sensibly be read as concerned only with a narrow focus  on  how  to
         identify the person applying for naturalisation simply by reference
         to whether they have ILR as an identifiable individual.

      1. The appellants were only in a position to  seek  naturalisation  as
         British citizens because they had first obtained a necessary status
         through fraudulent impersonation of the requisite  seriousness  and
         materiality. They sought to benefit from  that  original  fraud  by
         taking the fruit of it (the grant of ILR) and relying  on  that  in
         their applications to the Secretary of  State  for  naturalisation.
         That is itself a relevant form of fraudulent impersonation for  the
         purposes of the implied limitation upon the  Secretary  of  State's
         powers, as the Puttick case shows. In that case, it was  the  fraud
         of the claimant in obtaining the  status  of  being  married  to  a
         United Kingdom citizen which enabled her to apply to the  Secretary
         of State for naturalisation and which was found to  be  the  reason
         that she was not entitled to be registered as  a  citizen  herself.
         This is not a surprising result: in both Puttick  and  the  present
         cases there was  and  is  a  direct  link  between  the  fraudulent
         impersonation to obtain the status which was then  relied  upon  to
         seek to obtain citizenship by naturalisation by  the  Secretary  of
         State.

      1. Further, in the  present  cases  the  causative  relevance  of  the
         original fraudulent impersonation is underlined by the way in which
         the appellants necessarily had to, and did, maintain the fraudulent
         pretence that they were refugees from Kosovo through  to  the  time
         when they applied for naturalisation as  citizens.  If,  when  they
         applied for naturalisation,  they  had  then  told  the  truth  and
         revealed their earlier lies, the  Secretary  of  State  would  have
         rejected their applications on the grounds that they could not show
         that they were of good character: see para. 1(1) (b) of Schedule  1
         to the 1981 Act."

50. In Deliallisi, the appellant had obtained refugee status on  the  basis
    that he was Kosovan, whereas he was  in  fact  from  Albania.  He  then
    obtained indefinite leave to remain and then British  Citizenship,  and
    in his citizenship application maintained that he was from Kosovo.  The
    Tribunal decided that the Secretary of State's  discretion  should  not
    have been decided differently and that it was  appropriate  to  deprive
    the appellant of his citizenship.

51. In the more  recent  case  of  AB  (British  Citizenship:  deprivation;
    Deliallisi considered) Nigeria [2016] UKUT 451, the  appellant  claimed
    asylum in a false identity and  claimed  to  be  an  Ivorian  national,
    whereas she was in fact Nigerian. In that case however, the question of
    whether the appellant's British citizenship was obtained "by means  of"
    fraud, false representation or concealment of a material fact, was  not
    in issue.

52. Lastly, in Ahmed and Others, the decisions to deprive the appellants of
    citizenship were made on the basis that deprivation  was  conducive  to
    the public good, as a result of the appellants' convictions for serious
    sexual offences.

53. In the cases of obvious fraud, such  as  in  relation  to  identity  or
    nationality, it is much easier to see the causative  link  between  the
    conduct of the appellant and the  granting  of  citizenship.  In  other
    cases the link may be less clear. Hence,  in  the  NI's  at  55.7.13  a
    number of hypothetical examples are given, described as 'Case Studies',
    in relation to whether or not consideration should be given  to  action
    to deprive of citizenship.

54. It is not the case, as was submitted on behalf of the appellant  before
    me, and as advanced in the skeleton argument at  [13],  that  the  2004
    decision on the appellant's asylum claim was predicated on the basis of
    the claim being true, or that the facts were assumed  to  be  true.  In
    fact, that decision dated 30 June 2004 states at [10]  that  the  claim
    that the police in Lebanon wanted to arrest him was "not believed", and
    was "not considered credible", and the claim was refused "as a result".

55. It should  not  be  thought  therefore,  that  internal  relocation  or
    sufficiency of protection were the reasons  for  rejecting  the  claim,
    although those matters  were  raised  in  the  decision  as  additional
    reasons for rejecting the claim.

56. Furthermore, although no point was taken  on  this  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant, it does seem to  me  that  the  deprivation  of  citizenship
    decision does in fact identify the basis of the decision  in  terms  of
    the options  of  fraud,  false  representations  or  concealment  of  a
    material fact. The decision states at [3] that "the Secretary of  State
    had decided that you  did  in  fact  obtain  your  British  citizenship
    fraudulently".

57. S. 40(3) of the 1981 Act permits the  Secretary  of  State  to  make  a
    deprivation decision  where  the  registration  or  naturalisation  was
    obtained "by means of" fraud etc. Clearly therefore, there must be some
    causative link between the action(s) or omission of the  appellant  and
    the obtaining of citizenship. In Hysaj & Ors, there is reference  to  a
    "direct link" at [60], and at  [61]  to  "causative  relevance  of  the
    original fraudulent impersonation".

58. The NI's are by no means determinative in relation  to  a  question  of
    whether the citizenship was obtained  "by  means  of"  fraud  or  false
    representation, or concealment of a material fact,  but  they  indicate
    the approach of the Secretary of State. The  NI's  at  55.7.2,  on  one
    view, would suggest that this appellant's citizenship was  obtained  by
    that means, referring  to  "False  details  given  in  relation  to  an
    immigration or asylum application, which led to that status being given
    to a person who would not otherwise have qualified, and so  would  have
    affected a person's ability to meet the residence and/or good character
    requirements for naturalisation or registration". The appellant in this
    case was granted a period of leave ("DLR") that he would not  otherwise
    have been granted.

59. On the other hand, whilst this appellant was granted a period of  leave
    as a minor to which he was not entitled, he was not granted  a  defined
    status.  In  addition,  55.7.3  states  that  if   the   fraud,   false
    representation or concealment of material fact did not have a  "direct"
    bearing on the grant of citizenship, it  will  not  be  appropriate  to
    pursue deprivation action.

60. The phrase "direct bearing" suggests that in cases where the fraud etc.
    only has an indirect bearing on the grant of  citizenship,  deprivation
    action would not be appropriate. This, it seems to  me,  is  consistent
    with the phrase "by means of"  in  s.40  (3).  Furthermore,  under  the
    "Definitions" in the NI's, "Concealment of any material fact" (although
    s.40 (3) itself reads "concealment of a material fact"),  is  described
    as meaning "operative concealment i.e. the concealment practised by the
    applicant must have had a direct bearing on the  decision  to  register
    or, as the case may be,  to  issue  a  certificate  of  naturalisation"
    (emphasis as in original).

61. On the basis of the above, I would agree with Mr Yeo's submission  that
    the impugned behaviour must be directly material  to  the  decision  to
    grant citizenship. Was it directly material in this case, is  then  the
    question.

62. The appellant was granted ILR was on 4  May  2010  under  the  'Legacy'
    scheme. The deprivation decision states that "Your FLR application  was
    granted under legacy due to the length  of  time  the  application  was
    outstanding; your age was irrelevant" (quoted in full at  [42]  above).
    Mr Yeo, understandably, focuses on the asserted irrelevance of  age  to
    the respondent's decision to grant ILR.  A  counter  argument  however,
    could be that whilst his age was irrelevant to the grant of  ILR  under
    the Legacy scheme that does not mean to say that the  deception  as  to
    age was similarly irrelevant. Indeed, the decision letter  states  that
    the deception was directly material to the decision to  grant  of  "DL,
    ILR LOTR".

63. That potential counter argument however, was not advanced on behalf  of
    the respondent, and there is some validity to the argument on behalf of
    the appellant to the effect that grants of leave under Legacy were made
    in cases where individuals had no right (otherwise) to be  in  the  UK,
    and no doubt included many whose asylum claims were false.

64. It should be said that the skeleton argument that was  before  the  FtJ
    does not refer to the 'age irrelevant' point, and it seems the argument
    was not advanced in submissions before him either. That matter seems to
    have come to the fore when the Home Office file note,  referred  to  at
    [7] above, was discovered. After referring to the false date  of  birth
    in the asylum application, and that it was not thought appropriate that
    his citizenship should be considered a nullity because the only  change
    in detail was his date of birth, the file note states  that  the  false
    date of birth allowed the appellant to claim asylum as a minor. It then
    states, materially, that "his ELR application was granted under  legacy
    due to  the  length  of  time  the  application  was  outstanding.  The
    subject's age was irrelevant". In its context of a consideration of the
    false date of birth, this could be taken to suggest or  imply  that  in
    fact the false date of birth was itself irrelevant to the  decision  to
    grant ILR.

65. Furthermore, it is not suggested by the respondent that had  the  false
    date of birth been  known  by  her  at  the  time  of  the  citizenship
    application, the application would have been  rejected  on  the  ground
    that the appellant had not shown that he was of good character.

66. It is said in the respondent's decision at [20] that had the  appellant
    not deceived the Home Office by making himself appear  to  be  a  minor
    when he applied for asylum he would have been returned to Lebanon  when
    his asylum claim was refused, and thus would not have been in the UK to
    submit an application for further leave to remain. However,  on  behalf
    of the appellant it is said that in 2004 there were only 18 removals to
    Lebanon and 146 asylum claims from Lebanese nationals (the  weblink  is
    given in the skeleton argument). But those bare figures do  not  reveal
    how many of the asylum claims were accepted, and thus  what  proportion
    of those claiming were returned, and  it  does  not  appear  that  that
    information was put before the FtJ,  he  having  raised  the  issue  of
    returns to Lebanon (see [13] of his decision).

67. Nevertheless,  the  contention  that  the  appellant  would  have  been
    returned to Lebanon when his asylum claim was refused is, it  seems  to
    me, a speculative assertion.

68. The FtJ was entitled to find as he did at [36] and [37] in relation  to
    the credibility of the appellant's  evidence  about  his  intention  to
    inform the respondent as to his correct date of birth and  in  relation
    to his having deliberately sought to portray himself as a minor when he
    claimed asylum, and that he  had  perpetuated  that  deception  in  the
    process of applying for citizenship.

69. However, having concluded that  the  behaviour  (fraud  etc.)  must  be
    directly material to the  decision  to  grant  citizenship,  I  do  not
    consider that the evidence in this case justified the FtJ's  conclusion
    that the appellant's deception as to his date  of  birth  was  directly
    material to the decision to grant citizenship; in the language of  s.40
    (3), that the appellant's citizenship was obtained "by means of" fraud,
    false representation or concealment of  a  material  fact.  In  holding
    otherwise, I am satisfied that the FtJ erred in law, such as to require
    his decision to be set aside.

70. In the light of that conclusion, it  is  not  necessary  to  go  on  to
    consider the appellant's second  ground  of  appeal  in  terms  of  the
    reasonably foreseeable consequences of deprivation.

71. The appropriate course is for the decision to be re-made,  and  in  re-
    making it the appeal must be allowed because  the  respondent  has  not
    established that the appellant's citizenship was obtained by  means  of
    fraud, false representation or concealment of a material fact.

Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  Its decision to dismiss the appeal  is  set  aside,
    and the decision is re-made, allowing the appeal.





Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            17/07/17


