
[pic]
IAC-FH-GJ-V6

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                  Ali (s.120 - PBS) [2012] UKUT 00368(IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 20 August 2012                             |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHALKLEY

                                   Between

                                 MANSOOR ALI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Z Malik, instructed by Malik Law Chambers
                    Solicitors (Bethnal Green Road)
For the Respondent:    Ms M Tanner, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


(1)   In a PBS case the exception set out in section 85A(3) and (4) of the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 precludes a section 120
    statement from being used in order to adduce evidence of compliance
    with a different requirement of the PBS.

(2)   What is said in AQ (Pakistan) [2011] EWCA Civ 833 regarding the
    material date in respect of evidence adduced does not apply to s.85A
    cases.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant is a national of Pakistan.  He appealed to a  First-tier
    Tribunal judge against the Secretary of State's decision  of  16  March
    2011 refusing to vary leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

2.    The appellant had applied on 29 January 2011 for leave  to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom as a Tier 1 (General) Migrant under the points-based
    system and for a biometric residence permit.  He was  not  awarded  any
    points for qualifications under Appendix A of the Immigration Rules  as
    the MBA issued by Liverpool John Moores University was not included  in
    the list  of  MBA  eligible  programmes  as  stated  in  the  published
    guidance, and the evidence provided did  not  show  that  he  had  been
    awarded  the  qualification  at  the  date  of  application.   It   was
    considered that the further documents he had  submitted  from  Pakistan
    did not satisfy the requirements of the published  guidance  and  could
    not be considered.  As regards his claimed earnings,  he  had  provided
    one payslip each from the two employers to whom he referred.  Also  the
    bank statements provided only covered the period of 2 October  2010  to
    31 December 2010 and did not cover the period  shown  in  the  payslips
    which were both dated 14 January 2011.  This meant  that  he  had  only
    supplied one type of document as evidence of earnings, as the  payments
    could not be corroborated by the relevant bank statements and therefore
    no points were awarded for earnings.  The evidence did not include  the
    date of award of the degree or confirmation that he had  completed  and
    had been awarded the qualification claimed.  Also as  regards  the  ten
    points he claimed for English language, the score he  had  obtained  in
    the ESOL examinations did not satisfy the necessary minimum standard.

3.    In his grounds of appeal the appellant had submitted  a  statement  of
    additional grounds in which he stated that:

         "There is no pressing social need to deny the appellant  the  right
         to remain in the United Kingdom as he also qualifies for  leave  to
         remain in the UK as a Tier 1 (Post Study Work) Migrant."


    It was argued on his behalf that the Tribunal was obliged  to  consider
    and determine his additional ground in line with what had been said  by
    the Court of Appeal in AS and NV [2009] EWCA Civ 1076.

4.     The  judge  considered  the  submissions,  but  concluded  that   the
    application was under the PBS and was fixed in time  and  the  position
    had to be considered at the date of application.  She considered it was
    for the appellant to make a further application on  the  basis  of  the
    award of the Master's degree  which  would  enable  him  to  satisfy  a
    different requirement of the  Rules.   Article  8  was  raised  in  the
    grounds of appeal but the judge commented that it  was  not  diligently
    pursued before her.  She accepted that the  appellant  had  established
    private life as a student in the United Kingdom, however she  concluded
    that the decision to remove him was legitimate and there was nothing in
    his circumstances to show that the decision was disproportionate.

5.    The appellant sought and was  granted  permission  to  appeal  on  the
    basis that the judge had come to conclusions  which  were  inconsistent
    with the decision of the Court of Appeal in AQ (Pakistan)  [2011]  EWCA
    Civ 833 and also with other authorities.  It was  further  argued  that
    the appeal should have been allowed under Article 8.  The case was  not
    one of a "near-miss" but of a  "no-miss".   Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted on the appellant's grounds.

6.    Mr Malik adopted and developed the grounds  before  us.   He  took  us
    through  the  relevant  statutory  provisions  and  also  the  relevant
    authorities including AS and NV, MS [2010] UKUT 117  (IAC),  MU  [2010]
    UKUT 442 (IAC), AQ (Pakistan), JM [2006] EWCA Civ 1402 and Alam  [2012]
    EWCA Civ 960.  He argued that the  case  was  not  one  of  a  specific
    timeline, as identified in MS, and  that  the  facts  in  AQ  were  not
    materially different from those in MS.  In the instant case the  degree
    had been awarded on 11 March 2011, six days before the date of decision
    on 17 March, and it was clear from the concession as recorded in AQ  at
    paragraph 22 that the relevant date for the assessment of evidence  was
    the date of the Secretary of State's decision and not the date  of  the
    application to her.  It was clear from JM that the appellant should not
    be required to commit a criminal offence as in effect he would have  to
    on the basis of the Secretary of State's argument.  There was also  the
    risk of a multiplicity of actions, a point  in  respect  of  which  the
    Court of Appeal had expressed concern in AS and NV.

7.     In  her  submissions  Ms  Tanner  argued,  with  respect  to  section
    85A(3)(b) and (4) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002
    ("the 2002 Act") that it was clear that  the  former  referred  to  the
    points-based system (PBS) and the latter referred to  evidence  adduced
    at the time of the application.  Clearly despite  AS  and  NV  and  the
    other authorities and the seeming concession about date of decision  as
    the key date, that was the position unless it was refuted or altered by
    legislation.  It was clear from these provisions that in a PBS case the
    exception applied and it was the date of application as had been  found
    by the judge.  Section 120 merely underlined to the appellant  that  it
    was  appropriate  to  make  any  representations  but  it  was  not  an
    encouragement to make another application for which a fee would have to
    be paid.  It was an opportunity to say why he should not be required to
    leave the United Kingdom.  The judge had not erred as to  the  date  of
    application being the key date as  set  out  at  paragraph  10  of  the
    determination.  In any event  it  was  far  from  certain  whether  the
    appellant would have succeeded under a different rule  as  the  refusal
    letter referred not only to the degree certificates required  but  also
    evidence about employment.  Even if only  one  type  of  evidence  were
    required, the bank statements did not reflect the period shown  on  the
    payslip and the refusal in respect of English language.  The judge  had
    dealt properly with Article 8.  There was no error of law.

8.    By way of reply Mr Malik argued  firstly  that  with  respect  to  the
    points he had made that had not been dealt with by Ms Tanner  it  could
    be inferred that  there  was  no  answer  to  what  he  had  submitted.
    Secondly, he argued that though the Secretary of  State's  reasons  for
    decision were defended by the Presenting Officer, and he accepted  that
    these were accurate with regard to the general category,  however  they
    were different from the immigration decision and it took the  Secretary
    of State no further.  Thirdly, it was argued that in respect of section
    85A the point made on behalf of the Secretary of State was  irrational.
    For example, if a student applied for leave to remain while  a  Tier  4
    Student and got married while the application was pending and then made
    a One-Stop Statement, the Secretary of State was saying that that could
    be considered but section 85A barred putting forward evidence  to  back
    the statement up, yet the evidence of the marriage could not have  been
    submitted with the application.  In the instant  case  the  degree  had
    been awarded after the  application  was  made  and  the  Tribunal  was
    required to consider the point left open by  Sullivan  LJ  in  Alam  at
    paragraph 42.  In any event, Ms Tanner had not addressed  his  argument
    about section 85(5) and his case was based on section 85(2).   As  long
    as that subsection and section 120 were in the legislation the Tribunal
    was obliged to determine any ground raised in a section 120  statement.
    Fourthly, with regard to Article 8 his point  had  not  been  addressed
    about this not being a near-miss case but a no-miss case,  and  if  the
    requirements of the Rules were met at the date of decision and  at  the
    hearing it could not be said that the interference was proportionate.

9.    We reserved our determination.

10.   It will be convenient to set out the relevant provisions of  the  2002
    Act.

         "82.     Right of appeal: general
         E+W+S+N.I.
         This section has no associated Explanatory Notes
             (1) Where an immigration decision is made in respect of a
                  person he may appeal [to the Tribunal].


             (2) In this Part "immigration decision" means-


                  (a)  refusal of leave to enter the United Kingdom,


                  (b)  refusal of entry clearance,


                  (c)  refusal of a certificate of entitlement under section
                      10 of this Act,


                  (d)  refusal to vary a person's leave to enter or remain
                      in the United Kingdom if the result of the refusal is
                      that the person has no leave to enter or remain,


                  (e)  variation of a person's leave to enter or remain in
                      the United Kingdom if when the variation takes effect
                      the person has no leave to enter or remain,


                  (f)  revocation under section 76 of this Act of indefinite
                      leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom, ...


         84.      Grounds of appeal
         E+W+S+N.I.
             This section has no associated Explanatory Notes
             (1) An appeal under section 82(1) against an immigration
                  decision must be brought on one or more of the following
                  grounds-


                  (a)  that the decision is not in accordance with
                      immigration rules;


                  (b)  that the decision is unlawful by virtue of section
                      19B of the Race Relations Act 1976 (c. 74) [or
                      Article 20A of the Race Relations (Northern Ireland)
                      Order 1997] (discrimination by public authorities);
                      ...


                  (c)  that the decision is unlawful under section 6 of the
                      Human Rights Act 1998 (c. 42) (public authority not
                      to act contrary to Human Rights Convention) as being
                      incompatible with the appellant's Convention rights;


         85.      Matters to be considered
         E+W+S+N.I.
             This section has no associated Explanatory Notes
             (1) An appeal under section 82(1) against a decision shall be
                  treated by [the Tribunal] as including an appeal against
                  any decision in respect of which the appellant has a right
                  of appeal under section 82(1).


             (2) If an appellant under section 82(1) makes a statement
                  under section 120, [the Tribunal] shall consider any
                  matter raised in the statement which constitutes a ground
                  of appeal of a kind listed in section 84(1) against the
                  decision appealed against.


             (3)       Subsection (2) applies to a statement made under
                  section 120 whether the statement was made before or after
                  the appeal was commenced.


             4) On an appeal under section 82(1), 83(2) or 83A(2) against a
                decision the Tribunal may consider evidence about any
                matter which it thinks relevant to the substance of the
                decision, including evidence which concerns a matter
                arising after the date of the decision...


             5) But subsection (4) is subject to the exceptions in section
                85A.


         85A.     Matters to be considered: new evidence: exceptions
         E+W+S+N.I.
             This section has no associated Explanatory Notes
             (1) This section sets out the exceptions mentioned in section
                  85(5).


             (2) Exception 1 is that in relation to an appeal under section
                  82(1) against an immigration decision of a kind specified
                  in section 82(2)(b) or (c) the Tribunal may consider only
                  the circumstances appertaining at the time of the
                  decision.


             (3) Exception 2 applies to an appeal under section 82(1) if-


                  (a)  the appeal is against an immigration decision of a
                      kind specified in section 82(2)(a) or (d),


                  (b)  the immigration decision concerned an application of
                      a kind identified in immigration rules as requiring
                      to be considered under a "Points Based System", and


                  (c)  the appeal relies wholly or partly on grounds
                      specified in section 84(1)(a), (e) or (f).


             (4) Where Exception 2 applies the Tribunal may consider
                  evidence adduced by the appellant only if it-


                  (a)  was submitted in support of, and at the time of
                      making, the application to which the immigration
                      decision related,


                  (b)  relates to the appeal in so far as it relies on
                      grounds other than those specified in subsection
                      (3)(c),


                  (c)  is adduced to prove that a document is genuine or
                      valid, or


                  (d)  is adduced in connection with the Secretary of
                      State's reliance on a discretion under immigration
                      rules, or compliance with a requirement of
                      immigration rules, to refuse an application on
                      grounds not related to the acquisition of "points"
                      under the "Points Based System"


         120.     Requirement to state additional grounds for application
         E+W+S+N.I.
             This section has no associated Explanatory Notes
             (1) This section applies to a person if-


                  (a)  he has made an application to enter or remain in the
                      United Kingdom, or


                  (b)  an immigration decision within the meaning of section
                      82 has been taken or may be taken in respect of him.


             (2) The Secretary of State or an immigration officer may by
                  notice in writing require the person to state-


                  (a)  his reasons for wishing to enter or remain in the
                      United Kingdom,


                  (b)  any grounds on which he should be permitted to enter
                      or remain in the United Kingdom, and


                  (c)  any grounds on which he should not be removed from or
                      required to leave the United Kingdom.


             (3) A statement under subsection (2) need not repeat reasons
                  or grounds set out in-


                  (a)  the application mentioned in subsection (1)(a), or


                  (b)  an application to which the immigration decision
                      mentioned in subsection (1)(b) relates."


11.   In AS and NV, the Court of Appeal had to consider the effect of  "One-
    Stop" Notices pursuant to section 120 of the 2002  Act  on  appeals  in
    immigration cases.  It was concluded that  the  effect  of  a  One-Stop
    Notice was that the appeal covered  not  only  any  ground  before  the
    Secretary of State when she made the decision under appeal but also any
    grounds raised in response to a One-Stop Notice even if  they  had  not
    been the subject of a decision by the Secretary of State  and  did  not
    relate to the decision under appeal.  In the first  of  the  two  cases
    before the Court of Appeal the  Appellant  had  applied  for  leave  to
    remain as a person intending to establish  herself  in  business  under
    paragraph 206E of HC 395 and, that  application  having  been  refused,
    with  a  One-Stop  Notice  being  included  with  the   decision,   she
    subsequently submitted an application for leave  to  remain  under  the
    international graduate scheme.  In the second case  considered  by  the
    Court of Appeal the appellant had submitted an application for leave to
    remain on the basis of ten years'  residence  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    This application was refused and with the refusal was also served a One-
    Stop Notice.  She appealed against the Secretary  of  State's  decision
    and subsequently served  a  statement  of  additional  grounds  seeking
    variation of her leave to remain on the basis that she was  a  student.
    By a majority the Court of Appeal allowed the appeals of the appellants
    against the decisions of Senior Immigration Judges upholding  decisions
    of Immigration Judges that they were without jurisdiction, and remitted
    the cases back to the Tribunal  for  consideration  of  the  additional
    grounds.

12.   Moore-Bick LJ at paragraph 78 considered  that  the  language  of,  in
    particular, section 85(2), section 96(2) and section  120  demonstrated
    that they were  intended  to  form  constituent  parts  of  a  coherent
    procedure designed to avoid a multiplicity of applications and appeals.
     He also considered that it was clear that the expression  "immigration
    decision" in section 84(1) had the same meaning as  in  section  82(1),
    and the word "decision"  in  that  subsection  had  to  bear  the  same
    meaning.  Again, in section 85, the word "decision" in  subsection  (1)
    had to mean an immigration decision of the kind identified  in  section
    82(1), and the word "decision" in subsection (2) had to have  the  same
    meaning.  He considered, at  paragraph  81,  that  all  the  provisions
    pointed towards a procedural  scheme  under  which  the  appellant  was
    required to put forward all his grounds for  challenging  the  decision
    against him for determination  in  one  set  of  proceedings,  and  the
    Tribunal was placed under a corresponding duty to  consider  them.   It
    followed that the notice was not intended to be restricted  to  matters
    relating to the original grounds of application or  that  the  decision
    being challenged could be defined by reference to the particular  facts
    on which it was based.  The fact that the  effect  of  the  appellant's
    argument was to  make  the  Tribunal  the  primary  decision  maker  in
    relation to any additional grounds was not problematic.  He noted  that
    in   practice   the   Tribunal   made   many   decisions   which   were
    indistinguishable from those made by the Secretary  of  State  and  was
    quite  capable  of  carrying  out  that  function  and   it   was   the
    responsibility of the appellant to ensure that it had all the  material
    it needed to make a decision.  It was necessary to bear  in  mind  that
    the service of a notice under section 120 was in the discretion of  the
    Secretary of State who was not obliged to  take  that  step  and  would
    presumably do so only if she  was  content  that  the  Tribunal  should
    consider any matters put forward in response to it.

13.   Sullivan LJ, who agreed with Moore-Bick LJ, considered it to be  clear
    that the  underlying  legislative  policy  was  to  prevent  successive
    applications, and emphasised  that  the  words  "against  the  decision
    appealed  against"  at  the  end  of  subsection  85(2)  were  properly
    interpreted as being the decision to refuse  to  vary  the  appellant's
    leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  rather  than  the  decision  to
    refuse to vary leave to remain under paragraph X of the Rules.  He also
    made the point, at paragraph 113, that it  was  readily  understandable
    that the AIT should not be required to consider a matter  raised  in  a
    statement of additional grounds if it did not  constitute  one  of  the
    grounds on which an appeal might be brought under section 84, or if  it
    sought to challenge either a different category of immigration decision
    as defined by subsection 82(2) from that which  had  been  taken  (e.g.
    refusal to vary leave where entry clearance had been refused)  or  some
    other decision against which there was no right of appeal under section
    82.

14.   Subsequently in MS the Upper Tribunal had to  consider  an  appeal  in
    circumstances where the appellant had applied for leave to remain as  a
    Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant  and,  that  application  having  been
    refused, on the basis that he did not have the necessary funds for  the
    relevant period, it was argued that on  a  proper  reading  of  section
    85(4) consideration could be given to more recent bank statements which
    were in effect referred to in a witness statement which was taken to be
    a section 120 statement.  At paragraph 49 the Tribunal  concluded  that
    the Court of Appeal in AS and NV had limited the ambit of its  decision
    to cases where a fresh ground was raised in respect of  the  particular
    immigration decision made, rather that the making at a later date of an
    application based on fresh evidence arising from the original  refusal.
    It was concluded that the purpose of the procedural scheme  established
    by section 120 was to encourage an applicant to provide all the reasons
    he or she had for appealing against a particular decision  rather  than
    permitting the later submission  of  evidence  relating  to  subsequent
    circumstances in a case such as the  instant  one  where  the  Rule  in
    question specified a fixed historic timeline.

15.   This decision was subsequently approved by the Court of Appeal  in  AQ
    (Pakistan).  In that case, the  issue  as  summed  up  by  Pill  LJ  at
    paragraph 4, was whether the points entitlement arising from a Master's
    degree could count towards the minimum if the degree was awarded  after
    the Secretary of State's  decision  but  before  the  decision  of  the
    Tribunal.  On behalf of the Secretary of State it  was  accepted  that,
    following AS, the relevant date for the assessment of evidence was  the
    date of the Secretary of State's decision and not, as had been held  in
    earlier Tribunal decisions such as KAN [2009] UKAIT  00022,  NO  [2009]
    UKAIT 0054 and NA and Others  [2009]  UKAIT  00025,  the  date  of  the
    application to the Secretary of State.  It was noted at paragraph 26 of
    AQ (Pakistan) that both the cases considered  in  AS  and  NV  involved
    consideration of evidence of  events  prior  to  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State.  The Court  of  Appeal  also  made  the  point,  at
    paragraph 37, that section 120 was not intended and did  not  have  the
    effect of allowing a fresh application to be made to the Tribunal under
    the Rules relying on events since the Secretary  of  State's  decision.
    Sullivan LJ at paragraph 41 made the point that under the  points-based
    system there was a fixed historic timeline and the effective  operation
    of a points-based system required the points to have  been  accumulated
    at the date of the Secretary of State's decision.

16.   The next case we must consider is that of Alam [2012]  EWCA  Civ  960.
    There the Court of Appeal disagreed with the decision of  the  Tribunal
    in Shahzad [2012] UKUT 81 (IAC),  where  it  had  been  concluded  that
    Article 2 of the Commencement Order  of  17  May  2011,  which  brought
    section 19 of the UK Borders Act 2007 into force on 23 May 2011, was to
    be construed as affecting substantive rights, not merely procedure, and
    that Article 3 of  the  Order  should  be  interpreted  narrowly.   The
    Tribunal concluded that in  order  to  avoid  any  other  retrospective
    effect Article 2 was to be interpreted as having effect only where  the
    appellant's application to the Secretary of State was made on or  after
    23 May 2011.  The Court of Appeal  concluded  that  Parliament  clearly
    intended section 85A of the 2002 Act, which was created by section  19,
    to operate as from 23 May  2011.   We  should  note  in  passing  that,
    although the date on the determination of the  judge's  appeal  in  the
    case before us was 17 June 2011, that was in fact the continuation of a
    hearing that had commenced on 20 May 2011, and therefore this  case  is
    not caught by the Commencement Order made in respect of section 19.  At
    paragraph  41  in  Alam  the   Court   of   Appeal   noted   that   the
    interrelationship  between  the   policy   underlying   the   "One-Stop
    Procedure" considered in AS and the policy underlying the  Points-Based
    System (PBS) was far from clear.  Quoting from  what  he  had  said  at
    paragraph 41 in AQ, Sullivan LJ went on at  paragraph  42  of  Alam  to
    accept Counsel's submission that it was unnecessary to explore the role
    of section 120 in appeals under the PBS in the instant case because the
    appellant's statement of additional grounds in response to the  section
    120 notice had not in fact put forward any additional grounds.

17.   It is clear from what was said in AS and NV,  that  where  a  One-Stop
    Notice has been served, the Tribunal must consider and make a  decision
    on grounds of appeal provided in a  statement  of  additional  grounds,
    provided that it constitutes grounds on which an appeal can be  brought
    under section 82 of the 2002 Act, and  is  neither  a  challenge  to  a
    different category of immigration decision from  that  which  has  been
    taken, nor a decision against which there is no right of  appeal  under
    the 2002 Act.  As was pointed out by Moore-Bick LJ  in  AS  and  NV  at
    paragraph 84, the Secretary of State is not required to serve a section
    120 notice, and will presumably only do so if she is content  that  the
    Tribunal should consider any matters (subject to the above caveats) put
    forward in response to it.

18.   However, we have to consider the issue, which was  identified  by  the
    Court of Appeal in Alam as "far from clear", of  the  interrelationship
    between the policy underlying the One-Stop  procedure  and  the  policy
    underlying the PBS.  In  Shahzad  the  Upper  Tribunal  considered  the
    argument (advanced by Mr Malik), that the "application" referred to  in
    section 85A(4)(a) includes "additional grounds"  tendered  pursuant  to
    section 120.  It was argued that if the effect of section 85A was  that
    the appellant could not ask the Tribunal to consider  the  evidence  he
    did not submit with his application without which it could not succeed,
    the  same  evidence  could  be  introduced  in  support  of   a   fresh
    application, which  was  permissible  because  the  section  120  route
    constituted  "additional  grounds"  being  grounds  other  than   those
    specified in section 85A(3)(c).

19.   The Tribunal concluded:


         "The very fact  that  the  statement  under  s120  relates  to  new
         evidence that was  not  submitted  with  the  original  application
         simply reinforced the correctness of the refusal on the basis  that
         the evidence  that  was  required  to  satisfy  the  rule  did  not
         accompany  the  application.   What  Mr  Malik  seeks  is  not  the
         opportunity to raise new grounds for challenging the decision under
         appeal but to make  an  entirely  fresh  application  supported  by
         evidence that did not accompany the  first,  thereby  negating  the
         purpose sought to be achieved by the amendment to s85 of  the  2002
         Act."

20.   The appellants in Shahzad had all made  PBS  applications  which  were
    refused.  Additional evidence provided at the appeal hearings could not
    be relied on, it was held, because the judge in each case found he  was
    precluded from doing so by section 85A.  In the instant case the appeal
    is on the basis that the appellant satisfies a different requirement of
    the PBS, i.e. Tier 1 (Post-Study  Work)  Migrant  rather  than  Tier  1
    (General) Migrant, rather than seeking  to  cure  inadequacies  in  the
    evidence concerning the particular category in  respect  of  which  the
    application was made.  The Court  of  Appeal  in  Alam  noted,  without
    comment, the rejection of the appellant's argument in  this  regard  by
    the Tribunal in Shahzad.  Insofar as it is relevant, we agree with what
    the Tribunal said on the point, but we must consider whether the  above
    difference between  the  two  cases  is  a  matter  of  substance.   At
    paragraph 47 of Shahzad, the Tribunal quoted Moore-Bick LJ in AS and NV
    at paragraph 80:

         "That seems to me to contemplate that the statement provided  under
         section 120 will generally contain new grounds for challenging  the
         decision rather than additional evidence or material supporting the
         original grounds."

      This might be said to lend some support to Mr  Malik's  argument,  but
    of course the Court of Appeal in AS and  NV  was  not  considering  the
    impact of section 85A on a section 120 statement, and it  is  necessary
    to examine closely the wording of the section in  the  context  of  the
    surrounding relevant provisions.  Mr Malik places reliance  on  section
    85(2).  Section 85(2) states the general rule in respect of section 120
    statements, requiring the Tribunal to consider any matter raised in the
    statement which constitutes a ground of appeal of the  kind  listed  in
    section 84(1).  Section 85(4) then empowers the  Tribunal  to  consider
    evidence about any matter which it considers to be relevant.   However,
    section 85(5) makes (4) subject to the exceptions in section 85A, which
    include the case where the immigration decision is made in respect of a
    PBS case, when evidence can only be considered if submitted in  support
    of, and at the time of making, the application to which the immigration
    decision related.  So, though Mr Malik is right in general  in  respect
    of the proper approach to the application of  section  120,  he  cannot
    surmount the limitation in  section  85A(4)(a)  which,  in  this  case,
    precludes reliance on the evidence on  which  the  appellant  seeks  to
    rely.   There  is  a  clear  statutory  framework  which   specifically
    precludes the consideration of post-application evidence adduced by the
    appellant in particular categories of case, of which this is one.   The
    fact that the case concerns a claim  that  the  appellant  satisfied  a
    different requirement of the PBS, rather than  attempting  to  rely  on
    further evidence in support of an application  that  had  already  been
    made,  as  in  Shahzad,  is  a  distinction  without  substance.   Both
    situations come within the exception set out in section 85A(4)(a).   In
    cases governed by section 85A it is clear that in respect  of  evidence
    adduced the material date is the date of application, not the  date  of
    decision.  What is said in AQ about the relevant date being the date of
    decision not the date of application has to be seen as not applying  to
    cases governed by section 85A, with which the Court of Appeal  was  not
    concerned (para 31 of its judgment).

21.    As  a  consequence,  the  appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules   is
    dismissed, and we therefore maintain the decision of the judge,  albeit
    for somewhat different reasons.

22.   As regards Article 8, we consider this was properly dealt with by  the
    judge at paragraphs 15 and 16 of the determination.  If  a  case  is  a
    "near-miss", that is by the way, as was made clear in the  decision  of
    the Court of Appeal in Miah [2012]  EWCA  Civ  261,  in  particular  at
    paragraph 26, and we do not consider it to be a case of a "no-miss", as
    set out above.  Accordingly we maintain the judge's  decision  in  this
    regard also.

23.   The appeal is dismissed.




Signed                                             Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
Immigration and Asylum Chamber
