

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

VT (Article 22 Procedures Directive - confidentiality) Sri Lanka [2017]
UKUT 00368 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 14 March 2017 &                            |                             |
|28 April 2017                                 |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between


                                     V T
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:           Ms S. Jegarajah, Counsel instructed by Duncan
Lewis Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Mr B. Rawat, instructed by the Government
Legal Department


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves protection issues. We find that it is appropriate to  continue
the order. Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
appellant is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.



      (i)   There is no  general  duty  of  inquiry  upon  the  examiner  to
           authenticate documents  produced  in  support  of  a  protection
           claim. There may be exceptional situations when a  document  can
           be authenticated by a  simple  process  of  inquiry  which  will
           conclusively resolve  the  authenticity  and  reliability  of  a
           document.

      (ii)  There is a general duty of confidentiality  during  the  process
           of  examining  a  protection  claim,  including  appellate   and
           judicial review proceedings. If it is  considered  necessary  to
           make an inquiry in the country of origin the country  of  asylum
           must obtain  the  applicant's  written  consent.  Disclosure  of
           confidential information without consent is  only  justified  in
           limited  and  exceptional  circumstances,  such   as   combating
           terrorism.

      (iii) The humanitarian  principles  underpinning  Article  22  of  the
           Procedures Directive prohibit direct contact  with  the  alleged
           actor of persecution in the country of origin in a  manner  that
           might alert them to the likelihood that a protection  claim  has
           been made or in a manner that might place  applicants  or  their
           family members in the country of origin at risk.

      (iv)  The humanitarian objective of the  Refugee  Convention  requires
           anyone seeking to authenticate a document produced in support of
           a protection claim to follow a precautionary  approach.  Careful
           consideration should be given to the duty of confidentiality, to
           whether an inquiry is necessary, to whether  there  is  a  safer
           alternative and whether the inquiry is made in a way  that  does
           not give rise to additional protection issues for applicants  or
           their family members. Disclosure of personal information  should
           go no further than is strictly necessary. Whether an inquiry  is
           necessary and is carried out in an appropriate way  will  depend
           on the facts of the case and the circumstances in the country of
           origin.

      (v)   Failure to comply with the duty of confidentiality or  a  breach
           of  the  prohibitions  contained  in   Article   22   does   not
           automatically lead to recognition as a  refugee,  but  might  be
           relevant to the overall assessment of risk on return.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This appeal raises issues relating to the duty of confidentiality  and
    the proper scope of inquiries  to  authenticate  documents  during  the
    examination of a protection claim.

Background

2.    The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka  who  entered  the  UK  on  29
    September 2014 with entry clearance  as  a  Tier  4  (General)  Student
    Migrant, which was valid until 30 October 2017. He claimed asylum on 24
    November 2014. The respondent refused the application  on  30  December
    2014. First-tier Tribunal Judge  Telford  dismissed  the  appeal  in  a
    decision dated 03 February 2015. On 27  February  2015  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge  Southern  concluded  that  the  First-tier   Tribunal   decision
    disclosed an error of law because the First-tier Tribunal Judge  failed
    to appreciate that an adjournment application was made to  enable  time
    for further enquiries relating to evidence from Sri Lanka. The decision
    was set aside and the appeal remitted for a fresh hearing in the First-
    tier Tribunal.

3.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Chana re-heard and dismissed the  appeal  on
    16 March 2015. The appellant appealed  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.  In  a
    decision dated 23 July 2015 Upper Tribunal  Judge  Gleeson  and  Deputy
    Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood ("the panel") concluded  that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error of  law  because
    the judge failed to give adequate reasons and erred  in  rejecting  the
    evidence produced by the appellant from a lawyer in Sri  Lanka  because
    she had already found his account was not credible.

4.    The panel set aside the decision and directed it to be remade  in  the
    Upper Tribunal. The appeal was delayed while the parties made inquiries
    and sought to produce further evidence from Sri Lanka. The  appeal  was
    eventually relisted for hearing before this panel.


5.    The  appellant  attended  the  hearing  and  gave  evidence  with  the
    assistance of a Tamil speaking  interpreter.  He  was  asked  questions
    about his reasons for claiming asylum.  The  relevant  details  of  the
    evidence given by the witness are incorporated  into  our  findings  of
    fact.


6.    We have considered the appellant's grounds of  appeal,  the  oral  and
    documentary evidence, the skeleton arguments and  oral  submissions  as
    well as the reasons given for refusing the application before coming to
    a decision in this appeal.

Legal framework

Basic principles

7.    The 1951 Refugee Convention is interpreted  in  European  law  through
    Council  Directive  2004/83/EC  ("the  Qualification  Directive").  The
    Directive is transposed into law in  the  UK  through  The  Refugee  or
    Person in Need of International Protection (Qualification)  Regulations
    2006 ("the Qualification Regulations") and the Immigration Rules.

8.    The third recital of the Qualification Directive makes clear that  the
    Refugee  Convention  and  Protocol  provide  the  cornerstone  of   the
    international legal regime for the protection of refugees.

9.    The courts have repeatedly recognised the humanitarian nature  of  the
    Refugee Convention and have emphasised  the  need  to  treat  it  as  a
    'living instrument' that must be interpreted in a purposive  way.  Lord
    Hope confirmed this principle in R v Special Adjudicator ex parte Hoxha
    [2005] UKHL 19:
           "6.   No-one questions the broad humanitarian  principles  which
                 underlie the Convention. The social and humanitarian nature
                 of the problem of refugees was expressly recognised in  the
                 preamble to the Convention. So too was the fact that it was
                 the express wish of all  states  to  do  everything  within
                 their power to prevent the problem from becoming a cause of
                 tension between them. ...
           7.    As a result of the amendments which  it  made  to  article
                 1A(2) of the Convention, these two instruments now  provide
                 the cornerstone of the international legal regime  for  the
                 protection of refugees: see paragraph (3) of  the  preamble
                 to Council Directive 2004/83/EC of 29 April 2004 on minimum
                 standards for the qualification and status of third country
                 nationals  or   stateless   persons   as   refugees   ("the
                 Directive"). These are to be seen as living instruments, to
                 which the broadest effect must be given to ensure that they
                 continue to serve the  humanitarian  principles  for  whose
                 purpose the Convention was entered into."

10.   The burden of proof is on an asylum applicant to show that he  or  she
    has a well-founded fear of persecution for  one  of  the  five  reasons
    outlined in the Refugee Convention i.e.  race,  religion,  nationality,
    membership of a particular social  group  or  political  opinion.   The
    standard of proof  has  been  described  as  a  'reasonable  degree  of
    likelihood',  a  'serious  possibility',   'substantial   grounds   for
    thinking' or a 'real risk' of serious harm:  see  R  v  SSHD  ex  parte
    Sivakumaran [1988] Imm AR 147. The reason why there is a  low  standard
    of proof is because of the serious nature of the potential consequences
    of return.

Establishing a claim

11.   In  Karanakaran  v  SSHD  [2000]  Imm  AR  271  the  Court  of  Appeal
      considered the earlier Tribunal decision in Kaja v SSHD [1995] Imm  AR
      1 and summarised it as follows:

           "53.  It is clear  that  the  majority  was  influenced  by  the
                 notorious difficulty many asylum-seekers face in  "proving"
                 the facts on which their asylum plea is founded. In many of
                 these  cases,  they  said,  the  evidence   will   be   the
                 applicant's own  story,  supported  in  some  instances  by
                 reports from organisations like Amnesty International.  The
                 stress generated by the nature of an asylum claim  and  the
                 possible  consequences  of  refusal,  complemented  by  the
                 highly formalistic atmosphere of interview or  court,  made
                 the task of evaluating the evidence more complex. This  did
                 not mean that there should be a more  ready  acceptance  of
                 fact as  established  as  more  likely  than  not  to  have
                 occurred. On the other hand, it  created  a  more  positive
                 role for uncertainty. It would be a rare decision-taker who
                 was never uncertain about some  aspects  of  the  evidence,
                 particularly where, unlike civil litigation, evaluation was
                 often concerned only with one version of  the  "facts".  To
                 say that it is only the facts established  as  more  likely
                 than  not  to  have  occurred  on  which  the   "reasonable
                 likelihood" must be based would be, they  said,  to  remove
                 much  of  the  benefit  of  uncertainty  conferred  on   an
                 applicant through Sivakumaran."

12.   The UNHCR Handbook and  Guidelines  on  Procedures  and  Criteria  for
    Determining Refugee Status (December 2011) explains some of the reasons
    why an asylum seeker might have difficulty producing evidence.

           "196.       It is a general legal principle that the  burden  of
                 proof  lies  on  the  person  submitting  a  claim.  Often,
                 however, an applicant  may  not  be  able  to  support  his
                 statements by documentary or  other  proof,  and  cases  in
                 which  an  applicant  can  provide  evidence  of  all   his
                 statements will be the exception rather than the  rule.  In
                 most cases a person  fleeing  from  persecution  will  have
                 arrived with the barest  necessities  and  very  frequently
                 even without personal documents. Thus, while the burden  of
                 proof in principle rests on  the  applicant,  the  duty  to
                 ascertain and evaluate all the  relevant  facts  is  shared
                 between the applicant and the  examiner.  Indeed,  in  some
                 cases, it may be for the examiner to use all the  means  at
                 his disposal to produce the necessary evidence  in  support
                 of the application. Even such independent research may not,
                 however,  always  be  successful  and  there  may  also  be
                 statements that are  not  susceptible  of  proof.  In  such
                 cases, if the  applicant's  account  appears  credible,  he
                 should, unless there are good reasons to the  contrary,  be
                 given the benefit of the doubt."

13.   Article 4 of the  Qualification  Directive  (reflected  in  paragraphs
    339J-L  of  the  immigration  rules)  outlines  how   the   facts   and
    circumstances of a claim should be considered.

          1.     Member States may consider it the duty of the applicant to
                 submit  as  soon  as  possible  all  elements   needed   to
                 substantiate    the    application    for     international
                 protection. In cooperation with the applicant  it  is  the
                 duty of the Member State to assess the relevant elements of
                 the application.
          2.     The elements referred to in paragraph 1  consist  of  the
                 applicant's  statements  and  all  documentation   at   the
                 applicant's  disposal  regarding   the   applicant's   age,
                 background, including that of relevant relatives, identity,
                 nationality(ies), country(ies)  and  place(s)  of  previous
                 residence, previous  asylum  applications,  travel  routes,
                 identity and travel documents and the reasons for  applying
                 for international protection.
          3.      The  assessment  of  an  application  for   international
                 protection is to be carried out on an individual basis  and
                 includes taking into account:
                 (a)   all relevant facts as they relate to the  country  of
                       origin at the  time  of  taking  a  decision  on  the
                       application; including laws and  regulations  of  the
                       country of origin and the manner in  which  they  are
                       applied;
                 (b)   the relevant statements and  documentation  presented
                       by the applicant including information on whether the
                       applicant has been or may be subject  to  persecution
                       or serious harm;
                 (c)   the individual position and personal circumstances of
                       the applicant, including factors such as  background,
                       gender and age, so as to assess whether, on the basis
                       of the applicant's personal circumstances,  the  acts
                       to which the applicant has been or could  be  exposed
                       would amount to persecution or serious harm;
                 (d)   whether the applicant's activities since leaving  the
                       country or origin were engaged for the sole  or  main
                       purpose of  creating  the  necessary  conditions  for
                       applying  for  international  protection,  so  as  to
                       assess  whether  these  activities  will  expose  the
                       applicant to persecution or serious harm if  returned
                       to that country;
                 (e)   whether the applicant could reasonably be expected to
                       avail himself of the protection  of  another  country
                       where he could assert citizenship.

           4.    The fact that an applicant has  already  been  subject  to
                 persecution or serious harm or to direct  threats  of  such
                 persecution or such harm, is a serious  indication  of  the
                 applicant's well-founded fear of persecution or  real  risk
                 of suffering serious harm, unless there are good reasons to
                 consider that such persecution or serious harm will not  be
                 repeated.
           5.    Where Member States apply the principle according to which
                 it is  the  duty  of  the  applicant  to  substantiate  the
                 application for international protection and where  aspects
                 of  the  applicant's  statements  are  not   supported   by
                 documentary or other evidence, those aspects shall not need
                 confirmation, when the following conditions are met:
                  (a)    the  applicant  has  made  a  genuine  effort   to
                 substantiate his application;
                 (b)   all relevant elements, at the  applicant's  disposal,
                       have been submitted, and a  satisfactory  explanation
                       regarding any lack of  other  relevant  elements  has
                       been given;
                 (c)   the applicant's statements are found to  be  coherent
                       and plausible and do not  run  counter  to  available
                       specific and  general  information  relevant  to  the
                       applicant's case;
                 (d)   the general credibility of the  applicant  has  been
                 established.

Assessing documentary evidence

14.   In Tanveer Ahmed (documents unreliable and forged) Pakistan  *  [2002]
    UKIAT  00439  the  Tribunal  outlined  possible   considerations   when
    assessing what weight can be placed on documentary evidence produced in
    support of a protection claim.

              "31.     It is trite immigration and asylum law that  we  must
                 not judge what is or is  not  likely  to  happen  in  other
                 countries by reference to our perception of what is  normal
                 within the United Kingdom. The principle applies as much to
                 documents as to any other form of evidence.  We  know  from
                 experience and country information that there are countries
                 where it is easy and often relatively inexpensive to obtain
                 "forged" documents. Some of them are false in that they are
                 not made by whoever purports  to  be  the  author  and  the
                 information they contain is  wholly  or  partially  untrue.
                 Some are "genuine" to the extent that they emanate  from  a
                 proper source, in the proper form,  on  the  proper  paper,
                 with the proper seals, but the information they contain  is
                 wholly or partially untrue. Examples are birth,  death  and
                 marriage certificates from certain countries, which can  be
                 obtained from the proper source for a  "fee",  but  contain
                 information  which  is  wholly  or  partially  untrue.  The
                 permutations of truth, untruth, validity and  "genuineness"
                 are enormous. At its  simplest  we  need  to  differentiate
                 between form and content; that is  whether  a  document  is
                 properly issued by the purported  author  and  whether  the
                 contents are true. They are separate  questions.  It  is  a
                 dangerous  oversimplification  merely  to  ask  whether   a
                 document is "forged" or even "not genuine". It is necessary
                 to  shake  off  any  preconception  that  official  looking
                 documents are genuine, based on experience of documents  in
                 the United Kingdom, and  to  approach  them  with  an  open
                 mind."

15.   The Tribunal confirmed that it is  for  the  individual  applicant  to
    show that a document is reliable. Whilst recognising that the burden of
    proof to show  forgery  would  lie  on  the  respondent,  the  Tribunal
    cautioned against too much  emphasis  on  the  question  of  whether  a
    document is forged. A document should not be viewed in  isolation.  The
    decision maker should look at all the evidence  in  the  round.  As  to
    whether there is a duty on the Home  Office  to  make  inquiries  about
    documents produced in support of an asylum claim the Tribunal said:

           "36.  There is no obligation on the Home Office to make detailed
                 enquiries about documents produced by individual claimants.
                 Doubtless there are cost and logistical difficulties in the
                 light of the number of documents submitted by  many  asylum
                 claimants. In the absence of a  particular  reason  on  the
                 facts of an individual case a decision by the  Home  Office
                 not to make inquiries, produce in-country evidence relating
                 to a particular document or scientific evidence should  not
                 give rise to any presumption in  favour  of  an  individual
                 claimant or against the Home Office."

16.   In MJ (Singh v Belgium: Tanveer Ahmed unaffected)  Afghanistan  [2013]
    UKUT 00253 the Tribunal concluded that the  decision  of  the  European
    Court of Human Rights in Singh v Belgium (No: 33210/11) did not justify
    departing from the general principles outlined in  Tanveer  Ahmed.  The
    Tribunal in Tanveer Ahmed envisaged that there might be cases where  it
    is proper for inquiries to be made. Singh v Belgium  was  such  a  case
    where  verification  of  documents  was  straightforward  and  from  an
    "unimpeachable source" (UNHCR).

17.   In PJ (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ  1011  the  Court  of  Appeal
    considered the scope of the Secretary of  State's  duty  to  examine  a
    protection claim in  the  context  of  evidence  from  Sri  Lanka.  The
    evidence consisted of letters and attached  court  documents  from  Sri
    Lankan lawyers, who were said to have made inquiries on behalf  of  the
    appellant. The appellant also produced copies of the Bar Association of
    Sri Lanka (BASL) membership cards of the lawyers who were involved. The
    Court of Appeal considered what was said  in  Tanveer  Ahmed,  Singh  v
    Belgium and MJ (Afghanistan). Lord Justice Fulford made  the  following
    findings:

                   "29.      In my judgment, there is no basis  in  domestic
                 or European Court of Human  Rights  jurisprudence  for  the
                 general approach that  Mr  Martin  submitted  ought  to  be
                 adopted whenever local lawyers  obtain  relevant  documents
                 from  a  domestic  court,  and  thereafter  transmit   them
                 directly to lawyers in the UK. The involvement  of  lawyers
                 does  not  create  the  rebuttable  presumption  that   the
                 documents they produce  in  this  situation  are  reliable.
                 Instead, the jurisprudence referred to above does  no  more
                 than indicate that the circumstances  of  particular  cases
                 may exceptionally necessitate an element  of  investigation
                 by the national authorities, in order to provide  effective
                 protection against mistreatment  under  article  3  of  the
                 Convention. It is important to stress, however,  that  this
                 step  will  frequently  not  be  feasible  or  it  may   be
                 unjustified or disproportionate.  In  Ahmed's  case...  the
                 court highlighted the cost and logistical difficulties that
                 may be involved, for instance  because  of  the  number  of
                 documents submitted by some asylum claimants. The inquiries
                 may put the applicant or his family at risk,  they  may  be
                 impossible to undertake because  of  the  prevailing  local
                 situation or they may  place  the  UK  authorities  in  the
                 difficult position of making covert local inquiries without
                 the permission of the  relevant  authorities.  Furthermore,
                 given the uncertainties that  frequently  remain  following
                 attempts to establish the reliability of documents, if  the
                 outcome of any inquiry is likely to be inconclusive this is
                 a highly relevant factor. As  the  court  in  Ahmed's  case
                 observed, documents should not be viewed in  isolation  and
                 the evidence needs to be considered in its entirety.

                    30.      Therefore, simply because a  relevant  document
                 is potentially capable of being verified does not mean that
                 the national authorities have an obligation  to  take  this
                 step. Instead, it may be necessary to make  an  inquiry  in
                 order to verify  the  authenticity  and  reliability  of  a
                 document - depending always on the particular facts of  the
                 case - when  it  is  at  the  centre  of  the  request  for
                 protection, and when  a  simple  process  of  inquiry  will
                 conclusively resolve its authenticity and reliability:  see
                 Singh v Belgium.... I do not consider  that  there  is  any
                 material difference in approach  between  the  decision  in
                 Ahmed's case and Singh v Belgium, in  that  in  the  latter
                 case the Strasbourg  court  simply  addressed  one  of  the
                 exceptional situations  when  national  authorities  should
                 undertake a process of verification."

18.   In MA (Bangladesh) v SSHD [2016]  EWCA  Civ  175  Lord  Justice  Lloyd
    Jones clarified what was said in PJ (Sri Lanka) about the circumstances
    in which a duty to investigate might arise.

                 "29.  The statement in PJ (Sri Lanka) (at [29])  that  "the
                 circumstances  of  particular   cases   may   exceptionally
                 necessitate an element of investigation" does  not,  to  my
                 mind, lay down a legal requirements that  a  case  must  be
                 "exceptional" before such a duty can arise. Rather, I  take
                 Fulford LJ to be describing the situation in which  such  a
                 duty will arise only exceptionally. In the  great  majority
                 of cases no such duty will arise.

                          30.     PJ (Sri Lanka) permits an  approach  which
                 is  sequential  in  nature.  In  determining  whether   the
                 circumstances of  a  particular  case  may  necessitate  an
                 investigation,  national  authorities  may  first  consider
                 whether a disputed document is at the centre of the request
                 for protection before proceedings  to  consider  whether  a
                 simple process of inquiry  will  conclusively  resolve  its
                 authenticity  and  reliability.  If  these  conditions  are
                 satisfied it may be necessary for a national  authority  to
                 make  an  enquiry  to  verify  a  document.  It  does   not
                 necessarily follow, however, that such a duty  will  arise;
                 the judgment  in  PJ  (Sri  Lanka)  makes  clear  that  the
                 evidence,  including  the  documentary  evidence,  must  be
                 considered in  its  entirety.  If  the  court  or  tribunal
                 concludes that there was such a duty, it  will  proceed  to
                 consider whether it has been discharged  and,  if  not,  it
                 must assess the consequences for the case."

The Procedures Directive

19.   Council Directive 2005/85/EC ("the Procedures  Directive")  introduced
    a minimum framework of procedures for granting and withdrawing  refugee
    status. As with the Qualification Directive, the UK has not adopted the
    recast Procedures Directive (2013). Article 22 of the  2005  Procedures
    Directive sets out the following provisions relating to the  collection
    of information:

                       Article 22
                       For  the  purposes  of  examining  individual  cases,
    Member States shall not:

           a)   directly   disclose   information   regarding    individual
              applications for asylum, or the fact that an application  has
              been made, to the alleged  actor(s)  of  persecution  of  the
              applicant for asylum;
           b)  obtain  any  information  from  the  alleged   actor(s)   of
              persecution in a manner that would result  in  such  actor(s)
              being directly informed of the fact that an  application  has
              been made by the applicant in question, and would  jeopardise
              the  physical  integrity  of  the   applicant   and   his/her
              dependants, or the liberty and  security  of  his/her  family
              members still living in the country of origin.

20.   The provisions are transposed in paragraph 339IA  of  the  immigration
    rules.

           339IA.        For   the   purposes   of   examining   individual
      applications for asylum

              i) information provided in support of an application  and  the
                 fact that  an  application  has  been  made  shall  not  be
                 disclosed to the alleged actor(s)  of  persecution  of  the
                 applicant, and
             ii) information shall not be obtained from the alleged actor(s)
                 of persecution that would result in  their  being  directly
                 informed that an application for asylum has  been  made  by
                 the applicant in question and would jeopardise the physical
                 integrity of the applicant and  their  dependants,  or  the
                 liberty and security of their family members  still  living
                 in the country of origin.

21.   The parties were unable to refer the Tribunal  to  jurisprudence  from
    the Court of Justice of the European Union (CJEU) relating  to  Article
    22. The only case that touches on it is the Supreme Court decision in R
    v McGeough [2015] UKSC 62. In that case the  Supreme  Court  considered
    Article 22 of the Procedures  Directive  in  the  context  of  criminal
    proceedings in the UK. An application was  made  during  Mr  McGeough's
    trial for information he supplied when he made a  protection  claim  in
    Sweden to be excluded from the evidence.  In  view  of  the  fact  that
    Swedish law allowed  for  disclosure  of  information  in  unsuccessful
    asylum cases, and Mr McGeough was likely to be aware of the  fact  when
    he provided the information, the judge  admitted  the  evidence,  which
    formed the basis of his  conviction  for  membership  of  a  proscribed
    organisation.

22.   The Supreme Court in McGeough found  that  it  was  self-evident  that
    there was a need to encourage asylum applicants to feel  able  to  make
    full disclosure to the relevant authorities, but this did not give rise
    to an inevitable requirement that the information must be preserved  in
    confidence in every  circumstance.  The  court  made  clear  that  such
    information  should  not  be  disclosed  to  those  who  persecuted  an
    applicant. The injunction against  such  disclosure  was  contained  in
    Article 22 of the Procedures Directive and was specifically related  to
    the process of examining an individual protection claim. In  that  case
    the appellant's protection  claim  was  examined  and  the  application
    refused. The trigger for  confidentiality  under  Article  22  was  not
    present on the facts of the case. The court concluded  that  the  trial
    judge was right to refuse the application to exclude the evidence.

The UNHCR advisory opinion

23.   Signatory States to the  1951  Refugee  Convention  undertake  to  co-
    operate with the UNHCR and to facilitate it in its  duty  to  supervise
    the application of the provisions of the 1951 Convention (Article  35).
    Paragraph 358C of the Immigration Rules recognises the supervisory role
    of the UNHCR in relation to individual applications. The UNHCR shall be
    provided with information relating to an individual  applicant  if  the
    applicant agrees to the information being disclosed.

24.   On 31 March 2005 the UNHCR issued an "Advisory opinion  on  the  rules
    of confidentiality regarding asylum information". The  UNHCR  began  by
    emphasising the importance of the general principle of  confidentiality
    in  a  protection  claim.  The  right  to  privacy  and  the  need  for
    confidentiality is especially important to an asylum seeker whose claim
    is likely to suppose a fear of persecution by the  authorities  in  the
    country  of  origin  and  whose  situation  could  be  jeopardised   if
    protection of information is not ensured.  Bearing  those  concerns  in
    mind, the State which receives a protection claim should  refrain  from
    sharing any information with the authorities of the country  of  origin
    and from informing the authorities in the  country  of  origin  that  a
    national has presented a protection claim. This applies  regardless  of
    whether the country of origin is considered by the authorities  of  the
    country of asylum as a "safe country of origin" or whether the claim is
    considered to be based on economic  motives.  The  authorities  of  the
    country of asylum may not  weigh  the  risks  involved  in  sharing  of
    confidential information with the country of origin and  conclude  that
    it will not result in human rights violations. The UNHCR observed  that
    these principles are reflected in the Procedures Directive.

25.   The advisory opinion says the authorities must  seek  in  advance  the
    written consent of an asylum seeker if they want to check personal data
    in the country of origin. If an asylum seeker considers that compelling
    information might be obtainable from the country of  origin,  and  that
    this could only be obtained through disclosure of personal information,
    he or she may occasionally request the authorities of  the  country  of
    asylum for help in obtaining such evidence. In  the  opinion  of  UNHCR
    confidentiality is required until a  final  decision  is  taken  on  an
    individual case, including during  administrative  or  judicial  review
    proceedings. If  an  asylum  seeker  has  voluntarily  disclosed  their
    identity and the fact that they have made a  protection  claim  through
    public statements, in the view of UNHCR, this may not be interpreted as
    an explicit waiver of confidentiality.

26.   While there is a general rule against  sharing  information  with  the
    country of origin the disclosure of certain confidential information to
    the country of origin without the  consent  of  the  applicant  may  be
    justified in limited and exceptional circumstances, such as  combatting
    terrorism. In circumstances where a person is found not to be  in  need
    of  international  protection,  and  has  exhausted   available   legal
    remedies, the authorities in the country of asylum  may  share  limited
    information, even without  consent,  in  order  to  facilitate  return.
    Disclosure should go no further than is lawful and necessary to  secure
    readmission and there should be no disclosure that could  endanger  the
    individual or any other person, including  the  fact  that  the  person
    applied for asylum.

27.   The UNHCR summed up the advice  with  the  following  conclusions  and
    recommendations.

      "25.  UNHCR  shares  the  legitimate  concern  of  States  to  clearly
           distinguish between persons who  need  international  protection
           and those who have no valid claim for refugee status.  It  is  a
           State's  prerogative,  and  in  fact  its  duty,   to   make   a
           determination on refugee status based on all available  evidence
           presented in the case.  Human  rights  standards  prescribe  the
           State's obligation to  protect  the  right  to  privacy  of  the
           individual  and  its  inherent  protection  against  information
           reaching the hands of persons not authorized to receive  or  use
           it. The possible risks to the individual asylum-seeker caused by
           information reaching the wrong people, but also the  detrimental
           effect of misuse of information to the asylum system as a  whole
           are very serious in nature. Consequently,  strict  adherence  to
           the fundamental principles and refugee protection is vital,  and
           exceptions  should  only  be  allowed  under  well-defined   and
           specific circumstances.

      Summary of recommendations

         . If the authorities responsible for assessing  an  asylum  claim,
           whether administrative or judicial, deem it necessary to collect
           information from the country of origin, such  requests  must  be
           couched in the most general  and  anonymous  terms,  and  should
           never include names or data by which the asylum seeker or his or
           her family could be identified in the country  of  origin.  Such
           authorities however must not communicate with  entities  in  the
           country of origin of the claimant (whether governmental or  non-
           governmental)  to  verify  or   authenticate   declarations   or
           documents provided by the asylum-seeker.
         .  Confidentiality  requirements  apply  throughout   the   asylum
           procedure, including judicial review.
         . If research is conducted on an individual case to verify a  fact
           or a document, the written consent of the individual has  to  be
           sought  in  advance,   unless,   exceptionally,   a   legitimate
           overriding security interest is at stake."




Analysis of the legal framework

28.   The basic legal framework outlined above will  be  familiar  to  those
    involved in preparing, presenting and assessing protection claims.  The
    area needing some analysis, which has been subject to less scrutiny  by
    courts and tribunals, is the nature of the duty of confidentiality  and
    the scope of Article 22 of the Procedures Directive.

29.   We find that the Supreme Court decision  in  McGeough  is  of  limited
    assistance in interpreting how Article 22  should  be  applied  in  the
    context of assessing a protection claim. The crux of the  case  related
    to whether information provided during the examination of a  protection
    claim should have been admitted in a criminal  trial.  The  court  made
    clear that the prohibitions  contained  in  Article  22  focus  on  the
    process of examining an individual protection claim. The court  thought
    it "obvious" that  information  relating  to  a  claim  should  not  be
    disclosed to an alleged actor of persecution.

30.   It is necessary to put the provision  in  context  before  considering
    the wording. The  humanitarian  objective  of  the  Refugee  Convention
    underpins  the  legal  regime  contained  in  the   Qualification   and
    Procedures Directives. Any action that is taken in examining an  asylum
    claim that might place a person or their family  members  at  risk,  or
    that might enhance an existing risk, must be avoided because  it  would
    defeat the purpose of the Refugee Convention.

31.   The purpose of the Procedures Directive  is  to  introduce  a  minimum
    framework of standards within the  European  Union  on  procedures  for
    granting and withdrawing refugee status. Article 4 of the Qualification
    Directive provides guidance on how a  claim  should  be  assessed.  The
    Procedures Directive sets out more detailed provisions relating to  the
    procedures for making and examining a protection claim.

32.   As recognised in McGeough, Article 22 applies  for  the  "purposes  of
    examining  individual  cases".  Confidentiality  is   of   the   utmost
    importance during the process  of  examining  a  protection  claim.  An
    applicant must feel able to provide relevant information  without  fear
    that it might  be  disclosed  to  the  alleged  actor  of  persecution.
    Breaches of confidentiality during an inquiry in the country of  origin
    could give rise to additional risk to the applicant or to other  people
    connected to the claim in the country of origin.

33.   The provisions contained in sub-paragraphs (a) and (b) of  Article  22
    set out two separate prohibitions on Member States during  the  process
    of examining a claim. The first prohibition contained in  sub-paragraph
    (a) relates to disclosure of information by the Member State to alleged
    actors  of  persecution.  The  second  prohibition  contained  in  sub-
    paragraph (b) relates to obtaining information from the  alleged  actor
    of  persecution.  While  it  would  not   be   difficult   to   imagine
    circumstances in which disclosure of information could be made  in  the
    process of obtaining information from the alleged actor of persecution,
    the separation of the two provisions makes a clear distinction  between
    disclosure of information and the risks that might be  associated  with
    the process of obtaining information.

34.   We conclude that the reference  to  'direct'  disclosure  of  personal
    information or the fact that a person has made a protection claim  must
    relate to direct contact with the alleged actor of persecution and  not
    solely to disclosure of specific information.  The  provision  must  be
    read in the context  of  the  overall  humanitarian  objective  of  the
    Refugee Convention. Any direct contact made "in a  manner"  that  might
    lead the alleged actor of persecution to  conclude  that  a  person  is
    likely to have made a protection claim, or in a  way  that  might  give
    rise to additional risk, is likely  to  engage  the  prohibition  under
    Article  22.  Whether  direct  contact  with  the  alleged   actor   of
    persecution has been done in a way that is  prohibited  by  Article  22
    will depend on the nature of the inquiry and the circumstances of  each
    case.

35.   On behalf of the appellant it was argued that the remedy for a  breach
    of confidentiality under Article 22 is to  grant  refugee  status.  The
    respondent states that her general policy is to do  so  if  an  inquiry
    verifies a document as genuine.

36.   The wording of Article 22 does not include a remedy for  a  breach  of
    the provision. It cannot  be  right  that  a  breach  of  a  procedural
    requirement would give rise to recognition as a refugee if the evidence
    shows, as a matter of fact, that a person does not have a  well-founded
    fear of persecution. To do  so  would  undermine  the  purpose  of  the
    Refugee Convention. A parallel can be drawn with the duty to  endeavour
    to trace family members of unaccompanied asylum seeking children  under
    Article  19  of  the  Council  Directive  2003/9/EC   ("the   Reception
    Directive"). In KA (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2013] 1 WLR 615 the  Court  of
    Appeal found that failure to comply with the duty did  not  lead  to  a
    successful outcome in a claim. Careful consideration will  need  to  be
    given to the facts of each individual case. The  failure  to  discharge
    the duty might be relevant to judicial consideration  of  a  protection
    claim.

37.   A breach of confidentiality to the alleged actor of persecution  might
    give rise to additional risk to an applicant. This could be ameliorated
    by a grant  of  status  but  would  not  protect  those  who  might  be
    associated with the claim in the country of origin.  Anyone  making  an
    inquiry in the country of origin, whether on behalf of an appellant  or
    the respondent, should be vigilant about the  duty  of  confidentiality
    and the need to avoid risk. Careful consideration should  be  given  to
    whether an inquiry is necessary, and if it is, whether it can  be  made
    in a way that complies with the principles of the Refugee Convention.

38.   We draw together the following principles relating to  the  assessment
    and authentication of evidence produced  in  support  of  a  protection
    claim from the legal framework outlined above.

      (i)   The Refugee Convention is the cornerstone of  the  international
           protection regime. The humanitarian principles of the Convention
           underpin the provisions outlined in the Qualification  Directive
           and the Procedures Directive.

      (ii)  The standard of proof is low because of the  serious  nature  of
           the  potential  consequences  of  return.  It  creates  a  'more
           positive role for uncertainty'.

      (iii) Where possible, an asylum applicant must make a  genuine  effort
           to substantiate his or her claim, although it is recognised that
           an applicant might have  difficulty  in  producing  evidence  to
           support the claim.

      (iv)  The overall burden of proof is upon the  asylum  applicant,  but
           there is also a duty on the  examiner  to  assess  the  relevant
           elements of the application according to the principles outlined
           in Article 4 of the Qualification Directive.

      (v)   Documentary evidence produced in support of a  protection  claim
           forms part of a holistic assessment. The principles outlined  in
           Tanveer Ahmed  (documents  unreliable  and  forged)  Pakistan  *
           [2002] UKIAT 00439 should  be  considered  when  assessing  what
           weight can be placed on documentary evidence.

      (vi)  There is no  general  duty  of  inquiry  upon  the  examiner  to
           authenticate documents  produced  in  support  of  a  protection
           claim. There may be exceptional situations when a  document  can
           be authenticated by a  simple  process  of  inquiry  which  will
           conclusively resolve  the  authenticity  and  reliability  of  a
           document.

      (vii) There is a general duty of confidentiality  during  the  process
           of  examining  a  protection  claim,  including  appellate   and
           judicial review proceedings. If it is  considered  necessary  to
           make an inquiry in the country of origin the country  of  asylum
           must obtain  the  applicant's  written  consent.  Disclosure  of
           confidential information without consent is  only  justified  in
           limited  and  exceptional  circumstances,  such  as   combatting
           terrorism.

      (viii)     The humanitarian principles underpinning Article 22 of  the
           Procedures Directive prohibit direct contact  with  the  alleged
           actor of persecution in the country of origin in a  manner  that
           might alert them to the likelihood that a protection  claim  has
           been made or in a manner that might place  applicants  or  their
           family members in the country of origin at risk.

      (ix)  The humanitarian objective of the  Refugee  Convention  requires
           anyone seeking to authenticate a document produced in support of
           a protection claim to follow a precautionary  approach.  Careful
           consideration should be given to the duty of confidentiality, to
           whether an inquiry is necessary, to whether  there  is  a  safer
           alternative and whether the inquiry is made in a way  that  does
           not give rise to additional protection issues for applicants  or
           their family members. Disclosure of personal information  should
           go no further than is strictly necessary. Whether an inquiry  is
           necessary and is carried out in an appropriate way  will  depend
           on the facts of the case and the circumstances in the country of
           origin.

      (x)   Failure to comply with the duty of confidentiality or  a  breach
           of  the  prohibitions  contained  in   Article   22   does   not
           automatically lead to recognition as a  refugee,  but  might  be
           relevant to the overall assessment of risk on return.

Summary of the evidence

Summary of the appellant's case

39.   The appellant says that he is at risk  on  return  to  Sri  Lanka  for
    reasons of attributed political opinion. His father  was  a  well-known
    member of the LTTE. He says that  his  family  lost  contact  with  his
    father when they relocated to Colombo in 2008. He  is  presumed  to  be
    dead. The appellant does not claim to have been a member of the LTTE or
    that he carried out activities in support of the LTTE. He  claims  that
    in January 2014 he went to collect a paternal uncle from the airport in
    Colombo. His uncle is a French citizen. His mother told  him  that  his
    uncle was a member of the LTTE before he moved to France. Over the next
    two weeks he drove his uncle around Colombo and waited outside while he
    visited various friends. He drove his uncle to the airport at  the  end
    of his visit.

40.   The appellant says that the police came to his house  on  15  February
    2014. He was arrested and taken to Wellewatte police station  where  he
    was questioned by CID officers. He was asked who  his  uncle  met  with
    during his visit. The appellant  does  not  claim  he  was  ill-treated
    during this detention. Later the  same  day  he  was  released  on  the
    condition that he reported to the police station every two weeks.  When
    he returned home his mother  contacted  an  uncle  in  Switzerland  who
    advised him to leave Sri Lanka. His mother took  steps  to  contact  an
    agent to arrange for him to leave the country.

41.   The appellant continued to report to the police station until  he  was
    detained on 06 June 2014. He was fingerprinted  and  his  ID  card  was
    taken away. He does not describe any ill-treatment at this  stage.  The
    appellant says that he was accused of being a terrorist and  was  taken
    to court on 10 June 2014. The court remanded him in custody for 15 days
    to allow the Terrorist Investigation Division  (TID)  to  make  further
    inquiries. He was taken to the TID in Pettah. The appellant  says  that
    he was questioned about his family associations, including his father's
    and his uncle's links to the LTTE.  The  appellant  says  that  he  was
    beaten in detention. His mother came to visit him. She arranged  for  a
    lawyer to assist him.

42.   The appellant says that he appeared in Court 8 at  the  Colombo  Chief
    Magistrate Court on 24 June 2014. An attorney represented  him  at  the
    hearing ("Mr D"). The appellant was released on bail on a  recognisance
    of 200,000 Rupees. He says that he was required to report every  Sunday
    and was told to return to court on 17 October 2014. On the  evening  of
    his release two men, who he believes were members of the LTTE, came  to
    his home and warned him not to  disclosed  any  information  about  the
    meetings.  The agent assisted him to  obtain  a  UK  student  visa  and
    helped him to pass through the airport. He arrived  in  the  UK  on  29
    September 2014 with leave to enter that  was  valid  until  30  October
    2017. He claimed asylum on 24 November 2014.

43.   During the course of the initial application  and  subsequent  appeals
    the appellant has produced a number of  documents  in  support  of  his
    claim. In a letter dated 15 December 2014 to the  appellant's  previous
    solicitor, his lawyer in Sri Lanka, Mr D, confirmed that he appeared on
    behalf of the appellant in a bail application on 24  June  2014.  Mr  D
    said that he could provide a certified copy of the court  file  but  he
    needed three weeks to obtain the court records.

44.   In a letter dated 23 December 2014 Mr D  said  that  he  had  obtained
    certified copies of the records. He confirmed that  the  appellant  was
    arrested on 06 June 2014 and was taken  to  the  TID  on  suspicion  of
    aiding and abetting the LTTE. He was subsequently produced  before  the
    Colombo Magistrate Court on 10 June 2014 and cited the case number.  Mr
    D confirmed that the appellant was remanded in custody  until  24  June
    2014 when he represented him in an application for bail. He was granted
    bail with conditions to report to the TID every Sunday and was required
    to return to court on 17 October  2014.  When  the  appellant  did  not
    attend court on that date  the  magistrate  issued  an  arrest  warrant
    against him. Mr D attached a certified copy of the court records, which
    provided information that was consistent with Mr D's summary of events.



45.   The appellant's previous solicitor tried to obtain a copy  of  Mr  D's
    Bar Association of Sri Lanka (BASL) identity  card.  In  correspondence
    dated 23 December 2014 an associate, Mr J, wrote to say that Mr  D  was
    out of the country "due to higher education" and confirmed that he  was
    now handling Mr D's cases. Mr J provided a copy of his BASL ID card. In
    an email to the appellant's previous solicitor dated 06  February  2015
    Mr D apologised for not being available when they made the request  for
    a copy of his ID card. He attached a copy to the email.

46.   The appellant produced a certified copy of an arrest warrant  that  is
    said to have been issued at the Colombo Chief Magistrate  Court  on  18
    October 2014. The  translation  states  that  the  warrant  was  issued
    because the appellant failed to attend court. The Officer in Charge  at
    the TID was directed to arrest the appellant and produce him before the
    court. The name of the magistrate was not clear to the translator.  The
    certified copy of the  warrant  was  signed  and  countersigned  by  an
    additional registrar, but again, the name is not clear.

47.   In response to inquiries made by the  respondent,  in  which  the  TID
    confirmed that it had no record of the  case  number,  the  appellant's
    previous solicitor asked Mr D to  obtain  further  documents  from  the
    Chief Registrar or the Magistrate to confirm  that  there  was  a  case
    recorded under the relevant case number. Mr D was  also  instructed  to
    ask the Chief Registrar  to  explain  the  procedure  for  obtaining  a
    certified copy of the court  file.  In  a  letter  to  the  appellant's
    solicitor  dated  07  November  2016  Mr  D  attached  a  copy  of  his
    correspondence to the registrar at the court dated 02 November 2016,  a
    copy of the response from the Chief Registrar at the  Chief  Magistrate
    Court and an up to date copy of his BASL ID card

48.   The letter from the Chief Registrar, K.R.S.  Ranaweera,  is  dated  04
    November 2016. The registrar confirmed that he or she  had  been  Chief
    Registrar for about seven years. The letter  states  that  a  case  was
    filed by the TID in Court 8 and was recorded as  a  pending  case.  The
    registrar confirmed the name of the suspect  and  that  a  warrant  was
    issued on 17 October 2014. The registrar  stated  that  Mr  D  made  an
    application for a certified copy of the case  records  on  18  December
    2014. Magistrate
         R S issued a certified copy of the full case record on 23  December
    2014. The registrar attached a copy of Mr D's written request from  the
    records, which appears to contain a handwritten  endorsement  approving
    the request and a court  seal.  The  letter  goes  on  to  outline  the
    procedure for obtaining certified copies of case records, which must be
    done by way of a written motion by an attorney. The application  should
    be addressed to the registrar, who would then forward  the  application
    to a magistrate for approval.

49.   The appellant's previous solicitor instructed  another  attorney  ("Mr
    R"), to provide authentication of the certified court records  obtained
    by Mr D. In a letter dated 07 November 2016 Mr R stated that the  court
    record provided by the appellant's solicitor was  a  true  and  genuine
    copy of the record filed at the Colombo Magistrate Court. He  confirmed
    that Mr D obtained a certified copy of the file on 23 December 2014. He
    stated that he was able to verify the  information  through  the  court
    registrar, Mrs S. V. Mr R provided a copy of his BASL ID card.

Summary of the respondent's case

50.   The respondent accepts that if the claim is taken at its  highest  the
    appellant is likely to have  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  if
    returned to Sri Lanka. However, she argues that the appellant  has  not
    given a credible and consistent account and asserts that the  documents
    produced in support of the  application  are  unreliable.  Verification
    checks undertaken by the British High Commission  (BHC)  in  Sri  Lanka
    undermine the documents produced in support of the claim.

51.   The respondent refused the application in a decision date 30  December
    2014.  The respondent noted that the appellant  produced  a  number  of
    documents in support of his student visa  application  which  indicated
    that his father was still alive. A bank statement in the names  of  his
    parents was verified as genuine. He also provided documents in  support
    of the visa application, which showed that his father  sold  land.  The
    respondent considered his claim that the agent  helped  him  to  obtain
    these documents, but noted that during the asylum  screening  interview
    the appellant  also  stated  that  both  parents  lived  in  Sri  Lanka
    [qu.9.7].

52.   The respondent took into account the court records obtained by  Mr  D.
    She noted that the BHC in Colombo reported that  forged  documents  are
    readily available in Sri Lanka. Although the court record  stated  that
    the appellant was arrested in connection with his  uncle's  activities,
    and mentioned that his uncle was a French national, it did not  mention
    that his uncle entered Sri Lanka on a forged passport  as  outlined  by
    the appellant in interview [qu.20]. The appellant did  not  mention  in
    interview that his father was a high ranking LTTE member as  stated  in
    the court record. The respondent considered  it  implausible  that  the
    appellant could have been severely beaten on his feet and  then  walked
    down to the ground floor of the TID to see his  mother  as  claimed  in
    interview. It was not credible that, having forced him to  confess,  he
    was asked to sign a blank piece of paper. Nor was it plausible that his
    ID card would be confiscated but not his passport. The respondent  took
    into account the fact that  the  appellant  did  not  claim  asylum  on
    arrival at the airport in the UK. For these reasons, she did not accept
    the appellant's account of past events and concluded that he would  not
    be at risk on return.

53.   The evidence produced by the respondent  falls  into  two  categories.
    Firstly, a series of letters from the 2nd Secretary (Migration) at  BHC
    in Colombo outlining general information about the nature of  inquiries
    made by the BHC to authenticate documents  produced  in  support  of  a
    range of immigration applications, and in particular, the way in  which
    inquiries are made in relation to specific types of documents  produced
    in support of protection claims  ("the  general  evidence").  Secondly,
    several pieces  of  correspondence  and  formal  Document  Verification
    Reports (DVR) relating to inquiries made in relation to  the  documents
    produced by the appellant ("the individual evidence").

54.   The general evidence was prepared over a period of  time.  An  initial
    letter from the 2nd Secretary (Migration) dated 03 July  2015  outlines
    concerns about abuses involving  'attorney  letters'  from  Sri  Lanka.
    Since January 2014 the BHC checked 80 cases. 30 cases  were  associated
    with  attorney  endorsement  documents  in  the  form  of  letters   or
    credentials. It is not clear whether those inquiries related solely  to
    protection claims or other types of immigration applications. In  seven
    cases the attorney confirmed that  they  wrote  the  letter,  but  when
    verified separately with the police stations or courts  that  purported
    to issue the warrants, they were found to be false. In four  cases  the
    attorney confirmed that the letter was written by them, but there  were
    no other documents provided to verify the claims. There were six  cases
    where the attorney's credentials were found to be false and  in  eleven
    cases they  were  unable  to  contact  the  attorney  despite  repeated
    attempts to verify the letters. In only  two  cases  did  the  attorney
    confirm that the letters were not issued by him. The BHC  asserts  that
    this shows that the "vast majority" of letters provided by  Sri  Lankan
    attorneys that it verified were "not  credible".  Where  there  are  no
    supporting documents to verify what is said by an attorney the  BHC  is
    inclined to be cautious about  accepting  assertions  made  in  letters
    purporting to be from Sri Lankan attorneys.

55.   In a letter dated 28 February 2017 the 2nd Secretary  stated  that  it
    was his personal view that the majority of  attorneys  registered  with
    BASL engage in their professional honourably and act in accordance with
    the oaths of allegiance they have sworn.  He acknowledged that  members
    of the Sri Lankan legal profession have often shown great  bravery  and
    integrity in carrying out their duties and in trying to  improve  their
    country. However, it remained the case that documents purporting to  be
    warrants of arrest or court records were often submitted  with  letters
    of support from  attorneys  in  Sri  Lanka  or  those  claiming  to  be
    attorneys. The BHC in Colombo made complaints  to  BASL  about  several
    attorneys. The letter included details of some of  the  complaints  and
    the outcome of disciplinary proceedings conducted by BASL.  It  is  not
    necessary to set out the details of those individual cases here save to
    note that none of the  disciplinary  proceedings  relate  to  attorneys
    named in the evidence in this case.

56.   In a letter dated 02 November 2015 the 2nd Secretary provided  further
    information about the nature of the verification checks  undertaken  by
    the BHC with the assistance of  a  team  in  RALON  (Risk  and  Liaison
    Overseas Network). RALON is said to be a subsidiary of the Home Office,
    which works to reduce cross-border crime into the UK,  including  human
    trafficking by detecting and sharing intelligence on potential criminal
    activity at ports of entry, exit and transit. The 2nd Secretary  stated
    that since June 2014 verification was carried out  in  130  Sri  Lankan
    asylum cases. It is the practice of the  BHC  to  redact  the  personal
    information  from  the  document  so  that  the  individual  cannot  be
    identified. They only ask about the document and not the person who  is
    the subject of the document. They do not  reveal  the  reason  for  the
    inquiry. The BHC might make  inquiries  on  various  matters  including
    forced  marriage  cases,  criminal   cases,   forced   adoption/missing
    children, fraud, trafficking and visa verifications.

57.   The letter from the 2nd Secretary goes on to say that  the  BHC  never
    discloses the grounds for the inquiry. In almost all asylum  cases  the
    documents that the BHC verifies are either Sri Lankan court  or  police
    documents. The verification method has been, in most cases,  to  attend
    the police station or court that purported to issue the document and to
    ask them to check their records for a case bearing the reference number
    on the redacted document. The officer in charge of the  police  station
    or the court registrar will check the record while they wait. In  cases
    where the court or station is geographically too distant to  travel  to
    the BHC is able "to use our relationship with the Sri Lankan police  to
    verify redacted documents by fax through the head of  Interpol  in  Sri
    Lanka". He considered this useful because they  would  receive  written
    confirmation regarding the veracity of the document.

58.   In November 2015, the BHC was  aware  of  only  two  cases  where  the
    documents appeared to be genuine although inquiries were ongoing in one
    of those cases. In other words, it was thought that in 98.5%  of  cases
    the documents were not genuine. The 2nd Secretary went  on  to  observe
    that many of the cases appeared to involve those who had been in the UK
    for some time on Tier 4 student visas issued between  2009-2012  before
    making a protection claim. He speculated that the submission  of  court
    and police documents was likely to be an attempt to give credibility to
    a protection claim that would otherwise appear contrived.

59.   In a subsequent letter dated 15  November  2016  the  BHC  in  Colombo
    confirmed that since July 2014 the team  verified  355  documents  that
    were submitted in protection claims from Sri Lankan applicants. Of  the
    218 cases 88% were deemed false (191 cases). In the 12% of cases  where
    verification indicated that the document was likely to be  genuine  (26
    cases) a grant of protection was "generally the outcome". The other 117
    documents did not include police or court documents. The 2nd  Secretary
    confirmed that the process of  verification  was  unchanged  since  his
    letter dated 02 November 2015. He asserted  that  the  process  was  in
    accordance with the principles  outlined  in  paragraph  339IA  of  the
    immigration rules. Because 88% of the case numbers given on  police  or
    court documents did not relate to a real case  the  government  of  Sri
    Lanka is not able to learn the identity of those  people.  The  use  of
    redactions and non-disclosure of the reason for the verification  means
    that the government of Sri Lanka  is  never  told  that  a  person  has
    claimed asylum.

60.   The general evidence sets out  nature  of  the  document  verification
    process carried out by the respondent through the BHC in  Colombo.  The
    respondent has also produced evidence relating  to  specific  inquiries
    made in relation to this particular case. The  process  of  inquiry  is
    summarised by the 2nd Secretary in a letter dated 15 November 2016. The
    BHC received a request to verify the warrant of arrest in August  2015.
    A member of his team contacted the  TID  by  fax  because  it  was  the
    authority to whom the purported warrant was directed. The  warrant  was
    redacted to omit any reference to the individual and faxed to the  TID.
    The TID confirmed by telephone that they had no record of the  warrant.
    The information was included in a DVR prepared by RALON  on  14  August
    2015. On 23 August 2015 the  TID  provided  written  confirmation  that
    there was no record of the arrest warrant. Copies of the letter to  the
    TID, the redacted warrant and the TID written response are included  in
    the evidence.

61.   The 2nd Secretary  observed  that  it  might  be  suggested  that  the
    authorities in Sri Lanka have a vested interest in misleading his  team
    when they make verification inquiries. He believed that  there  was  no
    evidence to support such a claim. He was not aware of  any  case  where
    the authorities deliberately misled the BHC. He noted that in the faxed
    reply from TID they confirmed the arrest warrant  in  one  case,  which
    indicated that the TID provided truthful answers.  Although  there  was
    one  case  where  they  were  given  incorrect  information  they  were
    satisfied that it was unintentional.

62.   The respondent made her own inquiries in response to further  evidence
    produced by the appellant which was said to be from the Chief Registrar
    of the Colombo Chief Magistrate Court, K.R.S  Ranaweera.  In  a  letter
    dated 16 November 2016  the  2nd  Secretary  outlined  the  nature  and
    outcome of the inquiries and attached a copy of a DVR dated 15 November
    2016, which outlined the  same  information.  The  DVR  stated  that  a
    representative from RALON met with the Chief Registrar of  the  Colombo
    Chief Magistrate Court on 15 November 2016  and  presented  a  redacted
    copy of the arrest warrant for verification. The DVR stated  that  they
    spoke to the Chief Registrar, Mrs Chamila  Wikramatunga.  She  was  not
    aware of a registrar by the name of K.R.S Ranaweera.

63.   The DVR goes on to say that the Chief Registrar noted that  the  court
    reference was missing the relevant court house number. The  last  digit
    should indicate the court e.g. A11111/11/1. The spelling on  the  stamp
    was incorrect. The circular day stamp is only  placed  on  the  warrant
    once it is executed. Because the complainant was the TID she said  that
    the relevant court house should have been Court 8, where most TID cases
    are heard. The Chief Registrar told the respondent's representative  to
    meet  with  the  registrar  for  Court  8.  The  DVR  stated  that  the
    respondent's representative met with the  registrar  for  Court  8  who
    referred the warrant to the Chief Clerk for the court. The Chief  Clerk
    checked the day book and confirmed  that  there  was  no  record  of  a
    warrant being issued on 17/10/2014 with the reference number given. The
    Chief Clerk then referred the respondent's representative to the police
    post to check whether the warrant number existed. The police post  told
    the respondent's representative that the  only  reference  number  that
    matched the one listed on the warrant related to  a  case  recorded  in
    Court 6. The case related to a monetary fraud in the  name  of  another
    person. There was no record of a warrant being issued in that case.

64.   In a further letter dated 06 March 2017 the 2nd Secretary stated  that
    his team received verbal confirmation from the Registrar  for  Court  6
    that "the documents were not  genuine"  but  had  trouble  obtaining  a
    written response. A member of his team met with  the  Registrar  on  28
    February 2017. The Registrar provided a  written  response,  which  was
    translated from Singhalese by a member of his team. The  Registrar  was
    shown a copy of the redacted arrest warrant that was said to have  been
    certified by the court for Mr D on 23 December 2014.  The  letter  from
    the Registrar at Court 6 is  dated  28  February  2017.  The  Registrar
    stated that the arrest warrant submitted  for  verification  under  the
    reference given could not be confirmed because they were unable to find
    a corresponding case record. The Registrar went on to  state  that  the
    date and the court stamps on the arrest warrant "do not  correspond  to
    the date and court stamps used by this court".



Decision and reasons

65.   We have considered whether the appellant has made a genuine effort  to
    substantiate his protection claim, including  whether  his  account  is
    coherent and plausible and does not run counter to specific or  general
    information relevant to the case.

66.   We find that there is nothing inherently implausible  about  the  core
    elements of the appellant's claim. The fact that the government of  Sri
    Lanka might have an adverse interest in those  it  perceives  to  be  a
    threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single  state  is  consistent
    with the background evidence  and  the  most  recent  country  guidance
    decision in GJ and others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka  [2013]
    UKUT 00319. If the claim is found to be credible the respondent accepts
    that the appellant is likely to have a well-founded fear of persecution
    in Sri Lanka.

67.   The appellant does not claim to have been active for the LTTE  in  the
    past and does not claim to have carried out political activities in the
    diaspora in the UK.  His  claim  to  be  of  adverse  interest  to  the
    authorities relies on his association  with  his  father  and  paternal
    uncle, who are said to have been active LTTE members in the past.

68.    The  appellant  has  provided  little  detail  about   his   father's
    activities in Sri Lanka. This aspect of his claim does  not  appear  to
    form a central plank of the case, but is said to  be  relevant  to  his
    perceived profile in the eyes of the Sri Lankan authorities.   We  bear
    in mind that the appellant says that he last saw his  father  in  2008,
    when he was around 14 years old. Given  his  young  age  we  would  not
    necessarily expect him to have detailed knowledge of his own about  his
    father's activities. Nevertheless, it forms an important  part  of  the
    evidence  relied  upon  by  the  appellant  to  show  that  his  family
    background is known to the authorities. There  is  nothing  to  suggest
    that the appellant no longer has contact with family members who  might
    know more about his father's activities. Even though this  issue  forms
    part of his claim no further information has  been  provided  regarding
    his father's position in the LTTE.

69.   The appellant asserts that  he  lied  in  the  application  for  entry
    clearance as a Tier 4 student. In  interview  the  appellant  suggested
    that his parents were sponsoring the application. His  mother  was  the
    main sponsor, but he made clear that his father sold some land to  help
    finance his studies in the UK. He  produced  evidence  to  support  his
    assertions, including a  bank  statement  in  his  parents'  names  and
    evidence to show that his father sold land in June 2014.  The appellant
    says that the agent advised him to lie to obtain a  visa.  Although  we
    accept that it is possible that a genuine refugee  might  need  to  use
    deception or obtain false documents in order to secure his escape,  the
    appellant has not provided a satisfactory  explanation  as  to  why  he
    appeared to suggest that both parents were living in Sri Lanka  at  the
    asylum screening interview. Even if he had good reason to lie about his
    father's whereabouts in the entry clearance application, by the time he
    claimed asylum, he had no reason to  do  so  given  that  his  father's
    activities for the LTTE formed one aspect of his claim. The  fact  that
    the appellant indicated that both parents were  in  Sri  Lanka  in  the
    entry clearance application and in the screening interview does tend to
    undermine his claim that his father has been  missing,  presumed  dead,
    since 2008.

70.   There is nothing  inherently  implausible  about  the  fact  that  the
    appellant's uncle might have had previous LTTE  connections  given  the
    history of the Sri Lankan conflict. His account of the  time  he  spent
    driving his uncle around Colombo on a two-week visit is vague and lacks
    detail. The appellant says that he found out  about  his  uncle's  LTTE
    connections through his mother. Even though his  association  with  his
    uncle forms the central reason for his arrest the  appellant  has  been
    unable to  provide  much  detail  about  his  uncle's  history.  It  is
    reasonable to suppose that other relatives, such as his  mother,  might
    be able to provide him with more  detailed  information.  Although  the
    appellant claims that his uncle was arrested after he dropped  him  off
    at the airport, it became apparent during  cross-examination  that  the
    appellant and his family did not try to contact his uncle's  family  in
    France after his arrest and made no effort to find out what happened to
    him.

71.   The appellant's account of events, beginning with the first  detention
    on 15 February 2014, and ending with his release on  bail  on  24  June
    2014, has been internally consistent regarding the key  events  and  is
    broadly consistent with the  information  contained  in  the  certified
    copies of the court record and the arrest warrant produced  in  support
    of his claim. It is not disputed that detention would  attract  a  real
    risk  of  ill-treatment  amounting  to  persecution  in  light  of  the
    background evidence relating to the treatment of suspects in Sri Lanka.
    At the core of the claim is the reliability of the  documents  said  to
    have been produced and verified by attorneys in Sri Lanka.

72.   Both parties compiled evidence relating  to  these  documents.  It  is
    clear from the initial correspondence  from  the  appellant's  previous
    representatives to Mr D that they took  steps  to  obtain  evidence  in
    support of the claim at an early stage of the process.  Mr  D's  letter
    dated 15 December 2014 states that he was instructed  by  email  on  20
    November 2014. His further  letter  dated  23  December  2014  and  the
    certified copy of  the  court  records  and  the  arrest  warrant  were
    available shortly before the respondent took a decision on 30  December
    2014. The evidence shows that his legal  representative  forwarded  the
    documents to the respondent on  24  December  2014,  but  there  is  no
    consideration of the evidence in the decision letter.

73.   The fact  that  evidence  was  obtained  through  'lawyer  to  lawyer'
    correspondence does  not  mean  that  it  should  be  accepted  without
    question. The fact that the process of obtaining the evidence  is  more
    apparent is a matter that lends more weight to the  evidence,  but  the
    overall reliability of the information provided by an attorney  in  Sri
    Lanka must still be subject to scrutiny. The general evidence  produced
    by the  respondent  from  the  BHC  in  Colombo,  and  the  details  of
    disciplinary proceedings conducted by BASL in relation to  the  conduct
    of several attorneys in other cases, shows that  a  number  of  similar
    letters purporting to be from Sri Lankan attorneys have been  shown  to
    be unreliable. The overall context of the figures provided by  the  2nd
    Secretary is somewhat unclear.  We  do  not  know  what  proportion  of
    protection claims are thought to require further inquiries in Sri Lanka
    or whether the cases involving the provision of 'attorney letters' form
    a large or small proportion of the overall number of protection  claims
    from Sri Lanka. Nevertheless, the background evidence relating  to  Sri
    Lanka shows  that  corruption  is  widespread  and  the  use  of  false
    documents is a possibility.  Possible  permutations  could  range  from
    genuine letters from qualified attorneys, false letters  purporting  to
    be from qualified  attorneys,  letters  that  purport  to  be  from  an
    attorney whose credentials cannot be verified and  the  possibility  of
    corrupt and fraudulent practice by an attorney.

74.   In this case the  key  evidence  produced  by  the  appellant  is  the
    certified court records and a certified copy  of  the  arrest  warrant.
    This was supplemented with  a  letter  from  the  Chief  Registrar  and
    further inquiries made by another attorney, Mr R.

75.   The evidence from the  court  was  introduced  through  correspondence
    from Mr D. Although a copy of  his  BASL  ID  card  was  not  initially
    available, Mr D provided a copy of the card by email dated 06  February
    2015 and a copy of his new BASL ID card was provided at a later  stage.
    His credentials have not  been  questioned.  No  doubt  they  could  be
    readily checked by BASL if  there  was  any  question  mark  about  his
    qualification as an attorney.

76.   On the face of it the  documents  are  consistent  with  one  another.
    Taken alone, and in the absence of  any  information  relating  to  the
    court  procedures,  the  documents  are  broadly  consistent  with  the
    appellant's account of  events.  The  reference  number  for  the  case
    brought against the appellant is the same on each of the documents  and
    in the correspondence from the various attorneys. It takes  the  format
    of a letter, followed by five numbers followed by a  two-digit  number,
    which  would  appear  to  reflect  the  year  e.g.  A11111/11.  Mr  D's
    correspondence requesting a copy of the court  records,  the  certified
    court records, the arrest warrant and subsequent correspondence said to
    be from the Chief Registrar of the Chief Magistrate  Court  in  Colombo
    all state the same reference number.

77.   On the face of it the details contained in the certified copy  of  the
    court records would also appear  to  be  consistent  with  the  central
    elements of the appellant's account. The record states that  the  Chief
    Inspector of the TID was investigating a complaint.  The  appellant  is
    named. The record states that he was arrested by the Wellawatta  police
    on 06 June 2014 and handed over to the TID on suspicion of  aiding  and
    abetting the LTTE and being a member of the LTTE. The record goes on to
    state that he joined a French national (giving the name of  his  uncle)
    and had taken steps to "organize the LTTE Organization". It was alleged
    that the appellant used his  car  for  LTTE  activities.  The  car  was
    impounded by the TID. It reports that the appellant's father is a  high
    ranking LTTE officer. The record states that  the  TID  was  seeking  a
    remand order under the Prevention of Terrorism Act.  The  record  shows
    that he was remanded until 24 June 2014. On that date the  record  goes
    on to state that the suspect was represented by  Mr  D  and  names  the
    officer who appeared on behalf of TID. Consistent with the  appellant's
    evidence, the record notes that he was released on conditional bail  on
    a recognisance of 200,000 Rupees with  reporting  conditions.  A  final
    record for 17 October 2014 states that the suspect was  absent  and  an
    'open warrant' was issued for his arrest.

78.   A certified copy of the arrest warrant was produced with the  copy  of
    the court record. The warrant stated the appellant's  details  and  was
    directed at the Officer in Charge of the TID. The reason for the  issue
    of the warrant was "failure to attend court". The Officer in Charge was
    authorised to arrest and produce the appellant. The  original  copy  of
    the warrant appears to be in a standard format with individual  details
    such as the case reference and the details of the  subject  entered  by
    hand. The warrant is sealed with a round stamp with a hand-written date
    of 23 December 2014. The same seal and date is found on  the  certified
    copy of the court records as well as the arrest warrant. The  seal  has
    not been translated, but given that this was the date that Mr D says he
    obtained a certified copy, we find that it is reasonable to infer  that
    the seal is likely to indicate certification of the copy.

79.   The appellant says that he left the country with the assistance of  an
    agent. He says that his mother contacted an agent after he was released
    from detention in February 2014, but no further information is provided
    as to why he did not leave the country sooner. It was  only  after  his
    arrest, detention and subsequent release on bail some four months later
    that any discernible action was taken  to  make  arrangements  for  the
    appellant to leave the country. He already had a  valid  passport.  The
    entry clearance application was not made until around six  weeks  after
    his release on bail. No explanation has been given as to why it took so
    long to make the arrangements if the agent was instructed  in  February
    2014. However, we note that the applicant left Sri Lanka promptly after
    the visa was issued on 23 September 2014. The fact  that  he  travelled
    through the  airport  without  being  stopped  is  not  a  matter  that
    undermines his claim to be of interest to the authorities. He says that
    he passed through with the assistance of the agent. The arrest  warrant
    was not issued until sometime later. The Tribunal  in  GJ  (Sri  Lanka)
    recognised  that  it  is  possible  to  make  such  arrangements  given
    widespread corruption.

80.   We have also considered whether the timing of the  appellant's  asylum
    claim is a matter that might undermine  his  general  credibility.  The
    appellant entered the UK on 29 September 2014 and claimed asylum on  24
    November 2014. Although a genuine refugee might  be  expected  to  seek
    protection as soon as possible, we do not consider that a delay of  two
    months damages the credibility of the claim. The appellant says that he
    entered the UK and took advice before making a  protection  claim.  His
    student visa was valid for three years. This is not  a  case  where  he
    waited until his visa was about to expire. In the context  of  a  three
    year visa his application was made quite promptly.

81.   As noted above, the documents produced by the appellant are  generally
    consistent with one another in terms of dates,  reference  numbers  and
    other information relating to the  substance  of  the  claim.  However,
    there are some matters on the face  of  the  evidence  that  call  into
    question the reliability of Mr D's claim to have  made  inquiries  with
    the court in December 2014.

82.   The evidence produced  by  Mr  D  suggests  that  he  made  a  written
    application to the court for a certified copy of the court  records  on
    18 December 2014. He says that he received  a  certified  copy  of  the
    records on 23 December 2014.  His  correspondence  to  the  appellant's
    previous legal representatives enclosing the records is dated the  same
    day. The original correspondence did not include a copy of Mr D's  BASL
    ID card. It is not clear when the appellant's  representatives  made  a
    request for Mr D's BASL ID card. Another attorney, Mr J, responded to a
    request for the card in a letter dated 23 December 2014. This  was  the
    same day Mr D purported to send the evidence to the  appellant's  legal
    representatives. Mr J said that he was handling Mr  D's  cases  because
    "now a day he is not in the Island due to his higher education".  Mr  J
    provided a copy of his BASL ID instead. The suggestion that  Mr  D  was
    not in Sri Lanka in or around the time he says he  obtained  the  court
    records in December 2014 is repeated in a later email from Mr  D  dated
    06 February 2015. He stated: "Actually I handed over all my cases to Mr
    [J] to handle due to absence in Sri Lanka. At that time he was not able
    to contact me to obtain the Identity card copy."

83.   This evidence appears to show that Mr D was not in Sri Lanka  when  he
    purported to make a request for a certified copy of the  court  records
    in December 2014. No further detail is  provided  to  explain  how  the
    records were obtained if that was the case. Even if Mr  D  handed  over
    his cases to Mr J to deal with this does not explain  why  a  qualified
    attorney would send written and signed correspondence in Mr  D's  name.
    If Mr J had conduct of the case we  would  expect  him  to  make  those
    inquiries in his own name.  It  is  a  weakness  on  the  face  of  the
    evidence. The fact that there are two pieces of  evidence  to  indicate
    that Mr D was not in the country when he says he made the request for a
    certified copy of the court records calls into question how the inquiry
    was made. This point gives rise to doubts about how the documents  were
    produced. Taken alone, we do not place significant weight on it because
    it was not put to the appellant to answer at the hearing.

84.   Other evidence has been produced by the  respondent  that  also  calls
    into  question  the  reliability  of  the  documents  produced  by  the
    appellant. The most notable is a direct inquiry to  TID  regarding  the
    authenticity of the  arrest  warrant.  The  respondent  states  that  a
    redacted copy of the warrant was sent to TID. The only  redaction  from
    the warrant is the appellant's name and  address.  The  respondent  has
    produced a copy of the letter that was sent to TID on 10  August  2015.
    The letter is on BHC headed paper  with  an  additional  header  saying
    "Immigration Enforcement". The BHC asked the Director  of  the  TID  to
    verify the authenticity of four arrest warrants. The reference  numbers
    are listed. No other information was given about  the  purpose  of  the
    request.

85.   The TID response is dated 25 August 2015. The response lists the  same
    four reference numbers. Next to three of them, including the  reference
    number in this case, it states "Not relevant to  TID".  In  the  fourth
    case TID stated that the case was relevant but  the  suspect  had  been
    released and the case closed. TID did not request  a  warrant  in  that
    case.

86.   We take into account the fact that  the  BHC  takes  steps  to  redact
    personal information from documents it seeks to  verify  and  does  not
    make reference to the purpose of the inquiry.  These  safeguards  might
    protect people who may have submitted false documents in support  of  a
    claim because if there is no genuine record of an  arrest  warrant  TID
    would not be able to identify the person. But this  method  of  inquiry
    would not protect those  who  have  a  genuine  arrest  warrant  issued
    against them. The identity of the person will be known to TID from  the
    reference number whether the copy of the warrant is redacted or not.

87.   Although the BHC is  careful  not  to  disclose  the  reason  for  the
    inquiry, and seeks to authenticate a wide range of  documents  relating
    to different types of applications, it is difficult to see  what  other
    sort of inquiry might require the BHC to verify the authenticity of  an
    arrest warrant with a specialist terrorism branch of  the  police.  The
    letter  headed  "Immigration  Enforcement"  informs  the   Sri   Lankan
    authorities that the inquiry relates to an immigration matter. The  Sri
    Lankan authorities are well  aware  of  the  fact  that  the  UK  is  a
    destination country for asylum seekers. It seems to us that there is at
    least a reasonable likelihood that the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  would
    infer from the request to authenticate an arrest warrant that "has been
    submitted to our offices in the UK", that the person is likely to  have
    made a protection claim. If nothing else, the  Sri  Lankan  authorities
    may not have been aware of the  location  of  the  person  who  is  the
    subject of the warrant, but would now know that  they  have  made  some
    form of immigration application in the UK.

88.   The BHC in Colombo believes  that  a  large  proportion  of  documents
    produced in support of protection claims are false  or  unreliable.  No
    doubt this is a frustrating problem for the respondent when  trying  to
    assess a large number of protection claims. The UNHCR advisory  opinion
    recognised  that  a  state  might  have   legitimate   concerns   about
    distinguishing between those  who  need  international  protection  and
    those with no valid claim to refugee status. However,  the  authorities
    in the country of asylum must comply with the duty  of  confidentiality
    and the prohibitions outlined in  Article  22  during  the  process  of
    examining a protection claim.

89.   The general legal principles  we  outlined  above  should  be  applied
    before  deciding  to  make  an  inquiry  with  an  alleged   actor   of
    persecution.  The  overriding  principle  to  bear  in  mind   is   the
    humanitarian purpose of the Refugee Convention. The general  method  of
    inquiry in this case protects the personal  information  of  those  who
    have produced unreliable documents in support of a protection claim but
    genuine  applicants  would  not  be  protected  by  this  process.  The
    respondent asserts the genuine cases are fewer in number, but that does
    not release the respondent from her duties. Given that  the  respondent
    does not know which applicant is  genuine  or  not  before  making  the
    inquiry with TID, the process used at the current time is prohibited by
    Article 22.

90.   There is no suggestion that  any  of  the  evidence  produced  by  the
    respondent has been prepared in bad faith, but that does not mean  that
    it should not be assessed in  the  same  way  as  any  other  piece  of
    evidence. We must consider what weight can  be  placed  on  a  document
    emanating from an alleged  actor  of  persecution.  The  BHC  genuinely
    believes that the Sri Lankan authorities have been honest in  verifying
    documents, but it is at least possible that the authorities might  have
    a motive to deny the existence of  a  warrant  if  they  had  a  strong
    interest in arresting a person. The fact  that  TID  have  confirmed  a
    document in one case does not mean that weight  can  be  given  to  the
    information provided in response to every verification request.

91.   In summary, the current method of inquiry  with  TID  risks  breaching
    the prohibitions in Article 22 and  is  unlikely  to  produce  reliable
    evidence relating to the authenticity of the document in question.

92.   On the face of it the fact that TID had no record of the  case  number
    in this case would tend to undermine the credibility of  the  document,
    but given our concerns  about  the  reliability  of  evidence  from  an
    alleged actor of persecution who may  have  a  motive  to  undermine  a
    protection claim, we can place little weight on the evidence from TID.

93.   The duty of confidentiality relates to any  type  of  inquiry.  If  an
    applicant has given consent other types of inquiry might  produce  more
    reliable evidence. On behalf of the  appellant  it  was  accepted  that
    alternative inquiries with the courts or attorneys in Sri Lanka were of
    less concern. Whether it is appropriate  to  identify  safer  forms  of
    inquiry will depend on the evidence relating to the country of  origin.
    In some countries the evidence might show that  the  judiciary  is  not
    independent  and  is  inextricably  bound  to  the  alleged  actor   of
    persecution. In countries where there  is  in  general  an  independent
    judicial system the inquiry is less likely to  be  characterised  as  a
    'direct' inquiry with the alleged actor of persecution.  In  this  case
    the background evidence shows that there are some problems  within  the
    Sri Lankan court system, but generally it is said to be independent.

94.   We have considered what weight can be placed on the inquiries made  by
    both parties at the Chief Magistrate Court in Colombo. On the  face  of
    it the letter produced by  the  appellant  from  the  Chief  Registrar,
    K.R.S. Ranaweera, is consistent with the series of  documents  produced
    in support of the claim. The reference number  is  consistent  and  the
    date when the certified copies of the court records were obtained.  The
    correspondence shows that this document is said to have  been  obtained
    by Mr D, who wrote to the registrar on 02 November 2016.

95.   Perhaps because there is a question mark over the process  of  Mr  D's
    inquiries  the  appellant  produced  a  further  letter  from   another
    attorney, Mr R, dated 07 November 2016.  We  find  that  we  can  place
    little weight on this letter. Although his qualification as an attorney
    is supported by a copy of his BASL ID card, the  letter  provides  such
    limited information about the nature of  his  inquiry  that  it  is  of
    little use. He states that the court registrar,  Mrs  S.  Veeraseegara,
    confirmed that Mr D obtained a certified copy of the court file  on  23
    December 2014. No  further  information  is  provided  as  to  how  Mrs
    Veeraseegara checked the records to verify the information.  For  these
    reasons, we find that the letter from Mr R doesn't  take  the  evidence
    any further than the existing letter from K.R.S. Ranaweera.

96.   The respondent's inquiries at the Chief Magistrate Court  appeared  to
    focus solely on the arrest warrant. Given that  the  document  contains
    the same case reference as the certified copies of the court  file,  it
    is reasonable to assume that if there were court records they could  be
    verified. In any event, the two pieces  of  evidence  are  inextricably
    linked together. The certified copy of the court record  gives  details
    of the warrant that is said to have been  issued  after  the  appellant
    failed to attend a hearing on 17 October 2014.

97.   There is  no  suggestion  that  the  respondent's  representative  who
    attended the Chief Magistrate Court on 15 November 2016 to make further
    inquiries might have acted in bad faith. The DVR sets out a  record  of
    the inquiries, but it is somewhat limited because the record is in note
    form. The DVR states that the respondent's representative met with  the
    Chief Registrar, Mrs Chamila Wickramatunga.

98.   We give weight to the fact that the information  obtained  during  the
    inquiry came directly from the Chief Registrar. She is in a position to
    provide accurate information about the  procedures  at  the  court.  We
    consider that the Chief Registrar is a reliable source  of  information
    relating to the proper referencing of case numbers.  She  was  shown  a
    redacted copy of the arrest warrant, but the same reference  number  is
    repeated throughout the series of documents produced by the  appellant.
    She observed that the reference number was not in  the  correct  format
    because it did not contain the last digit, which  indicates  the  court
    room number e.g. A11111/11/1.

99.   The information provided by the Chief  Registrar  is  consistent  with
    the appellant's claim that his case was heard in Court 8. She confirmed
    that cases brought by TID are usually heard  in  that  court.  However,
    when the respondent's representative was directed to the Chief Clerk at
    Court 8, who checked the day book, there was no  record  of  a  warrant
    issued on 17 October 2014 with that reference number. The DVR  provides
    sufficient information to outline the nature of the inquiry at Court 8.
    The fact that  there  is  no  record  of  a  warrant  being  issued  in
    connection with the reference number on 17 October  2014  is  a  matter
    that seriously undermines the reliability of the document.

100.  We find that the evidence from the registrar at  Court  6  has  little
    relevance to our assessment in circumstances where  the  appellant  has
    always claimed that his case was brought in Court 8.  The  letter  from
    the registrar at Court 6 noted  that  the  court  stamps  used  on  the
    warrant did not correspond to the court stamps used by the court. It is
    not clear whether this refers to the court stamps generally used in the
    Chief Magistrate Court or for Court 6. Given the limited information we
    cannot place much weight on this comment, but it does cast  some  doubt
    on whether the arrest warrant conforms with  the  format  used  at  the
    Chief Magistrate Court.




Conclusions

101.  We bear in mind that the standard of  proof  is  low  because  of  the
    serious nature of the potential risk on return. The appellant has given
    a generally consistent account that is plausible in the context of  the
    background evidence. The appellant has repeated the course of events in
    2014 consistently, but the background to the account  is  rather  vague
    even though it seems likely that  the  appellant  could  have  obtained
    further information about the activities of his father and  uncle  from
    other family members. On  the  face  of  it  the  series  of  documents
    produced by the appellant  show  that  he  made  a  genuine  effort  to
    substantiate his claim. The credibility of his account hinges very much
    on the reliability of those documents.

102.  We note that the series of documents produced  by  the  appellant  are
    generally consistent with one another. We have  found  that  there  are
    some question marks about the process of inquiry  made  by  Mr  D.  The
    combination of evidence showing that he was likely to  be  outside  the
    country at the date he claimed to be applying for certified  copies  of
    the court records is a matter that tends to  undermine  the  documents.
    Given that this was not put to the appellant we have not placed  weight
    on the point, but we have taken it into account in so far as  it  forms
    one part of other evidence that tends to undermine the  reliability  of
    the documents.

103.  The series of evidence produced by the appellant is tied  together  by
    the same case reference and court number. If it was the  only  evidence
    produced in this appeal it might have been sufficient to discharge  the
    low standard of  proof  even  if  there  were  some  doubts  about  the
    evidence. However, the respondent has made  inquiries  to  authenticate
    the documents. The outcome of those inquiries significantly  undermines
    the reliability of the evidence produced by the appellant.

104.  We find that the evidence from TID is unreliable and that the  routine
    process used for making such inquiries with the TID  is  prohibited  by
    Article 22 because it could  place  genuine  applicants  at  risk.  The
    evidence from  TID  is  not  the  only  evidence  relied  upon  by  the
    respondent. The process of inquiry at the Chief Magistrate  Court  does
    not  appear  to  involve  direct  contact  with  an  alleged  actor  of
    persecution in the context of the background evidence relating  to  Sri
    Lanka. The evidence produced by the respondent seriously undermines the
    whole series of documents produced by the appellant.

105.   Albeit  the  inquiry  concentrated  on  the   arrest   warrant,   the
    appellant's  evidence  relies  on  the  same  case   reference   number
    throughout. The information obtained directly from reliable sources  at
    the  Chief  Magistrate  Court  shows  that  the  reference  number   is
    incomplete and does not relate to any case brought in Court  8  or  any
    other court in the complex. The only similar  reference  related  to  a
    completely different case. The day book for Court 8 had no record of  a
    warrant being issued by the court on the date  given  on  the  warrant.
    Although we find the response from TID unreliable, the outcome of  that
    inquiry was consistent with the inquiry made at the court.

106.  We have considered whether there is room  for  uncertainty  given  the
    low standard of proof. In another  case  the  evidence  might  be  more
    evenly matched. However, in this case  the  evidence  produced  by  the
    respondent is sufficiently strong to give little room  for  doubt.  The
    inquiries made at the Chief Magistrate Court  were  sufficiently  clear
    and thorough to undermine the credibility of the central aspects of the
    appellant's claim.

107.  We  conclude  that  the  documents  produced  by  the  appellant   are
    unreliable. Taken with the other matters that give rise to doubt  about
    the credibility of his account identified above, we conclude  that  the
    appellant has failed to establish on the low standard of proof that his
    account is credible. As such, he has failed to show that he would be at
    risk on return on Refugee Convention, Humanitarian Protection or  Human
    Rights grounds.

108.  The fact that the  respondent  sent  a  redacted  copy  of  an  arrest
    warrant that has been proven to be unreliable to  TID  is  unlikely  to
    lead to identification of the appellant or a breach of Article 22.  The
    remedy for a breach of Article 22 is not a grant of refugee  status  if
    there is insufficient evidence to show that the appellant has  a  well-
    founded fear of persecution.


DECISION

The appeal is DISMISSED


Signed   [pic]   Date   19 July 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
