
[pic]
AI v3

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

R (on the application of Neisi) v Secretary of State for the Home
Department (FCJR) [2012] UKUT 00367 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 27 September 2012                          |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                   the queen (on the application of neisi)

                                                                    Claimant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Defendant


Representation:

For the Claimant:      Mr S Muquit, instructed by Fadiga & Co
For the Defendant:     Mr C Thomann, instructed by the Treasury Solicitor





                                  JUDGMENT


1.    This is an application for judicial review, for which  permission  was
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson.  The claimant  challenges  the
    decision of the Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department  of  4
    November 2011 refusing to treat his additional  submissions  as  giving
    rise to a fresh claim under paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules.

2.    It is common ground that the issue is  whether  the  defendant's  view
    that the  further  submissions,  taken  together  with  the  previously
    considered material,  did  not  create  a  realistic  prospect  of  the
    claimant succeeding  before  a  First-tier  Judge,  was  irrational  or
    Wednesbury unreasonable, bearing in mind the needs of anxious  scrutiny
    (i.e. the need to give proper weight to the issues and to consider  the
    evidence in the round  MN (Tanzania) [2011] EWCA Civ 193).

3.    The claimant, who is Iranian, came, it seems, to  the  United  Kingdom
    on 10 July 2010.  He sought asylum but his application was refused.  He
    appealed to an Immigration  Judge,  who  dismissed  his  appeal  on  17
    December  2010.   An  application  to  the  First-tier   Tribunal   for
    permission to appeal was refused on 24  January  2011,  and  a  renewed
    application to the Upper Tribunal was also unsuccessful, on 15 February
    2011.

4.    Subsequently, the Claimant put in further submissions which were  said
    to amount to a fresh claim, on 12 September 2011.  This resulted  in  a
    decision letter of the Secretary of State which  is  dated  4  November
    2011, and,  subsequent  to  a  letter  before  claim  being  sent,  the
    Secretary of State sent a letter in response to that  on  24  November.
    The application for permission to apply for judicial review was made on
    25 November 2011.  An acknowledgement of service and summary grounds of
    defence were filed on 20 January 2012 and there  was  a  reply  to  the
    defence put in on 28 January 2012.  Judge Gleeson granted permission to
    apply for judicial review on 1 February.

5.    It is necessary to consider in some detail the decision of the  First-
    tier Judge.  It is right to say that he  found  the  claimant  to  lack
    credibility.  He summed up his conclusions in this regard at  paragraph
    60 of his determination where he said that he did not accept  that  the
    claimant was a credible witness  with  regard  to  events  in  his  own
    country, not accepting that he was accused of murder along  with  seven
    other persons as alleged and not accepting that he was  ever  detained,
    imprisoned and tortured, or released as a consequence on payment  of  a
    bribe and/or bail.  In effect, the entire account was disbelieved.

6.    The claimant had said that he supported the Tadamon Ahwazi  Democratic
    Party (DSPA), although he was not a member, saying  that  he  began  to
    support them around May or June 2007, although he did not attend any of
    their meetings or demonstrations.  He said that he,  along  with  seven
    friends, was accused of murdering a man called Hisham Al  Samari.   The
    seven friends were tortured in prison.  One  of  them,  called  Waleed,
    told the claimant in prison that  he  had  given  the  authorities  the
    claimant's name while he was being tortured.  The claimant said that he
    was taken from home on 20 December 2007 and held at  an  unknown  place
    for 50 days and then taken to prison.  He said that after three days he
    appeared  before  a  court  and  was  blindfolded  during   his   court
    appearance.  He denied working for the seven  other  people.   He  said
    that was the only thing that happened in court.  He said that  when  he
    was put in prison he was detained for a further three months.   He  was
    released on 29 April 2008 because his brother paid a bribe to  get  him
    released.  He had to go back to court at a future date as part  of  his
    release but did not do so.  He then went to live  in  Shiraz  where  he
    remained for a year and seven months.  He had  no  problems  there  and
    worked as a shepherd.

7.    The judge disbelieved the claimant's claim for a  number  of  reasons.
    First of all, he did not accept that it was credible that  Waleed,  who
    was a close neighbour, would divulge his name to the authorities  as  a
    person involved in a murder.  Nor did he accept that  if  the  claimant
    was  told  that  Waleed  had  given  his  name  and  that  people  were
    interrogated individually, revealing one name per  interrogation,  that
    the claimant would then say in his evidence that he was told there were
    detainees who had confessed that he  worked  with  them.   Nor  was  it
    suggested that he was asked to reveal any person's name in this manner.
     Waleed was unable to give him any explanation as to why he  had  given
    the authorities his name and that was also found to lack credibility.

8.    At interview the claimant said he was charged  with  an  offence,  but
    subsequently in the interview he said he was released  without  charge.
    There was a contrast in his evidence as to whether he was taken  before
    a judge or in front of a court official and whether he was taken to the
    Revolutionary Court office as opposed to some  ordinary  court.   There
    was also a contrast in his evidence as to whether he  was  released  on
    the basis of bail and released on payment of a  bribe  being  the  same
    thing or on the basis that the bribery was antecedent to the  bail  and
    not a substitute for it.  The judge also did not find it credible  that
    if the claimant was effectively released on payment of a bribe he would
    have been granted bail on  condition  of  his  brother  depositing  his
    property deeds especially given that it was his case that he was  never
    charged.  Nor did the judge find it credible that  he  would  not  have
    been told what the amount paid by way of bribe was.

9.    At interview the claimant had said that his brother was informed by  a
    contact of his in the intelligence services during  the  immediate  two
    days after his release, that the claimant would be arrested at any time
    and should leave as soon as possible.  At the  hearing,  the  claimant,
    when asked  whether  his  brother  had  contacts  in  the  intelligence
    services, said there was no direct  connection  but  that  Iran  was  a
    corrupt place.  When it was put to  him  that  he  had  said  that  his
    brother was told by a contact of his in the intelligence services  that
    the claimant would be rearrested, he  explained  that  the  information
    came from a person who was a contact between an intelligence agent  and
    his brother.  This again was found to lack credibility.

10.   The judge was also concerned at the absence of credible  corroborative
    documentary  evidence  of  the  claimant's  arrest,  imprisonment   and
    torture. Background evidence was provided of the arrest of seven Ahwazi
    Arabs facing execution, including his alleged co-accused,  but  he  was
    not referred to in that evidence.  The judge was also concerned at  the
    claimant's failure to produce any  documentary  evidence  corroborating
    his involvement with the state process.  He said that his  brother  was
    too scared to talk to him on the telephone when asked why  he  had  not
    been able to obtain such documentation for him.  The claimant  said  he
    had evidence that his brother had put up his house as surety  for  bail
    and thought he had that evidence somewhere but did not have it  at  the
    hearing.  This was again found to detract from  his  credibility.   The
    judge further did not find it  credible  that  if  he  had  been  truly
    advised to flee because he was to be rearrested that he would not  have
    left the country immediately rather than hiding  in  Shiraz.   He  also
    considered  if  the  Iranian  authorities  were   truly   intent   upon
    apprehending him then they would have discovered his whereabouts.

11.   The judge went on to consider the evidence of three witnesses who  all
    said they had learned of his arrest and detention from  the  claimant's
    family.  The witness, Mr Efravi, said that he thought that the claimant
    called him four or five times between June and November  in  2007  from
    Iran  giving  him  information  about  particular  problems  with   the
    authorities in  the  neighbourhood  and  especially  information  about
    arrests.  The judge noted that there was no explanation as to how or in
    what circumstances Mr Efravi might be interested  in  information  from
    the claimant who on his own evidence was never a supporter of the  DSPA
    and never attended any meetings or demonstrations.  In his statement Mr
    Efravi said that on the last occasion the claimant telephoned  him,  in
    November 2007, he gave him the names of seven men who had been arrested
    and who they learned later were implicated in  the  assassination.   In
    oral evidence, Mr Efravi  said,  on  one  occasion,  he  had  not  been
    provided with the names of seven men and when the contrast between that
    evidence and the evidence in his statement was put to him he said  that
    the previous occasions when he spoke to the claimant were to  say  what
    was happening.  The judge found this to detract from his credibility.

12.   As regards the evidence of Mr Fazlipoor,  he  said  that  he  owned  a
    piece of land jointly with the  claimant  and  when  he  heard  of  the
    claimant's imprisonment he sold it through an agent and gave the  whole
    amount to the claimant's brother to help to raise  funds  to  free  the
    claimant and the claimant's brother  gradually  repaid  Mr  Fazlipoor's
    share.  There  was,  however,  no  corroborative  documentary  evidence
    before the Tribunal or any credible explanation in the judge's view  as
    to how or in what circumstances Mr Fazlipoor was able to dispose of the
    claimant's share in a property  without  his  involvement.   The  other
    witness, Mr Habib Mahawy, said he learned of the claimant's arrest from
    a cousin who said in turn that he had learned about the arrest from the
    claimant's family.  Mr Efravi learned of the  arrest  from  Mr  Mahawy.
    The  judge  commented  that  none  of  the  witnesses  learned  of  the
    claimant's arrest and detention from any credible  independent  source,
    all saying that the information came either from  his  family  or  from
    each other.

13.   The judge went on to consider a  report  from  a  Dr  Moulson  of  the
    Medical Foundation.  The judge set out the evidence of  Dr  Moulson  in
    some detail, noting  that  he  said  that  the  claimant  was  held  in
    detention for almost five months, 50 days of  which  were  in  solitary
    confinement and was subjected  to  severe  beatings  and  burning.   Dr
    Moulson said that physical examination revealed  three  marks  that  he
    considered highly consistent with the deliberate application of heat to
    the skin of the claimant's arms and one leg  and  a  further  mark  was
    considered to be highly consistent with the result of  a  blow  to  the
    back.  He diagnosed the  claimant  as  suffering  from  PTSD.   He  had
    assessed the claimant during four hours of interview and examination.

14.   At paragraph 53 of his determination, the judge noted the  remarks  of
    the President of the IAT in IE & FE [2002] UKIAT 05237 * to the  effect
    that doctors generally accept an account  given  by  a  patient  unless
    there are good reasons for rejecting it or any  material  part  of  it.
    The judge reminded himself that  issues  regarding  the  truth  of  the
    claimant's account were a matter for him to assess and he did not  find
    the claimant credible.  He considered  that  if  the  claimant  carried
    scars and was suffering from PTSD he did not accept that it  was  as  a
    result of the events claimed.

15.   The judge had noted some discrepancies between the claimant's  account
    and his statement and what he told the doctor.  The judge bore in  mind
    what the doctor said: that solitary confinement was a cause  of  memory
    impairment and confused thought processes with disorientation; and that
    memory impairment was a feature of PTSD  and  the  late  disclosure  of
    additional information might also be attributed to the more therapeutic
    milieu of a medical interview.  The judge found significant differences
    in aspects of the claimant's evidence at interview and what he told  Dr
    Moulson, as set out at paragraph 54 of the determination.  He concluded
    that the claimant had developed and embellished his original account by
    degrees, and though he accepted what the doctor said as to the possible
    reasons for discrepancies, for all the reasons he had set  out  he  did
    not accept that to be the case with regard to this particular claimant.

16.   The judge went on to consider sur place activities, reminding  himself
    that he had found Mr Efravi not to be a credible witness with regard to
    his claim to have received information from the claimant prior  to  the
    claimant fleeing Iran.  There was no evidence before the judge  of  any
    involvement of the claimant  with  the  DSPA  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    Perhaps unnecessarily in the circumstances therefore, the judge did not
    accept that any involvement with  Mr  Efravi  or  DSPA  in  the  United
    Kingdom if any put the claimant  at  any  risk  on  return,  given  his
    adverse credibility findings.

17.   Both judges who refused permission to appeal found  the  reasoning  of
    the judge to be, in their words, clear and  adequate  and  careful  and
    structured.

18.   Various matters were raised in the claimant's letter of  12  September
    2011.  These comprise first a copy page of the Bassij Resistant  Forces
    internal  monthly  newsletter  of  the  Ahwaz  Revolutionary  Guard  of
    November/December 2008, secondly, a further  report  from  the  Medical
    Foundation, this time by Ms Jude  Boyles,  thirdly  a  letter  from  Dr
    Juliet Cohen the head of medical services at  the  Medical  Foundation,
    fourthly a letter  from  Yasser  Assadi  of  the  DSPA,  fifthly  a  CD
    consisting of photographs of attendance at a demonstration in front  of
    the UK Parliament on 5 May 2011, sixthly a print of KSA2 News broadcast
    of the demonstration recorded on YouTube and seventhly various articles
    from the Ahwazi Arab Solidarity Network with  regard  to  ill-treatment
    and executions of Ahwazi Arabs and problems in that region of Iran.

19.   The Bassij newsletter refers to a Zamel Bavi as  being  one  of  those
    anti-revolution people who waged war against God and was  sentenced  to
    death for wicked involvement in Khuzestan.  It then refers  to  another
    person, Hadi, also known as Sadegh Neisi, who was  sentenced  to  jail,
    but later released on bail.  Dr Cohen's letter purports to  respond  to
    paragraph 53 of the judge's determination, making the point that it  is
    very much not the case that doctors generally accept an  account  given
    by a patient but that it is an integral part of clinical  training  for
    doctors to assess and analyse what patients tell them,  how  they  tell
    it, and what they do not tell,  in  the  light  of  their  findings  on
    examination and their clinical training and experience.  She refers  to
    Dr Moulson noting and discussing  discrepancies  between  the  accounts
    given to him and elsewhere as indicating that he has indeed  critically
    considered the history provided in the  light  of  all  other  evidence
    available.  She also comments that although the judge  did  not  accept
    the findings of the doctor in saying that if the claimant carries scars
    and is suffering from PTSD he did not accept it was  a  result  of  the
    events he claims, it  was  the  case  that  no  alternative  events  of
    similarly traumatic and  violent  nature  were  known  or  proposed  as
    potential causes.  She also goes on  to  remark  that  Dr  Moulson  had
    considered the attribution of the scars and lesions  according  to  his
    training experience and the precepts of  the  Istanbul  Protocol.   She
    makes the point that Dr Moulson, having  discussed  in  detail  in  his
    report his reasons for diagnosing PTSD should  not  have  his  clinical
    opinion   discarded   by   someone   without    appropriate    clinical
    qualifications.

20.   In her report of 18 August 2011, Ms Boyles confirms the  diagnosis  of
    PTSD.  She says that the claimant has a diagnosis of chronic and severe
    PTSD and depression and that he  has  been  in  the  treatment  of  the
    Medical Foundation for four months.  He says that he has chronic health
    problems as a result of torture.  She says that  on  11  May  2011  his
    eldest brother had been detained in Iran and a friend of the family had
    told him about this and he felt to blame for his  brother's  detention.
    She considers him to be at medium risk of serious  self-harm.   It  was
    her clinical opinion that the discrepancies referred to by  Dr  Moulson
    had  an  explanation  given  the  diagnosis  of  PTSD  and  the  memory
    impairment associated with PTSD.  She noted that he had become homeless
    during the assessment and the conditions he was living in dominated his
    thoughts and severely impacted on his mental state.

21.   The letter from Mr Assadi of the DSPA is dated 26 May 2011.   He  says
    that the claimant is a committed Ahwadi activist who was a supporter of
    the party since 2007 when he was in Alahwaz and had now become a  party
    member.  It is said that the organisation is aware that he was in close
    contact with a senior DSPA member, Mr Efravi and  through  his  contact
    with him the claimant used to  send  them  very  important  information
    concerning human rights violations in Alahwaz,  especially  details  of
    people unlawfully arrested and detained  by  the  Iranian  regime.   He
    refers to  the  recent  participation  by  the  claimant  in  a  recent
    demonstration in front of the UK Parliament on 15 May 2011,  the  sixth
    anniversary  of  the  Ahwazi  Arab  Intifada.   He   says   that   this
    demonstration was widely broadcast on the Arabic media, both on TV  and
    on the internet.  There was a photograph from that demonstration  which
    purported to show the claimant as one of the people in the picture.  It
    is said in the claimant's letter of  12  September  2011  that  the  CD
    contains photographs of the claimant's attendance at the  demonstration
    and it is understood that photographs and videos/film  footage  of  the
    demonstration are widely available in  the  Arabic  media  on  both  TV
    stations and the internet.  Reference is made to the above link  and  a
    photograph from YouTube showing coverage of the demonstration  on  KSA2
    News, a Saudi news channel (the photograph to  which  I  have  referred
    above) and the claimant is said to be there  waving  the  Ahwazi  flag,
    wearing the distinctive Arabic kuffiyeh (headscarf), a  symbol  of  the
    Ahwazi struggle.

22.   There are various news items concerning problems being experienced  by
    the Ahwazis to which I have referred above.  The letter goes on also to
    refer to the country guidance in BA (Iran) CG [2011] UKUT 36 (IAC), and
    to the country guidance in SA (Iran) CG [2011] UKUT 41 (IAC).   It  was
    argued that the conclusions in both of these decisions were relevant to
    risk on return to the claimant and formed part of the fresh claim.

23.   In the decision letter the Secretary of State commented as follows  on
    the points raised.  As regards risk on return due to recent violence in
    Ahwaz, the claimant had not shown how he specifically would be at  risk
    on return and he could go and live elsewhere  anyway,  having  done  so
    before.  There was no  evidence  to  support  his  assertion  that  his
    brother had been arrested.  He had not provided  the  original  of  the
    Bassij newsletter, nor the full copy of the newsletter or any  evidence
    to show he received it from  Iran  and  when  and  nor  was  there  any
    explanation given as  to  why  a  newsletter  from  December  2008  was
    reporting on an event that was said to  have  occurred  some  seven  to
    eight months previously.  Taken together with the evidence in the round
    and in accordance with the principles in Tanveer  Ahmed  [2002]   UKIAT
    00439, the document was considered to be one on  which  reliance  could
    not be placed.  As regards the Medical Foundation  letter,  comment  is
    made that  just  because  one  cause  had  been  put  forward  for  the
    claimant's injuries, it did not necessarily mean that  that  was  true.
    It was noted that  the  judge's  determination  had  been  found,  when
    permission was sought  to  appeal  against  it,  to  be  satisfactorily
    reasoned and the evidence to have been  approached  in  a  careful  and
    structured manner.

24.   As regards the  further  medico-legal  report,  the  finding  in  that
    report that the claimant was tortured in Ahwaz  is  criticised  on  the
    basis that this was not part of the  function  of  the  writer  of  the
    report.  In addition the point is made  that  the  medical  report  may
    consider his condition as being consistent with his story but it  could
    not be considered in isolation.  The judge's finding was  that  if  the
    claimant carried scars and was suffering from PTSD he did not accept it
    was as a result of the events  he  claimed  and  these  remained  valid
    findings.  The evidence had to be assessed in the round.

25.   The letter from the DSPA is criticised on the basis  that  the  author
    has not provided any explanation as to how they were in a  position  to
    assert that the claimant was a supporter of the party in Iran from 2007
    especially  since  he  did  not  attend  any  of  their   meetings   or
    demonstrations.  His claim to have  attended  a  demonstration  in  the
    United Kingdom was considered in the  light  of  the  country  guidance
    decision in BA.  It is noted  that  he  had  submitted  photographs  of
    himself at one demonstration which did not show him to be a  leader  or
    organiser and there was no evidence that the photographs  had  appeared
    on the internet or in any publications.  The printout provided was  for
    a Saudi news channel and there was  no  evidence  that  this  had  been
    broadcast anywhere in Iran.  He had not shown that he was  a  committed
    opponent of the regime or someone with a significant political  profile
    and therefore it was not expected that he was someone who would  be  of
    interest to the Iranian authorities.

26.   Thereafter the defendant went on to consider the Article  3  claim  in
    relation to the claimant's health,  but  Mr  Muquit  confirmed  at  the
    hearing that that was not a matter that was pursued.

27.   In the grounds for judicial review,  as  amplified  in  the  reply  to
    defence of 28 January 2012 and Mr Muquit's submissions,  it  is  argued
    firstly that the further letter and report from the Medical  Foundation
    were not properly considered. They materially challenged and  addressed
    the premises upon which the judge discounted the probative value of  Dr
    Moulson's report to the assessment of the claimant's credibility,  i.e.
    that his  assessment  was  constrained  by  limited  contact  with  the
    claimant  and  Ms  Boyle's  and  had  assessed  the  claimant  over   a
    significantly longer period, and was na�ve to the possibility that  the
    claimant was being mendacious. That allegation directly rebutted by  Dr
    Cohen, and provided further confirmation that  inconsistencies  in  the
    claimant's evidence were symptomatic of his claim to  be  a  victim  of
    torture rather than contrary to it.  It is said  that  the  defendant's
    decision fails to appreciate the guidance in  Devaseelan,  under  which
    the judge's  determination  would  be  a  starting  point  rather  than
    determinative.  In refusing permission to appeal the Upper Tribunal had
    done so only on the basis that the conclusions  and  reasons  for  them
    given by the judge were within the range reasonably open to  the  judge
    rather than being the only ones open to him.  It is argued that it  was
    irrational for the defendant to consider that faced with the additional
    medical evidence and the absence of any alternative explanation for the
    claimant's medical and physical condition an  Immigration  Judge  would
    not be legitimately and rationally entitled to depart from the approach
    taken by the judge before.  It was the case that no alternative  expert
    account could be offered as to the cause of the claimant's  mental  and
    physical injuries  other  than  the  account  that  he  gave.   Anxious
    scrutiny should have led to a different decision on  the  part  of  the
    defendant.

28.   It is also argued that the defendant did not address the  decision  in
    SA despite its clear relevance to the fresh claim.  It was  clear  from
    that decision that being an  Iranian  citizen  who  was  also  an  Arab
    returning from the United Kingdom would  enhance  other  risk  factors.
    Low level support in the United Kingdom for separatist activities was a
    feature increasing the risk of persecution.  The relocation  point  was
    by the way: the claimant would be at risk at the airport.

29.   It is further argued that the reasons for rejecting the weight  to  be
    attached to the Bassij newsletter were wholly  subjective  and  ignored
    the claimant's representations that he received the document via  email
    from a friend in Iran whose  credibility  hitherto  was  untainted  and
    whose value as a source of evidence would be a matter for any new judge
    to evaluate in the round for himself.  The point taken as to the timing
    of the information contained in the report ignored the clear context of
    the report.  As regards the DSPA letter, it was clear that  the  letter
    said that its writer's knowledge of the  claimant's  support  for  that
    organisation arose through Mr Efravi and, contrary to what was  thought
    by the defendant, did not purport  to  corroborate  a  claim  that  the
    claimant was a member of the DSPA in Iran.  As regards the  photograph,
    this showed him waving the Ahwazi flag and wearing the distinctive Arab
    kuffiyeh, a symbol of  the  Ahwazi  struggle  and  his  photograph  was
    complemented by a CD containing further photographs of the claimant  at
    the demonstration and it was said that the photographs  and  video/film
    footage of the demonstration were widely available in the Arabic  media
    on both TV stations and the internet.  It was further argued  that  the
    defendant had failed to provide anxious  scrutiny  of  the  substantive
    terms of the guidance in  BA  and  that  the  decision  in  R  (on  the
    application of AM) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2012]
    EWCA Civ 521 in particular at paragraphs 29-32  identified  the  proper
    approach to medical evidence in such a case.

30.   In response to this in Mr Thomann's detailed  grounds  of  defence  as
    amplified in his oral submissions, it is argued that the judge did  not
    in fact dismiss Dr Moulson's report on the basis that he  accepted  the
    claimant's  evidence  uncritically.   The  judge  noted  the   doctor's
    objective assessment of the claimant's condition but  reminded  himself
    that the credibility assessment was for him.  Neither the  new  medical
    report nor the letter reached a significantly different conclusion from
    that of Dr Moulson and nor did either engage with  the  actual  reasons
    for the judge's credibility assessment.   The  inconsistencies  in  the
    claimant's story were assessed entirely properly as  very  significant.
    The  newsletter  referred  to  a  sentence  being  passed   for   anti-
    revolutionary opposition, which bore no relation to either the  alleged
    reason for the claimant's arrest or the alleged  circumstances  of  his
    release.  The point is also  made  that  his  ability  to  adduce  such
    evidence from Iran further contrasts with the lack of already available
    supporting documentation of his bail or  detention  arrangements.   His
    evidence of sur  place  activities  fell  significantly  short  of  the
    standard set out in BA.  In December  2010  he  had  never  attended  a
    single demonstration, he had never  been  a  member  of  any  political
    organisation in Iran, and provided an account of support activities for
    the DSPA which unravelled upon questioning of his  supporting  witness.
    SA did not take matters significantly further than BA.   The  point  is
    also  made  that  the  grounds  do  not  specifically   challenge   the
    defendant's rejection of hearsay evidence that the  claimant's  brother
    had, since the dismissal of his appeal, been arrested.

31.   It is further argued that the later  medical  reports  do  not  differ
    significantly from Dr Moulson's except with regard to  a  deterioration
    in the claimant's mental and  social  position  whilst  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  Dr Cohen's letter of 19 August 2011 was said to be flawed  in
    misunderstanding the respective roles of the  medical  expert  and  the
    judge and in suggesting that  the  judge  had  discarded  Dr  Moulson's
    report, which was not the case.  Ms Boyles attributed the deterioration
    in the claimant's condition to his social  situation  and  homelessness
    exacerbating his lack of hope.   This  did  not  appear  to  have  even
    noticed let alone engaged critically with the fact that the  claimant's
    differing accounts were not capable of being described as holding  only
    minor discrepancies.  AM was fact-specific and was  a  detention  case.
    The challenge  on  the  part  of  the  defendant  is  characterised  as
    essentially an attempt to have an out of  time  first  instance  appeal
    against the judge's decision.  There was no obligation on the judge  to
    identify alternative causes for the claimant's psychiatric and physical
    conditions: rather a failure by the claimant to make  out  a  claim  of
    persecution.  It is further argued that neither SA  nor  BA  shows  the
    claimant to face a real risk on return on  any  reasonable  view.   The
    criticisms of the Bassij newsletter and the DSPA letter set out in  the
    decision letter are maintained.

Discussion and Conclusions

32.   If there were to be a new appeal, the  starting  point  would  be  the
    decision of the judge, and I have set out in some detail the nature  of
    his adverse credibility findings, which were upheld by both judges  who
    refused permission to appeal.  Clearly this decision is  important  and
    relevant background to any assessment that a future judge  would  make.
    As regards the judge's assessment of the medical evidence, he noted the
    expertise of the doctor  and  his  findings.   He  properly  noted  the
    comments of Collins J in AE &  FE  that  doctors  generally  accept  an
    account given by a patient unless there are good reasons for  rejecting
    it or any material part of it.  He properly noted that  the  assessment
    of credibility was a matter for him.  He noted the discrepancies  which
    had been identified by Dr Moulson, and the possible reasons  for  those
    discrepancies by Dr Moulson.  However, for all the reasons he  had  set
    out, as he noted at paragraph 55  of  the  determination,  he  did  not
    accept that they explained the discrepancies in this case.  He assessed
    the evidence in the round, paying proper respect to the findings of the
    medical expert.  As Mr Thomann has pointed out,  it  was  not  for  the
    judge to set forward alternative causes for the  scars  and  PTSD,  but
    rather it was for the claimant to make out his case, and on the judge's
    proper findings assessing the evidence in the round he had not done so.

33.   I also agree with Mr Thomann  that  the  further  medico-legal  report
    does not take matters significantly further.  The  diagnosis  of  PTSD,
    indeed  severe  PTSD,  is  maintained,  and   Ms   Boyles   notes   the
    deterioration in the claimant's  living  circumstances,  having  become
    homeless and  living  in  very  difficult  social  circumstances  which
    severely impacted on his medical state.  Insofar as it  is  said  that,
    for example at paragraph 113 of her report, the claimant  was  tortured
    in Ahwaz and that his severe and chronic PTSD has arisen following  his
    torture, that is a matter for  the  judge.   It  is  not  a  matter  of
    significance in assessing whether the fresh claim criteria are  met  in
    this case.  I should say that I do not read the judge as having, as  is
    suggested, discounted the probative value of Dr Moulson's report on the
    basis that his assessment was constrained by limited contact  with  the
    claimant.  He gave the  report  proper  consideration,  and  I  do  not
    consider that anything is materially added by the more  lengthy  period
    of time over which Ms Boyles has assessed the claimant.  They have both
    come to the same essential conclusion as to his mental  state  and  the
    judge accepted that he suffered  from  PTSD  but  did  not  accept  the
    claimed cause of this, and in my view nothing can properly be  said  to
    be added to this by the further medical report.  I do not consider that
    it is other than fanciful to suggest that  another  judge,  considering
    the further  evidence  in  this  regard,  would  come  to  a  different
    conclusion and I do not consider that Dr Cohen's comments take  matters
    any further.

34.   As regards AM, there is a  clear  point  of  distinction  between  the
    circumstances in that case and this, in that the judge in  the  instant
    case had Dr Moulson's report and assessed it, together with  the  other
    evidence, whereas in AM, though the expert was unaware of  the  adverse
    credibility findings, the litigation was conducted without the  benefit
    of her reports, whereas  clearly  the  judge  had  full  regard  to  Dr
    Moulson's report.  It is also relevant to  note  the  context  of  AM's
    appeal: the requirement of very exceptional  circumstances  to  justify
    detention and the relevance of the existence of independent evidence of
    torture.

35.   As regards the Bassij newsletter, I think the criticisms  of  this  in
    the decision letter are well founded.  It is clearly relevant that  the
    original was not provided, nor the full copy of the newsletter, nor any
    evidence as to show the claimant received the document  from  Iran  and
    why it would be reporting on an  event  that  occurred  several  months
    earlier, if indeed  it  did  occur.   Perhaps  more  significantly,  it
    undermines the claimant's claim on the facts rather than supporting it.
     It says that the claimant was sentenced to jail but later released  on
    bail, and that was not his case.   The  reference  to  him  is  in  the
    context of anti-revolution people waging war against  God  rather  than
    referring, as was his account, to  a  charge  of  homicide.   Again,  I
    consider it is a matter of minimal substance  in  the  context  of  the
    claim.

36.   Insofar as reliance is placed on what the claimant said to  Ms  Boyles
    about the arrest of his brother, there  was  no  evidence  provided  to
    substantiate this claim, and it appears to be recognised by the absence
    of any submission in that regard on the claimant's behalf  as  again  a
    matter of minimal significance at best.

37.   As regards the sur place activities, it is clearly  relevant  to  bear
    in mind that Mr Efravi was found not to  be  a  credible  witness,  and
    there was no evidence before  the  judge  of  any  involvement  of  the
    claimant with the DSPA in the  United  Kingdom.   The  judge  therefore
    disbelieved Mr Efravi's claim to have  received  information  from  the
    claimant prior to him fleeing Iran, and Mr Assadi's letter  has  to  be
    seen bearing that in mind.  There is no substantiation for Mr  Assadi's
    claim that the demonstration was widely broadcast on the Arabian media,
    both on TV and on the internet, and the fact of it being  broadcast  on
    the Saudi news channel does not show any real risk of it coming to  the
    attention of the authorities in Iran.

38.   The sur place activities have to be considered in the context  of  the
    relevant country guidance cases.  In BA  the  Tribunal  concluded  that
    regard required to be had to the level of  involvement  the  individual
    had in the United Kingdom as well as any political activity which  they
    might have been involved in in Iran before seeking asylum in the United
    Kingdom.  A returnee who met  the  profile  of  an  activist  might  be
    detained whilst searches of documentation were made.  The Tribunal went
    on to note that it is important to  consider  the  level  of  political
    involvement before considering the likelihood of the individual  coming
    to the attention of the authorities.   Relevant  factors  include  such
    matters as the nature of the sur place activity, including the person's
    role  in  demonstrations  and  political  profile,  whether  they  have
    attended one or  two  demonstrations  or  are  a  regular  participant,
    identification risk factors triggering enquiries/action on return, such
    as their profile and immigration history, and  identification  risk  on
    return.   The  claimant  in  that  case  had   participated   in   five
    demonstrations outside the Iranian Embassy in London  at  a  time  when
    there were worldwide protests against  perceived  malpractices  in  the
    recent Presidential elections.  His participation in the demonstrations
    was recorded in a YouTube film and a photograph in UFIN's  publication.
    For at least part of  the  time,  although  he  was  not  a  leader  or
    organiser, he was not on the periphery and a short  video  on  Facebook
    showed him shouting particularly inflammatory slogans and his face  was
    clearly recognisable in the photograph in the publication.

39.   In SA it was found that the Iranian state  is  suspicious  of  Iranian
    citizens who  are  also  Arabs  and  regards  London  as  a  centre  of
    separatist activity.  Being an Iranian Arab returned  from  the  United
    Kingdom enhances other risk factors, but an Iranian Arab does not  risk
    persecution or other ill-treatment solely by reason of ethnicity.

40.   In this regard it is important to recollect  the  evidence  concerning
    the claimant.  He did not on his own case join or engage  in  political
    activities in Iran and has attended one demonstration in front  of  the
    UK Parliament on  May  15  2011.   There  is  no  indication  that  the
    demonstration attracted any publicity in Iran or the United Kingdom  or
    that he has been or would be  identified  as  having  attended  it.   I
    consider that the matter has been properly considered by the  defendant
    who has come to the conclusion that it is  again  not  a  matter  which
    either separately or taken with the other factors meets  the  paragraph
    353 threshold.

41.   Bringing all these matters together, I consider that the Secretary  of
    State  was  entitled  to  conclude  that   neither   individually   nor
    collectively can it be said that the new pieces  of  evidence  set  out
    above, when taken with the previously  considered  material,  create  a
    realistic prospect of success before a First-tier Judge.  The Secretary
    of State properly assessed all the relevant  matters  and  came  to  an
    appropriate conclusion, having asked herself  the  right  question  and
    satisfied the test of  anxious  scrutiny.   I  therefore  dismiss  this
    application for  judicial review.
    42.    As regards costs, Mr Muquit indicated that the claimant  has  no
    funds.  I assume that he is legally aided.  I order the claimant to pay
    the defendant's costs, to be assessed if not agreed, the order  not  to
    be enforced without leave of the court.






Signed                                             Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
Immigration and Asylum Chamber
