

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

        Nixon (permission to appeal: grounds) [2014] UKUT 00368 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Sheldon Court, Birmingham            |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 09 July 2014                               |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey

                                   Between

     SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 PAUL NIXON
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

For the Respondent:    Mr M Azmi (of Counsel), instructed by Genesis Law
                  Associates Limited.

Whilst making due allowance where an applicant for permission to  appeal  to
the Upper Tribunal is unrepresented and in respect  of  the  requirement  to
consider obvious points arising under the Refugee Convention or  ECHR  (R  v
Secretary of State for the Home Department ex parte Robinson  [1997]  3  WLR
1162), the First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal  can  be  expected  to
deal brusquely and robustly with any application for  permission  that  does
not specify  clearly  and  coherently,  with  appropriate  particulars,  the
error(s) of law said to contaminate the decision under  challenge.   Besides
placing  unnecessary   demands   upon   the   judiciary,   poorly   compiled
applications risk undermining the important value  of  legal  certainty  and
causing unfairness to the other party.




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal has its origins  in  a  decision  made  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department (the "Secretary of  State"),
    dated 24 September 2013,  whereby Mr Nixon's application for  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom, based on Article 8 ECHR, was refused.  Mr
    Nixon's appeal was allowed by the First-tier Tribunal (the "FtT").  The
    Secretary of State appeals, with permission, to this Tribunal.

 2. I draw attention to the two grounds upon  which  permission  to  appeal
    were formulated:

    [1]  "The Judge erred in according no weight to the emails from a local
         authority  social  services  department  to  the  effect  that  the
         Appellant was not living with his wife and child."

    [2]  "The Judge  erred  in  assessing  the  credibility  of  the  three
         witnesses  (besides  sponsor,  appellant  and   child)   who   gave
         evidence."

    The grant of permission to appeal focused exclusively on the second  of
    these grounds and was couched in the following terms:


         "The grounds submit the Judge  erred  in  law  in  her  credibility
         assessment of the three witnesses ...


         It is arguable that the Judge erred in  law  by  finding  that  the
         three witnesses ...  gave evidence honestly and using that  finding
         as the basis for finding the Appellant's evidence credible ....


         It is arguable that the Judge gave inadequate reasons  for  finding
         that  the  Appellant  lived  with  his   wife   in   a   subsisting
         relationship."

     The permission Judge added:

         "The grounds may be argued."

 3. It is appropriate to draw attention  to  the  governing  statutory  and
    regulatory  regime.   Section  11(2)  of  the  Tribunals,  Courts   and
    Enforcement Act 2007 ("the 2007 Act") confers a right of appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal against decisions of the FtT, provided  that  permission
    to appeal is granted by one or other.   This  has  been  the  governing
    statutory provision since the introduction of the new two  tier  system
    with effect from 15 February  2010.   Pursuant  to  section  11(5)  and
    certain  measures  of  related   subordinate   legislation,   specified
    decisions are excluded from the appeals  regime:  decisions  in  asylum
    support appeals,  bail  decisions  and  any  procedural,  ancillary  or
    preliminary decisions in appeals, as defined.

 4. The requirement to secure  permission  to  appeal  establishes  a  pre-
    condition,  or  threshold,  of  real  substance.     The   content   of
    applications for permission  to  appeal  is  regulated  by  subordinate
    legislation.  Rule  24(5)  of  The  Asylum  and  Immigration   Tribunal
    (Procedure) Rules 2005 (the "2005 Rules") provides:

         "An application under paragraph (1) must -


         (a)  identify the decision of the Tribunal to which it relates;


         (b)  identify the alleged error or errors of law in  the  decision;
         and

          (c)   state  the  result  the  party  making  the  application  is
seeking."

         [My emphasis.]

    Rule  25(4)  provides  that  in  determining   permission   to   appeal
    applications, the FtT "must" provide written reasons for its  decision.
    Further, per Rule 25(5), the FtT  may  give  permission  to  appeal  on
    limited grounds but, in doing so, must provide its reasons for refusing
    permission on any other ground.  By Rule 21 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, an unsuccessful applicant  for  permission
    to  appeal  may  renew  the  application  before  the  Upper  Tribunal,
    Immigration and Asylum Chamber ("UTIAC"). The decision of UTIAC on such
    applications  is  final,  subject   to   limited   challenge   in   the
    Administrative Court by judicial review:  see  Cart  v  Upper  Tribunal
    [2011] UKSC 28 and Eba v Advocate General for Scotland [2011] UKSC 29.

 5. UTIAC Guidance Note 2011 No  1  must  also  be  considered.   This  was
    introduced in July 2011 and amended in September 2013.  It makes  clear
    that the threshold test  for  granting  permission  to  appeal  against
    appealable decisions of the FtT is whether an arguable  material  error
    of law has been demonstrated.  The possibility of  granting  permission
    in cases where an arguable, but evidently immaterial, error of law  has
    been committed is recognised.  The general rule enunciated in  Anoliefo
    (permission to appeal) [2013] UKUT 00345 (IAC) should  be  noted.   The
    President stated, at [16]:

         "Where there is no  reasonable  prospect  that  any  error  of  law
         alleged in the grounds of appeal could have made  a  difference  to
         the outcome, permission to appeal should not normally be granted in
         the absence of some point of public importance that is otherwise in
         the public interest to determine".

     FtT Judges considering applications for permission to appeal must  also
    be alert to their power under rule 60 of the 2005 Rules  to  set  aside
    the decision challenged on the  grounds  of  clerical  error  or  other
    accidental slip or omission or administrative error on the part of  the
    Tribunal or its staff.  Judges  should  also  be  alive  to  the  power
    conferred by section 9 of the 2007 Act, read in tandem  with  rules  25
    and 26 of the 2005 Rules, to review FtT decisions when  an  application
    for permission to appeal is received. Where a review is undertaken, the
    FtT is empowered to correct accidental errors in the decision or  in  a
    record thereof; or amend the reasons given for the decision; or set the
    decision aside: per section 9(4).

 6. Given recent experience, it may be timely  to  formulate  some  general
    rules  of  practice.  It  is  axiomatic  that  every  application   for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal should identify, clearly and
    with all necessary particulars, the error/s of law for which the moving
    party contends.  This must be effected in terms which are  recognisable
    and comprehensible.  A properly compiled application for permission  to
    appeal will convey at once to the Judge concerned the  error/s  of  law
    said to have been committed.   It  should  not  be  necessary  for  the
    permission Judge to hunt and mine in order to understand the basis  and
    thrust of the application.  While in some cases it will be possible for
    the permission Judge to engage in a  degree  of  interpretation  and/or
    making inferences for this purpose, this should never be assumed by the
    applicant and cannot  operate  as  a  substitute  for  a  properly  and
    thoroughly compiled application.  These are elementary requirements and
    standards.

 7. As ever in law context is, of course, everything.  While high standards
    will always be expected of the representatives of a party applying  for
    permission to appeal, some adjustment may be appropriate in the case of
    an unrepresented party.  This is  a  reflection  of  both  reality  and
    individual context.  The  specific  attention  given  to  unrepresented
    parties in paragraph 10 of the Guidance Note is worth reproducing:

        "Immigration Appellants are frequently unrepresented and  in  those
        circumstances it is necessary to read the decision appealed against
        with some care to ensure that an error of law is  not  revealed  in
        the decision making, even if  it  is  not  one  identified  in  the
        Appellants own grounds".

    Moreover, as the Guidance Note expressly recognises (in  paragraph  8),
    it is now established that in cases where life, limb or liberty  is  at
    stake or some other important human right is engaged, the  approach  of
    the higher courts has been to scrutinise anxiously the decision  below.
    The Guidance Note also highlights cases involving rights under  the  EU
    treaties  and  the  related  secondary   legislation,   together   with
    deportation appeals.  There is also recognition that in  some  cases  -
    which one would expect to constitute a small minority - a  clear  point
    may not be identified in the permission application by reason  of  lack
    of skill, knowledge or pressure of time.   Thus  there  is  a  duty  to
    consider points that are "Robinson obvious":  R v  Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department, ex parte Robinson [1997] 3 WLR 1162.  There is
    also power to consider any other point arising from the decision if the
    interests of justice so require: paragraph 9 of the Guidance Note.

 8. FtT Judges, representatives  and  parties  are  also  reminded  of  the
    decision of UTIAC in Ferrer (Limited Appeal Grounds; Alvi) [2012]  UKUT
    00304  (IAC),  [22]-[32]  especially,  which  contains  some  important
    pronouncements and guidance on the grant of  permission  to  appeal  to
    UTIAC on  limited  grounds  only.   It  also  draws  attention  to  the
    importance of two procedural notices:  IA68 (FtT) and Form UT1 (UTIAC).
     It may be worth emphasising that, irrespective of  whether  permission
    to appeal is granted on all of the grounds  advanced  or  some  thereof
    only, a reasoned decision is always required in  respect  of  each  and
    every ground, which reinforces the necessity of considering all grounds
    with scrupulous care.

 9. Finally,  representatives  should  be  aware  that  grounds  of  appeal
    presented in formulaic terms,  particularly  when  they  reappear  with
    frequency in a multiplicity of  cases  over  time,  are  likely  to  be
    received with circumspection.  There can be no substitute for  properly
    tailored and carefully crafted grounds of appeal which clearly  reflect
    the unique facts, features and  issues  pertaining  to  the  individual
    case.  "Boilerplating" will be quickly recognised by permission Judges.
    Ditto makeweights and embellishments.

10. The application for permission to appeal in the present  case  did  not
    satisfy the requirements and standards rehearsed  above.   It  made  no
    attempt to specify the error/s of law said to have  been  committed  by
    the FtT.  It employed the vague  language  of  "erred",  without  more.
    This was inadequate and unacceptable.  In principle, an  error  of  law
    may take a number of forms.  Inexhaustively, these include a failure to
    have regard to   material  evidence;  taking  into  account  and  being
    influenced  by  immaterial   evidence;   inadequate   reasons;   unfair
    procedure; misunderstanding or misconstruction of the law; disregarding
    a relevant statutory provision; failing to give  effect  to  a  binding
    decision of a superior court; and  irrationality.   It  should  not  be
    difficult for those who compile applications for permission  to  appeal
    to  do  so  in  terms  which  specify  clearly  and  coherently,   with
    appropriate particulars, the error/s of law said   to  contaminate  the
    decision under challenge.  Terms such as "erred" or "erred in  law"  or
    "was wrong in law" or "misdirected  itself  in  law"  are  unacceptable
    unless accompanied by a clear  specification  of  the  error/s  of  law
    alleged  and  suitable  brief  particulars.   If  the  application  for
    permission fails to satisfy this standard and the  Judge  concerned  is
    unable to identify with confidence the error/s  of  law  asserted,  the
    appropriate course will be a refusal.

11. One of the negative consequences of poorly  compiled  applications  for
    permission to appeal is the inappropriate expenditure of judicial  time
    in attempting to understand the basis and thrust  of  the  application.
    This occurred in the present case, both in advance of  the  substantive
    hearing and at the hearing itself.  Given the pressures on Tribunals to
    process large  volumes  of  cases  efficiently  and  expeditiously,  in
    circumstances where  there  has  been  a  notable  recent  increase  in
    applications for permission to appeal to UTIAC, this  is  unacceptable.
    Furthermore, it is inimical to the overriding  objective  enshrined  in
    rule 2(1) of the 2008 Rules.  This provides, inter alia, that the Upper
    Tribunal must be enabled to process cases  in  a  manner  which  avoids
    delay.  Poorly compiled applications for permission to appeal can  have
    other  undesirable  consequences.   These   include   undermining   the
    important value of legal certainty and unfairness to the  other  party.
    Henceforth,  applicants  can  expect  unsatisfactory  applications  for
    permission to appeal to be dealt with brusquely and robustly.

12. The nebulous terms of the application for permission to appeal  in  the
    present case are reflected in the grant of permission. The former had a
    contagious  effect  on  the  latter.   The  Judge  granted  permission,
    firstly, on the ground that the FtT had arguably erred in  law  in  its
    assessment of the credibility of three particular  witnesses:  see  the
    second ground of appeal reproduced in [2] above.  It  may  be  observed
    that it will very rarely be appropriate to grant permission  to  appeal
    on this kind of ground.  Credibility assessments by first instance fact
    finding Tribunals will normally be challengeable only on the  basis  of
    irrationality (or, as it is sometimes inelegantly termed,  perversity):
    Edwards - v - Bairstow [1956] AC 14. Judges  should  be  very  slow  to
    grant permission on such a ground. The second striking feature  of  the
    grant of permission is the statement:

         "It is arguable that the Judge gave inadequate reasons for  finding
         that  the  Appellant  lived  with  his   wife   in   a   subsisting
         relationship."

    There was no contention in the  application  for  permission  that  the
    FtT's  determination  was  inadequately  reasoned.  Thus  there  was  a
    mismatch between application and  grant.  It  seems   likely  that  the
    permission Judge was struggling to comprehend the application  and  was
    driven to this formulation in consequence.   Finally,  as  regards  the
    first ground of appeal, also quoted in  [2]  above,  it  is  abundantly
    clear from the determination that the Judge had considered  the  emails
    from the  local  authority  but,  on  perfectly  rational  and  clearly
    explained grounds, declined to accord them any weight.

13. I announced my  decision,  with  reasons,  at  the  conclusion  of  the
    hearing.  In brief summary, Mr Smart,  representing  the  Secretary  of
    State,  accepted,  realistically  and  correctly,  that  this   is   an
    irrationality challenge.  The proportions of the hurdle thereby erected
    require  no  elaboration.   I  am  satisfied  that  the  findings   and
    conclusions of the Judge were comfortably open to her, having regard to
    the documentary  evidence  (which  I  have  considered)  and  the  oral
    evidence of those who testified (summarised in the determination).   It
    was plainly open to the Judge to make  the  omnibus  finding  that  the
    Appellant and  his  spouse  were  living  together  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship.  There is no demonstrable error on the face of
    the determination.  Furthermore,  sufficient  findings  are  rehearsed,
    while others can be readily inferred.  No piece  of  material  evidence
    was overlooked by the Judge.  Fundamentally, the weight which the Judge
    determined  to  accord  to  certain  aspects  of  the  evidence,  while
    attaching  correspondingly  little  or  no  weight   to   others,   lay
    comfortably within the bounds of the standard of rationality.

14. In my view, permission to appeal should not have been  granted  to  the
    Secretary of State in this case.  The application for  permission  fell
    measurably short of the governing threshold and  invited  a  swift  and
    summary refusal.

DECISION

15. I dismiss the appeal and affirm the decision of the FtT.


                                                 [pic]
                                                THE HON. MR JUSTICEMCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                        Date:   24 July 2014
