
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                 HAA (s.72: overseas conviction) Somalia [2012] UKUT 00366
(IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                     |Determination Promulgated   |
|On 27 September 2012                 |                            |
|                                     |............................|
|                                     |...........                 |

                                   Before

                      Mr C M G Ockelton, Vice President
                         Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb

                                   Between

                                    H A A
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms V Templeton instructed by Ty Arian Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr K Hibbs, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

In cases where s 72 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  is
invoked, it is important to see  that  the  specific  requirements  of  that
section have been complied with.   In  particular,  if  the  conviction  was
outside the United Kingdom, there must be either proof of  the  offence  and
sentence (s 72(3)), or certification under s 72(4)(b).  It does  not  appear
that the statute requires certification to be in the letter of refusal.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a national of  Somalia  born  on  3  March  1980.   An
    anonymity order has been made in his case.

 2. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against the  decision
    of the respondent  on  6  September  2011  to  direct  his  removal  to
    Somaliland, Somalia or Mexico,  following  refusal  of  his  claim  for
    asylum.  Immigration Judge Hart dismissed his  appeal.   The  appellant
    has permission to appeal to this Tribunal.


 3. The appellant's history is of some complexity.  He left his country  of
    origin a long time ago.  He has spent a considerable period of time  in
    the United States of America and apparently some time  in  Mexico.   He
    arrived in the United Kingdom  in  2007.   He  has  been  convicted  of
    criminal offences in the United States of America  and  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  For that  reason,  the  Secretary  of  State  relied  on  the
    provisions of s.72 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002,
    to which we make  fuller  reference  below.   The  Secretary  of  State
    concluded that, even if the appellant is a refugee, he is,  because  of
    his criminality, not protected from removal from  the  United  Kingdom;
    and that, in any event, although he is a member of  a  Somali  minority
    clan, he is not at risk of persecution in  Somaliland,  from  which  he
    comes.

 4. When the matter came before Judge Hart in the First-tier  Tribunal,  he
    very properly recognised that he had to  consider  s.72  first,  before
    going on to the appellant's substantive claim to be a refugee.  He  was
    required to do that, because the ground  of  appeal  available  to  the
    appellant is that his removal would breach the Refugee Convention;  and
    it would not breach the Refugee Convention if, despite being a refugee,
    he were not a person who could claim the benefit of Article 33 of  that
    Convention.  Section 72 is in mandatory terms and in a case such as the
    present, where the Secretary of  State  has  certified  that  exclusion
    under  s.72  applies,  the  Tribunal  is   required   to   begin   with
    consideration of that issue.

 5. The Immigration Judge's discussion of exclusion is at paragraphs 21  to
    43 of his determination.  He then went on to consider  the  appellant's
    claim substantively, in particular because he also claims a fear of ill-
    treatment contrary to Article 3 of the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights.

 6. The Judge's conclusions on the facts were based on the material  before
    him.  It is clear that he regarded  the  appellant's  evidence  on  his
    history and origins as not worthy of credit, in particular  the  recent
    evidence by which he sought to distance himself  from  Somaliland.   On
    the other hand, the Judge appears to  have  concluded  the  appellant's
    evidence of his criminal history in the  United  States  as  worthy  of
    credit, in particular the recent evidence in which he  had  given  some
    details of the offences of which he was convicted.  The Judge concluded
    that s.72 applied and excluded the appellant from the protection of the
    Refugee Convention, but  that,  even  if  s.72  had  not  applied,  the
    appellant was not at any risk  of  ill-treatment.   We  have  begun  by
    pointing out those features of the  determination,  because  they  have
    influenced our view on the case as a whole.  For reasons which we shall
    set out, we have come to the conclusion that material disclosed by  the
    Secretary of State for the first time on 26 September 2012  shows  that
    the hearing before Judge Hart was not fair.

 7. The material in question is information provided by the  United  States
    of America pursuant to a request made by the Secretary of State.  There
    are two versions of it: we do not know why.  At the time the  decision-
    maker wrote the letter refusing the appellant's claim, he had a version
    of the information,  which,  we  are  told,  became  available  to  the
    Secretary of State on 15 August 2011.  It is as follows:

        "Subject is believed to have been in the  US  from  March  1996  to
        September 2007.
        Subject was convicted of selling cocaine in the US on 21/02/2002.
        Subject was apprehended by US Immigration Enforcement  Officers  in
        San Francisco on 07/07/2004 when he  was  charged  with  aggravated
        felony, controlled substance trafficking, and having  a  possession
        of a controlled substance.
        - Subject used the [appellant's name].
        Subject was granted supervisor release on 23/03/2005  and  reported
        periodically thereafter".

 8. Before the First-tier Tribunal, the appellant accepted that he had been
    convicted of some offences in the United States.   The  detail  of  the
    offences grew with the telling, and he eventually said that he had been
    sentenced to 5 years imprisonment.  He also told the Judge that he  had
    been recognised in the United States as  a  refugee.   The  Immigration
    Judge accepted the appellant's latest account of his conviction for the
    purposes of his examination of s.72, but said specifically at paragraph
    72 of his determination, when setting out his reasons for  disbelieving
    the appellant's account, that "he has not  produced  any  documents  to
    verify that he was at one time recognised by the  United  States  as  a
    Convention Refugee".

 9. Shortly after the refusal decision was made, in fact  on  17  September
    2011, further information became available; we do  not  know  precisely
    what its source was.   In  the  second  version,  the  differences  are
    emphasised by bold type.  Instead of the first line the information now
    is:

        "Subject entered the US as a refugee on 24/03/1995
        - Subject was subsequently granted refugee status, and then applied
        for permanent residence status on 05/10/1998".

10. A further paragraph is inserted above the last  line  of  the  original
    note, as follows:

        "Subject was denied permanent residence status on 21/07/2004.
        - Subject was subsequently denied refugee status on 13/09/2004."

11. The reference to  the  refusal  of  refugee  status  appears  to  be  a
    reference to the provisions of s.208 of the United  States  Immigration
    and Nationality Act.  What is of prime  interest,  of  course,  is  the
    information that the appellant had been granted refugee status in 1998.
     It is clear that the Secretary of State had  that  information  by  17
    September 2011 at the latest: we say "at the latest", because the  form
    of the dates in the narrative shows that the information must have been
    redacted  after  receipt  from  the   United   States,   before   being
    incorporated in this document.  If the information  now  available  had
    been disclosed at the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, it  would
    clearly have had some impact on the Judge's reasoning.

12. We do not attribute any blame to any individual officer of the UKBA for
    the failure to disclose at that stage: no doubt the original  decision-
    maker had put the file away and those who prepared the case for hearing
    were not aware of the two versions of the  document.   We  should  say,
    however, that it is particularly unfortunate that,  in  response  to  a
    more recent disclosure request, the  appellant's  representatives  were
    given only the earlier version of the information, as recently as  last
    month.  But, wherever the fault lies, in  our  view  the  Secretary  of
    State's failure to disclose this information, which helped  to  support
    the credibility of the appellant's case and,  as  it  turned  out,  the
    absence of which influenced the Judge's reasoning, made the proceedings
    unfair.

13. It might be said that because of the impact of  s.72,  the  outcome  of
    these proceedings would have been the  same  in  any  event.   We  have
    concluded, however, that the matter should be remitted  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.  There  are  two  reasons  for  that
    conclusion.  The first is that we do not think that it is at  all  easy
    to say that a judicial decision tainted by unfairness of  the  judicial
    procedure should be allowed to stand by being  shown  that  the  result
    would probably have been the same in  any  event.   The  second  reason
    depends on an analysis of s.72  and  its  application  to  the  present
    appeal, which we now undertake.

14. The first four subsections of s.72 are as follows:

        "72. Serious criminal
        (1)   This section applies for the purpose of the construction  and
             application  of  Article  33(2)  of  the   Refugee   Convention
             (exclusion from protection).
        (2)   A person shall be presumed to have been convicted by a  final
             judgement of a particularly serious crime and to  constitute  a
             danger to the community of the United Kingdom if he is -
                 (a) convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence, and
                 (b) sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at  least  two
years.
        (3)   A person shall be presumed to have been convicted by a  final
             judgement of a particularly serious crime and to  constitute  a
             danger to the community of the Untied Kingdom if -
                 (a) he is  convicted  outside  the  United  Kingdom  of  an
offence,
                 (b) he is sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least
two years, and
                 (c)   he  could  have  been  sentenced  to  a   period   of
                    imprisonment of at least two years  had  his  conviction
                    been a conviction in the United  Kingdom  of  a  similar
                    offence.
        (4) A person shall be presumed to have been convicted  by  a  final
           judgement of a particularly serious crime and  to  constitute  a
           danger to the community of the United Kingdom if -
                 (a) he is convicted of an offence specified by order of the
                    Secretary of State, or
                 (b) he is  convicted  outside  the  United  Kingdom  of  an
                    offence and the Secretary of State certifies that in his
                    opinion the offence is similar to an  offence  specified
                    by order under paragraph (a)."


15. On their face, subsections (2), (3) and (4)  impose  presumptions:  the
    legality of those presumptions was successfully challenged in the Court
    of Appeal in EN (Serbia) v SSHD and SSHD v  KC  (South  Africa)  [2009]
    EWCA Civ 630 and it is now clear that,  even  when  those  sub-sections
    apply, there needs to be an investigation of  the  individual's  actual
    criminality and the risk posed to the  United  Kingdom.   But,  in  any
    event, the case must be one in which the facts justify the  application
    of one of the three subsections.  So far as offences committed  in  the
    United Kingdom are concerned, s. 72(2) will apply  if,  on  conviction,
    there was a sentence of at least two years; and s. 72(4) will apply  if
    the conviction was of a  specified  offence.   So  far  as  convictions
    outside the United Kingdom are concerned, s. 72(3) applies if there was
    a sentence to a term of imprisonment of  at  least  two  years  for  an
    offence which could have carried such a sentence if the conviction  had
    been in the United Kingdom; and s. 72(4) applies if the  conviction  is
    of an offence that the Secretary of State certifies is in  his  opinion
    similar to an offence that is  specified.   It  follows  that,  for  an
    overseas conviction to fall within s. 72, either there must have been a
    sentence of imprisonment for at least  two  years,  or  there  must  be
    certification of the kind required by s. 72(4).

16. The decision letter in the present case, after  setting  out  s.  72(4)
    (but not any preceding subsections), was worded as follows:


       "46. The decision maker considers that the possession and supply  of
           class A drugs (cocaine) in which you have been found guilty  off
           [sic] and  received  a  custodial  sentence  is  a  particularly
           serious crime.  It was such a serious crime in the eyes  of  the
           US authorities that they sought to deport you from their country


           [The next two paragraphs refer  to  IH  (Eritrea)  [2009]  UKAIT
           00012 and to the appellant's own history.]


        49. It is considered that you have been convicted of a particularly
           serious crime and  that you constitute a danger to the community
           of the United Kingdom therefore  you  have  been  excluded  from
           protection  under  section  72(4)  Nationality  Immigration  and
           Asylum Act 2002".

17. Certification  under  s.  72(4)  will,  we  think,  necessarily  be  by
    reference to the similarity of the constituent elements of the relevant
    offences, not by reference to the particular circumstances of the case.
     In any event, there is no remotely clear indication that the decision-
    maker had taken into account the list of specified offences, and  there
    is,  to  our  eyes,  nothing  resembling  the  relevant  certification.
    Further, it is  apparent  that  the  decision-maker  relied  solely  on
    subsection (4), and not at all on sub-section (3).

18. After considering the material before him,  including  the  appellant's
    evidence that  he  had  been  sentenced  to  a  term  of  eight  months
    imprisonment for "some offence relating to drugs", and to a sentence of
    five years for robbery, the Judge wrote this:

        "42. I have noted  that  section  72(3)  in  effect  establishes  a
             presumption upon the appellant being sentenced for at least two
             years, whereas section 72(4) refers to  a  list  of  comparable
             offences, which might not necessarily have attracted a term  of
             imprisonment of two years.


          43. I am satisfied, largely on the basis of  the  appellant's  own
             admission, that he has been convicted  of  an  offence  in  the
             United States of the supply or offering to supply a  controlled
             drug, namely crack cocaine, a Class A drug, and  that  such  an
             offence would have been an  offence  under  section  4  of  the
             Misuse of Drugs Act 1971.  Accordingly, on that basis, I uphold
             the respondent's certificate."

19. It appears to us that the Judge fell into the trap set by the terms  of
    the refusal letter.  The appellant was not convicted of the supply of a
    controlled drug: that is merely the apparently equivalent notion  under
    the law of England and Wales.  He was convicted of some drug offence in
    the United States of America, and there is no clear indication of  what
    that was, and no relevant "certificate" for the Judge to "uphold".   In
    addition, as we have indicated, it appears that the Judge erred in  his
    failure to appreciate the impact of the decision of the Court of Appeal
    in EN (Serbia).

20. For these reasons we consider that it is  far  from  obvious  that  the
    appellant's appeal is doomed to fail by reason of  the  application  of
    s.72 to it.  That, as we have said, is a further reason  for  requiring
    the proceedings on appeal to begin again with a  full  hearing  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Our formal decision is therefore that we find  an
    error of law by the First-tier Tribunal.  We set  its  decision  aside.
    We remit the appellant's appeal for a fresh hearing by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

21. It appears to us that there  is  nothing  in  s.72  that  requires  any
    relevant consideration and certification by the Secretary of  State  to
    take place at any specified time: in particular, the  consideration  is
    not confined to the wording  of  the  decision  letter.   We  make  the
    following direction to enable the Secretary of State  to  consider  and
    clarify her position under s.72 in this case.  We bear in mind that the
    Tribunal will have to consider whether the  circumstances  under  which
    the United States offence or offences were committed, and the sentences
    imposed for them, are  such  as  to  lead  to  a  conclusion  that  the
    appellant should now be regarded as  a  person  who  cannot  claim  the
    benefit of Article 33(2) of the Refugee Convention.

Directions

22. The Secretary of State is to consider forthwith the application of s.72
    to the appellant's claim.  An assertion that s. 72(3) applies  must  be
    accompanied by appropriate evidence of the  level  of  the  appellant's
    sentence.  An assertion that s. 72(4) applies must  be  accompanied  by
    the appropriate  certificate.   Any  information  obtained  as  to  the
    circumstances of the appellant's  conviction  or  convictions  must  be
    disclosed to the appellant and to the Tribunal, even if  the  Secretary
    of State considers that the information is not relevant for the purpose
    of s.72.

23. This appeal will be listed before the First-tier Tribunal  for  a  full
    hearing, probably in the week beginning 5 December 2012, and  a  Notice
    of Hearing will be sent out in the usual way.

24. The Secretary of State's time for complying with  the  direction  above
    expires 14 days before the hearing of this  appeal  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.   The First-tier Tribunal will not take into account, in  the
    respondent's favour, any evidence produced after that date.


                             C M G OCKELTON
                       VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL IMMIGRATION AND
                       ASYLUM CHAMBER
                       Date: 9 October 2012
