

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

            Win (s. 83 - order of events) [2012] UKUT 00365 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 4 July 2012                                |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                      Mr C M G Ockelton, Vice President
                         Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

                                   Between

                                KHINE ZAR WIN

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D O'Callaghan, instructed by The Legal Resource
Partnership
For the Respondent:    Mr R Hopkin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



The right of appeal under s.83 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
Act 2002 arises only if the relevant grant of leave postdates the asylum
claim.





                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. Appeals to the First-tier Tribunal in immigration  and  asylum  matters
    are governed  by  the  comprehensive  provisions  in  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, as amended.[1]  An  appeal  lies  only
    against decisions of the sort listed in ss 82,  83  and  83A.   Section
    82(2) lists the "immigration decisions" that carry a right  of  appeal.
    The list includes decisions that a person is to be removed  in  one  of
    the  various  ways  permitted  by  the  Immigration   Acts,   decisions
    terminating a person's leave to be in  the  United  Kingdom,  decisions
    refusing leave to enter the United Kingdom,  decisions  refusing  entry
    clearance, and decisions refusing to extend a person's  leave.   But  a
    decision to refuse to extend a person's leave  is  only  an  appealable
    "immigration decision" if "the result of the refusal is that the person
    has no leave to enter or remain".   There  is  no  appeal  under  s  82
    against the grant of leave; and there is no appeal under s  82  against
    the refusal of leave if, at the time the decision is made,  the  person
    has existing leave which continues for the time  being,  regardless  of
    the refusal to extend it.

 2. The incidents of permission to be in a country can, generally speaking,
    be left to the provisions of national  law;  but  the  United  Nations'
    Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees is, as its name suggests,
    primarily concerned with the status that a refugee has when outside his
    country of nationality.  In order to comply with its obligations  under
    the Convention, the United Kingdom is  required  not  merely  to  allow
    refugees to be present in the United Kingdom, but to allow them  to  be
    present with the status of refugees.  The 2002 Act  therefore  provides
    for "upgrade" appeals by people who seek to establish  that  the  leave
    they have should be leave in the character of a refugee.   Section  83A
    makes such provision  for  a  person  whose  status  as  a  refugee  is
    terminated but who remains in the United Kingdom  with  leave  in  some
    other category.  Section 83 is as follows:-

        "83. Appeal: asylum claim


        (1)  This section applies where a person has made an  asylum  claim
and -
           (a) his claim has been rejected by the Secretary of State , but
           (b) he has been granted leave to enter or remain in  the  United
Kingdom for a
                 period exceeding one year (or for  periods  exceeding  one
year in aggregate).
        (2)  The person may appeal to the Tribunal against the rejection of
his asylum
               claim."

 3. In appeals under s 83 or s 83A, the grounds are limited: the appeal has
    to be "on the grounds that removal of the  appellant  from  the  United
    Kingdom would breach the United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee
    Convention" (see s 84(3) and (4)).  No doubt those provisions  fail  to
    meet the needs of a person who, for one reason  or  another,  does  not
    have the protection of Articles 32 and 33 of the Refugee Convention and
    so is removable from the United Kingdom.   But  the  vast  majority  of
    refugees do have the protection of those  articles  and  their  removal
    would breach the Refugee Convention: for those appellants the ground of
    appeal is, essentially, the ground that the appellant is a refugee.

 4. Section 83 has been the subject of decisions by the Tribunal in  Abiyat
    and Others (rights of appeal) Iran [2011] UKUT 00314 (IAC), by the High
    Court in R (S, D & W) v First-tier Tribunal (IAC and SSHD) [2011]  EWHC
    627 (Admin) and R (Omondi) v SSHD [2009] EWHC 827 (Admin); and  of  the
    Court of Appeal in SSHD v AS  (Somalia)  [2011]  EWCA  Civ  1319.   The
    submissions made to us in the course of the present  appeal  show  that
    its meaning may still be regarded as not entirely clear.

The Facts

 5. The appellant is a national of Myanmar.  She applied in 2010 for  entry
    clearance to the United Kingdom as a  student.   That  application  was
    granted,  and  she  entered  the  United  Kingdom  on  29  March  2010,
    presenting her visa, which thereupon, under the provisions of  Part  II
    of  the  Immigration  (Leave  to  Enter  and  Remain)  Order  2000  (SI
    1161/2000), took effect as leave to enter, granted before arrival,  and
    valid until 31 July 2012.

 6. On 25 October 2010 the appellant attended  the  respondent's  screening
    unit in Croydon.  She was given an appointment for 9 November 2011  and
    on that day formally claimed asylum.  She was  interviewed,  and  on  8
    December 2011 her claim was refused.  The  letter  refusing  her  claim
    specifically indicates that her existing leave is not being curtailed.

 7. Some six weeks later, on 19 December 2011, the appellant sent a  Notice
    of Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.   The  notice  alleged  that  the
    Secretary of State's  decision  refusing  her  Refugee  status  was  an
    appealable decision, and set out grounds of  appeal  against  it.   The
    matter was set down for hearing, and at a hearing on 9  February  2012,
    Judge Brenells was referred to the decisions of the High Court and  the
    Court of Appeal to which we have referred above.  He decided  that  the
    appellant had no right of appeal.  The appellant  now  appeals  against
    that decision, with permission granted by the First-tier Tribunal.  The
    Secretary of State maintains, as she has maintained from the beginning,
    that her decision of 8 December 2011 carries no right of appeal because
    it falls neither within s 82 nor within s 83 of the 2002 Act.

The Law

 8. As we have indicated, rights of appeal arise only under the  2002  Act.
    The Court of Appeal has warned against methods of interpretation of the
    appeals provisions that do other than apply their clear  language.   In
    AS v SSHD, Sullivan LJ (with  whom  the  other  members  of  the  court
    agreed) said, at [32]:

        "The court should be very slow to read words into such a  detailed,
        self contained, statutory code."

 9. The section with which we are concerned must, however, be seen  in  the
    context of the whole of that code.  We do not need to set out  all  the
    appeals provisions of the 2002  Act,  but  we  need  to  refer  to  two
    specific characteristics of them: certification, and the prohibition on
    removal.

10. Sections 94 and 96 of the 2002 Act allow  the  Secretary  of  State  to
    restrict or remove rights of  appeal  by  certification.   For  present
    purposes, the relevant provisions are that, under s 94,  the  Secretary
    of State can remove an in-country right of appeal by certifying that an
    asylum claim is clearly unfounded, and under s 96 can remove a right of
    appeal altogether by certifying that the matters which might be  raised
    in it either have been, or could have been dealt  with  in  an  earlier
    appeal.  Those provisions relate only to  appeals  against  immigration
    decisions as defined by s 82: they do not apply to the rights of appeal
    given by ss 83 and 83A.  Further, in the part of the Act  dealing  with
    detention and removal, s 78  provides  that  the  Secretary  of  State,
    acting under the Immigration Acts, may not remove  a  person  from  the
    United Kingdom while his appeal under  s  82  is  pending.   There  is,
    again, no parallel provision for appeals under ss 83 or 83A.

11. Omondi concerned a national of Kenya, who, like the present  appellant,
    had come to the United Kingdom as a student.   He  arrived  in  October
    2002 with three years' leave to remain.  He made an in-time application
    for further leave which was refused on 27 January 2006.  His leave thus
    expired soon afterwards.  He did not depart from  the  United  Kingdom,
    and two years later, was arrested  as  an  overstayer,  upon  which  he
    claimed asylum.  That claim was refused, and the  claim  was  certified
    under s 94(2) with the  result  that  any  right  of  appeal  could  be
    exercised  only  outside  the  Untied  Kingdom.   The  claimant  sought
    judicial review of the refusal decision on the ground that (whether  or
    not he had a right of appeal under s 82) he had one under s 83, because
    his immigration history clearly included the two aspects set out  in  s
    83(1): his asylum claim had been rejected and he had been granted leave
    for a period exceeding one year, in fact for three years.   The  Deputy
    High Court Judge (a member of  the  Tribunal  as  constituted  for  the
    present appeal) held that the claimant had no right of appeal  under  s
    83.  He said this:

       "19. Like Blake J in Etame v SSHD and AIT [2008] EWHC 1140 (Admin) I
           have no difficulty in concluding that the defendant's  arguments
           are to be preferred. Reading s.83 in the way contended for by Mr
           Drabble would produce an absurd and illogical result.  It  would
           be entirely illogical that a person who had  made  an  unfounded
           asylum claim should have an in country right of  appeal  arising
           solely from what Blake J in Etame at [42] called the "irrelevant
           happenstance" of whether he had had an unrelated grant of  leave
           in the past. I am fortified in that conclusion by  a  number  of
           factors. First, the only rational basis upon  which  Mr  Drabble
           has been able to suggest someone  in  this  claimant's  position
           should have the right of appeal  is  that  having  been  in  the
           United Kingdom in the past should be a cause for him being given
           special consideration in  the  appeals  process.  But  I  cannot
           accept that argument. The right  of  appeal  under  s.83  is  on
           Refugee Convention grounds only. If the purpose of the provision
           were to recognise the circumstances of a person who had been  in
           the United Kingdom for some time, it would be absurd to  exclude
           a human rights ground, as s.84(3) does. Secondly, the provisions
           of s.78 make it  clear  that  launching  an  appeal  under  s.82
           prevents removal. That benefit does not extend to appeals  under
           s.83. In one sense,  that  is  sufficient  to  deal  with  these
           proceedings anyway, because they  appear  to  be  based  on  the
           assumption that if the appellant has the right of  appeal  under
           s.83 and exercises that right, he cannot be  removed  while  the
           appeal is pending. But that assumption does  not  appear  to  be
           right. If the appellant appealed under s.83, he could apparently
           nevertheless  be  removed  from  the  United  Kingdom.  But  the
           exclusion of s.83 from the provisions of s.78 is absurd  if  and
           only if Mr Drabble is right.  If  he  is  not  right,  a  person
           appealing under s.83 has leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom
           and therefore does not need the protection of s.78.
        1. The third reason is that s.85(1)  has  the  clear  intention  of
           ensuring that all possible current appeals by an individual  are
           dealt with by one appeal process. But s.85(1) again applies only
           to appeals under s.82. If Mr Drabble is right, the claimant  has
           an appeal under s.83 and also an appeal under s.82, although, in
           the present case, the latter is exercisable only from abroad. If
           his s.83 appeal is unsuccessful, he can start new proceedings on
           an appeal under s.82. There is no suggestion that the  statutory
           scheme  envisages  such  a  result.  It  is  only  because   the
           claimant's asylum claim has been certified that he  has  no  in-
           country right of appeal under s.82. If it had not been certified
           Mr Drabble's argument would entail separate rights under ss.  82
           and 83, which would substantially reduce the  obviously-intended
           effects of both ss. 85(1) (because  there  would  still  be  two
           appeals) and 84(3) (because there would be no effective limit on
           the s. 83 grounds if a s.82  appeal  was  available  alongside).
           This effect is avoided if ss.83 and 83A are understood as giving
           rights of appeal only in circumstances where no right of  appeal
           exists under s.82. That understanding follows clearly  from  the
           wording of s.83A. It applies to s.83 if and only if  the  period
           of leave referred to in s.83(1)(b) is a period of leave  granted
           in response to or after the asylum claim. As I have said,  there
           is no right of appeal under s.82 against the grant of leave. The
           appellate structure makes sense only if the rights of appeal are
           mutually exclusive. They are mutually exclusive if  the  appeals
           under ss.83 and 83A arise only where the appellant has leave.
        1. My conclusion is that the right of appeal under s.83 arises only
           in circumstances where the appellant has made  an  asylum  claim
           which has been refused, and has been granted  periods  of  leave
           exceeding one year in aggregate since  the  decision  to  refuse
           asylum. The claimant has no right of appeal under s.83,  because
           his period  of  leave  long  pre-dates  his  asylum  claim.  His
           application for Judicial Review must therefore be dismissed."
12. S, D and W concerned three claims for judicial review, sharing a number
    of common features, identified by Beatson J at [3] as follows:

         " 3. ...The first is that an application for asylum  was  rejected
           and, at the same time, either no leave to remain or less than  a
           year's leave to remain was granted.  Secondly, at a later  stage
           further representations were submitted and it was asserted  that
           a fresh asylum claim arose.  Thirdly, after  the  submission  of
           the further representations,  the  Secretary  of  State  granted
           indefinite leave to the claimants to remain outside  the  Rules,
           but made no decision on the  applications  asserting  the  fresh
           asylum claim and stated that unless  told  otherwise  within  14
           days would treat them as withdrawn."

13. The Tribunal declined to entertain the claimant's appeals.  Counsel for
    the Secretary of State argued that, in order for s 83 to  apply,  there
    had to be some connection between the refusal of asylum and  the  grant
    of leave: "it is a precondition to an appeal under s 83 that  there  is
    therefore a  decision  upon  "the  asylum  claim  that  is  before  the
    Secretary of  State""  (at  [25]).   That  argument  would  have  posed
    difficulties for the claimants in the instant case,  because,  although
    their earlier asylum claims had been  refused,  no  decision  had  been
    taken on the later claims.   A  further  aspect  of  the  Secretary  of
    State's argument in S, D and W was that, because the refusal of  asylum
    had to be "related to the grant of leave": so a new  claim  for  asylum
    essentially removed the effect of a previous refusal, for the  purposes
    of s 83.  In other words, a person who had been granted more  than  one
    year's leave could not rely on a refusal of asylum years ago, in  order
    to invoke s 83.

14. Beatson J rejected the Secretary of State's  arguments.   He  concluded
    that they were impossible to reconcile with the actual wording not only
    of  s  83,  but  also  of  the  Tribunal's  Procedural  Rules  and  the
    Immigration (Notices) Regulations.  For present purposes we do not need
    to set out the reasoning but merely to state the conclusion, which  was
    that all three texts clearly envisage the grant of leave  taking  place
    after the refusal, that is to say, at a time when there  is  no  asylum
    claim "before the Secretary of State" and that the Act  and  the  Rules
    specifically, and the Notices Regulations by implication, show  that  s
    83 applies where a subsequent grant of leave is  added  to  an  initial
    grant of leave  in  order  to  make  up  the  necessary  period.   That
    subsequent grant cannot be in response to the asylum claim, but clearly
    counts for the purposes of s 83.

15. Counsel for the Secretary of State had relied on Omondi,  which,  as  a
    result, is discussed by the learned judge.  At [64], the first sentence
    of paragraph [21] of Omondi is  cited,  apparently  with  approval,  as
    supporting the conclusion that the Secretary of State's argument is  to
    be rejected.  Later, there is this:
16.
       "69. As to [Omondi] and  Etame  both  involve  very  different  fact
           situations.  In [Omondi] the three years'  leave  as  a  student
           granted to the claimant had expired in 2005, three years  before
           he made his claim for asylum in  2008  when  apprehended  as  an
           overstayer.  There was thus never a time when the claimant  both
           had leave for  over  a  year  and  had  his  asylum  application
           rejected.  His was an attempt to  get  round  the  certification
           process in section 96 by a person without leave at the  material
           time.  It is not surprising that the result is as it was.


        70.  As to Etame's case, a section 83 was not considered in it.  It
           is a case concerned with section 82.  It was not concerned  with
           whether there was a right of appeal or not under section 82, but
           whether the undoubted right of appeal that existed,  was  to  an
           "in-country" appeal, i.e. the case was concerned with the  issue
           of venue."


17. In  response  to  submissions  about  the  possibility  of  repetitious
    appeals, the judge said this:

         "81. I turn to the position in D and W's cases.  In their cases it
           was also submitted by Mr Mandalia  that  there  is  no  rational
           basis upon which it could be said that a person should  be  able
           to exercise a further right of appeal under section  83  against
           the refusal of a previous claim against which the  claimant  has
           exercised a right to  appeal  and  received  its  determination.
           However, it is significant that whereas there  is  provision  to
           preclude appeals under section 82 which are  purely  repetitious
           or which advance grounds that should have  been  raised  in  the
           past in section  96  of  the  2002  Act,  there  is  no  similar
           provision in respect of appeals under section 83.


        82. There is a particular need to prevent repetitious appeals under
           section 82 because they have the potential to frustrate  removal
           of an individual while he pursues  multiple  appeals  which  are
           unlikely to be meritorious.  I accept Mr  McKenzie's  submission
           that the same concerns do not apply to section 83 appeals  where
           the appellant is by definition not liable to be removed from the
           United Kingdom and has no interest in spinning out the process."

18. The result was that all three claimants obtained judicial review.   The
    Secretary of State appealed to the Court of Appeal.  By then, both  S's
    and D's cases had become academic, but the Court needed to consider S's
    case as well as W's in order to reach its conclusions.  The proceedings
    before Beatson J are summarised in the judgement of Sullivan  LJ  (with
    whom Davis LJ and Maurice Kay LJ agreed) as follows:-


       "16. Before Beatson J it was submitted by Counsel who then  appeared
           on behalf of the Secretary of State (not Mr. Payne)  that  there
           had to be a nexus between the grant of leave to enter or  remain
           for a period of one year or more (para. (b) in subsection 83(1))
           and the rejection of the asylum claim (para. (a)  of  subsection
           (1)).  Thus, AS could not rely on the rejection  of  his  asylum
           claim on 15th November 2006 because there was no  nexus  between
           that rejection and the grant of ILR some three years later:  see
           para. 57 of Beatson J's judgment.  Nor could AS  rely  upon  his
           claim to be a refugee in February 2007, when applying to  extend
           his discretionary leave, because the Secretary of State had  not
           reached any decision upon that claim.   It  was  "a  refugee  in
           February 2007, when applying to extend his discretionary  leave,
           because the Secretary of State had not reached any decision upon
           that claim. It was "a precondition to an appeal under section 83
           that there is ...... a decision upon the asylum  claim  that  is
           before  the  Secretary  of  State":  see  paragraph  52  of  the
           judgement.


        17.  Beatson J rejected the submission that there had to be a nexus
           between the rejection of the claim for asylum and the  grant  of
           leave to enter or remain for one year or more (in AS's case  the
           grant of ILR).  That submission was not pursued  by  Mr.  Payne.
           He was right not  to  do  so.   As  Beatson  J  pointed  out  in
           paragraph 58 of his judgment, section 83(1)(b) refers  not  only
           to a period exceeding one year, but to  "periods  exceeding  one
           year in aggregate."  It follows that the grant  of  leave  which
           causes the period of leave to exceed one year in aggregate  need
           not to be contemporaneous with the  rejection  of  the  person's
           asylum claim, and the reason for the subsequent grant  of  leave
           which causes the period of leave to exceed one year in aggregate
           may be wholly unrelated to the rejection of the asylum claim. "

19. Before the Court of Appeal, the Secretary of State submitted that W was
    not entitled to appeal under s 83 because the rejection of his  earlier
    asylum claim was "in the context of  an  immigration  decision  against
    which there was a right of appeal under s 82", and that "it  could  not
    have been Parliament's intention to  provide  for  a  second  right  of
    appeal" (at  [24]  and  [31]).   The  Court  of  Appeal  rejected  that
    argument.  Sullivan LJ pointed out that the appeal under s  82  was  an
    appeal against the  immigration  decision,  albeit  mounted  on  asylum
    grounds, whereas the appeal under s 83  was  specifically  against  the
    refusal of asylum.   There  was  therefore  no  duplication  of  appeal
    apparent on the words of the statute, and there was no clear warrant to
    read in such words as the Secretary of State's argument would  require.
    Besides, an unmeritorious appeal under s82 could be certified:

        "38.  There is undoubtedly a problem of spurious and/or repetitious
             claims for asylum in the context of appeals under  section  82.
             Sections 94 and 96 enable the Secretary of State to respond  to
             that problem and they do not, as Mr. Payne pointed  out,  apply
             to appeals under  section  83.   Thus  he  submitted  that  the
             Secretary of State will  not  be  able  to  prevent  manifestly
             unfounded and/or repetitious appeals under section 83.   Again,
             the potential problem is overstated.  Appellants under  section
             82 are, in practice, seeking to prevent their removal from  the
             UK (see the list of immigration decisions in subsection 82(2)).
              It is understandable, if  regrettable,  that  such  Appellants
             will make  every  endeavour,  however  hopeless,  to  avoid  or
             postpone their removal.  By contrast, those entitled to  appeal
             under section 83 will, by definition, have been given leave  to
             remain in the UK for a least a year, and will know that if that
             leave is not extended they will be entitled to an appeal  under
             section 82.  While there are advantages  in  obtaining  refugee
             status in terms of access to employment,  housing  and  welfare
             benefits, the ability to travel and to bring family members  to
             the UK (see paras. 9 and 10 of Saad), a  wish  to  obtain  such
             advantages under section  83  should  not  be  equated  with  a
             determination to remain in the UK at all  costs  under  section
             82: see paragraph 82 of the judgement of Beatson J."

20. If there was no certification, or no basis for certification, an appeal
    that was unmeritoriously repetitive would be likely to fail  under  the
    guidelines set out in Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702, [2003] Imm  AR  1:
    "a person whose claim for asylum has been rejected in the context of  a
    s82 immigration decision against which he has  unsuccessfully  appealed
    will be told if he seeks legal advice and/or  public  funding  that  he
    will fair no better in a subsequent appeal under s  83  unless  he  can
    persuade the Tribunal that there is some good reason to depart from the
    earlier decision".   The Court does not cite Omondi and there does  not
    appear to us to be any specific discussion  of  the  possibility  of  a
    decision raising rights of appeal under ss 82 and 83 at the same  time.



Discussion

21. Mr O'Callaghan's submissions to us were clear and concise.   They  were
    that in paragraph 17 of the judgement of  Sullivan  LJ,  the  Court  of
    Appeal had approved Beatson J's view that s 83 imposed  no  requirement
    of a connection between the refusal of asylum and the grant  of  leave.
    Beatson J had disapproved Omondi and the Court of Appeal had decisively
    overruled it.  "It therefore follows,"  he  submitted  in  his  written
    skeleton, "there being no nexus between  the  rejection  of  an  asylum
    claim and the grant of leave to remain, that the grant of  leave  could
    be granted prior to the rejection of the asylum claim".   The judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal was wrong to rely on Omondi, a decision of  the
    High Court that had been overruled by the Court of Appeal and, finally,
    "the Court of Appeal clearly  had  the  judgment  of  Omondi  in  mind"
    because it had been considered by Beatson J.

22. Mr Hopkins' submission was that the grant of leave had to be subsequent
    to the refusal of asylum.  He indicated that he thought the  conclusion
    that there need be no nexus between the refusal and the grant of  leave
    was simply wrong.

23. There was a striking difference between the facts  of  Omondi  and  the
    facts of S, D and W.   In Omondi the grant of leave was made at a  time
    when the claimant had never claimed asylum.  The sequence of events was
    first, grant of leave; secondly, expiry of the  leave;  thirdly,  claim
    for asylum; fourthly, refusal of asylum claim.  In  S,  D  and  W,  the
    sequence of events was  as  follows:  First,  asylum  claim;  secondly,
    refusal of asylum claim; thirdly, grant of leave  exceeding  one  year.
    The facts of the present appeal are different from both but are  closer
    to those of Omondi: the sequence is first, grant of leave of more  than
    one year; secondly, claim for asylum; thirdly, refusal of  claim.   The
    difference from Omondi  is  that  at  the  time  of  the  refusal,  the
    appellant still had leave.

24. Mr O'Callaghan's submission asks us to treat the difference in sequence
    of events between Omondi and S, D and W as of no  significance  in  the
    context of the interpretation of s 83.  He makes that submission on the
    basis that it must now be regarded as decided that there does not  need
    to be a connection between the claim for asylum and its refusal on  the
    one hand, and the grant of leave on the other.  To say that there  does
    not need to be a connection between the events is in our  judgment  not
    the same as saying that the order of the events is irrelevant.  On  the
    contrary, it appears to us that both Beatson  J  and  Sullivan  LJ  had
    clearly in mind that the order of events needed to be that  exemplified
    in S, D and W, for s 83 to apply.  At paragraph 64  of  his  judgement,
    Beatson J cites a sentence from Omondi.  Mr O'Callaghan submitted  that
    Beatson J goes on to disapprove of the view  there  expressed,  but  we
    think it is difficult to read the judgement in that way: it is cited in
    order to support the conclusion  that  Beatson  J  was  reaching.   The
    sentence is:

          "The right of appeal under section 83 arises only in circumstances
          where the appellant has  made  an  asylum  claim  which  has  been
          refused and has been granted periods of leave exceeding  one  year
          in aggregate since the decision to refuse asylum" (our  emphasis).



25. Later in his judgement, at [82], Beatson  J  specifically  accepts  the
    submission of counsel for the claimants before him that in s 83 appeals
    "the appellant is by definition not  liable  to  be  removed  from  the
    United Kingdom and has no interest in spinning out the process".   That
    is a reference to a s 83 appellant having existing leave, which is seen
    by the judge as a reason for the lack of  provision  for  certification
    for s 83 appeals.  In our judgement, although Beatson J clearly decided
    that there does not need to be any connection between  the  refusal  of
    asylum and the grant of leave, it is inherent in s 83 that the grant of
    leave follows the refusal, and that (as a  result  of  the  grant)  the
    appellant has leave at the time of his s 83 appeal.  The  latter  point
    is also explicit in the reasoning of Sullivan LJ in  his  judgement  in
    the Court of Appeal at [38]: "Those entitled to appeal under s83  will,
    by definition, have been given leave to remain in the UK for at least a
    year, and will know that if that leave is not  extended  they  will  be
    entitled to an appeal under s 82".  Nothing that  we  can  see  in  his
    lordship's judgement gives us any reason to  suppose  that  he  thought
    that an appeal under s83 would lie on the facts of Omondi.

26. We therefore do not accept that Omondi was disapproved by Beatson J  or
    overruled by the Court of Appeal in S, D and W.  Its  requirement  that
    the refusal of asylum precede the grant of leave was, on the  contrary,
    at both levels assumed to be correct.

27. For that reason it may be appropriate to recall and review the  reasons
    said by the Deputy Judge to fortify his conclusion.  The first was that
    if a person such as Omondi had a right of appeal, it was  difficult  to
    see why it should be restricted to refugee grounds.  That  reason  may,
    we think, need reconsideration in the light of Sullivan  LJ's  reminder
    that the appeal under s 83  is  specifically  against  the  refusal  of
    asylum.  The second reason was that s 78 provides no  security  against
    removal for a person who appeals under s 83.  That, as  it  appears  to
    us, is still a good reason for supposing that the appeal under s 83  is
    necessarily by a person who has leave at the date of the  appeal.   The
    third reason is that in Omondi's case there was a right of appeal under
    s 82 (albeit certified) and that the statue would not have intended  to
    provide for appeals under s 82 and s  83  against  the  same  decision.
    That reason may also need reconsideration in the light of the  decision
    of the Court of Appeal in AS.

28. It does seem to us, however, that, for the reasons given in Omondi  and
    at both levels in AS, s 83 envisages that the grant of leave be current
    at the date when the appeal is raised.  That is the case in the present
    appeal.  The question is whether the specific decision in Omondi,  that
    the grant of leave must postdate the asylum claim or refusal,  is  also
    good law.

29. We have indicated above the reasons for considering that both Beatson J
    and the Court of Appeal assumed that it was.  It does not appear to  us
    that anything said by either is sufficient to undermine that view.  The
    notion that an appeal under s  83  arises  in  circumstances  where  an
    asylum claimant happens to have had (or to have) a  previous  grant  of
    leave still appears inexplicable.  It is  also  inexplicable  that  the
    statute should envisage that if an asylum claim is made by a person who
    has existing leave of over one year, it cannot  be  certified,  however
    repetitious or clearly unfounded it may be, which would be the case  if
    the refusal of the claim carried a right of appeal under s 83 in  those
    circumstances.

30. The crucial difference between Omondi and S, D and W is not  merely  in
    the sequence of events: it is that, at the time of granting leave,  the
    Secretary of State knew that S, D and W claimed to  be  refugees.   The
    grant of leave otherwise than  as  a  refugee  was  itself  in  part  a
    rejection (if not a formal  refusal)  of  their  refugee  claims.   If,
    following the claim that the present appellant has  now  unsuccessfully
    made, the Secretary of State grants her further leave amounting to more
    than a year, that grant will have been made to a  person  whose  claims
    were known to the Secretary of State, and will carry a right of  appeal
    under s 83.  If she is refused leave, and becomes  liable  to  removal,
    there is bound to be, at some stage, an  immigration  decision  against
    which she can appeal under s 82.  But in the meantime it is not at  all
    obvious that any injustice to her is caused by continuing to treat  her
    as a person enjoying the remainder of the  leave  she  sought  and  was
    granted as a student.

31. Our conclusions are that the decision in  Omondi  that,  for  s  83  to
    apply, the grant of leave must post-date  the  refusal  of  asylum,  is
    neither overruled in AS nor shown to be wrong by the judgements in that
    case at  either  level.    Immigration  Judge  Brenells  was  therefore
    correct to apply it and made no error of law in his conclusion that the
    appellant had no right of appeal.  This appeal to the Upper Tribunal is
    therefore dismissed.










                                                              C M G OCKELTON

VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                     Date: 26 September 2012

-----------------------
[1] See also s 40A of the British Nationality Act 1981; reg 26 of the
Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006

