





R (on the application of AM and others) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
Department (liberty to apply - scope - discharging mandatory orders)  [2017]
UKUT 00372 (IAC)


                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                               Judicial Review




            The Queen on the application of AM, SASA, MHA, and SS
                                                                  Applicants
                                      v

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent





               The Honourable Mr Justice McCloskey, President




Having considered all documents lodged, together  with  the  submissions  of
Miss C Kilroy  and  Miss  M  Knorr,  both  of  counsel,  instructed  by  the
Migrants' Law Project, Islington Law Centre, on  behalf  of  the  Applicants
SASA and MHA, and by Bhatt Murphy Solicitors on behalf of the Applicants  AM
and SS, and of Mr B Keith, of counsel, instructed by  the  Government  Legal
Department, on behalf of the  Respondent,  at  a  hearing  at  Field  House,
London on 21 June 2017.


      1. Section 25 (2) (c) of TCEA 2007 invests the upper Tribunal with the
         same powers as the High Court in matters of liberty to apply.


      2. The mechanism of liberty to apply may be invoked for the purpose of
         pursuing a declaratory order that the Tribunal's principal order in
         judicial review proceedings has not  been  satisfied,  particularly
         (but not exclusively) where the latter is a mandatory order.


      3. In evaluating the scope of liberty to apply in any given  case  the
         Tribunal will seek to give effect to the overriding objective.


      4. A mandatory order may be discharged where it has  served  its  main
         purpose and its perpetuation will advance no discernible end.


McCloskey J


The Applications

 1) In each of these four cases the Applicants  have  brought  applications
    seeking the following relief:

         "A declaration that the Respondent has not complied with  paragraph
         2 of the Tribunal's order of [date]".

    That section directed that the Respondent "... shall start the  process
    of making a fresh lawful decision forthwith  and  shall  complete  that
    process at latest by midnight on [date]."

    The applications continue, in each case:

         "We are exercising the liberty to apply mechanism in order to  seek
         a declaration to that effect ... "

    Each of the four applications is dated 12 June 2017, but were  preceded
    by notifications detailing the basis for the  applications  on  6  June
    2017 to which the Respondent replied on the same day  maintaining  that
    the 2 June 2017 decisions are lawful and setting out  her  position  on
    the liberty to apply application, which elicited a  response  from  the
    Applicants on 7 June 2017.

 2) The Upper Tribunal responded to these applications by a combined  order
    dated 14 June 2017 whereby (a) the Respondent, the Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department (the "Secretary of  State"),  was  directed  to
    respond, evidentially or otherwise, by a specified time  and  date  and
    (b) the applications were listed on an expedited basis before me on  21
    June 2017.

 3) The Respondent did not comply with the aforementioned  order.   Rather,
    on  15  June  2017,  in  all  four  cases,  the  Respondent  lodged  an
    application in the following terms:

         "The SSHD seeks an order that the previous order of the Tribunal be
         set aside.  If the Applicants wish to challenge the decision of  02
         June 2017 they should issue fresh JR proceedings.  This application
         should be refused.  In the alternative  the  directions  should  be
         varied to allow the SSHD sufficient time to respond.   The  hearing
         of 21 June should be vacated for the same reason ...

         There cannot be any prejudice to the Applicant in the SSHD having a
         longer and sufficient period to respond."

    I shall explain infra the meaning of "the decision letter of 02 June".

Previous Orders and Judgments

 4) The four orders of the Tribunal under scrutiny were variously  made  on
    16 and 17 May 2017.  They are in the following, identical terms:

         "It is ordered that:

         (1)      The Respondent shall admit  [AM]  to  the  United  Kingdom
             forthwith using best endeavours at all material times  and  at
             latest by midnight on 22 May 2017.

         (2)      The Respondent shall begin the process of making  a  fresh
             lawful decision forthwith and shall complete that  process  at
             latest by midnight on 22 May 2017.

         (3)      Liberty to apply."

    Each of these orders was promulgated as a "short form" order  upon  the
    completion of each of the hearings,  which  were  of  the  "rolled  up"
    species.  The practice  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  is  to  promulgate  a
    composite judgment and  order  in  judicial  review  cases.   The  full
    judgment was  not  available  at  the  stage  when  the  hearings  were
    completed.  As a result the Tribunal had  resort  to  the  "short  form
    order" mechanism.

 5) In all four cases the  Secretary  of  State,  under  the  mechanism  of
    liberty to apply, has applied for, and has been granted, extensions  of
    the time limits specified in (1) and (2) of the orders.  As regards (1)
    of the orders, the current state of play is that the Applicants AM  and
    SS have been admitted to the United Kingdom.   The  Applicant  SASA  is
    expected to be admitted  tomorrow  (22  June  2017).   As  regards  the
    Applicant MHA the Tribunal, in making a further extension of time order
    (today), has directed the Secretary of State to make a full  evidential
    response via the twin media of a witness statement, to  be  made  by  a
    properly selected witness, and disclosure of all material documents, by
    13.00 hours on 26 June 2017 [all four Applicants have now been admitted
    to the United Kingdom and have claimed asylum].

 6) The combined judgments and orders of the  Tribunal  (to  be  contrasted
    with the short form orders) are dated 12 May 2017 (in two cases) and 17
    May 2017 (in the other two).  These judgments differ according  to  the
    differing factual matrix of each individual case.   However,  in  their
    operative sections they are materially indistinguishable.  In all cases
    the Tribunal held that  the  Secretary  of  State's  initial  decisions
    (belonging to the so-called "expedited process"), the  decision  making
    process and the perpetuation of such decisions via a continuing refusal
    to admit the Applicants to the United Kingdom  were  unlawful,  in  the
    following series of respects:

      a) The Secretary of State acted unlawfully in purporting to apply  the
         Dublin Regulation and its  sister  measure  in  an  incomplete  and
         selective fashion: see AM [2017] UKUT 262 (IAC) at [93] - [115].

      b) Irrespective of  whether  the  Dublin  Regulation  and  its  sister
         instrument governed the expedited process, the Secretary  of  State
         acted unlawfully in operating a procedurally irregular  and  unfair
         decision making process: see AM at  [116]  -  [129].   This  latter
         conclusion is encapsulated in [129] of the judgment in AM:

         "To summarise, AM can lay claim to a series of procedural,  or  due
         process, protections and safeguards  enshrined  in  three  separate
         legal regimes: EU law, the Human Rights Act  1998  and  the  common
         law.  Based on the analysis, findings  and  conclusions  set  forth
         above he has been denied the safeguards identified.   The  decision
         making process resulting in the Secretary of State's  original  and
         continued refusal to admit  him  to  the  United  Kingdom  for  the
         purpose of family  reunification  with  AO  was,  for  the  reasons
         explained,   irredeemably   flawed.    It   has,   without    legal
         justification,  breached  AM's  procedural  rights.  This   applies
         irrespective  of  whether  the  Dublin  Regulation   governed   the
         expedited process. AM's challenge must succeed in consequence."

    This was prefaced by the following, in [122]:

         "The expedited process in the group of five  cases  to  which  this
         challenge  belongs  was  beset  with  procedural  deficiencies  and
         shortcomings and  egregious  unfairness.   These  contaminants  are
         either not contested or incontestable.   The  conduct  of  the  two
         interviews alone warrants a conclusion  of  procedural  unfairness.
         The materiality of these procedural frailties is  beyond  plausible
         argument.   The  acid  question   is   whether   these   procedural
         irregularities can be excused on  the  basis  of  the  humanitarian
         challenge and the need for expedition. These are the two factors on
         which the Secretary of State relies. These must  be  recognised  as
         important considerations  and  we  readily  acknowledge  the  major
         challenge the two Governments concerned faced. However, we consider
         that the exercise of balancing them  with  all  the  other  factors
         summarised below results in a resounding  negative  answer  to  the
         question posed.  Fundamentally, there was far too much at stake for
         these  isolated  and  vulnerable  children  to  warrant  any  other
         answer."

    This passage in turn was preceded by the Tribunal's  detailed  analysis
    of, and commentary upon, the decision making process, at [36] - [44].

 7) As regards the other judgments delivered it is appropriate to refer  to
    one passage only.  In SASA (JR/2476/2017), the Tribunal stated at [35]:

         "AM has decided two central issues of law which are common  to  all
         of the cases in this group namely the  application  of  the  Dublin
         Regulation to the Secretary of  State's  decision  making  and  the
         requirements of procedural fairness in the context of the expedited
         process: see [86] - [128]. The AM analyses  and  conclusions  apply
         fully to the case of SASA."

    Continuing, at [36]:

         "The principal consequences flowing from the above are as follows:

         (i)      By failing to give full effect to the Dublin Regulation
             and its sister measure, the Secretary of State acted
             unlawfully.

         This illegality included blanket exclusion of consideration of
         cousins under Article 17(2).

         ii)     SASA was unlawfully deprived of  a  series  of  procedural
             safeguards and protections.


        iii) SASA's subsequent quest for admission to  the  United  Kingdom
             under Article 8 ECHR cannot be defeated on the basis  that  he
             did not first attempt to secure the  same  outcome  under  the
             Dublin regime."


    The Tribunal added at [39]:

         "An alternative conclusion is readily  made.   If  this  Tribunal's
         primary conclusion that this Applicant (and all the others) engaged
         in a process governed by the Dublin Regulation  is  incorrect,  the
         alternative conclusion that the ZT (Syria) test expounded  in  [95]
         is nonetheless satisfied is available.  This takes as its  starting
         point the finding that the expedited process, whatever its  precise
         legal characterisation, was replete with defects and  shortcomings.
         Laudable though the aim of expedition  was  this  cannot  serve  to
         redeem the serial frailties identified in [23] - [28] above and  in
         [36] - [43] of AM.  On  this  alternative  approach,  reasoning  by
         analogy with ZT (Syria), the conclusion that the process  in  which
         the  Applicant  participated  was  "not   capable   of   responding
         adequately to [his] needs" and failed to provide an "effective  way
         of proceeding" is irresistible.  The reason for this  fundamentally
         is  that  the  process  devised  and  operated  lacked  the  scope,
         structures, depth, penetration and flexibility necessary to  ensure
         basic procedural fairness, adequate  enquiry,  sufficient  evidence
         gathering and proper fact finding.  The effect of this is that  the
         adoption of both approaches yields the same conclusion namely  that
         the "exceptionally compelling circumstances" test does not apply to
         this challenge."

 8) Having regard to the  sequence  by  which  the  inter-related  hearings
    unfolded, the most detailed consideration to the question of remedy  is
    to be found in the judgment in AM.  At [130],  the  Tribunal  described
    this as an "important" question, noting the decision of  the  Court  of
    Appeal in ZT (Syria).  This was followed by, at [131] - [133]:

         "[131]   In the present litigation context we  are  bound  to  take
               into account that the "Calais expedited process" is done and
               dusted.  The Tribunal could, in theory, formulate  a  remedy
               requiring the Secretary of State's  officials  to  seek  the
               permission of the French  authorities  for  the  purpose  of
               travelling to the reception centre in  France  where  AM  is
               accommodated and conducting a procedurally fair and  regular
               inquisition followed by all  appropriate  subsequent  steps,
               which would include thorough enquiries of OA and his  family
               circumstances.  However  this   would   entail   delay   and
               uncertainty, coupled with the imponderable of the  necessary
               co-operation of the French authorities.  It  would  also  be
               cumbersome and expensive.


         [132]    We take into account simultaneously  the  desirability  of
               any remedial order not interfering with appropriate  further
               best interests and child safeguarding checks and  enquiries.
               Given the inadequacies of  enquiry  and  procedural  defects
               which we have diagnosed, the outcome of such steps could, in
               principle, frustrate the family reunification aspirations of
               AM and OA.  While we attribute  substantial  weight  to  the
               evidence  of  the  two  protagonists,  which   we   consider
               plausible, we must recognise that this will not  necessarily
               be determinative of the ultimate outcome for both.


         [133]    The considerable delays to date must further  be  weighed.
               In addition, each segment of  continuing  delay  is  plainly
               inimical to the Applicant's best interests.   We  also  take
               into account that the immediate  practical  effect  of  AM's
               admission to the  United  Kingdom  will  be  his  absorption
               within the statutory care system,  without  prejudice  to  a
               final decision.  Thus while on the one  hand  it  would  not
               achieve immediately his goal of family reunification, on the
               other this would protect  his  best  interests  while  final
               checks and enquiries are completed. Furthermore,  this  step
               will enhance  the  prospects  of  a  fresh  decision  making
               process which will respect his right to procedural  fairness
               and  other  due  process  safeguards  and  guarantees   and,
               simultaneously,  facilitate   the   Secretary   of   State's
               corresponding legal obligation. AM's swift transfer  to  the
               United Kingdom would  also  be  a  positive  step  from  the
               perspective of his mental health."

    The Tribunal then expressed its conclusions thus, at [134]:

         "Thus there is a delicate and intensely fact sensitive  balance  to
         be struck. Having  considered  the  submissions  of  both  parties'
         representatives,  we  have  concluded,  in  the  exercise  of   our
         discretion, that the appropriate remedy is the following:


         (i)       An  Order  quashing  the  Secretary  of  State's  initial
             decision whereby the transfer of AM from France to the  United
             Kingdom in November/December 2016 was refused.


         (ii)     A declaration that the  aforementioned  decision  and  the
             Secretary of State's continuing refusal to  admit  AM  to  the
             United Kingdom are unlawful being  in  breach  of  the  Dublin
             Regulation  and  its  sister  measure  and/or  the  procedural
             dimension of Article 8 ECHR and/or the common law requirements
             of procedural fairness.


         (iii)    An Order requiring the Secretary of State:


               a) to forthwith make all necessary and immediate arrangements
                  for the transfer of AM from France to the United  Kingdom,
                  using best endeavours at all  times  and  not  later  than
                  midnight on 22 May 2017; and


               b) to begin forthwith a fresh decision making process in AM's
                  case, to be completed by the same deadline.


         (iv)     There shall be liberty to apply."






The Secretary of State's Further Decisions

 9) By four separate letters dated 02 June 2017 the  Secretary  of  State's
    officials purported to comply with  the  Tribunal's  orders.   Each  of
    these fresh decisions contains the following passage:

         "The order of Mr Justice McCloskey did not state  specifically  the
         basis on which the 'fresh lawful decision' should be made,  or  the
         particular  evidence that  should  be  considered  or  disregarded.
         Therefore,  in making this decision the SSHD has taken into account
         the evidence listed below and considered the following questions:

          1)     Whether your client would qualify for transfer  under  the
             Calais expedited process, which was based on the criteria  and
             definitions for [sic] family members, siblings  and  relatives
             set out  in  Articles  2,  8.1  and  8.2  of  the  Dublin  III
             Regulation;




          2)     Whether your client meets the  criteria  set  out  in  the
             judgment of the Court of Appeal in ZT (Syria) for transfer  to
             the UK on the basis of Article 8 of the ECHR."



    In each of these cases the decision maker proceeded to answer  the  two
    questions posed in the negative.

10) The further decisions on behalf of the  Secretary  of  State  have  the
    following additional features:

      a) A reliance on records of interviews which  this  Tribunal,  by  its
         judgments, had held were procedurally unfair.

      b)  A  repetition  of  previous   assessments   of   asserted   family
         relationships, based on the procedurally unfair interview records.

      c) A primary conclusion that Article 17 of the Dublin Regulation  does
         not apply because no "take charge" request has been  received  from
         the French authorities.

      d) An alternative conclusion that Article 17(2) does not apply in  any
         event because of rejection of asserted family relationship.

      e) A failure to carry out any considered assessment of the Applicants'
         best interests.

      f) Finally, the following noteworthy assertion:

             "The SSHD notes that the effect of the  order  to  admit  your
             client, at the same time and by the same date has the order to
             make a fresh decision on  whether  to  transfer  your  client,
             makes the practical effect of this decision null.   We  assume
             that it is your clients' intention to claim asylum on  arrival
             in the UK, following which the SSHD will  consider  the  claim
             according to the usual processes."




11) The Secretary of State's further decisions in the cases of SASA and MHA
    contained,  respectively,  one  further  ingredient  of  substance  not
    replicated in the other two cases.  In the case of SASA it is  recalled
    that the Secretary of State's  original  negative  decision  was  based
    exclusively on the fact that SASA and his United Kingdom based relative
    are in a  cousin/cousin  relationship.   However,  within  the  further
    decision there is an analysis of certain pieces of documentary evidence
    giving rise to the assertion of  "inconsistency  during  the  expedited
    process ... ", in turn yielding the conclusion that the United  Kingdom
    persons concerned are not related to SASA.  In common  with  the  other
    cases this exercise relied upon a decision making  process  which  this
    Tribunal has held to be procedurally unfair.

12) In the case  of  MHA  (JR/2492/2017)  the  judgment  of  this  Tribunal
    contains, at [27] - [32] an assessment  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
    unlawful failure to conduct a proper  assessment  of  this  Applicant's
    best interests.  The Tribunal stated inter alia, at [32]:

         "Here it  suffices  to  identify  the  following  clear  facts  and
         factors.  First, it is overwhelmingly in MHA's  best  interests  to
         escape from his current plight and ever  worsening  predicament  in
         France.  Second, there is no indication that any feature of SHA  or
         his  circumstances  contradicts  swift  reunification  of  the  two
         brothers.  Third, SHA's short  term,  medium  term  and  long  term
         future in the United Kingdom will not inevitably involve removal to
         some other country.  Fourth, there is  no  indication  that  family
         reunification cannot be  maintained  even  in  the  event  of  such
         removal. Finally, in the short to medium term  there  is  no  other
         realistic or feasible prospect of family life for this teenager."


    These passages are to be considered in conjunction with  the  following
    excerpt from [19]:

         "Each of these touchstones  ...  points  clearly  to  a  reasonable
         prediction that inter-partes consensus in SHA's  case  is  unlikely
         and that protracted litigation is a probability."

    In brief compass, in the Secretary of State's further decision there is
    no engagement with any of the above.




13) The further ingredient in the Secretary of State's new decision in  the
    case of MHA relates to his brother, SHA and emerges  in  the  following
    passages:




         "... SHA is not legally present in the UK.   The  SSHD  understands
         that the remaining authorities have  accepted  that  they  are  the
         state responsible  for  his  care  as  he  was  awarded  subsidiary
         protection in Romania on 10/07/2015.  SHA  has  previously  claimed
         asylum in the UK following illegal entry  ....   This  was  refused
         ....  [Subsequently] the Home Office erroneously dropped SHA out of
         the Third Country Unit (TCU)  process  after  incorrectly  assuming
         that SHA's removal to Romania would be processed through the Dublin
         III regulation.  As such, the SSHD incorrectly identified that  she
         had missed the six month procedural deadline  for  processing  such
         removals.  When it came to light that  the  TCU  drop  out  was  an
         error, the SSHD's  position  is  that  she  had  no  obligation  to
         substantively consider SHA's asylum claim within the UK.   SHA  was
         informed  of  TCU's  intention  to  remove  him   to   Romania   on
         12/05/2017."



    This is followed by an apparent assertion of receipt from Romania of  a
    "transfer acceptance under the readmission agreement dated  04/04/2016"
    and the following passage:

         "SHA has now been served with a fresh decision refusing his  asylum
         claim ...

         The Romanian authorities have confirmed that they will  accept  the
         transfer of SHA to Romania  under  the  readmission  agreement  and
         efforts are being made to effect this."



    All of the foregoing gives rise to the Secretary of State's  conclusion
    that MHA's case is  non-compliant  with  Article  8(1)  of  the  Dublin
    Regulation coupled with the further conclusion that it would not be  in
    MHA's best interests to transfer to  the  United  Kingdom  given  SHA's
    impending removal to Romania.




First Issue: Breach of the Tribunal's Orders?

14) Bearing in mind the Secretary of State's application to  set  aside  or
    extinguish the Tribunal's case management order of 14 June 2017  -  see
    [3] above - I refer at this juncture to Mr Keith's  submission  that  a
    more generous revised timetable would enable the Secretary of State  to
    adduce evidence of why the decisions of 02 June 2017 are in  the  terms
    in which they appear.   Having regard to the  substantive  progress  in
    three of the four cases and the most recent order made in the  case  of
    MHA - see [5] above - I extended the relevant time limit: from 16  June
    to 30 June 2017.

15) However, as I ruled orally at the hearing, I was unable to identify any
    merit in the Respondent's request for an  extended  period  to  respond
    substantively to the Applicant's "liberty to  apply"  applications.   I
    accepted Ms Kilroy's submission that any reworking/enlargement  of  the
    Secretary of State's further decision letters dated 02 June 2017  would
    probably be in conflict with the line of authority exemplified by  R  v
    Westminster County Council, ex parte Ermakov [1995] EWCA  Civ  42.   Ms
    Kilroy's  submissions  further  reflected  the  strikingly  faint   and
    unparticularised  terms  in  which  Mr   Keith,   clearly   acting   on
    instructions, had developed the Secretary of State's applications.

16) Mr Keith, loyally, also sought to stand over the vague hint in each  of
    the further decision letters that the judgments may not have been fully
    understood by the officials who proceeded to make the further decisions
    in  purported  compliance.   This  submission  invites  the   following
    riposte:

      i) This is an issue in  respect  whereof  suitable  witness  statement
         evidence might in principle have been admissible.  There is none.

     ii) The Secretary of State has at all material times  been  represented
         by a legal team of counsel and solicitors.

    iii) In the post-judgment phase the Secretary of State's legal team have
         not been slow to attack (some might say disparage)  the  Tribunal's
         judgments and orders.   These  incursions  have  not  included  any
         suggestion  that  they  are  unclear  or  otherwise  difficult   to
         understand.

     iv) The Secretary of State has invoked  the  mechanism  of  liberty  to
         apply for a variety of purposes: it has at no time been invoked for
         the  purpose  of  seeking  clarification  or  elaboration  of   the
         Tribunal's orders and judgments.

17) It is appropriate at this juncture to highlight one  particular  aspect
    of the Tribunal's judgment in AM.  At [133], debating the merits  of  a
    remedy mandating AM's admission to the  United  Kingdom,  the  Tribunal
    stated:


         "....  This step will enhance the prospects  of  a  fresh  decision
         making process which will respect his right to procedural  fairness
         and   other   due   process   safeguards   and   guarantees    and,
         simultaneously, facilitate the Secretary of  State's  corresponding
         legal obligation."


    The simple, but startling, fact is that in making the  fresh  decisions
    required by the second element of the Tribunal's substantive order, the
    Secretary of  State's  officials  have  ignored  this  passage  in  its
    totality.




18) To the above I add the following.  It is a fact that the  Secretary  of
    State did not, in the wake of the Tribunal's judgments and orders, seek
    any illumination or elaboration.  I consider that  none  was  required.
    The Tribunal, in its judgments, found that the Secretary of  State  had
    acted unlawfully  in  a  series  of  clearly  identified  respects.   I
    consider that, in its formulation of remedy, it was not  necessary  for
    the Tribunal to engage in an exercise of repetition.  The Secretary  of
    State, arguably  the  most  experienced  and  prolific  of  all  public
    authority litigants in the United Kingdom and surrounded and  bolstered
    by a posse of legal advisers, did not on any reasonable showing require
    this  further  cosseting  in  the  text  of  the  Tribunal's  judgment.
    Furthermore, the Secretary of State's representatives did not delay  in
    preparing an application for permission to appeal  and  were  under  no
    evident handicap in formulating their grounds.

19) Notwithstanding, it was at all times open to the Secretary of  State  -
    under the rubric of "liberty to apply" - to return to the Tribunal  for
    the purpose of receiving any desired clarification  and/or  elaboration
    of the Tribunal's four Orders to facilitate the  Secretary  of  State's
    constitutional duty of obedience and compliance.   The  Tribunal  would
    have viewed this as a responsible step as well as a mark of respect for
    the judiciary by the executive arm of the separation  of  powers  which
    underpins  the  constitutional  arrangements  of  the  United  Kingdom.
    However, this step was not taken.

    First Conclusion

20) The further decisions of 02 June 2017 constitute, in  my  judgement,  a
    hopelessly inadequate attempt to comply with this Tribunal's orders and
    judgments. In its four judgments, the Tribunal spelled out clearly  the
    legal  shortcomings  and  deficiencies  in  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision making  processes.   It  held  that  these  were  procedurally
    irregular and unfair.  Its conclusions were reflected  in  its  orders.
    In the context of the present applications, the spotlight falls on  the
    second provision of each of the orders: see [4](2) above. In short  the
    Secretary  of  State,  duly  educated  and  guided  by  the  Tribunal's
    judgments, was ordered to embark upon and complete  a  further,  lawful
    decision making process culminating in fresh decisions.  Self-evidently
    such process and its outcomes would have to  address  and  rectify  the
    preceding unlawful exercises.

21) As [130] - [134] of the judgment in AM in particular  makes  clear  the
    exercise of the Tribunal's discretion in the matter of remedy in  these
    cases, was far from straightforward.  The  Tribunal's  overarching  aim
    was, as ever, to devise a remedy that was practical and effective.  The
    Tribunal is at a loss  to  understand  why  the  Secretary  of  State's
    officials did not appreciate that this required of them, as a  minimum,
    to devise a new procedurally fair decision making process  which  would
    not repeat the errors and shortcomings of  its  predecessors:  indecent
    haste, cutting  corners,  manifestly  inadequate  question  and  answer
    interviews, no - or no adequate - consultation and communication  among
    all concerned in the process and a lack  of  proper  enquiry.  None  of
    these public law defects and misdemeanours has been  rectified  in  the
    Secretary of State's new decisions.  It is evident that each  of  these
    decisions was the product of a purely  paper,  static  and  introverted
    exercise.  The conclusion that these decisions are  in  breach  of  the
    Tribunal's orders follows inexorably.

22) This conclusion is a cause of profound disappointment for the Tribunal.
    In  evaluating  why  this  has  occurred  the  Tribunal  cannot   avoid
    reflecting upon the way in which this most recent series of  Article  8
    ECHR/Dublin Regulation cases, which continue to  grow  slowly  in  this
    jurisdiction, has been contested on behalf of the Secretary  of  State.
    In [91] - [92] of its judgment in AM the Tribunal stated:

         "[91] In a context where there  have  been  repeated  requests  for
         disclosure, in both this case and the others, the evidence does not
         include any case notes, file notes, emails or other contemporaneous
         records.  Nor is there any material documenting  the  training  and
         instructions, if any, given to interviewers and interpreters,  with
         one limited exception which seems directed more to decision makers.
          Furthermore, the evidential gaps thereby created have not, in many
         material instances, been rectified through the  medium  of  witness
         statements.  Given the major procedural dimension of this  judicial
         review challenge and the absence of any agreement or concession  on
         various material factual issues, this is one of those cases  where,
         it becomes necessary for the  Tribunal  to  find  certain  material
         facts,  as  was  recognised  by  Lord  Brown  in  Tweed  v  Parades
         Commission [2006] UKHL 53 at [52]-[57].  This exercise will  extend
         to considering whether inferences arising from the absence  of  the
         kind of materials noted may reasonably be made.  Linked to this  is
         the Secretary of State's duty of candour.



         [92] It is appropriate to recall  the  decision  of  the  Court  of
         Appeal in R (Das) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 45.   In  that  case,  the
         Court drew attention to a striking gap in  the  evidential  matrix,
         namely "the absence of any evidence on behalf of the  Secretary  of
         State before the Court below or before this Court  to  explain  her
         decision making in this  case":  see  [79].   The  Appellate  Court
         approved the principal formulated  by  the  first  instance  Court,
         namely inferences adverse to the  Secretary  of  State's  case  may
         properly be drawn in such circumstances.  The following passage  in
         the first instance judgment, at [21], is especially noteworthy:

            "The basis for drawing adverse inferences of fact  against  the
            Secretary of State  in  judicial  review  proceedings  will  be
            particularly strong, because in such proceedings the  Secretary
            of State is subject to the stringent and well known  obligation
            owed to the Court by a public authority facing a  challenge  to
            its decision ...."

         The obligation to which the Judge was  referring  is  the  duty  of
         candour.  This duty was considered in extenso in  the  decision  of
         this Tribunal in R (Mahmood) v SSHD [2014] UKUT 00439 at  [15]  ff.
         The duty of candour was reviewed more  recently  by  the  Court  of
         Appeal in R (Khan) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 416: see especially  [35]
         - [45] per Beatson LJ.  Lord Walker's succinct formulation  of  the
         duty leaves nothing unsaid.  Every respondent public authority  has
         a duty:


            "....  to co-operate and to make candid disclosure  by  way  of
            affidavit of the relevant facts and (so far  as  they  are  not
            apparent  from  contemporaneous  documents  which   have   been
            disclosed) the reasoning behind the decision challenged in  the
            judicial review proceedings ..."

         See Belize Alliance of Conservation Non-Government Organisations  v
         Department of the Environment [2004] UKPC 6 at [86]."



23) The  Secretary  of  State's  entrenched  practice  in  this  sphere  of
    litigation of failing to spontaneously disclose material documents  has
    been a matter of continuing concern  to  the  Tribunal.   It  has  also
    become a hallmark of the post-Orders phase during which  the  Secretary
    of State, invoking the liberty to apply mechanism, has been  driven  to
    apply to the Tribunal for extensions of the time limits  prescribed  in
    its principal orders.  The one exception to this occurred in  the  case
    of MHA when certain documents were attached to  the  witness  statement
    grounding the Secretary of State's application to the Tribunal  for  an
    Order extending time.  However, these documents, which took the form of
    email exchanges between the Secretary of State's  officials  and  their
    French counterparts, were so heavily redacted that some  of  them  were
    virtually unintelligible.  In these circumstances, it became  necessary
    for the Tribunal  to  order  disclosure  to  it  of  the  documents  in
    unredacted form, accompanied by  a  witness  statement  explaining  the
    reasons for the redactions.  I consider that it should  not  have  been
    necessary for the Tribunal to go to these lengths.




24) This discrete conclusion is reinforced by the witness  statement  of  a
    GLD lawyer provided to  the  Tribunal  in  compliance  with  the  order
    mentioned immediately above.  In this  the  lawyer  explains  that  the
    extensive redactions had two  main  purposes,  namely  to  protect  the
    personal data of the authors and  recipients  of  the  various  written
    communications and to delete material  bearing  on  the  other  related
    cases on the ground of relevance.  Finally, the lawyer explains that as
    regards one of the documents exhibited - there were 25  in  total  -  a
    redaction was  made  with  a  view  to  protecting  legally  privileged
    material.


25)  It forms no part  of  the  Tribunal's  function,  at  this  stage,  to
    evaluate the sustainability of these explanations. The  real  point  is
    that in fulfilment of the Secretary of State's duty of candour  to  the
    Tribunal  and  the  specific  duties  of  co-operation  and  assistance
    enshrined in the overriding objective, these explanations  should  have
    been proactively proffered in the body of the witness  statement.  They
    are uncomplicated and compact  in  nature  and  this  could  have  been
    achieved in the span of a couple of sentences.   Furthermore,  ideally,
    the Secretary of State should have sought the Tribunal's  authorisation
    in advance of compiling  the  initial  witness  statement  and  heavily
    redacted exhibits, the more so in circumstances where the Secretary  of
    State was seeking a favourable exercise of judicial discretion.  All of
    this is singularly regrettable.




26) In another witness statement filed on behalf of the Secretary of State,
    the acting  Head  of  the  UKVI  European  Intake  Unit,  in  purported
    justification of the non-disclosure of documents  which  satisfied  the
    tests of prima facie existence and prima facie relevance, averred:


         "....  Officials do not routinely keep minutes/attendance notes  of
         every telephone call with French operational counterparts."



    This prompts two responses.  First, having regard to the context of all
    cases belonging to this sphere of litigation,  it  is,  as  a  minimum,
    surprising that the importance of the cases, coupled  with  the  solemn
    constitutional duty of  compliance  with  the  Tribunal's  orders,  are
    evidently not considered to be of sufficient  gravity  to  warrant  the
    simple step of making notes of  material  verbal  communications.  Some
    independent observers might, legitimately, find this claim  perplexing.
    Others might wonder whether this asserted non-recording of contemporary
    communications is harmonious  with  Government  policy,  procedure  and
    guidance. The second  observation  is  that  the  deponent  hints  that
    records of this kind are sometimes generated: but no  justification  is
    proffered for failing to routinely and spontaneously  disclose  same  -
    and in full - to the Tribunal.

27) This collection of cases has displayed yet another disturbing  feature.
    In  the  wake  of  its  judgments  the  Tribunal,   following   careful
    reflection, found itself obliged to take two  relatively  unprecedented
    steps.   First,  reflecting  its  concerns  about  the  aggressive  and
    disparaging  nature  of  the  Secretary  of  State's  application   for
    permission to appeal, it considered it necessary to respond by  drawing
    attention to the unfortunate terms in which parts  of  the  application
    were  couched.  Second,  more  disturbing,  having  received  from  the
    Applicants' representatives a Note to the Administrative Court Judge in
    Citizens UK v SSHD prepared by counsel for the Secretary of State,  the
    Tribunal considered it necessary  to  write  to  the  Government  Legal
    Department in the terms of the letter and enclosure  appended  to  this
    judgment.  These documents speak for themselves.





28) The Tribunal received a response from the Government  Legal  Department
    to the aforementioned letter. Its terms were cursory  and  perfunctory.
    It neither  acknowledged  nor  engaged  with  the  Tribunal's  profound
    concerns about the Note to the Administrative Court.  It  contained  no
    recognition that issues of professional  misconduct  could  potentially
    arise. It was not written by the Treasury Solicitor.  The response  did
    accept (inevitably) that the Tribunal's letter would have to be brought
    to the attention of the Administrative Court Judge.



29) There is another feature of this cohort of cases which I must  mention.
    In most of these cases the Tribunal has received large swathes of inter-
    partes communications.  These have related to all manner of  procedural
    and interlocutory issues. I consider that the GLD  communications  have
    in many instances been antithetical to the ethos  of  judicial  review.
    They were frequently  inappropriately  confrontational  and  defensive,
    resonant of a (hopefully)  bygone  era  of  private  litigation  trench
    warfare. Linked to this, there is an unavoidable concern that excessive
    time, effort and energy have been invested in  communications  of  this
    kind when the focus should more properly have been  on  complying  with
    reasonable requests for disclosure of documents and  kindred  requests.
    This, in turn, has diverted the resources of both the Applicants' legal
    representatives and the Tribunal into  unnecessary  contentious  issues
    and areas. All of this was pre-eminently avoidable.




30) Most recently, in the latest of the cases belonging to this cohort, the
    Tribunal has found it necessary to say the following:




        "[52]    I have received,  and  considered,  the  parties'  further
                 written representations mooted above.   On  behalf  of  the
                 Applicant, there is no challenge, at  this  stage,  to  the
                 order  being  formulated   in   the   terms   provisionally
                 indicated. The only issue of substance raised is  that  the
                 order should include a  specific  clause  requiring  active
                 communication and co-operation on the part of the Secretary
                 of State with the Applicant's representatives.  The purpose
                 of this is expressed in the following terms:


                       "...  to  ensure  that  both  parties  have  relevant
                       information to assist with facilitating transfer  and
                       so that the vulnerable Applicant is kept informed  of
                       progress."


                 This is trenchantly opposed on behalf of the  Secretary  of
                 State.  This dogged resistance has become a feature of  all
                 cases belonging to this cohort.  It is a further reflection
                 of the  way  in  which  the  defence  of  these  cases  has
                 habitually been conducted by the Secretary of State.  [This
                 issue is addressed fully  in  the  Tribunal's  "liberty  to
                 apply" judgment in AM, supra.] Furthermore,  it  airbrushes
                 provisions to this effect which I have included in 'liberty
                 to apply' orders made in ease of  the  Secretary  of  State
                 extending  time  limits  for  admission  of  the   claimant
                 concerned. I am frankly at  a  loss  to  understand  why  a
                 provision of this kind is resisted so doggedly.   The  more
                 so when experience of this litigation shows that the active
                 involvement of,  and  reasonable  communication  with,  the
                 claimant's  legal  representatives  and  others,  including
                 charitable organisations  and  volunteers  sur  place,  can
                 positively enhance compliance with the  Tribunal's  orders.
                 Furthermore, there is no evidence that  mutual  cooperation
                 and communication of this kind can have a  negative  effect
                 on compliance.


          [53]    I reject the submission that the inclusion of a  provision
                 of this case in  the  Tribunal's  orders  would  impose  an
                 "onerous"  burden  on  the  Secretary   of   State.    This
                 submission is made  in  the  terms  of  a  bare  assertion,
                 without particularisation.  Furthermore, it  is  confounded
                 by what I have stated above. I also reject  the  submission
                 that a provision  of  this  kind  would  be  "unclear".   I
                 consider that mature, adult litigants who have a keen sense
                 of the rule of law  should  not  require  kindergarten-type
                 elaboration.    Good sense, good faith  and  reasonableness
                 are the three stand out ingredients  in  complying  with  a
                 provision of this  kind.   In  the  world  of  contemporary
                 litigation, there should be no requirement  for  subsequent
                 judicial monitoring.  This is, however, available to  cater
                 for  something  unpredicted  or  unforeseeable.    In   the
                 abstract, and given  the  Tribunal's  experience  of  these
                 cases, it would be highly surprising if the imposition of a
                 requirement  on  the  part  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
                 officials  and   legal   representatives   to   engage   in
                 appropriate  communication  with  the   Applicant's   legal
                 representatives, in the interests  of  securing  compliance
                 with a judicial order, were to  prove  "onerous".  However,
                 should  this   expectation,   for   whatever   reason,   be
                 unfulfilled,  the  mechanism  of  liberty  to  apply   will
                 accommodate any need for judicial re-examination."

    [AR v SSHD, unreported, JR/6014/2017]


    These passages require no elaboration.



31) All of the foregoing has unfolded in a public law ligation context.  In
    all of the cases concerned, the Secretary of State has been subject  to
    -


           "...  a very high duty .....  to assist the court with full  and
           accurate explanations of all the facts relevant to the issue the
           Court must decide."

    [R (Quark) v Secretary of State for Foreign  and  Commonwealth  Affairs
    [2002] EWCA Civ 1409 at [50]].


    The  duty  imposed  on  every  public  authority  in  judicial   review
    proceedings to make disclosure of material documents is a reflection of
    the public law character of the proceedings.  There is  no  lis  inter-
    partes, in marked contrast with private law litigation.  Furthermore, I
    consider that the conduct of  judicial  review  proceedings  by  public
    authorities should  at  all  times  be  guided  by  the  concept  of  a
    partnership with the court.


32) In Tweed v Parades Commission for Northern Ireland [2006] UKHL 53, Lord
    Bingham of Cornhill stated at [2]:


         "The disclosure of documents in  civil  litigation  has  long  been
         recognised throughout the common  law world as a valuable means  of
         eliciting the truth and thus  of  enabling  courts  to  base  their
         decisions on a sure foundation of fact."

    This  applies  a  fortiori  in  judicial   review.    Furthermore,   in
    contemporary judicial review, proceedings are conducted on the  footing
    that  the  demonstration  of  some  contradiction,   inconsistency   or
    incompleteness in the respondent's affidavits (witness  statements)  is
    no longer a pre-requisite to ordering disclosure:  per  Lord  Brown  in
    Tweed at [56].  Finally, as Lord Brown emphasised at [57], courts  have
    for some time expected respondents to routinely  exhibit  all  material
    documents to their affidavits/witness statements.

33) I conclude, reluctantly, that the Secretary of State's conduct  of  all
    of these cases has been inappropriate.  It has failed to adhere to  the
    high standards expected of government departments  in  judicial  review
    litigation.  The allegiances owed by the  Secretary  of  State  to  the
    court in public law proceedings arise out of a species of  partnership.
    The essential tenets of this partnership are that the public  authority
    concerned will, figuratively, play its cards face up and the court,  in
    turn, will be mindful of its supervisory (not appellate)  jurisdiction,
    will accord such deference as is appropriate according to  the  context
    and will fashion remedies which respect  the  differing  roles  of  the
    public authority as primary decision maker and the court as supervisory
    judicial authority.  All of this  is  embedded  in  the  separation  of
    powers and the rule of law itself.

34) In one of the liberty to apply orders the  Tribunal,  acceding  to  the
    Secretary of State's application for a further extension of time,  said
    the following, at [3]:

         "I emphasise:

         (a)      This is, once again, a backstop, not a vague  aspirational
             target; and

         (b)      Active communication and cooperation between the  parties'
             representatives is of paramount importance."

    I consider that, having regard to the  governing  principles  expounded
    above, it should not have been necessary for this Tribunal  to  express
    itself in these terms.  That said, one month later there is no evidence
    that the Secretary of State has absorbed the  central  message  of  the
    order. Quite the contrary: there has been dogged resistance to frequent
    and proactive communication and co-operation with the Applicant's legal
    representatives and the  agencies,  charities  et  al  with  whom  they
    typically interact and much time has been  invested  in  purporting  to
    justify this. Stated  succinctly,  the  Secretary  of  State,  in  this
    discrete respect, has defied the Tribunal's order.   This  is  another,
    freestanding matter of profound concern.

35) I am, reluctantly but unhesitatingly, driven to the conclusion that the
    Secretary of State has not taken either  the  Tribunal  or  its  orders
    seriously enough.




Second Conclusion: The Reach of 'Liberty to Apply'

36) The question is very simply framed: in the circumstances prevailing, is
    it incumbent upon the Applicants to issue  fresh  judicial  proceedings
    for the purpose of securing an order declaring that  the  Secretary  of
    State has failed to comply with the Tribunal's principal orders: or can
    they invoke the "liberty to apply" provision?

37) The mechanism of liberty to apply is a valuable adjunct to the  court's
    powers.  Unsurprisingly it has its  origins  in  judge  made  law  and,
    therefore, belongs to the inherent jurisdiction of the High Court.  See
    Halsburys Laws of England, Vol 12A (2015), paragraph 1602.  The authors
    of The White Book 2017, Volume 2, observe (at  paragraph  3.1.13)  that
    where an order makes provision for liberty to apply -

         "....  The court making the order  does  not  lose  seisin  of  the
         matter: the inclusion of a liberty to apply indicates  that  it  is
         foreseen that further applications are  likely  in  the  course  of
         implementing the decision."



    While, as I have noted, this would formerly have  been  viewed  through
    the lens of the inherent jurisdiction of the  High  Court,  the  modern
    approach is to apply the court's  general  power  of  case  management,
    giving effect to the primacy of the overriding objective.

38) A survey of the relatively few reported cases which have considered the
    scope  of  "liberty  to  apply"  reveals  that  bright  line  rules  or
    principles do not abound.  One  of  the  clearest  principles  is  that
    liberty to apply serves to "work out" the order of  the  court,  rather
    than  vary  it  (Halsbury,  op  cit).  In  the  jurisprudence  of   the
    Commonwealth, there is a useful synopsis in Koh v Koh [2002] 3 SLR 643,
    per Choo JC:

           "The 'liberty to apply' order is a judicial device  intended  to
           supplement the main orders in form and convenience only so  that
           the main orders may be carried out.  Within  its  ambit,  errors
           and omissions which do not affect  the  substance  of  the  main
           order may be corrected or augmented, but nothing must be done to
           vary or change the nature or substance of the main orders ....

           What amounts to a  variation  depends  on  the  context  of  the
           individual case."



    The Judge also spoke of "a further order to give effect to the original
    order".  All of this is  consonant  with  the  leading  United  Kingdom
    cases, it being sufficient to refer to Cristel v Cristel  [1951]  2  KB
    725.

39) This  being  quintessentially  a  matter  belonging  to  the  realm  of
    procedural law, in any case raising questions concerning the scope  and
    limitations of liberty to apply in a given order I consider that regard
    should also be had  to  the  applicable  provisions  enshrined  in  the
    overriding  objective.   These  include,  inexhaustively,   expedition,
    finality, certainty and saving costs.

40) The Upper Tribunal, of course, cannot lay claim to the fund of residual
    powers lying within the inherent jurisdiction of the  High  Court.  The
    bridge between the powers of these two judicial organs is  provided  by
    section 25 of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 which,  in
    material part, states:

         "(1)     In relation to the  matters  mention  in  (2),  the  Upper
             Tribunal -

             (a) Has, in England and Wales or in Northern Ireland, the same
                  powers, rights, privileges and authority of the High Court
                  ....

         (2)      The matters are -

               a) the attendance and examination of witnesses,




               b) the production and inspection of documents, and



               c) all other  matters  incidental  to  the  Upper  Tribunal's
                  functions."


    [My emphasis]

    I consider that section 25(2)(c) has the effect that the Upper Tribunal
    may exercise the same "liberty to apply" powers as are  exercisable  by
    the High Court.  To the extent that any reinforcement of this  analysis
    is required, section 25(3) provides that section 25 (1) "...  shall not
    be taken ... to limit any power to make Tribunal procedure rules"  and,
    within the body of the latter, rule 5 provides that the Upper  Tribunal
    may regulate its own procedure, subject to the provisions of  the  2007
    Act and this includes, per rule 5(2), a power to ".... give a direction
    in relation to the conduct or  disposal  of  proceedings  at  any  time
    ....".  Unsurprisingly, no argument to the contrary  was  presented  on
    behalf of the Secretary of State.

41) I return to the present context of the Tribunal's order requiring:

         "(1)     The Respondent shall admit [the Applicant] to  the  United
             Kingdom forthwith using best endeavours at all material  times
             and at latest by midnight on 22 May 2017;

         (2)      The Respondent shall begin the process of making  a  fresh
             lawful decision forthwith and shall complete that  process  at
             latest by midnight on 22 May 2017."

    The Applicants are seeking a declaration that the  Secretary  of  State
    has not complied with (2).  At  the  time  when  this  application  was
    initiated, the Secretary of State had failed to comply  with  the  time
    limit specified in (1)  of  the  Tribunal's  several  Orders  and  had,
    timeously, sought and received variations from the Tribunal whereby the
    time  limit  was  extended.   The  Tribunal's  principal  Orders  were,
    carefully and deliberately, framed in less than  absolute  terms  which
    contemplated that the Secretary of State might  be  driven  to  seeking
    extensions of time.  It was implicit  in  the  orders  that  reasonable
    extensions of time would be granted  if  good  reason  to  do  so  were
    demonstrated.  In each of these cases, the Tribunal has been  persuaded
    to extend time on the basis that good reason  for  doing  so  has  been
    established.  It follows, logically, that there has been no  breach  by
    the Secretary of State of paragraph (1) of the principal Orders.

42) However, paragraph (2) of the Tribunal's principal Orders is in  marked
    contrast with paragraph (1).  In particular, it does  not  contain  the
    qualification  of  "using  best  endeavours"  and  it  is  couched   in
    relatively monochromatic terms.  For the reasons given in [14]  -  [35]
    above, I have concluded that the  Secretary  of  State  has  failed  to
    comply with the  Tribunal's  orders  in  this  respect.  I  am  further
    satisfied that an application for a declaratory order to this effect is
    harmonious with the principled framework expounded above, fundamentally
    because it belongs to the realm of the outworkings  of  the  Tribunal's
    orders  and,  simultaneously,  promotes  several  of   the   principles
    enshrined in the overriding objective.

    Order

43) The foregoing analysis and  conclusions  give  rise  to  the  following
    Order:

    The Tribunal hereby declares that the Secretary of State has unlawfully
    failed to comply with paragraph (2) of the Tribunal's principal  orders
    in these cases.


    Costs


44) I discern no reason for departing from  the  general  rule  that  costs
    follow the event, the parties having had an  opportunity  to  formulate
    representations on this discrete issue.   Accordingly,  the  Respondent
    shall pay the Applicant's reasonable costs of this further application,
    to be assessed in default of agreement.  Further, the Applicant's costs
    shall be assessed to reflect their status of publicly funded litigants.

Postscript

45) Following circulation of this  judgment  in  draft,  with  all  of  the
    Applicants having been  admitted  to  the  United  Kingdom  and  having
    submitted claims for asylum, at the hand down stage  the  Tribunal  was
    informed of the Secretary of State's intention to make fresh  decisions
    in all cases whereby the discretion to examine the  said  claims  under
    Article 17(1) of the Dublin Regulation will be exercised. The Tribunal,
    under the  aegis  of  liberty  to  apply,  was  asked  to  comment,  if
    considered appropriate.

46) I would observe that, for a variety of reasons, this was a  responsible
    step to take.

47) Any mandatory order is susceptible to an application for  variation  or
    discharge. I shall treat the Secretary of State's notification as  such
    an application. Having  afforded  the  Applicants'  representatives  an
    opportunity to make representations, being satisfied that  the  earlier
    mandatory orders have served their purpose and that no identifiable end
    will be served by their perpetuation, the  Tribunal  hereby  discharges
    the mandatory orders (1) and (2) noted in [4] above.  I  add  that  the
    course proposed by the Secretary  of  State  noted  in  [45]  seems  in
    principle  appropriate  and  will  be  facilitated  by  the  Tribunal's
    aforementioned discharge order.

48) This litigation saga hereby reaches its terminus, I trust.









       Signed:
                    The Honourable Mr Justice McCloskey
                    President of the Upper Tribunal
                    Immigration and Asylum Chamber


       Dated:     06 September 2017







Sent to the Applicant, Respondent and any interested party / the
Applicant's, Respondent's and any interested party's solicitors on (date):
Home Office Ref:


                                 APPENDIX 1




I  write  to  you  on  behalf  of  the  President  of  the  Upper   Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber), the Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey.

The Tribunal has already drawn to your attention the  inappropriate  content
of the Respondent's Notice of Appeal in  its  Notice  dated  27  May  [first
attachment].  It does not find your response satisfactory.

The President has now seen, and considered, the Respondent's "Note"  to  the
trial judge in Citizens' UK v SSHD.  He is gravely concerned by much of  its
content.   This   document   contains   various   assertions   of   judicial
impropriety, a lack of judicial impartiality and equality  of  treatment  of
the  parties  and  improper  purpose.   It  is   significantly   inaccurate,
incomplete  and  unbalanced.   It   contains,   in   substance,   collateral
allegations  of  judicial  misconduct,  casting  grave  aspersions  on   the
impartiality and integrity of the President  and  another  senior  judge  of
this Chamber.

Elaboration  and  particularisation  of  the  above  can  be  found  in  the
insertions in the version of the Note attached [second attachment].

The President notes that the central, clearly expressed purpose of the  Note
is to invite the trial judge  in  a  court  of  coordinate  jurisdiction  to
attribute minimal, or no, weight to the  judgments  of  this  Chamber.   The
Respondent has sought to achieve this goal through the medium of a  document
suffering from the multiple imperfections noted above and elaborated in  the
second attachment.

This, self-evidently, is a matter of profound concern.

A further matter of concern is that, so far as this  Chamber  is  aware,  no
steps  have  been  taken  to  withdraw  or  rectify  the  document  in   the
circumstances of the exchange noted in the second paragraph hereof.

An additional, discrete concern is that this document  has  been  created  -
and  has  been  neither  withdrawn  nor   significantly   rectified   -   in
circumstances where there is an unresolved application to this  Chamber  for
permission to appeal to the  Court  of  Appeal  in  AM.   Furthermore,  this
document will, predictably, be paraded before the Court  of  Appeal  in  any
application for permission to appeal or any substantive appeal.

The  steps  requiring  to  be  taken  immediately  to  rectify  this  highly
regrettable state   of affairs are obvious.

It is assumed that a matter of this gravity will  be  immediately  drawn  to
the attention of the Treasury Solicitor.

Finally, you will, presumably, forward this to both counsel  concerned  who,
in   turn,   will   doubtless   wish   to   consider   their    professional
responsibilities.

This letter is copied to all parties' representatives.













___________________________________________________________________________



                                 APPENDIX  2





      NOTE: the italicised passages in this document are the Tribunal's
                                 insertions






                 IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE





                             CO 5255/2016





                        QUEEN'S BENCH DIVISION





                       ADMINISTRATIVE COURT






 IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW BETWEEN


            THE QUEEN (On the application of [pic]  CITIZENS UK)

Claimant

                                 - and[pic]

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

Defendant


               DEFENDANT'S NOTE ON THE UPPER TRIBUNAL'S

                      DECISIONS IN AMAND RELATED CASES






Introduction


 1. This Note is served  on  behalf  of  the  Defendant  and  addresses  the
    Tribunal's decisions in the cases of AM, and SS, which were handed  down
    very shortly before the start of the hearing in Citizens UK.


 2. The Court is of course entitled to have regard to those decisions of the
    Tribunal, but for the reasons set out below,  it  is  submitted  that  a
    particularly high degree of caution needs be  applied  when  considering
    the Tribunal's views in these cases.  Above  all,  the  Defendant  [pic]
    submits that the Citizens UK case in the High Court is  the  appropriate
    forum for careful consideration of the evidence and issues in this case,
    and that in the particular circumstances of this case the  Court  should
    consider these issues for itself, and it would be  unsafe  to  make  any
    assumption that the Tribunal's view  of  these  issues  was  a  fair  or
    reasonable starting point.

 3. The SSHD is actively seeking to appeal the Tribunal's decisions,  and  a
    copy of the  application  for  permission  to  appeal  is  attached  for
    reference.



Submissions


 4. The context in which the Tribunal made its decisions is important.  This
    claim (Citizens UK) was issued  in  October  2016,  and  the  Claimant's
    Amended Grounds (where they first  sought  to  challenge  the  expedited
    process) were served in mid-January. At the hearing before Lang J on  28
    February 2017,  when  permission  was  granted,  there  was  substantial
    argument about the timetable. It was agreed by the Court that  the  case
    required expedition, but  the  necessity  of  the  SSHD  having  a  fair
    opportunity to present her evidence was also recognised. [pic]Expedition
    was ordered, and the timetable that was set  provided  for  a  three-day
    hearing [pic] (including a reading day) beginning 22 May. The  SSHD  has
    put in a very considerable amount of work to prepare the SSHD's response
    in that timescale, and the Court has as a result the  detailed  evidence
    before it from very  senior  officials  responsible  for  the  expedited
    process.

 5. The Tribunal claims on the other hand were issued only after  the  grant
    of permission in Citizens UK, and not until 13 March 2017. The SSHD made
    an application to have them stayed pending the imminent hearing in  this
    case, but by its judgment dated 29 March 2017, the Tribunal refused that
    application, considering  that  to  wait  until  after  the  hearing  in
    Citizens  UK  "would  impose  a  limitation  serious  impacting  on  the
    Applicants'  right  of  access  to  a  court",  and  that  the  Tribunal
    "reject[s] the argument of substantial judicial overlap  [pic](paragraph
    28 of the judgment on the stay).




    i) The whole of  the  Tribunal's  decision  refusing  the  Secretary  of
       State's stay application is  available  to  be  read.   At  [23]  the
       Tribunal identified certain guiding principles.  At [24] it stated:




          "A   stay   application   will   require   especially   compelling
          justification in a case qualifying for urgent  judicial  decision.
          The cases of  unaccompanied,  isolated  teenagers  marooned  in  a
          foreign  land  suffering  from  major  psychological  trauma   and
          seeking, via litigation, the  swiftest  reunion  possible  with  a
          separated family member will always, in principle, have a powerful
          claim to judicial prioritisation."




       At [25] the Tribunal undertook the exercise of  balancing  "...   the
       avoidance of excessive cost, the unnecessary  expenditure  of  finite
       public resources, the right of every litigant to expeditious justice,
       the minimising of  litigation  delays,  managing  the  interface  and
       overlap between two judicial organisations, the allocation of limited
       judicial resources and, broadly, the  convenience  of  all  concerned
       .... [and] ...   the  ages,  vulnerability  and  plight  of  the  two
       litigants ....




       Fairness,  reasonableness  and  proportionality  loom  large  in   an
       exercise of this kind."




       The Tribunal's reasoning and conclusions are  set  forth  in  [26]  -
       [28].




       All of the above is blithely ignored by the Respondent.

 6. However, despite the reasoning that there was not  significant  judicial
    overlap, the Tribunal then subsequently proceeded to admit into evidence
    (against the objection of the SSHD) all of the  evidence  from  Citizens
    UK, and  ultimately  to  decide  the  lawfulness  of  the  decisions  by
    reference to some of that material. Indeed the Tribunal  made  clear  at
    the hearing of the AM case on 5 May  2017  that  it  wished  counsel  to
    address it on the procedural aspects  of  the  claim.  Given  that  this
    inevitably would involve the same issues at the Citizens UK  claim,  the
    SSHD renewed her application for a stay behind  Citizens  UK  which  the
    Tribunal refused.  The  Tribunal  then  heard  submissions  made  almost
    exclusively with reference to the bundle [pic]in  Citizens  UK  for  the
    rest of that day and there was not time for Counsel for the SSHD to make
    any submissions on that day.

       i) The Tribunal reasoned that it was  seized  of  individual  rights
          cases, in sharp contrast to the Administrative Court proceedings.
          Furthermore, the Tribunal made  its  ruling  at  a  time  of  the
          Secretary of State's choosing and when the Secretary  of  State's
          evidence in Citizens UK was not available.




     ii) This was a two day hearing, spread over 05 and 11  May  2017.   The
         oral submissions of Counsel for the Secretary of State were made on
         the second day.  There was no suggestion of lack of time.

                                                                           2
 7. The Tribunal also  conducted  its  consideration  of  the  cases  in  an
    extraordinarily  compressed  timetable.  This  had  consequences   which
    seriously disadvantaged the SSHD, and impaired the Tribunal's  decision-
    making:

    (i)     The hearings were listed without reference to availability of
          Counsel for the SSHD;


     ii) The time available  for  oral  submissions  by  the  SSHD  on  the
         substantive issues (for all the Tribunal cases) was restricted  to
         less than  4  hours  on  a  single  day.  This  was  insufficient,
         especially as the Tribunal had not considered the SSHD's  evidence
         or submissions prior to this point;
    iii) A simple but obvious practical disadvantage was that the  Tribunal
         considered the Claimant's Skeleton Argument from in  the  Citizens
         UK case, but did not have the SSHD's Skeleton Argument until part-
         way through the proceedings, as the date for service of  the  same
         had not occurred. Although  subsequently  provided  with  it,  the
         Tribunal does not appear to have considered it before  giving  its
         decision.

    (iv)   The Tribunal's timetable was dictated by the factors  summarised
         in [24] of its stay ruling and reiterated in [25].   The  timetable
         was  intensely  context  sensitive.  It  was  compressed,  but  not
         "extraordinarily" so, particularly when compared with timetables in
         analogous  previous  cases.  The  broad  margin   of   appreciation
         available  to  every  court  in   cases   management   matters   is
         disrespectfully ignored.

    (v)    The listings followed upon the Upper  Tribunal's  assessment  of
         the need for expedition having regard to the factors identified  in
         the stay decision - see [24] and [25]  especially  -  which  itself
         acknowledged expressly the need for "fairness to the  Secretary  of
         State" in the  context  of  timetabling  matters:  see  [34].   All
         parties were treated with  absolute  equality  in  all  aspects  of
         timetabling.   The  main  exception  to  this  was   the   specific
         accommodation which  the  Tribunal  provided  to  counsel  for  the
         Secretary  of  State  in  respect  of  listing  arrangements,  both
         proposed and finalised, on 17/18 May 2017.  The Secretary of  State
         was at all times represented by the same Junior Counsel  instructed
         in Citizens UK.

    (vi)   The reference  to  the  submissions  of  counsel  for  the  SSHD
         occupying "less than four hours on a single  day"  is  correct,  as
         regards AM.  The assertion that  counsel's  oral  submissions  were
         "...  for all the Tribunal cases ... restricted to less  than  four
         hours on a single day" is disturbingly incorrect.  Counsel for  the
         SSHD made oral submissions to the Tribunal on all of  the  separate
         hearing dates relating to the other four cases.

    (vii)  The uncompleted and undeveloped point relating to the  Secretary
         of State's skeleton argument in Citizens  UK  contains  nothing  of
         substance.

 8. The Tribunal appears to  have  prioritised,  at  all  costs,  producing
    decisions in the individual cases prior to the hearing in Citizens  UK.
    It is the Defendant's view that this has been at  the  expense  of  the
    opportunity of considering the material in this case with the care  and
    detail that it required.

   (i)     This  unfortunately  phrased  mere  comment  airbrushes  in  its
         totality the Tribunal's  reasoning  and  conclusions  in  its  stay
         ruling. The impropriety of the allegation of carelessness and  what
         follows in [9] below require no elaboration. What follows in [10] -
         [12] simply erases large swathes of the Tribunal's judgment in AM.

 9. It may be the haste with which these cases were  considered  that  have
    contributed to the errors made by the Tribunal.

        This is  more  disrespectful  bare  comment  and  an  impermissible
        expression of the author's personal opinion,  which  is  irrelevant
        and inadmissible in a document of this kind.

10. The SSHD considers that the errors of law  made  by  the  Tribunal  are
    clear: these are set out in the application for permission  to  appeal.
    The High Court is invited to consider the legal questions carefully and
    independently. Of necessity, the grounds  of  appeal  in  the  Tribunal
    cases focus on the most important errors, and those which  go  directly
    to the Tribunal's conclusions, but  it  is  emphasised  that  the  SSHD
    fundamentally disagrees with the  Tribunal's  approach  on  almost  all
    aspects of this case.

11. The SSHD does not set out here all of  the  errors  in  the  Tribunal's
    decision: for the reasons set out above it  is  submitted  that  it  is
    fundamentally important for the fair adjudication of these issues  that
    this Court considers the issues for  itself,  rather  than  by  way  of
    review of the Tribunal's views.
                                                                           3

12.   It may nevertheless be helpful to give particularly obvious examples
    of where the Tribunal failed to consider the SSHD's evidence:

    [pic]   The Tribunal appears to have entirely overlooked the fact  that
        the  process  operated  without  prejudice  to   the   Dublin   Ill
        Regulation.  The  process  fast-tracked  a  substantial  group   of
        children who could be readily and confidently identified as meeting
        the criteria in question, but that for all  children  remaining  in
        France, they retained full access to the Dublin procedure, and were
        essentially in the same position  as  those  unaccompanied  asylum-
        seeking children elsewhere in France and Europe.  This  error  then
        fed into the Tribunal's key conclusions. The Tribunal asserted, for
        example, that the standards  of  fairness  that  it  required  were
        because the decisions involved "the making  of  life  changing  and
        destiny shaping decisions for  the  children  involved",  seemingly
        unaware  that  the  underlying  position  of   the   children   not
        transferred under this process was not  determined:  the  right  to
        consideration  of  a  take-charge  request  under  the  Dublin  Ill
        Regulation from France being unaffected.

    (ii)    The Tribunal refers to the SSHD's Summary  Grounds  of  Defence
        (paragraph 36), seemingly without appreciating that at  this  point
        the Grounds were responding to the original, unamended, claim,  and
        were not concerned with the expedited process, but rather with  the
        Claimant's original case based on the Joint Declaration.

    (iii)   There  is  no  detailed  acknowledgement  or  rebuttal  of  the
         arguments set out in the  SSHD's  Skeleton  Argument  and  Detailed
         Grounds of Defence.

    (iv)    In respect of the ''filter" process that was followed following
        completion of Operation Purnia Phase  2,  the  Tribunal  apparently
        considered that there was no '(clear evidence"  of  the  nature  of
        this, seemingly unaware of paragraph 69 of Mr Cook's statement, and
        70-77 of Ms  Farman's  statement.  This  is  one  of  a  number  of
        instances [pic]where the Tribunal appears unwilling to engage  with
        or accept evidence from "litigation  statements".  In  general  the
        Tribunal appears to have been  unwilling  to  accept  the  evidence
        presented to it, for reasons that are largely  unexplained  in  the
        Judgments.




                                                        22 May 2017




                                                                       [pic]

