
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Adam (Rule 45: authoritative decisions) [2017] UKUT 00370 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 August 2017                              |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between


                               MEID OMAR ADAM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D McCormick, instructed by Halliday Reeves Law
Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer

A decision with the status of "authoritative" within the meaning of s. 107
of the 2002 Act is to be regarded as "binding" within the meaning of r. 45
of the Upper Tribunal Rules.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Tribunal has before it an application for permission to  appeal  to
    the Court of Appeal against a decision of Deputy Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Doyle, given on 23 June 2017.  The appellant before Judge Doyle  was  a
    person who has always claimed to be of Sudanese nationality and at risk
    of persecution in Sudan.  The Secretary of State  has  taken  the  view
    that he is  not  Sudanese  but  Libyan.   Judge  Doyle  considered  the
    material  before  him  and  dismissed  the  appeal,  finding  that  the
    appellant was a Libyan who could be returned  to  Libya  without  risk.
    The appellant has sought permission to appeal to the  Court  of  Appeal
    against that decision on a number of grounds.

 2. Since the issue of the decision the  Upper  Tribunal  has,  in  a  case
    reported as ZMM  and  given  a  CG  Country  Guidance  designation  ZMM
    (Article 15(c)) Libya CG [2017] UKUT 00263 (IAC),  indicated  that,  in
    principle, Libyans are at risk of treatment contrary to  article  15(c)
    of the Refugee Qualification Directive 2004/83/EC on return  to  Libya.
    It follows that the appellant, if covered by Country  Guidance  as  now
    existing, would be entitled to humanitarian protection, that is to  say
    to have his appeal allowed rather than dismissed.

 3. The difficulty for the appellant as it  presents  itself  is  that  the
    failure to take into account Country Guidance not existing at the  date
    of the Upper Tribunal's decision could not be an error of law.  If that
    were the end of the matter we  should  have  to  refuse  permission  to
    appeal to the Court of Appeal, there being no  error  of  law  to  that
    extent in the Tribunal's decision, unless other matters  as  raised  in
    the grounds merited a grant.

 4. That is not, however, the end of the matter for the following  reasons.
    Rule 45 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008,  SI
    2698/2008 (as amended) provides as follows:


             "45.(1) On receiving an application for permission to appeal
                  the Upper Tribunal may review the decision in accordance
                  with rule 46 (review of a decision), but may only do so
                  if -


                    a) when making the decision the Upper Tribunal
                       overlooked a legislative provision or binding
                       authority which could have had a material effect on
                       the decision; or


                    b) since the Upper Tribunal's decision, a court has made
                       a decision which is binding on the Upper Tribunal and
                       which, had it been made before the Upper Tribunal's
                       decision, could have had a material effect on the
                       decision."

 5. The Country Guidance  decision  ZMM  is  not  in  any  technical  sense
    "binding". But in s 107 of the Nationality, Immigration  &  Asylum  Act
    2002 we find the following provision:


             "107. Practice Directions


             (3) In the case of proceedings under section 82... or by virtue
               of section 109, or proceedings in the Upper Tribunal arising
               out of such proceedings, practice directions  under  section
               23 of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007


                                 (a)  may require the Tribunal  to  treat  a
                         specified  decision  of  the  Tribunal  or   Upper
                         Tribunal  as  authoritative  in   respect   of   a
                         particular matter; and


                      b)   may  require  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  treat  a
                         specified  decision  of  the  Tribunal  or   Upper
                         Tribunal  as  authoritative  in   respect   of   a
                         particular matter.


             (3A) In subsection (3) the  reference  to  a  decision  of  the
Tribunal includes -


      a) a decision of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal, and
      b) a decision of the Immigration Appeal Tribunal."


    (The reference to "the Tribunal" throughout is by  virtue  of  s  81  a
    reference to the First-tier Tribunal).

 6. A practice direction to  that  effect  has  been  issued.   It  is  the
    Practice Direction of the Immigration & Asylum Chambers of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal. At  para  12  of  that  direction
    there is the following:

             "Starred and Country Guidance determinations

             12.1 Reported determinations of the Tribunal, the AIT  and  the
                 IAT which are "starred" shall be treated by the Tribunal as
                 authoritative  in  respect  of  the  matter  to  which  the
                 "starring" relates unless inconsistent with other authority
                 which is binding on the Tribunal.

             12.2 A reported determination of the Tribunal, the AIT  or  the
                 IAT bearing  the  letters  "CG"  shall  be  treated  as  an
                 authoritative  finding  on  the  country   guidance   issue
                 identified in the determination, based  upon  the  evidence
                 before the members of the Tribunal, the AIT or the IAT that
                 determine the appeal.  As a  result,  unless  it  has  been
                 expressly  superseded  or  replaced  by  any   later   "CG"
                 determination, or is inconsistent with other authority that
                 is binding on the Tribunal, such a country guidance case is
                 authoritative in any subsequent  appeal,  so  far  as  that
                 appeal:

                     (a) relates to the country guidance issue in question;
and

                     (b) depends upon the same or similar evidence.

             12.3 A list of current CG  cases  will  be  maintained  on  the
                 Tribunal's website.  Any representative of a  party  to  an
                 appeal concerning a particular country will be expected  to
                 be conversant with the current "CG" determinations relating
                 to that country.

             12.4 Because of the principle that like cases should be treated
                 in like manner, any failure to follow a  clear,  apparently
                 applicable country guidance case or to show why it does not
                 apply to the case in question is likely to be  regarded  as
                 grounds for an appeal on a point of law."

    (In  that  Practice  Direction  "the  Tribunal"  is  defined   as   the
    Immigration and Asylum Chamber of the First-tier  Tribunal  or  of  the
    Upper Tribunal, as the case may be.)

 7. A Country Guidance case is therefore "authoritative".  The question  is
    whether a case which is "authoritative" is to be treated as  one  which
    is "binding" within the meaning of rule 45 and 46.  We  adjourned  this
    application into court in order to hear the submissions of the  parties
    and neither of them has given us any substantive reason  to  alter  the
    provisional view we had taken which is that for these purposes  a  case
    which is "authoritative" within the  meaning  of  s  107  and  Practice
    Direction issued in pursuant of  that  section  should  be  treated  as
    "binding" within the meaning of rules 45 and 46 of the  Upper  Tribunal
    Rules.  It appears to us that for these purposes the notion of  a  case
    being authoritative has sufficient parallels with the binding nature of
    a decision binding as a point of law.  The elevation to "authoritative"
    status by means of the CG designation has the effect  that  it  is  not
    open to a Tribunal affected by the decision simply to decide a case  on
    its own motion, in a sense contrary to that indicated by  the  decision
    in question in the same way as if there were a binding decision.

 8. We emphasise,  however,  the  restrictions  which  specifically  appear
    within rule 45.  What this decision does is to open the possibility  of
    review to cases where the decision of the Upper Tribunal which is under
    challenge by an application for permission to appeal to  the  Court  of
    Appeal is one which  might  have  been  affected  by  an  authoritative
    decision within the terms of paragraph 12 of  the  Practice  Direction.
    The power to review still only arises where the authority  in  question
    could have had a material effect on the decision.   In  terms  of  rule
    45(1)(a) it may be that a complete failure to notice the existence of a
    relevant Country Guidance decision might constitute overlooking it, but
    nevertheless a question on review would have to be whether the  Country
    Guidance decision in question could have had a material effect  on  the
    decision of the Upper Tribunal; and similar  considerations  relate  to
    paragraph (b).  Therefore this decision opens the door  to  review:  it
    does not mean that in every case where  there  is  a  Country  Guidance
    decision in existence  or  in  issue  the  power  to  review  would  be
    exercised.

 9. Having reached that conclusion  in  principle,  we  conclude  that  the
    subsequent issue of the Country Guidance decision brought  the  present
    case within the terms of rule 45(1)(b).  We therefore consider  whether
    to review the Upper Tribunal's decision and set it aside under rule 46.
     It appears to us on the factual basis that we have indicated that  the
    decision in ZMM clearly  could  have  had  a  material  effect  on  the
    decision. Indeed if the Country Guidance decision had been before Judge
    Doyle he would, as it appears to us, inevitably have taken  a  view  on
    the outcome of the appeal which he did not take.

10. We review and  set  aside  his  decision.   The  consequences  of  that
    conclusion are accepted by Mr Jarvis.  They are that we  should,  there
    being an appeal to the Upper Tribunal before us following  the  setting
    aside of its earlier decision, we should substitute a decision allowing
    the appeal on humanitarian protection grounds, which we do.




                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                        Date: 15 August 2017
