
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Ndwanyi (Permission to appeal; challenging decision  on  timeliness)  [2021]
UKUT 00378 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|via Skype for Business                        |                              |
|On 7 August and 16 October 2020               |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               ELISHA NDWANYI
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:         Ms Aboni (7 August 2020); Mr McVeety (16 October
2020)
For the Respondent:      Mr Cole (7 August 2020) and Ms Khan (16 October
2020)

If a decision of the First-tier Tribunal that an application for  permission
to appeal was in time represents the clear  and  settled  intention  of  the
judge then, as it is an  'excluded  decision'  (see  the  Appeals  (Excluded
Decisions) Order 2009 (SI 2009/275, as amended), it may only  be  challenged
by way of judicial review; that remains so even if both parties  agree  that
the decision is wrong in law. Only if the judge has overlooked the  question
of timeliness and any explanation for delay will the  grant  be  conditional
upon the Upper Tribunal exercising a discretion to extend time  (see  Boktor
and Wanis (late application for permission) Egypt [2011] UKUT 00442 (IAC)).

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the 'respondent' and  the  respondent
    as the 'appellant', as they appeared respectively before the First-tier
    Tribunal. The appellant was born on 12 February  1997  and  is  a  male
    citizen of Rwanda. He appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  a
    decision of the Secretary of State  dated  6  June  2019  refusing  his
    application for international protection. The First-tier Tribunal, in a
    decision promulgated on 20 December 2019, allowed the appeal on  asylum
    and human rights (Article 3 ECHR) grounds. The Secretary of  State  now
    appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. At the initial hearing held via Skype for Business on 7 August 2020,  I
    was asked by both parties' representatives to deal with  a  preliminary
    issue arising from the grant of permission of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Chohan.  Paragraph  (1)  of  the  grant  of  permission  states,   'The
    application is in time.' The remainder of the  grant  consists  of  the
    judge's reasons for finding it arguable that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    had erred in law. At the initial hearing, both representatives told  me
    that they agreed that Judge Chohan had been  wrong  to  find  that  the
    application for permission to appeal had been made in  time.  Mr  Cole,
    who appeared for the appellant, submitted that I should find  that  the
    application for permission had been out of  time,  that  I  should  not
    extend time and that I should decline to hear the  appeal  accordingly.
    The respondent submitted that, if I considered it necessary,  I  should
    exercise discretion to extend the time for appealing.

 3. The judge's finding at [1] is strange given that,  at  Part  B  of  the
    application, the    Secretary  of  State  has  given  her  reasons  for
    applying for an extension of time: 'Although  it  might  be  considered
    that this application is 4 days out of time, the decision was  received
    over the Christmas holiday/bank holidays where an inadequate amount  of
    staff was available to consider  the  decision  and  lodge  grounds  of
    appeal and therefore it is requested that in the interests  of  justice
    time is extended.'  Following  a  brief  discussion,  I  adjourned  the
    initial  hearing  to  enable  both  parties  to  make  further  written
    submissions on Judge Chohan's decision as to timeliness.  Both  parties
    have  delivered  helpful  submissions  and  the  initial  hearing   was
    concluded by Skype for Business on  16  October  2020.  I  reserved  my
    decision.

 4. First, I have considered whether Judge Chohan has simply overlooked the
    Secretary of State's application to extend time. At the  hearing  on  7
    August 2020, I told the representatives that, in the  Tribunal's  file,
    there is a copy of the notice of receipt of application for  permission
    to appeal which bears two  endorsements.  First,  there  is  a  sticker
    placed  on  the  document  by  a  member  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    administrative staff and which  reads,  'Dear  Sir/Madam.  Please  find
    enclosed Application made that the application had been made 'OOT' [out
    of time]. Date due: 06.01.2020. Date Rec'd 07.01.2020' Adjacent to  the
    sticker is a manuscript note signed by Judge Chohan. This  note  reads,
    'Xmas bank holidays must be taken into account. Application  in  time.'
    The judge's note is dated 22 January  2020.  Whilst  the  Secretary  of
    State's statement in  Part  B  of  the  application  form  is  somewhat
    equivocal ('...it might be considered that...'), I  am  satisfied  that
    the judge was aware that timeliness was an issue. At  paragraph (1)  of
    the grant of permission, he  has  given  his  reason  why  he  did  not
    consider it necessary to exercise any discretion as to an extension  of
    time.

 5. The Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014 ('The Procedure Rules'), paragraph 33(2) provides:

    Subject to paragraph (3), an application under paragraph  (1)  must  be
    sent to the Tribunal so that it is received no later than 14 days after
    the date on which the party making the application was sent the written
    reasons for the decision.

    The Secretary of State's application for permission  was  delivered  to
    the First-tier Tribunal on 7 January 2020. The Tribunal file has a copy
    of the covering letter sent to the parties with the First-tier Tribunal
    decision.  That  letter  has  been  endorsed  'issued'  by  post   'via
    rep[resentative]' 23 December 2019'. The parties agree  that  the  last
    date for the application to have arrived at the First-tier Tribunal  in
    time was 6 January 2020 and that consequently the application  was  one
    day out of time (not four days, as the Secretary of State herself seems
    to have believed). Whilst it is clear from the judge's note on the file
    that he believed that bank holidays (i.e. Christmas Day, Boxing Day and
    New Year's Day) should be 'taken into account' both parties accept that
    the judge was wrong. The  appellant's  skeleton  argument  contends  at
    [11]:

    The 14 day time-limit relates to calendar days and  not  working  days.
    This is not specifically stated in the Tribunal Procedure Rules, but it
    is accepted practice that it is only time limits of 5 days or less that
    exclude Bank Holidays and other non-working days (see CPR 2.8(4)).

    The only provisions in the Procedure Rules regarding time appear at
    paragraph 11:

    11.-(1) An act required or permitted to be done on or by  a  particular
    day by these Rules, a practice direction or a  direction  must,  unless
    otherwise directed, be done by midnight on that day. (2) Subject to the
    Tribunal directing that this paragraph does  not  apply,  if  the  time
    specified by these Rules, a practice direction or a direction for doing
    any act ends on a day other than a working day, the act is done in time
    if it is done on the next working day.

    6 January 2020 was a Monday and so not a  'day  other  than  a  working
    day'.

 6. I have not been asked to determine whether the 'accepted  practice'  in
    the First-tier Tribunal of excluding non-working days applies  only  to
    time limits of 5 days or  less  (as  CPR  2.8(4)  indeed  provides)  is
    legally correct; both  parties  have  made  their  submissions  on  the
    understanding that it is. What is clear, however, is that there  is  no
    support in the Procedure Rules for Judge Chohan's declaration that bank
    holidays 'must be taken into account.'

 7. The sticker placed on  the  file  by  Tribunal  staff  was,  therefore,
    correct; the application for permission was one day out  of  time.  The
    question remains as to what, if anything, the Upper  Tribunal  can  and
    should do to correct the judge's error.

 8. First, I have considered whether the Upper Tribunal  should,  with  the
    support of both parties or otherwise, reverse Judge  Chohan's  decision
    that the appeal was in time. In  short,  it  cannot.  In  NA  (Excluded
    decision; identifying judge) Afghanistan [2010]  UKUT  444  (IAC),  the
    Upper Tribunal considered the question: 'Does a right of appeal lie  to
    the Upper Tribunal against a decision that a notice of appeal is out of
    time and not to extend that time?'. By extension, the question posed by
    Judge Chohan's decision will have the same answer. The Tribunal  in  NA
    held:

    18.  As will be clear, the right of appeal is from any decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal on a point of law other than an "excluded
    decision".  Section 11(5) of the 2007 Act sets out what, for the
    purposes of subsection (1) is an "excluded" decision.  None of the
    decisions in s.11(5), as originally enacted, are relevant to this
    appeal.  However, Article 3 of the Appeals (Excluded Decisions) Order
    2009 (SI 2009/275 as amended) adds a further decision to the category
    of "excluded decisions" which is relevant.  Article 3 states that:




    "3. For the purposes of section  11(1)  and  13(1)  of  the  Tribunals,
    Courts and Enforcement Act 2007, the following decisions of the  First-
    tier Tribunal or the Upper Tribunal are excluded decisions -

    ....

    (m) any procedural, ancillary or preliminary decision made in  relation
    to an appeal against a  decision  under  section  40A  of  the  British
    National  Act  1981,  section  82,  83  or  83A  of  the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, or regulations 26 of  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006."




    19.   That  provision  reflects  the  wording  of  s.103A(7)   of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  (now  repealed)  which
    excluded from the category of decisions of the Asylum  and  Immigration
    Tribunal which could be subject  to  the  reconsideration  process  any
    "decision  on  an  appeal"  which  was  "a  procedural,  ancillary   or
    preliminary   decision".    The   words   "procedural,   ancillary   or
    preliminary" which define the nature of the decision remain  the  same;
    the current provision (s.11(1))  requires  that  the  decision  be  "in
    relation  to  an  appeal",   whilst   the   reconsideration   framework
    (s.103A(7)) required it to be a decision "on an appeal".




    20.   There  is  no  doubt  that  the  decision  in  this  case  is   a
    "preliminary" decision by the First-tier Tribunal.  Indeed, rule  10(6)
    of the First-tier Tribunal Procedure Rules states, inter alia, that




    "The Tribunal must decide any issue as to whether a  notice  of  appeal
    was given in time, or whether to extend the time for  appealing,  as  a
    preliminary decision without a hearing..." (emphasis added)




    21.  That, in our judgment, reflects what must be the natural  meaning,
    and consequent effect of, the legislative words initially in  s.103A(7)
    of the 2002 Act and now found in  Art  3  (m)  of  the  2009  Order  as
    amended.

    At [23], the Tribunal concluded:

    23.  In our judgment, there was no statutory basis upon which to  grant
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal in this case.  The fact that
    it was granted cannot confer a jurisdiction  upon  the  Upper  Tribunal
    which it does not have.  There is no  valid  appeal  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

    The Upper Tribunal has no  jurisdiction  to  reverse  the  decision  on
    timeliness taken by the First-tier Tribunal. That  both  parties  agree
    that the decision was wrong makes no difference to  the  position;  the
    parties cannot give the Tribunal a jurisdiction it does not possess.

 9. Can the Upper Tribunal exercise a discretion as  to  the  extension  of
    time because the First-tier Tribunal has failed  to  exercise  it?  The
    appellant relies on the Upper Tribunal decision  in  Boktor  and  Wanis
    (late application for permission) Egypt [2011] UKUT 00442 (IAC):

    Where permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal has been granted,  but
    in circumstances where the application is out of time,  an  explanation
    is provided, but that  explanation  is  not  considered  by  the  judge
    granting permission, in the light of AK (Tribunal appeal - out of time)
    Bulgaria [2004] UKIAT 00201 (starred) and the clear wording  of  rule
    24(4) of the Asylum and Immigration (Procedure) Rules 2005,  the  grant
    of permission to appeal is conditional, and  the  question  of  whether
    there are special circumstances making it unjust not to extend time has
    to be considered.

    The Upper Tribunal in Samir (FtT Permission  to  appeal:  time)  [2013]
    UKUT  3  (IAC)  followed  Boktor  save  that  it  held  that,  'if  the
    application was to the First-tier Tribunal, the decision as to time  is
    therefore made by the First-tier Tribunal, and if  the  application  is
    not  admitted  there  is  the  possibility  of  renewal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal'. The Tribunal in Samir considered that,  where  an  issue  of
    timeliness had been overlooked by the First-tier Tribunal and was  then
    raised before the Upper Tribunal, it would be necessary for  the  Upper
    Tribunal Judge to determine the question sitting  as  a  judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

10. The appellant in the instant appeal relies on Boktor  and  argues  that
    'whether to extend time is a discretionary judgment  for  the  relevant
    judge  considering  all  the  relevant  circumstances  and,   in   this
    particular case, Judge Chohan has not exercised that discretion ...  it
    is submitted that this case is no different from the established  cases
    where the issue of timeliness has not been considered at all' [skeleton
    argument, 15 and 16].

11. I disagree. First, the approach advocated by the appellant  would  lead
    to the procedural problem identified in Samir; if, sitting as  a  judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal, I decided the issue of  timeliness  against
    the respondent, I would be unable to refuse to hear the appeal  in  the
    Upper Tribunal  (as  the  appellant  proposes)  without  depriving  the
    respondent of the opportunity to renew her application  for  permission
    to the Upper Tribunal. There is, however, a  more  fundamental  problem
    with the appellant's argument. The judge found  that  no  issue  as  to
    timeliness arose at all. He decided (wrongly, as it happened) that  the
    appeal was in time. In my view,  it  is  not  possible  for  the  Upper
    Tribunal  to  ignore  and  then  circumvent  the  judge's  decision  on
    timeliness simply because it  is  wrong.  The  decision  is  clear  and
    unambiguous. Unlike the Tribunal in Boktor, it is clear from  the  file
    note and paragraph 1 of the grant of  permission  that  the  judge  has
    considered the reasons given for delay but concluded  that  these  were
    not relevant. As soon as his decision had been recorded  in  its  final
    form, Judge Chohan became functus officio; as  we  shall  see  at  [11]
    below, it was thereafter not possible for Judge  Chohan  or  any  other
    judge of the First-tier Tribunal to  change  the  decision  unless  the
    'slip rule' applies. Equally, it would be wholly inconsistent with  the
    doctrine of functus officio for the Upper Tribunal to ignore a decision
    on timeliness and to exercise its own discretion  on  the  basis  that,
    because both parties agree that it was wrong, the judge's decision,  in
    effect, does not exist. By finding that the application for  permission
    was in time, the judge has decided that it was unnecessary to  exercise
    any discretion.  This  is  not  a  case  where  the  judge  has  simply
    overlooked the fact that the  application  was  out  of  time;  on  the
    contrary, he has engaged with the issue of timeliness and  has  reached
    an unequivocal decision on that  issue.  The  circumstances  here  are,
    perhaps, unusual as we have the judge's file note but, even if  we  did
    not, it is difficult to see how it would be possible to go  behind  his
    clear finding at paragraph 1 of the grant that the application had been
    made in time. It follows that, if a remedy exists, then it is not to be
    found in the principles of law and practice articulated in  Boktor  and
    Samir.

12. Since both parties agree that Judge Chohan made  a  mistake,  can  that
    mistake be corrected  under  the  'slip  rule'?  Paragraph  31  of  the
    Procedure Rules provides:

    31. The Tribunal may at any time correct any clerical mistake or  other
    accidental slip or omission in a decision, direction  or  any  document
    produced by it, by- (a) providing notification of the amended  decision
    or direction, or a copy of the amended document, to  all  parties;  and
    (b) making any necessary amendment  to  any  information  published  in
    relation to the decision, direction or document.

    In the recent decision MH (review; slip rule;  church  witnesses)  Iran
    [2020] UKUT 125 (IAC), the Upper Tribunal held that:

    A decision which contains a clerical mistake or other  accidental  slip
    or omission may be corrected by  the  FtT  under  rule  31  (the  'slip
    rule'). Where a decision concludes  by  stating  an  outcome  which  is
    clearly at odds with the intention of the judge, the  FtT  may  correct
    such an error under rule 31, if necessary by invoking rule 36 so as  to
    treat an application for permission to appeal as an  application  under
    rule 31. Insofar as Katsonga [2016] UKUT 228 (IAC) held otherwise, it
    should no longer be followed. [my emphasis]

    The problem with Judge Chohan's decision is that, no matter  how  wrong
    it may have been, it is undoubtedly  what  he  intended;  the  decision
    recorded on the grant of permission was manifestly not 'clearly at odds
    with the intention of the judge'.  As  the  Court  of  Appeal  held  in
    Bristol-Myers Squibb Company v. Baker Norton  Pharmaceuticals  Inc  and
    Napro Biotherapeutics Inc [2001] EWCA Civ 414 at [25]:

    25. ... the  slip  rule  cannot  enable  a  court  to  have  second  or
    additional thoughts. Once the order is drawn up any  mistakes  must  be
    corrected by an appellate court. However it is possible under the  slip
    rule to amend an order to give effect to the intention of the Court.

    Paragraph 31 of the Procedure Rules, therefore, offers no assistance.

13. The appellant [skeleton argument, 17] accepts that, where a  judge  has
    exercised discretion regarding the extension of time  unlawfully,  then
    judicial review is the appropriate remedy (for an example,  see  R  (on
    the application of Onowu) v First-tier Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum
    Chamber) (extension of time for appealing: principles) IJR [2016]) UKUT
    185 (IAC). Judicial review is the only means by  which  Judge  Chohan's
    decision to admit the application for  permission  can  be  challenged.
    That remains the case notwithstanding that both the appellant  and  the
    Secretary of State agree that the judge was  wrong  to  find  that  the
    application had been made in time. As the First-tier  Tribunal's  grant
    of permission has  not  been  disturbed  on  judicial  review,  I  have
    proceeded to consider the Secretary of State's appeal  on  its  merits.
    Both parties' representatives made submissions regarding error  of  law
    at the initial hearing on 16 October 2020.

14. There is one ground of appeal:

    At the paragraphs 35-36, the FTTJ states that the appellant  failed  to
    answer the questions asked and the  therefore  the  FTTJ  decided  that
    consideration of the expert report would be determinative of the claim.
    However, after having considered points on  both  sides  regarding  the
    expert report, the FTTJ nonetheless are concludes that the  appellant's
    account is plausible at paragraph 58, even though there was a  lack  of
    evidence to support the appellant's account as noted at paragraph 57.

    The decision of the FTTJ  is  therefore  inconsistent  and  lacking  in
    reasons especially in respect of why the SSHD  lost  the  appeal.  Both
    parties have a right to know why one party lost and the other won,  but
    that it lacking (sic) throughout this decision.

    The appellant claims to fear the Rwandan government. Born in Zaire (now
    the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC)), he  fled  to  Rwanda  in  1995
    following the death of his parents. He now holds  a  Rwandan  passport.
    The appellant has worked for a number of government agencies and joined
    the World Food Programme (WFP - an agency of  the  United  Nations)  in
    2017. In February 2017, the appellant visited the  United  Kingdom.  In
    September 2017, at his office in Kigali, the appellant claims  that  he
    received, apparently in error, an  email  from  a  government  security
    agency. The email concerned Rwandan troop movements on the DRC  border.
    The appellant claims that he was alarmed that the UN  was  aware  'that
    these things were happening' and photographed the email. Over the  next
    few weeks, the appellant became aware that the Rwandan  secret  service
    (the Directorate of Military Intelligence - DMI) had become  interested
    in him. He travelled to the United Kingdom on  14  October  2017.  Some
    time between 20-25 October  2017,  he  learned  that  a  friend  (a  Mr
    Bamporiki) to whom he had sent the photograph of the email and who  had
    'broadcast' that troops were about to enter the DRC, had been murdered.
    The appellant then claimed asylum.

15. The respondent accepts that the appellant worked for the WFP. She  also
    agrees that, if his account is found to be  true,  then  the  appellant
    faces a real risk of suffering harm on return to Rwanda (see First-tier
    Tribunal decision at [64]). Otherwise, the respondent submits that  the
    appellant's account is inconsistent and unreliable.

16.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge   Cox)   [36]   agreed   'with   the
    representatives and believe that my assessment  of  the  expert  report
    will be determinative.' Judge Cox considers in detail the report of the
    expert, Dr Joseph Mullen, at [37-54]. He records  that  the  Presenting
    Officer sought to rely on certain passages of the report in support  of
    his submission  that  the  appellant's  account  was  implausible.  The
    Presenting Officer noted that the expert had been 'a little puzzled' by
    the appellant's claim that a highly restricted email should have  'gone
    astray'. The Presenting Officer also drew the judge's attention to  the
    fact that the expert had, despite researching relevant  websites,  been
    unable to 'triangulate' the death of Mr Bamporiki. Dr Mullen  had  also
    not considered it 'likely' that, as the appellant claims, the  head  of
    the WFP in Rwanda had passed the appellant's name to the  DMI.  In  the
    case of each passage of the  expert  report  cited  by  the  Presenting
    Officer, the  judge  records  the  response  made  by  the  appellant's
    counsel. The judge's approach throughout is measured and even-handed.

17. At [56], Judge Cox acknowledges  that  the  appeal  was  'difficult  to
    determine'. He found 'troubling' the absence of any evidence  regarding
    the murder of the appellant's friend and that the expert considered  it
    unlikely that any colleague of the appellant  at  the  WFP  would  have
    passed the appellant's name to the DMI. However,  at  [58],  the  judge
    accepted that the core of the appellant's account was true and at  [59-
    63] he has given clear and cogent reasons for reaching that conclusion.
    He noted that the expert had accepted that the DMI may have had  agents
    operating in the office of the WFP and found also that  the  email  had
    been sent in error. He considered the appellant's evidence in the wider
    context of politics in the region (both parties accept that  there  had
    been troop movements on the border around the time the email  had  been
    sent) and the appellant's own circumstances; the judge found  that  the
    appellant would not have abandoned his job and good standard of  living
    for the uncertainty of life as a refugee had he  not  genuinely  feared
    for his safety and he also took into account  that  the  appellant  had
    been born in DRC and was a naturalised citizen of Rwanda;  that  was  a
    relevant factor given the significance of ethnicity in the politics  of
    the region. I reject the respondent's submission that 'the decision  is
    lacking in reasons.'

18. I accept that not every judge would have reached the same  findings  as
    Judge Cox on the  same  evidence.  However,  that  is  not  the  point.
    Further, I do not consider that the findings of the judge are perverse.
    Indeed,  Mr  McVeety,  who  appeared  for  the  Secretary   of   State,
    acknowledged that, on the evidence, there 'were ways  the  judge  could
    have allowed the appeal.' In my opinion, the judge took one  such  way.
    He engaged fully with the relevant evidence; his analysis of the expert
    report, especially those parts which were not obviously  favourable  to
    the appellant, is thorough and even-handed. Moreover, the judge did not
    find in favour of the appellant in the teeth of a  negative  conclusion
    from Dr Mullen; the expert unequivocally  states  at  the  end  of  his
    report [26] that the appellant's return to either  DRC  or  Rwanda  'is
    likely to result in a life-threatening situation.' Contrary to what  is
    asserted in the grounds, the respondent has been left in no doubt as to
    why she lost; ultimately, the grounds amount to  nothing  more  than  a
    disagreement with findings available to the Tribunal on the evidence.

19. Finally, in his oral submissions, Mr McVeety cast doubt on the  use  by
    the judge, when discussing the email, of the phrase 'I  cannot  exclude
    the possibility'. Mr McVeety submitted that the judge appeared to  have
    departed from the appropriate standard of proof. I do not agree and  in
    any event, Mr McVeety acknowledged that this challenge does not  appear
    in the grounds of appeal as drafted.

20. For the reasons I have given, the  Secretary  of  State  's  appeal  is
    dismissed.

    Notice of Decision

    The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed

         Signed                              Date:  30 November 2020
         Upper Tribunal Judge Lane











