
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

R (on the application of Masuma Rahman) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
Department IJR [2014] UKUT 00374 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House
On 14 July 2014

             IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN



                                   Between

                       THE QUEEN ON THE application OF


                                MASUMA RAHMAN
                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Collins, instructed by Duncan Lewis Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms K Olley, instructed by the Treasury Solicitor






1.   The  applicant  applies  with  permission  for  judicial  review  of  a
    decision of the respondent dated 2 July 2013 refusing to grant leave to
    remain in the United Kingdom.  There is also a  supplementary  decision
    of 18 March 2014 which also requires to be taken into account.

2.    The  application  was  made  on  7  November  2012.  It  set  out  the
    applicant's immigration history. She was born on 7  December  1994  and
    arrived in the United Kingdom with her mother,  Jabun  Rahman  and  her
    younger sister, Masuda Rahman, in July 2008.  Masuda  was  born  on  29
    July 2003.  The applicant and  her  sister  were  dependents  on  their
    mother's visitors visa which was valid for six months.  It is said that
    the mother lost the children's passport while  in  the  United  Kingdom
    and returned to Bangladesh alone with the intention  of  obtaining  new
    passports  for the children.  They were  left  in  the  care  of  their
    maternal aunt, Nurjahan Sheuli, who is a British citizen.   The  mother
    never  returned  to  the  United  Kingdom  and  it  is  said  that  her
    whereabouts are unknown.

3.   Mrs Sheuli  also  had  contact  with  the  applicant's  father  on  one
    occasion and was told that the mother's mental state  had  deteriorated
    even further and there were no arrangements in place for  the  children
    to return to Bangladesh and it was  understood  that  the  parents  had
    moved from the family home.  The applicant's grandmother and uncle went
    to Bangladesh in January 2011 in order to trace the  children's  mother
    but they were unsuccessful.

4.   The applicant has studied successfully while in the United Kingdom.  At
    the time of the application letter she was studying  for  A  levels  in
    four subjects and was hoping to go on into higher education.   As  well
    as her aunt and her family, including her aunt's daughter with whom the
    applicant is very close, the applicant has also uncles and grandparents
    in the United Kingdom with whom she maintains regular contact.

5.   A similar application was made in respect  of  the  applicant's  sister
    Masuda.   That  application  was  also  refused,  and  judicial  review
    proceedings were commenced. Limited leave to remain was  granted  on  2
    January 2014 and as a consequence the proceedings were withdrawn.

6.   In the decision of 2 July 2013 the  respondent  gave  consideration  to
    the applicant's family life under Article 8 which, it was noted, from 9
    July 2012 fell under Appendix FM of the Rules.  It  was  considered  on
    the  basis of whether the applicant met the relevant  requirements  for
    leave to remain as a child, and it was concluded that  neither  of  her
    parents had leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  and  she  therefore
    failed E-LTRC.1.6 of Appendix FM .

7.   The decision maker went on to say  that  consideration  had  also  been
    given to whether her application raised or  contained  any  exceptional
    circumstances which, consistent with the right to respect  for  private
    and family life contained in Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights, might warrant consideration by the respondent of a  grant
    of leave to remain in the United Kingdom outside  the  requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules.  It had been concluded that it did not  and  the
    application was therefore refused.

8.   Thereafter a letter before action was sent on 22 July  2013,  to  which
    there was no response.  The application for judicial review  was  filed
    on 1 October 2013.  In the grounds it was argued  that  the  respondent
    had failed to engage  with  the  highly  unusual  facts  of  the  case,
    referring inter alia to what had been said by the Upper Tribunal in  MF
    (Article 8 -  new  Rules)  [2012]  UKUT  00393  (IAC)  and  R  (on  the
    application of Nagre) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin).  It was argued that  the decision was unlawful
    because the applicant's Article 8 rights had not received discrete  and
    separate consideration outside the Immigration Rules.

9.   It was also argued that this  was  a  case  where  the  respondent  was
    required to make an immigration decision providing a right  of  appeal,
    noting that the applicant had been a child  when  the  application  was
    made although she was now 18, and the decision did not conform with the
    respondent's own policy "Requests for removal decisions".

10.  In her summary grounds, the respondent  contended  that  there  was  no
    basis for a grant of leave to remain  on  Article  8  grounds,  whether
    under the Immigration Rules or otherwise, and that she was not  obliged
    to issue a removal decision, bearing in mind inter alia what  had  been
    said by the Court of Appeal in Daley-Murdock v Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ 161.

11.  On 27 January 2014 Upper Tribunal Judge King granted permission to  the
    applicant  on  the  basis  that,  although  she  might  not  meet   the
    Immigration Rules, it was unclear from the decision letter what factors
    were taken into account in concluding as the respondent did in  respect
    of Article 8.

12.  Subsequently, on 18 March 2014, the  respondent  sent  a  supplementary
    decision letter.  In that letter she noted the applicant's  immigration
    history and considered her private life under paragraph  276ADE  of  HC
    395.  It was concluded that the applicant was  not  able  to  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE.

13.  The decision maker went on to consider the application in light of  the
    guidance in MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192,  which  was  the  appeal
    against the earlier decision of the Tribunal referred  to  above.   The
    decision maker considered whether there were exceptional  circumstances
    shown,  and  concluded  that  they  were  not.  It   was   noted   that
    "exceptional" meant circumstances in  which  refusal  would  result  in
    unjustifiably harsh consequences for the  individual  or  their  family
    life such that refusal of the application would not  be  proportionate.
    Reference was made to the fact that the applicant,  together  with  her
    sister,  lived  with  their  aunt,  and   taking   into   account   the
    circumstances in which that came about.  It was also noted that  Masuda
    had been granted leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  outside  the
    Rules, on compassionate grounds.

14.  It was concluded, however, that a grant of leave outside the Rules  was
    not appropriate in the  case  of  the  appellant.   It  was  said  that
    although her mother could not be contacted, her aunt had spoken to  the
    applicant's father in Bangladesh, hence she could  be reunited with him
    there.  She could maintain contact with her  relatives  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  Although there might be a degree of hardship for her in  that
    she would be away from her aunt, sister and extended family if she were
    to return to Bangladesh, she could still keep  in  contact  with  them.
    There was no evidence to indicate that the ties she had with her  aunt,
    grandmother and extended family exceeded the normal ties beyond  adults
    nor indeed that she had custody of Masuda.

15.  It was said that the circumstances which led to a  grant  of  leave  to
    Masuda were not directly  applicable  to  the  applicant.   She  was  a
    healthy young woman who had benefited from an English  state  education
    and who could reasonably be expected to resume her life  in  Bangladesh
    where she had lived until the age of 13.    It was said that as she had
    left Bangladesh as teenager she would have knowledge of the customs and
    dialects of the country.  Both her father and mother were nationals  of
    Bangladesh and the location of at least her father was known.

16.  As regards the other issue, reference was again made  to  the  decision
    in Daley-Murdock.  The criteria which would lead the respondent to make
    a removal decision where there was a request to do so were not met.

17.  I have had the benefit of oral  submissions  from  Mr  Collins  and  Ms
    Olley and also a skeleton argument from each of them and I am  grateful
    to both for their considerable assistance.

18.  Mr Collins argued  that  both  decision  letters  were  deficient.   He
    argued that there was no real addressing of the applicant's  six  years
    in the United Kingdom as an adolescent, having been  abandoned  by  her
    family in the United Kingdom.  There was a failure to engage  with  the
    evidence, and in this regard he referred to  the  statements  that  had
    been made, which were indicative of the life that the applicant enjoyed
    in the United Kingdom and the fact that efforts  to  contact  both  her
    mother and father had been unsuccessful as long ago  as  2011.  It  was
    clear that there had been no communication with either parent for quite
    some time.

19.  He also argued that it was wrong to conclude that  Article  8  was  not
    engaged, bearing in mind the decisions in Ghising [2012] UKUT 00160 and
    in Gurung [2013] EWCA Civ  8.   It  was  true  that  cases  were  fact-
    sensitive, but the fact that the applicant had  attained  her  majority
    did not mean that family life disappeared.  She had  family  life  with
    her relatives in the United Kingdom, in  particular  with  her  sister.
    There had been no engagement in either decision with the effect on both
    sisters of separation.

20.  There was no  reference  to  the  Section  55  duty  incumbent  on  the
    Secretary of State.  It was clear from paragraph 24  of  ZH  (Tanzania)
    [2011] UKSC 4 a decision would not be in accordance  with  the  law  if
    regard was not had to the need to safeguard and promote the welfare  of
    any children involved.  There had been no attempt to identify  Masuda's
    wishes.

21.  In addition Mr Collins argued that, in line with what had been said  in
    SK (Zimbabwe) [2011] UKSC  23  and  also  Khan  [2012]  EWHC  707,  the
    respondent was required to follow her own policies  and  that  had  not
    been done in this case.   It  could  not  properly  be  said  that  the
    applicant would want to leave the United Kingdom, and indeed  a  recent
    letter of 3 July  2014  from  her  solicitors  to  the  respondent  was
    produced in which it was made  clear  that  she  had  no  intention  of
    leaving the United Kingdom of her own volition.

22.  In her submissions Ms Olley referred to  the  recent  decision  of  the
    Court of Appeal in MM [2014] EWCA Civ 985, in particular at  paragraphs
    129 to 131, especially with regard to what the  Court  of  Appeal  said
    about the decision of  Mr  Justice  Sales  in  Nagre.   If  there  were
    weaknesses in the earlier decision letter they had been  made  good  in
    the second  letter.   The  private  life  of  the  applicant  had  been
    considered.  She did  not  qualify  under  the  Rules  and  exceptional
    circumstances had nevertheless been considered.

23.  It was a question of whether there was an error of law in applying  the
    residual discretion, and whether the decision was not impossible for  a
    reasonable decision maker to come to.  Each case had to  be  determined
    on its own facts. The reference to the  contact  with  the  applicant's
    father was made on the basis of the GCID, which had been appended to Ms
    Olley's skeleton.  It  could  be  seen  from  page  205  of  the  final
    paragraph at tab B that  there  had  been  contact,  so  there  was  no
    inaccuracy. In any event, the applicant was an adult and  her  position
    was therefore very different from that of her  sister.   She  had  done
    very well educationally and was well placed to avoid  destitution.   In
    contrast  to  her  sister,  she  had  spent  her  formative  years   in
    Bangladesh.  It had not been shown that  it was impossible  to  contact
    her father or other family members in Bangladesh.  There was no need to
    refer expressly to section 55 and clearly  the  relationship  had  been
    dealt with in the letter.  The relevant consideration had been provided
    and there was no need for a separate reference.  As regards the  Daley-
    Murdock point, the matter did not fall within the  respondent's  policy
    since the application did not include a dependent child and there  were
    no exceptional, compelling reasons to make a removal decision.

Discussion

24.   It  is  clear  that  the  application  could  not  succeed  under  the
    Immigration Rules  and  they  have  been  considered  adequately  in  a
    combination of the two decision letters, as regards family  life  under
    the Rules and private life under the Rules.  The first letter  did  not
    address private life but that deficiency was addressed  in  the  second
    letter.  In the first letter  it  was  concluded  that  there  were  no
    exceptional circumstances which might warrant consideration of a  grant
    of leave outside the Rules.  More detailed consideration was  given  to
    exceptional circumstances in the  second  decision,  and  the  approach
    there accords with the guidance in authorities such as MF (Nigeria) and
    Nagre.

25.  The first of the three essential matters raised by Mr Collins  concerns
    what he says is an error in the assumption that the applicant could  be
    reunited with her father in Bangladesh.   The evidence in this  regard,
    as  set  out  in  statements  by  the  applicant,  her  aunt  and   her
    grandmother, is to the effect that although there was initially contact
    with  the  applicant's  mother  on  a  number  of  occasions,  and  the
    applicant's aunts spoke to the applicant's father, it  seems  in  2011,
    about the situation, eventually she lost contact with the  parents  and
    they moved out of the house they were living in in Bangladesh.

26.  The GCID attached to Ms Olley's skeleton  argument  does  not  I  think
    take matters any further. It is the basis for the remark in the  second
    decision letter, but it is taken from the  evidence  to  which  I  have
    referred above.

27.  The letter is worded quite carefully.  It  says  "Although  her  mother
    cannot be contacted, your client's aunt has  spoken  to  your  client's
    father in Bangladesh, hence your client could   be  reunited  with  her
    father in that country."  That, I  think,  is  an  accurate  statement.
    Although  efforts  to  contact  the  father  have,  it  is  said,  been
    unsuccessful, certainly the possibility is not ruled out, and  to  that
    is added Ms Olley's point that the applicant is now an adult and better
     equipped to cope with life than she would have been  as  a  child.  In
    that regard it is relevant to bear in mind Mr Collins'  point  in  that
    attaining the age of 18 is not a bright line departure  from  childhood
    and family links, and certainly the evidence put to  the  Secretary  of
    State about the family does indicate that they are close.

28.  The conclusion in the first decision letter was  that  there  were  not
    exceptional circumstances shown warranting a grant of leave outside the
    Rules in  respect  of  private  and  family  life,  although  this  was
    addressed it seems particularly in the context  of  the  decision  that
    under the Immigration Rules the applicant  could  not  succeed  on  the
    basis of family life.  To that also has to be added the point  made  in
    the second letter that no evidence had been provided to  indicate  that
    the ties the applicant has with her relatives exceed  the  normal  ties
    beyond [sic] adults and it is also noted that the  applicant  does  not
    have custody of Masuda.

29.  Again I think this  was  a  conclusion  to  which  the  respondent  was
    entitled to come on the  evidence,  and  I  bear  in  mind  Ms  Olley's
    reminder that this is not an issue of agreement  or  disagreement  with
    the conclusions of the respondent but rather an assessment  of  whether
    any public law challenge to her reasoning and conclusions is made  out.
    I consider that the  decision  letters  taken  together  do  adequately
    address the issues that were put to the respondent and accordingly  the
    first ground is not made out.

30.  Mr Collins' next main point is the section 55 point.  It  is  the  case
    that section 55 was not referred to in either decision letter.  However
    the second letter displays a clear awareness of the  situation  of  the
    applicant and her sister, including the reasons why Masuda was  granted
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom, and noting  that  she  does  not
    have custody of Masuda.  Again I consider it was open to the respondent
    to find that there were not exceptional circumstances in this case that
    would justify a grant  of  leave,  and  the  absence  of  any  specific
    reference to  Masuda's  interests,  bearing  in  mind  the  quite  full
    analysis of the family situation, does not seem to me to preclude  that
    conclusion having been properly reached.

31.  As regards the third main  point,  what  might  be  called  the  Daley-
    Murdock point, I consider that again the challenge is not made out. The
    respondent's policy is set out towards the end of the  second  decision
    letter, and, bearing in mind my above findings, it is the case that  no
    exceptional and compelling reason to make a removal decision  had  been
    made out, and it is the case that the application does  not  include  a
    dependent child under 18 since Masuda was not of  course  part  of  the
    application.  Accordingly I consider that the respondent  was  entitled
    to decide not to make a removal decision in this case and  that  ground
    therefore also falls away.

32.  For all these reasons, therefore, the application is dismissed.

33.  I will deal with costs and  any  other  issues  when  the  judgment  is
    handed down on 30 July 2014.





Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen



