


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal


(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


   Ajakaiye (visitor appeals - right of appeal) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00375
                                    (IAC)


                            the immigration Acts

Heard at: Field House
On 21 June 2011                              Determination promulgated


                                    Before

                         Mr. Justice Blake, President
                             Senior Immigration Judge Gill


                                         Between


                               Kehinde Temilade Ajakaiye



                                                        Appellant


                                               And


                              Entry Clearance Officer, Abuja

                 Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No representation but Mr. O.  Awonuga,  the  sponsor,
                       appeared.
For  the  Respondent:           Mr.  G.  Saunders,  Home  Office  Presenting
                 Officer.

(1)   In family visitor appeals, the question whether there is  a  right  of
      appeal depends on whether the application "was made" for  the  purpose
      of visiting a relative to which the applicant is related in one of the
      ways described at paragraph  2  of  the  Immigration  Appeals  (Family
      Visitor) Regulations 2003.

(2)   Ascertaining the  purpose  of  the  visit  is  primarily  achieved  by
      examining what the applicant said in the visit visa application  form,
      although, as presently drafted, the forms may not  provide  sufficient
      opportunity to identify all relevant matters.

(3)   In the event of ambiguity as to who is to be visited and whether  they
      are a qualifying relative, regard may be had to extraneous evidence.

(4)   Where a judge has  embarked  on  the  hearing  of  an  appeal  without
      objection and reaches  the  conclusion  that  the  appellant  was  not
      seeking to visit a qualified person, there is a right of appeal to the
      Upper Tribunal. The right of appeal does not depend on the Immigration
      Judge's findings of fact.

(5)   Although the Immigration Appeals  (Family  Visitor)  Regulations  2003
      distinguish between two classes  of  in-laws  (see  SB  (family  visit
      appeal: brother-in-law?) Pakistan [2008] UKAIT 00053), an intention to
      visit a nephew or niece is within its scope.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



1.    The appellant, a 26-year old Nigerian national, had  appealed  against
     the respondent's decision of 29 June 2010 to refuse her application  of
     22 June 2010 to visit Mr.  O.  Awonuga  (the  sponsor)  in  the  United
     Kingdom for a period of two weeks under paragraph 41 of  the  Statement
     of  Changes  in  the  Immigration  Rules  HC  395  (as  amended)   (the
     Immigration Rules).

2.    In response to question 8.4 of her completed  visa  application  form,
     the appellant said that she would be staying with the sponsor, who  she
     described as her brother-in-law and gave his address.  In  response  to
     "Part 9 Additional information" of the application form, the  appellant
     said that she wished to visit her brother-in-law and "their kids".

3.     The  appellant's  appeal  was  heard  on  18  February  2011   before
     Immigration Judge I F Taylor who dismissed her appeal. The  Immigration
     Judge said that he was satisfied that there was no valid appeal  before
     him under the Immigration Rules because the  relationship  between  the
     appellant and her sponsor was too distant. In response  to  a  question
     from the Immigration Judge, the sponsor said in evidence  that  he  and
     the appellant were "very distant cousins" and that they were not  first
     cousins. The record of proceedings suggests that the sponsor was  never
     asked whether he was related by marriage to the appellant or invited to
     comment on the appellant's contention that he was her brother in law.

4.    In the Refusal Notice, the respondent had not  taken  issue  with  the
     relationship claimed between the appellant and the sponsor  or  whether
     the claimed relationship gave rise to a right of appeal. No preliminary
     point was taken as to  right  of  appeal  by  the  duty  judge  or  the
     respondent in subsequent submissions.

5.    The issues taken by the respondent were  whether  she  was  a  genuine
     visitor seeking entry as a visitor for a limited period  as  stated  by
     her, whether she intended to leave the United Kingdom at the end of her
     proposed visit,  whether  she  would  be  accommodated  and  maintained
     without working or recourse to public funds and whether she would  able
     to meet the  costs  of  her  return  or  onward  journey,  as  required
     (respectively) under paragraph 41 (i), (ii),  (vi)  and  (vii)  of  the
     Immigration Rules. The Immigration Judge did not make any  findings  on
     the issues taken by the respondent.

6.    On 14  April  2011,  Senior  Immigration  Judge  Spencer  granted  the
     appellant's application for permission to appeal,  observing  that  the
     Immigration Judge had taken a point as to whether the appellant  had  a
     right of appeal under the  Immigration  Rules  without  notice  to  the
     appellant, that the fact that the sponsor was a distant cousin  of  the
     appellant would not preclude him from being her brother-in-law and that
     how his answer  should  have  been  interpreted  depended  on  how  the
     question as to his relationship was asked  and how  he  had  understood
     it.

7.    At the hearing, we permitted Mr. Saunders  to  ask  the  sponsor  some
     questions about the nature of his relationship with the appellant.  The
     sponsor told us that he gave the Immigration  Judge  the  wrong  answer
     when he told her that he was the distant cousin of the  appellant.  The
     reason was that he was confused and  depressed  when  he  attended  the
     hearing. He is  married  to  the  appellant's  biological  sister  Tola
     Mutiat. They were married in the United Kingdom and have two sons.  The
     first was born on 11 July 1998 and the second on 27 June 2003. His wife
     did not work. The appellant would be visiting him and his  family.  She
     kept in touch with her sister by telephone. There  had  been  a  recent
     telephone conversation. She  had  now  completed  the  studies  at  her
     college. He did not know why the appellant had said in her  application
     form that she was visiting  her  brother-in-law  rather  than  she  was
     visiting her sister and family.

8.    Mr. Saunders did not take issue with the evidence we  heard,  nor  did
     he dispute the proposition that  the Immigration Judge made an error of
     law, in that, the appellant had not had a fair opportunity to deal with
     the issue whether there was a right of appeal by reason of  the  family
     nature of the intended visit, and the Immigration Judge  had  not  from
     the record of proceedings adequately explored with the sponsor  whether
     he was related by marriage and why the appellant had stated that he was
     her brother in law.

9.    We are satisfied  for  both  reasons  that  the  Immigration  Judge's
     decision did involve an error on a point of law. If  he  was  going  to
     explore the question of the relationship for the purpose of considering
     his jurisdiction and the credibility of the claimed purpose of visit it
     was incumbent on him to do so fairly. The point had not been  taken  by
     the respondent and so neither sponsor  nor  appellant  would  have  had
     notice of it or come prepared to address  it.   From  the  evidence  we
     heard from the sponsor we have little doubt that  if  the  matters  had
     been put to him for comment he would have indicated that he was married
     to the appellant's sister and if  necessary  the  marriage  certificate
     could have been produced. From the record of  proceedings  we  consider
     there to have been a reasonable possibility that the sponsor thought he
     was being asked about a relationship by blood rather than by  marriage.
     We conclude that the error was material both as to jurisdiction and the
     merits of the appeal.  We accordingly set aside the decision and remake
     it. Following the hearing  we  invited  further  submissions  from  the
     respondent and if any submissions were made by the appellant  in  reply
     as to the merits of the visa application and the points  on  which  the
     respondent has based his refusal.


Right of appeal

10.   Section 88A(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002,
     as amended (the 2002 Act), provides for the right of  appeal  in  entry
     clearance cases. This states:

      "88A. Entry Clearance


      (1)   A person may not appeal under section 82(1) against  refusal  of
           an application for entry clearance unless  the  application  was
           made for the purposes of -
            (a)   visiting a person of a class or description prescribed  by
                 regulations for the purpose of this subsection, or
            (b)   [not relevant]"

11.   The Regulations referred to in  section  88A(2)  are  the  Immigration
     Appeals (Family Visitor) Regulations 2003 (the 2003 Regulations), which
     provide as follows:

      "2.   (1)   For the purposes of  section  90(1)  of  the  Nationality,
                 Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,  a  'member   of   the
                 applicant's family' is any of the following persons-


                   (a)   the  applicant's  spouse,  father,   mother,   son,
                       daughter,   grandfather,    grandmother,    grandson,
                       granddaughter, brother, sister, uncle, aunt,  nephew,
                       niece or first cousin;


                   (b)   the  father,  mother,  brother  or  sister  of  the
                 applicant's spouse;


                  (c)  the spouse of the applicant's son or daughter;


                  (d)   the  applicant's  stepfather,  stepmother,  stepson,
                       stepdaughter, stepbrother or stepsister; or


                  (e)  a person with whom  the  applicant  has  lived  as  a
                       member of an unmarried couple for at least two of the
                       three years before the day on which  his  application
                       for entry clearance was made.


            (2)   In these Regulations, 'first cousin' means, in relation to
                 a person, the son or daughter of his uncle or aunt."

      Paragraph 2(1) of the 2003 Regulations refers to section 90(1) of  the
     2002 Act but section 88A of the 2002 Act was substituted for  ss.  88A,
     90 and 91 of the 2002 Act by section 4 of the Immigration,  Asylum  and
     Nationality Act 2006 from 1 April 2008. In other words,  the  reference
     to section 90(1) in paragraph 2(1) of the 2003 Regulations  should  now
     be read as a reference to section 88A.

12.    The  right  of  appeal  under  section  88A  turns  on  whether  "the
     application was made" for the purpose  of  visiting  a  person  who  is
     related to the applicant in one of the ways described at paragraph 2 of
     the 2003 Regulations. The  reference  to  "the  application  was  made"
     suggests that the answer to whether a refusal of the application  gives
     rise  to  a  right  of  appeal  is  governed  by  the  purpose  of  the
     application. The most obvious place to find out what the purpose of the
     application was is the applicant's completed application form and  such
     other documents as may have been submitted at  the  time  in  order  to
     decide whether the applicant had applied  in  order  to  visit  such  a
     relative. If examination of this material reveals  that  this  was  the
     stated purpose of the visit then the individual has a right  of  appeal
     and that right of appeal is not lost, whatever evidence is subsequently
     served and even if that  evidence  detracts  from  and  undermines  the
     application itself. If subsequent evidence reveals that an individual's
     intention as stated in the application itself is unreliable, or  it  is
     found to be unreliable, that may (depending on  the  circumstances  and
     the other evidence in the case) justify reaching adverse conclusions on
     the requirements under paragraph 41 of the  Immigration  Rules  but  it
     would not justify a conclusion that the individual did not have a right
     of appeal.  Equally if there is an error of law  in  an  assessment  of
     what the purpose of the application made was, the Upper  Tribunal  will
     have jurisdiction to investigate the matter.

13.   Whether there is a right of  appeal  is  a  preliminary  decision  for
     determination by the duty judge at a screening stage: see rule  9  (1A)
     (b) Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.  There  the
     First tier Tribunal is directed to look at the notice of appeal to  see
     whether:

           "the notice of appeal concerns the refusal of an application for
           entry clearance which was not made for a purpose falling  within
           s.88A(1)(a) or (b) of the 2002 Act".


     An Immigration Judge has to have jurisdiction in order to entertain  an
     appeal and receive evidence in the case. If the notice  of  appeal  has
     been accepted and no objection is taken by the respondent, there is  no
     need for the Immigration Judge to embark on an inquiry into his or  her
     own  jurisdiction.  Indeed  having  embarked  on  the  appeal   without
     objection, it may be that an Immigration Judge should not  do  so  (see
     the judgment of Sedley LJ in Pengeyo & Ors  [2010]  EWCA  Civ  1275,  a
     decision made in the context of section 92 of the 2002 Act). If however
     a preliminary point is taken and enquired into by the judge, it appears
     to us that the starting point is the application  form  and  supporting
     material.  The problem arises  if  the  application  form  is  entirely
     neutral on the question, and the notice of appeal has not advanced  the
     position. If the Immigration Judge is entitled to embark on an  inquiry
     into jurisdiction at the stage of the substantive hearing at all, he or
     she must do so fairly and give the person lodging the notice of  appeal
     the opportunity to make  representations.  At  that  stage  it  may  be
     possible to receive information as what the  application  was  for,  by
     extraneous further evidence that a judge can take into account.

14.   One reason why a problem of this kind arises  is  because  the  family
     visitor application forms that are currently in use are unsatisfactory,
     in our view, for the following reasons

      (a)   Question 8.4 of this form reads:

      "8.4  Please name the relative you will stay with  and  provide  exact
                 details of your relationship with them ... "

           Question 8.4 is inadequate, because  it  is  possible  to  visit
           person A, who comes within the 2003 Regulations, but  stay  with
           person B, who does not. For  example,  it  is  possible  for  an
           applicant to wish to visit his or her sister but due to problems
           with accommodation, intend to  stay  with  a  family  friend  or
           indeed a hotel. Thus, if such an applicant  were  to  state,  in
           response to question 8.4, that he or she intended to  stay  with
           person B, he or she has answered the question but  not  provided
           the information which establishes whether there was a  right  of
           appeal.

     b) If an individual wishes to visit his or her brother-in-law,  it  may
        be thought by a lay person that a description of the  individual  to
        be visited as "brother-in-law"  is  sufficiently  precise.  However,
        this is not the case because the Regulations distinguish between two
        classes of in  laws.   SB  (family  visit  appeal:  brother-in-law?)
        Pakistan [2008] UKAIT 00053 establishes that there  is  a  right  of
        appeal if the  applicant  intends  to  visit  his  or  her  spouse's
        sibling, but not if the  applicant  intends  to  visit  his  or  her
        sibling's spouse.


     c) Question 9 on the form asks for supplementary information but not  a
        precise description of the relationship between  applicant  and  the
        person intended to be visited. In some cultures, the terms  "uncle",
        "aunt" and "cousin" may be used to describe individuals who  may  or
        may not fall within paragraph 2 of the 2003 Regulations.   Precision
        is desirable so that the First-tier  Tribunal  does  not  embark  on
        appeals that if the facts  were  clear  at  the  outset  it  had  no
        jurisdiction to do so, and appellants are not  misled  into  wasting
        time and money on such proceedings.

15.   Whilst the content of a visa application form  is  a  matter  for  the
     respondent, it is in the interests of all parties for it be clear  from
     the outset whether an individual has a right of appeal.  In  our  view,
     the family visitor application forms that are currently in use fail  to
     achieve this purpose and the questions should therefore be sufficiently
     precise to extract the relevant information. In  our  view,  the  forms
     should require applicants to state which relative(s) they are intending
     to visit (and not merely stay with) and to provide precise  details  of
     their relationship with those relative(s), with some examples, so  that
     applicants understand that it will not be enough  to  state  that  they
     intend to visit a brother-in-law or a  sister-in-law  or  a  cousin  or
     uncle or aunt, but that it  is  necessary  for  them  to  identify  the
     individuals (if any) through whom they are  related  to  the  relatives
     they intend to visit and to explain how they and the person they intend
     to visit are each related to those individuals.

16.   For the time being, where there  is  ambiguity  on  the  face  of  the
     application form taken together with documents submitted at the time of
     application, it may be necessary to make enquiries at  the  hearing  in
     order to establish whether there was a right of  appeal.  However,  the
     focus of the enquiry must be to cast light on the  application  itself.
     This is consistent with the decision in SB (Pakistan).

17.   We turn now to the application form in the instant case. In answer  to
     question 8.4, the appellant mentioned the sponsor's name and said  that
     he was her brother-in-law. This is not necessarily a relationship which
     falls within paragraph 2 of the 2003 Regulations.

18.   However, in  answer  to  question  9,  "Additional  Information",  the
appellant said:


            "I wish to visit my brother-in-law and their kids ......"

19.   Whether the brother-in-law is the sibling of an applicant's spouse  or
     the spouse  of  the  applicant's  sibling,  the  offspring  of  such  a
     relationship would be a nephew or niece, and if  visiting  them  was  a
     declared purpose of the visit there would be a right of appeal  against
     any  refusal.  In  this  case,  therefore,  the  application  form  and
     supporting material was not  ambiguous  and  there  was  no  basis  for
     objection to the jurisdiction as a preliminary issue, especially  given
     that the respondent had not taken the jurisdiction point, nor  had  the
     duty judge. On this basis the judge should not have concluded there was
     no jurisdiction to hear the appeal.

20.   If there had been ambiguity as to the purpose of the application  then
     we would have considered the extraneous evidence given  to  us  by  the
     sponsor. We accept his evidence that his wife is the appellant's sister
     and that the visit was to see the family unit consisting  of  him,  his
     wife and their children. If there had been no nephews and  nieces  that
     the appellant was coming to visit, no doubt about the address that  the
     appellant was seeking to stay at and therefore visit, and the  evidence
     was that at that address there was to be found both the sponsor and the
     spouse of the sponsor who is the relevant relative for the  purpose  of
     the regulations, we consider it would  have  been  permissible  in  the
     present state of the application form, for an Immigration Judge to have
     received this information and to have concluded that the purpose of the
     visit  included visiting the relative living at the  address  (in  this
     case, the appellant's sister). We have concluded  that,  having  become
     concerned about the jurisdiction  issue,  if  the  judge  had  enquired
     fairly into the relationship by marriage and the accuracy of  what  the
     appellant had stated in the application form  he  would  have  obtained
     these answers. His evidence before the Immigration  Judge,  when  asked
     whether he was related to the appellant, or how he was related  to  the
     appellant,  that  he  was  a  distant  cousin,   is   not   necessarily
     inconsistent with his evidence to us, as he may well have thought  that
     he was being asked  whether  he  had  a  blood  relationship  with  the
     appellant. It was therefore necessary for the Immigration Judge to have
     put to the sponsor the fact that the appellant had described him as her
     brother-in-law. If the Immigration Judge had done so, we have no  doubt
     that the sponsor would have told him in evidence what he told  us.  The
     procedural irregularity led to an inadequate evidential inquiry. We are
     satisfied that on this basis there  is  jurisdiction  and  the  genuine
     purpose of the visit was to see the family.

21.   We now consider the merits of the substantive appeal  under  paragraph
     41 of the Immigration Rules.

22.   By a Notice dated 26 June 2011, we informed the parties  that  we  had
     concluded that the appellant had a right of appeal and,  further,  that
     we had taken the preliminary view that the evidence  demonstrated  that
     she satisfied the requirements of paragraph 41 that were put  in  issue
     by the respondent. Accordingly, we informed the parties  that  we  were
     minded to allow the appellant's under the Immigration  Rules,  for  the
     reasons given in the notice. We gave  the  respondent  28  days  within
     which to object to the proposal to allow the  appellant's  appeal,  and
     serve written submissions on the evidence.  We  gave  the  appellant  a
     further 28 days to serve written submissions in reply, in the event the
     respondent served any submissions.

23.   On 14 July 2011, the Upper Tribunal received  a  letter  from  the  UK
     Border Agency stating that it  accepted  that  there  was  a  right  of
     appeal, that it accepted our findings as to the merits of  the  appeal,
     and that it did not propose to make any further representations.

24.    We  are  satisfied,  on  the  balance  of  probabilities,  that   the
     circumstances appertaining as at the date of  the  decision  were  such
     that the appellant satisfied the requirements of paragraph 41 that were
     placed in issue by the respondent (see paragraph 5 above). Our  reasons
     (which were set out in the Notice dated 29 June 2011) are as follows:

      (a)   In the application form, the appellant said that her brother-in-
           law would pay for her expenses such as  accommodation  and  food
           (question 5.17) and that her uncle in  Nigeria  would  fund  her
           trip to the United Kingdom. Given that the appellant said in her
           application form that her brother-in-law was employed  and  that
           there was a letter from the appellant's sponsor  confirming  his
           employment and that he would accommodate  the  appellant,  there
           appears to be no basis for  saying  that  he  was  unwilling  or
           unable to provide her with accommodation  and  food  during  her
           short visitor of two weeks.

      (b)   There is no reason to doubt that the appellant was intending  to
           visit the address as she declared in the form. At  this  address
           lives her sponsor, the husband of her sister Tola and their  two
           children born in 1998 and 2003.

      (c)   In the Refusal Notice, the respondent stated that the  appellant
           had not provided evidence  that  her  uncle  had  the  necessary
           authority to use the funds of Shisamdy Nigeria Limited, of which
           he is the managing director, for personal use. In  response  the
           appellant submitted minutes of a meeting on 16 June 2010, during
           which it was resolved that the company would finance in full the
           managing director's trip abroad that summer or, if he was unable
           to embark  on  such  a  trip,  a  trip  abroad  by  any  of  his
           dependants.  The  minutes  record  that  the  appellant's  uncle
           informed the members present  that  his  niece,  the  appellant,
           would travel abroad in his place, as he  was  unable  to  travel
           abroad  for  personal  reasons.  In  the  review  by  the  Entry
           Clearance Manager (ECM), the ECM said that the "abstract of  the
           minutes" of the meeting submitted  does  not  confirm  that  the
           appellant's sponsor had the permission to use company funds  for
           personal use. However, the ECM did not explain why the  copy  of
           the minutes supplied (they were not  merely  extracts)  did  not
           provide adequate evidence that the appellant's trip  was  to  be
           financed by the company and the company had given  its  approval
           to such a course. We further conclude that the  question  as  to
           who is going to pay for an air ticket is  a  rather  subordinate
           one to the question  whether  the  applicant  will  be  able  to
           maintain  and  accommodate  herself  during  the  visit  without
           employment or recourse to public funds.

      (d)   The appellant attached to the Notice of  appeal  copies  of  her
           personal bank statements and personal  bank  statements  of  her
           uncle. She said in the grounds of appeal that the deposits  from
           her uncle  were  noted  with  asterisks  in  her  personal  bank
           statements. We note that the bank statements in the respondent's
           bundle are poor copies, in that, part of many of the entries  on
           the left side of each page are  off-page.  However,  there  were
           letters from Lead  City  University  which  confirmed  that  the
           appellant was a student at the institution. The respondent  does
           not appear to take issue with this evidence. The letter dated 17
           June 2010 states that the appellant is expected to return to the
           university to complete her studies there. There appear to be  no
           reasons to take issue with this evidence, which is  relevant  in
           deciding whether the  appellant  intends  to  leave  the  United
           Kingdom at the end of her proposed visit.

Decision

25.   The decision of the Immigration Judge involved the making of an  error
     on a point of law such that it falls to be set aside.  We  have  remade
     the decision. Our decision is that the appellant's appeal  against  the
     decision of the Entry Clearance Officer is allowed.



Signed

Senior Immigration Judge Gill
Judge of the Upper Tribunal


