

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

AB (Article 1F(a) - defence - duress) Iran [2016] UKUT 00376 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 1 June 2016                                |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                                LORD TURNBULL
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN

                                   Between

                                     A B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves protection issues. We find that it is appropriate to  continue
the order. Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
appellant is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Representation:

For  the  Appellant:      Ms  A.  Pickup,  Counsel,  instructed  by  Wilsons
Solicitors
For the  Respondent:     Ms  J.  Isherwood  Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
Officer


1.    In response to an allegation that a person should  be  excluded  under
      Article 1F(a) of the Refugee  Convention  because  there  are  serious
      reasons for considering that the person has committed a crime  against
      peace, a war crime or a crime against humanity as defined in the  Rome
      Statute, there is an initial evidential  burden  on  an  appellant  to
      raise a ground for excluding criminal responsibility such as duress.

2.    The overall burden remains on the respondent to establish  that  there
      are serious reasons for considering that the  appellant  did  not  act
      under duress.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background and introduction

    1. This appeal concerns the remaking of the decision on the appellant's
       appeal against the respondent's  refusal  to  grant  her  claim  for
       asylum.


    2. The appellant is an Iranian citizen. She held a  senior  role  in  a
       women's prison under the control of the Islamic Revolutionary  Guard
       Corps in which political prisoners were detained  and  tortured.  In
       2009 she, her husband and her young child  left  Iran  clandestinely
       with the help of an agent. Having become separated from her husband,
       the appellant arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  with  her  child  in
       September 2009 and claimed asylum. It transpired  that  her  husband
       had made his way to Turkey but had been forcibly returned from there
       to Iran, where he was detained and tortured over a period of months.
       On his release he subsequently made his way to the  United  Kingdom,
       arriving in December 2010, when he too claimed asylum.


    3. The respondent refused each of the applications, giving reasons  for
       doing so in the appellant's case by letter dated 2 October 2012.  In
       that  letter  the  respondent  explained  her  conclusion  that  the
       appellant was to be excluded from  the  protection  of  the  Refugee
       Convention upon the grounds set out in article  1F(a),  namely  that
       there were serious grounds for considering that she had committed  a
       crime against humanity, and her  consequential  certification  under
       section 55 of the Immigration Asylum and Nationality Act  2006  that
       she was not entitled to the protection of article 33 paragraph 1  of
       the Refugee Convention. For the same reasons she concluded that  the
       appellant did not qualify for  protection  under  the  Qualification
       Directive. The appellant, her child and  her  husband  all  appealed
       against the respondent's decisions and their linked cases were heard
       together before the First-tier Tribunal on 28 April 2014.


    4.  In  its  determination,  the   First-tier   Tribunal   upheld   the
       respondent's decision to exclude the appellant from protection under
       the Refugee Convention and the Qualification Directive and in  doing
       so rejected  the  appellant's  claim  that  she  was  excluded  from
       criminal responsibility on account of  having  acted  under  duress.
       However, by concession it allowed the appellant's  appeal  on  human
       rights grounds on the basis that she would be at real  risk  of  ill
       treatment on return to Iran. The appeals of the appellant's  husband
       and her child were each allowed on  both  asylum  and  human  rights
       grounds.


    5. After permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  was  refused  the
       appellant  sought  Judicial  Review,  which  was  granted  with  the
       following observations:


           "The Grounds for seeking Judicial Review are reasonably
    arguable.                     Furthermore, a point of principle of
    general importance is at issue, namely         the proper burden of
    proof when an applicant for refugee status claims that          she
    should not be regarded as complicit in a crime against humanity because
           of duress (and, more specifically, whether it is for her to show
    that she could          not have avoided the duress by, for instance,
    resigning from her post, or              whether it is for the SSHD to
    show that this was a course that had been                 open to
    her)."


    6. By determination dated 19 December 2015, Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
       Chamberlain held  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       involved the making of an error on a point of law,  as  its  finding
       that the appellant could  have  left  the  prison  service  "without
       serious difficulty" was inadequately reasoned and not  supported  by
       evidence before it. The  decision  on  the  appellant's  appeal  was
       ordered to be remade with the  original  findings  and  decision  in
       relation to exclusion from protection under the  Refugee  Convention
       and the Qualification Directive (paragraphs [55] to [65]) being  set
       aside. The  remaining  findings  and  decisions  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal were preserved.


The history of the appellant's involvement with  the  Iranian  Revolutionary
Guard Corps

    7. The evidence available on this matter comprised the content  of  the
       appellant's screening interview dated 15 September 2009, the content
       of her asylum interview dated 23 October 2009, the  content  of  her
       statement dated 27 April 2014,  the  content  of  her  supplementary
       statement dated 26 May 2016 and the oral  testimony  which  he  gave
       before us. With one possibly significant exception, to which we will
       return later, the appellant  has  been  broadly  consistent  in  the
       account which she has given throughout.


    8. From these sources an accepted account of the  appellant's  life  in
       Iran can be distilled. As  a  teenager,  and  after  her  two  older
       brothers were sent to war,  she  began  working  for  the  Basij  (a
       volunteer  organisation  for  young  Iranians  subordinate  to   the
       Revolutionary Guards). In  this  capacity  she  attended  to  fairly
       menial tasks  in  her  local  mosque  whilst  still  at  school  and
       thereafter, whilst studying at University,  provided  assistance  to
       the mosque in other ways, such as bookkeeping. She obtained a degree
       and was then referred by her mosque to the personnel  department  of
       the Revolutionary Guard. In due course, in her mid-twenties, she was
       invited for an interview and offered a position as a prison guard in
       a women's prison. She was given to  understand  that  the  prisoners
       were political  prisoners  who  attempted  to  mislead  others  with
       philosophy and writings and were in prison  because  of  the  danger
       which they posed to other members of society. After discussion  with
       a senior member of her mosque she decided to  accept  the  position,
       understanding that she might be able to help rehabilitate  those  in
       prison and through her belief in the Revolution  might  be  able  to
       help them back to the right way of thinking by bringing them back to
       Islam and the Hezbollah way.


    9. The prison at which the appellant commenced work was operated by the
       Revolutionary Guard  Corps  and  contained  between  150-260  female
       inmates. It was a temporary  detention  facility,  known  by  number
       rather than name and had no  official  address.  Correspondence  was
       brought to and taken from the prison by  the  Revolutionary  Guard's
       own courier service. Within the prison there was a separate  section
       controlled  by  the  Hefazat-e  Etelaat-e  Sepah  Pasderan   -   the
       Intelligence Service of the Revolutionary Guard.  Certain  prisoners
       were  selected  for  transfer  to  that  section  for  interrogation
       achieved by means of torture. Part of the appellant's function as  a
       guard was to participate in the  physical  process  of  transferring
       these prisoners.


   10. After the appellant's child was born she took maternity leave for  a
       period of nine months. After that she remained off work for a period
       of two  years  having  been  diagnosed  with  depression  which  she
       attributed to the work which she did and the effect that it had upon
       her.


   11. Towards the end of 2007, by which time  she  been  employed  at  the
       prison for over ten years, the appellant was promoted  to  a  senior
       post with a staff of around 12 other guards under her command.


   12. She had responsibility for arranging the transfer  of  inmates  from
       the general area of the woman's prison to the section controlled  by
       the Intelligence Service. A list of  the  inmates  to  be  sent  for
       interrogation would be provided to the governor who  would  in  turn
       pass it to the appellant. The appellant would personally arrange the
       transfer of the named prisoners or instruct members of her staff  to
       do so.


   13. Prisoners transferred for interrogation were never returned  to  the
       general section of the prison. In evidence before us  the  appellant
       was coy in part about the fate of these individuals.  She  explained
       that she did not know whether they  were  transferred  on  to  other
       prisons or what became of them. In her asylum interview  though  she
       explained that the section was where people were taken  to  get  the
       last information out of them and within the prison it was known  as:
       "the end of the line". When asked at interview  what  she  meant  by
       that she explained that: "normally  they  wouldn't  be  alive  after
       that".


   14. Having expressed that reservation about the appellant's evidence, it
       is fair to recognise that from her screening interview  onwards  she
       has explained that prisoners were tortured and beaten.  Consistently
       with this, while stating that she had never been in that section, in
       giving evidence before us she accepted  straightforwardly  that  her
       understanding was that  the  prisoners  who  were  sent  there  were
       tortured.


   15. The appellant continued in her employment until 2009 when a relative
       was brought to her prison having been arrested at  a  demonstration.
       Her relative was placed in solitary confinement and the  appellant's
       understanding was that her relative was to  be  transferred  to  the
       section controlled by the  Intelligence  Service.  After  discussion
       with other family members the appellant arranged for her relative to
       be transferred to hospital from where they arranged for her relative
       to escape. Having paid a significant sum of money  to  an  agent  to
       provide assistance the family then left Iran.


   16. From the date of her screening interview onwards the  appellant  has
       maintained that she was required to sign a contract of employment on
       taking up her position at the prison. At  that  time  she  explained
       that it was not possible to  resign,  she  could  not  leave  unless
       fired, she could not choose to leave  and  that  she  was  sworn  to
       secrecy.  In her April 2014 statement she explained  that  when  she
       signed her contract of employment she  was  told  that  she  had  to
       continue to work there until her retirement, or until  her  term  of
       service had been completed, unless they transferred  her  elsewhere.
       She was not aware of anyone else ever  leaving  their  post  at  the
       prison in any other circumstances. She said that she was quite  sure
       that if she left she would have  had  a  serious  problem  with  the
       Revolutionary Guard. She thought that if she had asked to leave this
       would raise suspicions and she would have been suspected  of  having
       sold out or having passed on secret information  about  the  prison.
       She explained that if she had left without permission she would have
       been treated as a traitor, imprisoned, tortured and perhaps raped.


   17. In the appellant's supplementary statement of May 2016,  she  stated
       that her term of service was twenty five years and that this was the
       period which she  would  have  required  to  complete  before  being
       allowed to retire. She claimed that this was the normal period which
       women had to complete before they could leave their job  or  retire.
       It was a longer period for men. The appellant also claimed  that  it
       would have been possible for her to apply for early retirement after
       twenty years' service.


The respondent's overarching position on the appellant's conduct

   18.  The  respondent's  reasons  for  refusal  letter  begins  with   an
       assessment of the conduct of the Iranian authorities in recent years
       and then narrates, over some thirty or so pages, various,  sometimes
       repetitive, circumstances and considerations which  she  appears  to
       have taken into account in determining whether the  appellant  ought
       to be excluded from the protection  of  the  Refugee  Convention  by
       virtue of article 1F. It is not always easy to follow  the  thinking
       which lies behind this letter and a  number  of  the  considerations
       identified have no application to the  appellant  and  her  conduct.
       However, having the benefit of the  skeleton  argument  prepared  on
       behalf of the respondent,  and  having  heard  submissions  from  Ms
       Isherwood, we understand  the  respondent's  position  to  be  this.
       Article 1F of the Refugee Convention provides as follows:

                 "The provisions of this Convention shall not apply  to  any
person with                       respect to whom there are serious  reasons
for considering that:

                 (a) he has committed a crime against peace,  a  war  crime,
or a crime  against               humanity, as defined in the  international
instruments drawn up to make                       provision in  respect  of
such crimes;"

   19. The meaning to  be  given  to  article  1F(a)  is  to  be  found  in
       international  law  rather  than  domestic  law  and   the   guiding
       instrument is the Rome Statute of the International  Criminal  Court
       ("the ICC Statute").

   20. The  respondent  contended  that  the  acts  of  torture  admittedly
       perpetrated within the prison in which the appellant worked were  of
       a nature and extent such as would fall within the  definition  of  a
       crime against humanity, as set out in article 7 of the ICC  Statute.
       Although  it  was  not  suggested  that  the  appellant   personally
       conducted any acts of torture, she fell to be  held  responsible  in
       light of the terms of  article  25  paragraph  3(c)  which  attached
       criminal responsibility to someone who:


                 "For the purpose of facilitating the commission of  such  a
crime,  aids,                       abets  or  otherwise  assists   in   its
commission  or  its  attempted   commission,                       including
providing the means for its commission;"

   21.  The  Secretary  of  State's  contention  was  that  the   appellant
       facilitated the acts of torture which occurred in the  part  of  the
       prison controlled by the Intelligence  Service  by  her  conduct  in
       identifying those prisoners who were listed for interrogation and by
       taking them from  the  general  part  of  the  prison  to  the  part
       controlled by the Intelligence Service. It was  contended  that  the
       mental elements  of  intent  and  knowledge  required  for  criminal
       responsibility by the ICC Statute were met in light of the terms  of
       article 30, which provides as follows:

                 2. For the purposes of this article, a  person  has  intent
where:

                 (a) In relation to conduct, that person means to engage  in
the conduct;
                 (b) in relation to a  consequence,  that  person  means  to
cause that consequence                  or is aware that it  will  occur  in
the ordinary course of events.

                 3. For the purposes of this article, "knowledge" means
awareness that a                        circumstance exists or a
consequence will occur in the ordinary course of                    events.
'Know' and 'knowingly' shall be construed accordingly."

   22. On the appellant's own evidence she intended that  those  identified
       by her  as  corresponding  to  the  names  on  the  list  should  be
       transferred to the relevant part of the prison and she did  this  in
       the knowledge that they would be subjected to torture once  she  had
       done so. She personally undertook the transfer on various occasions.
       In these circumstances the respondent contended that on the evidence
       available it was clear that the appellant's conduct facilitated what
       occurred, that she knew what the consequence for  the  prisoners  of
       her participation would be and she had therefore made a  substantial
       contribution to the acts of torture  constituting  a  crime  against
       humanity perpetrated in the prison. Relying on the  authority  of  R
       (JS (Sri Lanka)) v SSHD [2010] UKSC  15,  the  respondent  submitted
       that she was therefore correct to conclude that there  were  serious
       reasons for considering that the appellant  had  committed  a  crime
       against humanity and her decision should be upheld.

   23. We shall look separately at  the  respondent's  submissions  on  the
       issue of duress later.




The appellant's overarching position

   24. On behalf  of  the  appellant,  Ms  Pickup  drew  attention  to  the
       background  material  available  describing  the  constitution   and
       purposes of the Revolutionary Guard Corps. She drew attention to the
       various  different  functions  which  were  encompassed  within  the
       organisation. She  pointed  out  that  it  had  security  functions,
       military functions, economic functions, and political functions. She
       also emphasised the distinction to be drawn between the general body
       of the  Revolutionary  Guard  and  the  much  smaller  and  separate
       Intelligence Directorate within the group. She  submitted  that  the
       appellant's membership of the Revolutionary Guard alone would not be
       sufficient to attach responsibility for  the  commission  of  crimes
       against  humanity.  She  submitted  that  given  the  wide   ranging
       functions of the Corps it could not be said that membership  equated
       to support for torture or that the appellant's previous  association
       would have given her knowledge of what took place in the section  of
       the prison controlled by  the  Intelligence  Service  prior  to  her
       taking up her post.


   25. That having been said, Ms Pickup did not challenge the  respondent's
       contention that the Iranian state had been  responsible  for  crimes
       against humanity as defined in article 7 of the ICC Statute, nor did
       she suggest that the respondent was wrong in founding upon the  acts
       of torture perpetrated within the prison for  this  purpose.  Taking
       account of the guidance given in JS (Sri Lanka) and in AA-R (Iran) v
       SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 835, Ms Pickup accepted that, subject to  other
       considerations, the appellant's conduct met the test of facilitating
       the acts of torture by  aiding  and  abetting  their  commission  as
       defined in article 25 of the ICC Statute. Her  contention  was  that
       the appellant had been acting under duress  and  was  therefore  not
       criminally responsible.  Again,  we  shall  look  separately  at  Ms
       Pickup's submissions on this point later.




Our initial assessment


   26. The respondent would only be entitled to conclude that the appellant
       was excluded from the protection of the Refugee  Convention  if  the
       terms of article 1F(a) of that Convention applied.  In  the  present
       case the respondent relies on the evidence of torture  taking  place
       within the area of the prison under the control of the  Intelligence
       Service and contends that this conduct falls within  the  definition
       of a crime against humanity. As  was  correctly  acknowledged,  that
       requires an analysis of the meaning of a crime against  humanity  as
       specified in article 7 of the ICC Statute. So far as relevant to the
       present case, article 7 provides as follows :


                 "1. For the purposes of this Statute 'crime against
humanity' means  any of                the following acts when committed as
part of a widespread or  systematic                     attack directed
against any civilian population, with knowledge of the attack:


                 (f) Torture;


                  2. For the purposes of paragraph 1:


                 (a) 'Attack directed against any civilian population'
means a course of                      conduct involving the multiple
commission of acts referred to in paragraph 1                 against any
civilian population, pursuant to or in furtherance of a State or
      organizational policy to commit such attack;


                 (e) 'Torture' means the intentional infliction of severe
pain or suffering,                     whether physical or mental, upon a
person in the custody or under    the                   control of the
accused; except that torture shall not include pain or suffering
arising only from, inherent in or incidental to, lawful sanctions;"


   27. The first sentence of paragraph 1 of article  7  comprises  what  is
       known as the  "chapeau"  requirement,  meaning  that  it  covers  or
       prefaces the  particular  provisions  which  follow.  The  available
       background evidence referred to  in  the  respondent's  reasons  for
       refusal letter, as taken  along  with  the  country  expert  reports
       relied upon by both the respondent and the appellant, vouch that the
       Iranian regime  has  been  engaged  in  the  brutal  and  systematic
       repression of civil society. The means through which that repression
       has been achieved include the widespread use of arbitrary  detention
       of  dissidents,  activists  and  intellectuals  accompanied  by  the
       routine use of torture to induce confessions which can  be  used  in
       legal proceedings to  support  vague  charges  such  as  "propaganda
       against the state" and "endangering the security of the  state".  We
       accept this evidence, none of which was challenged.  The  prison  in
       which the appellant worked was one of those to which such  political
       prisoners and  dissidents  were  taken  for  the  purposes  of  this
       detention. We also accept that acts of torture such as would fit the
       definition in article 7 paragraph 1(f) of the ICC Statute took place
       on a routine basis over many  years  within  the  prison  where  the
       appellant was employed.  We  accordingly  hold  that  the  "chapeau"
       requirement has been established and that the respondent was correct
       to conclude that crimes  against  humanity  were  committed  in  the
       prison.


   28. In examining the appellant's  own  involvement  in  such  crimes  we
       recognise the importance of  the  distinction  drawn  by  Ms  Pickup
       between membership of, or association with, the general body of  the
       Revolutionary Guard and membership of the  Intelligence  Directorate
       or Service. We see the force in her submissions concerning the  wide
       range of functions undertaken by  the  Revolutionary  Guard  and  we
       therefore do not accept that the appellant must  have  known  of  or
       approved of what was taking place at the prison prior to  commencing
       her post. Mere membership of an organisation  with  such  a  diverse
       function as the Revolutionary Guard  Corps  could  not  be  said  to
       involve personal and knowing participation  in  persecutory  conduct
       conducted by some of its elements - JS  (Sri  Lanka)  Lord  Hope  at
       paragraph 44.


   29. The appellant's own evidence was that she had no reason to be  aware
       of the practices conducted in the section of the  prison  controlled
       by the Intelligence Service prior to her commencing  employment  but
       that she became aware of them after working within  the  institution
       for a short period of time. Although she  may,  perhaps,  have  been
       somewhat idealistic, given her age and background when being offered
       the post at the prison we accept the appellant's evidence as to  her
       appreciation  of  what  her  role  would  involve.  We  accept   her
       consistent account that she only  learned  of  the  conduct  of  the
       Intelligence Service after commencing her employment.  Nevertheless,
       it is plain that from  shortly  after  commencing  her  service  the
       appellant's  conduct  contributed  in  a  significant  way  to   the
       Intelligence Service's ability to pursue its purpose of committing a
       crime against humanity. On a regular basis over a  period  of  years
       she was directly responsible for removing those prisoners listed for
       interrogation and ensuring that they were  transferred  directly  to
       the separate torture facility, in the full knowledge of  what  would
       befall those individuals on being left there. In later years she had
       a supervisory and controlling function. Article 25 paragraph 3(c) of
       the ICC Statute brings home criminal responsibility to those who aid
       and abet for the purpose of facilitating the commission of a  crime.
       Aiding and abetting in  this  context  encompasses  any  assistance,
       physical or psychological, that has  a  substantial  effect  on  the
       commission of the crime, it is not necessary to establish  a  common
       purpose - MT (Article 1F(a) - aiding and abetting)  Zimbabwe  [2012]
       UKUT 15.


   30. Having assessed the appellant's conduct in the manner we have, it is
       worth repeating the approach to article 1F as  articulated  by  Lord
       Brown in JS (Sri Lanka) which the Upper Tribunal drew on in arriving
       at its decision in the case of MT Zimbabwe. At paragraphs  35  -  39
       Lord Brown said the following:


                 "35. It must surely be correct to say ... that article 1F
disqualifies                      those who make a 'substantial
contribution to' the crime, knowing    that their             acts or
omissions will facilitate it ... [and] that article 1F responsibility
           will attach to anyone ... contributing to the commission of such
crimes                 by substantially assisting the organisation to
continue to function effectively             in pursuance of its aims.


                 36. Of course, criminal responsibility would only attach
to those with the                      necessary mens rea (mental element).
But, as article 30 of the ICC Statute                   makes plain, if a
person is aware that in the ordinary course of events a
particular consequence will follow from his actions, he is taken to have
acted                  with both knowledge and intent.


                 38..... Put simply, I would hold an accused disqualified
under article 1F if                    there are serious reasons for
considering him voluntarily to have contributed               in a
significant way to the organisation's ability to pursue its purpose of
           committing war crimes, aware that his assistance will in fact
further that                      purpose."


   31. Applying all of these considerations to the question of whether  the
       Secretary of State has established that there  are  serious  reasons
       for considering that the appellant has been guilty of crimes against
       humanity, we turn to the autonomous meaning to be given to the words
       "serious reasons for considering".  We  have  applied  the  guidance
       given in paragraph 75 of the decision in Al  Sirri  v  Secretary  of
       State for the Home Department [2012] UKSC 54 where  their  Lordships
       said:


                 "(1) 'Serious reasons' is stronger than 'reasonable
grounds'.


                 (2) The evidence from which these reasons are derived must
be 'clear                   and credible' or 'strong'


                  (3) 'Considering' is stronger than 'suspecting'. In our
view it is also                   stronger than 'believing'. It requires
the considered judgement of the                    decision maker.


                 (4) The decision maker need not be satisfied beyond
reasonable doubt                       or to the standard required in
criminal law."


   32. The evidence bearing  upon  the  appellant's  complicity  is  clear,
       credible and strong. It comes from her own statements and  testimony
       and provides an  uncontested  picture  of  her  knowingly  providing
       assistance to those who perpetrated torture  within  the  prison  in
       which, latterly, she was the Deputy  Governor.  That  knowledge  and
       assistance, in our  view,  easily  meets  the  test  of  aiding  and
       abetting and, but for the qualification of whether her participation
       was "voluntary", we would hold  that  the  Secretary  of  State  was
       correct to conclude that there are serious reasons  for  considering
       that the appellant has been guilty of crimes against humanity.  That
       conclusion takes us into the only real issue in the  case,  that  of
       duress.




The submissions on duress for the respondent


   33. On behalf of the Secretary of State it was acknowledged that article
       31 of the ICC Statute provides for a defence  of  duress,  as  there
       defined. It was submitted though that  there  was  no  onus  on  the
       Secretary of State to  disprove  the  defence  and  that  since  the
       process of the International Criminal Court was inquisitorial it was
       really a matter for the court alone to resolve. This  was  developed
       into a submission that the burden of establishing  duress  lay  with
       the appellant and reliance was placed for this  proposition  on  the
       decision of the Canadian federal  court  in  Oberlander  v  Attorney
       General of Canada 2015 FC 46 (CanLII).  However,  the  Secretary  of
       State was not able to assist with a submission as to  what  standard
       of proof the appellant would require to reach.


   34. Despite these submissions  on  the  availability  of  a  defence  of
       duress, the Secretary of State also submitted that  duress  did  not
       constitute a defence in international criminal law and went only  to
       mitigation. For this submission she relied upon the decision of  the
       International Criminal Tribunal for the  former  Yugoslavia  in  the
       case of Erdemovic (IT-96-22-A).


   35. On the facts of the present case, the Secretary of  State  submitted
       that on her own evidence the appellant was fully aware of  what  was
       taking place within the prison and that she had taken  no  steps  to
       distance herself or to avoid participation. It was pointed out  that
       she had been away from work for a period of maternity leave and  had
       returned voluntarily. It was pointed out that she  had  subsequently
       been promoted, that she had  never  asked  to  resign  or  sought  a
       transfer to a different  post  and  the  totality  of  the  evidence
       suggested that she participated voluntarily in her duties.




The submissions on duress for the appellant


   36. On behalf of the appellant, Ms Pickup drew attention to the terms of
       article 31 of the ICC Statute, which sets out the available defences
       and observed that acting under duress was specifically included. She
       drew  attention  to  the  terms  of  article  66  setting  out   the
       presumption of innocence and to the terms of article 67 setting  out
       the prohibition on any reverse burden of proof or onus of  rebuttal.
       She drew attention to the way this had been interpreted  in  Ambos's
       Treatise on International Criminal Law, Volume  1  pp  312  to  315,
       where the author stated:


                 "In the context of defences it is particularly important
that the ICC                           Prosecutor is under the legal
obligation to establish the truth and, in                     doing so,
investigate incriminating and exonerating circumstances equally.
[....] At the very least, one has to apply the rule prohibiting any
reversal of                 the burden of proof or onus of rebuttal to the
detriment of the accused not                       only to the elements of
the offence, but equally to defences, that is, the
Prosecutor is obliged to disprove the existence of a defence beyond
                 reasonable doubt."


   37. Ms Pickup accordingly submitted that as a  matter  of  international
       criminal law the defence of duress was available  to  the  appellant
       and that the onus of disproving that defence lay on the Secretary of
       State. The particular  application  of  that  onus  in  the  present
       proceedings would require the Secretary of State to demonstrate that
       there were serious reasons for considering that  the  appellant  did
       not act under duress. Ms Pickup submitted that the case of Erdemovic
       was of no assistance as it did not concern the  application  of  the
       ICC Statute and the case of Oberlander was  distinguishable,  as  it
       concerned the application of Canadian statutory provisions.


   38. Ms Pickup relied upon the evidence given by  the  appellant  herself
       and the expert report  from  Ms  Enayat.  She  submitted  that  this
       evidence in combination supported the finding that the appellant was
       required by law to complete a 25 year  term  of  employment  at  the
       prison. She submitted that the evidence vouched the proposition that
       resignation would only be possible after the minimum required period
       and that  even  asking  for  permission  to  resign  would  lead  to
       suspicion and possibly threat. She asked us to  accept  that  if  in
       reality permission to resign would not have been given it would  not
       be reasonable to have expected  the  appellant  to  have  made  that
       request. Ms Pickup submitted that on the  evidence  the  appellant's
       only realistic method of leaving the prison was  to  do  so  without
       permission which would be considered desertion. The expert  evidence
       vouched that desertion would lead to imprisonment in  conditions  in
       which there would be a high risk  of  torture  and  other  forms  of
       abuse.


The issue of duress

   39. The first question to be addressed is whether  an  individual  could
       avoid exclusion from the protection of the Refugee Convention  under
       article 1F(a) upon the basis that whilst he or she might  appear  to
       have engaged in conduct which would fit  the  definition  of  crimes
       against humanity, he or she was acting under duress.

   40. Since it is recognised that the meaning to be given to this  article
       is to be found in international law, and that the guiding instrument
       is the ICC Statute, this would seem the most obvious place to  begin
       to look for the answer.  Article  31  is  headed  up:  "Grounds  For
       Excluding Criminal Responsibility". Paragraph 1 provides as follows:

                 "1. In addition to other  grounds  for  excluding  criminal
responsibility                    provided for in  this  Statute,  a  person
shall not be criminally responsible  if,                   at  the  time  of
that person's conduct:

                 ...

                 (d) The conduct which is  alleged  to  constitute  a  crime
within the jurisdiction                 of the  Court  has  been  caused  by
duress resulting  from  a  threat  of  imminent                death  or  of
continuing  or  imminent   serious   bodily   harm   against   that   person
or another person, and the person acts necessarily and reasonably  to  avoid
            this threat, provided that the person does not intend  to  cause
a greater harm               than the one  sought  to  be  avoided.  Such  a
threat may either be:

            (i) Made by other persons; or
            (ii) Constituted by other  circumstances  beyond  that  person's
      control."

   41. The wording of  this  article  appears  to  provide  an  unequivocal
       statement that  criminal  responsibility  shall  not  attach  to  an
       individual who acts under duress, as so defined. If it was  accepted
       that an individual acted under duress it is therefore  difficult  to
       see how there could be serious reasons for considering that  such  a
       person had committed a crime against humanity,  as  defined  in  the
       international instruments. However, the respondent does  not  appear
       to adopt this interpretation.  In  her  letter  giving  reasons  for
       refusal of the appellant's claim, the respondent sets out a  heading
       of "Defences/Excuses" above paragraph number 136.  She  then  quotes
       article  31  of  the  ICC  Statute,  without  any   elaboration   or
       explanation. The next paragraph is in the following terms:

                 "137. Duress is not a  complete  defence  in  international
criminal law                      but  can  be  pleaded  in  mitigation.  In
Erdemovic (ICTY Appeals Chamber),                         para  19,  it  was
held:  'duress  does  not  afford  a   complete   defence   to   a   soldier
charged with a crime against humanity  and/or  a  war  crime  involving  the
            killing of innocent human beings.'"

   42. The same submission was made by Ms Isherwood before us and she  drew
       our attention to what had been said by the  Upper  Tribunal  in  the
       case of MT Zimbabwe at paragraph 106  where,  having  observed  that
       article 31 paragraph 1(d) of the ICC Statute makes clear that duress
       can be a defence to international criminal responsibility, the panel
       stated:

                 "Whether it is a complete defence and whether it can  apply
in all types of                   cases remains  unsettled:  see  the  Trial
Chamber discussions in Prosecutor v                 Erdemovic  (IT-96-22)  7
June 1997"

   43. It seems to us that there is an obvious  contradiction  between  the
       statement in the ICC Statute that criminal responsibility shall  not
       attach to an individual who acts under duress, and the  respondent's
       proposition that duress is not a complete defence  in  international
       criminal law but only constitutes mitigation.  It  would  have  been
       helpful had the Secretary of State provided us with the analysis, or
       reasoning which led to her conclusion on  this  matter.  No  further
       amplification is provided in the letter giving reasons  for  refusal
       and Ms Isherwood was not able to advance the matter either. We offer
       no criticism of her  in  this  respect,  the  effect  of  duress  is
       something which has troubled many  domestic  courts  throughout  the
       world, as can be seen from the comprehensive review conducted by the
       Appeal Chamber in Erdemovic of the way duress is  treated  in  other
       jurisdictions. As Judges McDonald and Vohrah observed in their joint
       opinion at paragraph 66:

                 "On the one hand, a large number of jurisdictions
recognise duress as a                   complete defence absolving the
accused from all criminal responsibility. On                  the other
hand, in other jurisdictions, duress does not afford a complete
      defence to offences generally but serves merely as a factor which
would                        mitigate the punishment to be imposed on a
convicted person."

                 In  the  end,  the  majority  judges  seem  to  have   been
influenced by the  prevailing                      view  in  the  common-law
jurisdictions   that   duress    operated    as    a    defence    to    any
crime except that of murder.

   44. Nevertheless, if it is the Secretary of State's view that  the  case
       of Erdemovic supplies the governing jurisprudence  in  circumstances
       concerning  the  application  of  article  1F(a)  of   the   Refugee
       Convention where duress arises,  then  this  is  a  matter  of  some
       importance. We shall require to consider it unaided.

   45. Any consideration of the import of the Appeal  Chamber  decision  in
       Erdemovic  has  to  begin  by  acknowledging  the  extent   of   the
       differences in reasoning and conclusion as between the five  judges.
       The court decided by a majority of three to two that duress does not
       afford a complete defence to a soldier charged with a crime  against
       humanity and/or a war crime involving the killing of innocent  human
       beings. At  page  662  of  the  Oxford  Companion  to  International
       Criminal Justice, published in 2009, the case is  described  as  one
       which:

                 "Stands out for the sincere, transparent and therefore
most stimulating                        attempt of five appellate judges to
cope with the fundamental                          methodological problem
of how to determine the applicable law where the              sources of
international law do not in their entirety provided for a clear cut
      answer."

   46. The extent of the differing conclusions which the  appellate  judges
       arrived at is striking and a flavour of this can be  seen  from  the
       dissenting judgement of the President, Judge Cassese, when he stated
       at paragraph 11 of his opinion:

                 "On the strength of international principles and rules my
conclusions on                    duress different widely from those of the
majority of the Appeals Chamber".

              Judge Cassese went on to explain that in  his  opinion  duress
was capable  of                     providing  a  defence  in  international
criminal  law  for  crimes  involving  the                      killing   of
innocent persons,  but  that  the  defence  was  subject  to  the  stringent
      requirements which he itemised. Unlike the majority, he seems to  have
been                   influenced by the thinking  reflected  in  the  civil
law jurisdictions in which duress            was accepted as  a  defence  to
any crime.

   47. If the majority view was to be taken as  reflecting  the  applicable
       law two  questions  would  immediately  arise.  The  first  concerns
       whether the case has general application, or whether it only applies
       to a restricted category of individuals.  The  majority  judges  who
       ruled that duress did not constitute a  defence  expressly  narrowed
       the issue for their decision  to  the  specific  one  of  a  serving
       soldier who killed innocent civilians - see paragraph numbers 41 and
       88 of the Joint Separate Opinion of Judges McDonald and Vohrah.  The
       reason why the judges looked at the matter  through  such  a  narrow
       prism is set out in paragraph 84 of the opinion,  which  is  in  the
       following terms:

                 "84. Secondly,  as  we  have  confined  the  scope  of  our
inquiry to the question                 whether duress  affords  a  complete
defence to a soldier charged with killing                 innocent  persons,
we   are    of    the    view    that    soldiers    or    combatants    are
expected to exercise fortitude and a  greater  degree  of  resistance  to  a
threat                       than civilians, at least when it is  their  own
lives which are being threatened.                   Soldiers,  by  the  very
nature    of    their    occupation,     must     have     envisaged     the
possibility of violent death in  pursuance  of  the  cause  for  which  they
fight.                       The relevant question must therefore be  framed
in terms of what may  be                       expected  from  the  ordinary
soldier in the situation of the Appellant. What  is                   to  be
expected of such an ordinary soldier  is  not,  by  our  approach,  analysed
      in terms of a  utilitarian  approach  involving  the  weighing  up  of
harms.                       Rather, it is based on the proposition that  it
is unacceptable to allow  a                    trained  fighter,  whose  job
necessarily entails the occupational hazard  of                       dying,
to avail himself of a complete  defence  to  a  crime  in  which  he  killed
            one or more innocent persons."

   48. Since these were at least some of the considerations  which  weighed
       with the majority judges in arriving at the decision which they did,
       one might legitimately ask why the conclusion on the issue of duress
       which they arrived at ought to apply to civilians? The Secretary  of
       State has provided us with no answer.

   49. The second question which arises is this. Even if the import of  the
       case extends beyond the narrow category of soldiers  or  combatants,
       does Erdemovic only govern cases involving crimes  against  humanity
       involving the killing of innocent human  beings,  or  does  it  also
       govern cases where this crime is committed by the  act  of  torture,
       such as is founded upon in  the  present  case?  Again  we  have  no
       guidance. This question  would  be  of  importance  given  that  the
       dominant common law jurisdictions influencing the  majority  opinion
       only exclude the crime of murder from the defence of duress.

   50. Whilst it seems to us that the  two  questions  we  have  identified
       would need to be answered satisfactorily before we could give effect
       to the submission that Erdemovic provides the governing law for  our
       purposes, there is another even  more  fundamental  question  to  be
       addressed concerning the applicability of this  case.  Since  it  is
       agreed  that  the  ICC  Statute  is  the   governing   international
       instrument, what relevance does the case of Erdemovic have for us in
       assessing the issue of duress under any circumstances?

   51. The case  of  Erdemovic  was  prosecuted  before  the  International
       Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia. The Tribunal was  bound
       by the terms of its own Statute, which was adopted in May 1993. That
       Statute says nothing about the issue  of  duress.  The  question  in
       Erdemovic came before the Appeal  Chamber  in  1997  and  since  the
       applicable statute was silent on the issue, the court sought to find
       an answer to whether duress would  provide  a  complete  defence  by
       drawing on the sources of international law.

   52. However matters moved on. The ICC Statute was adopted in July  1998,
       after many years of discussion and compromise, and it  entered  into
       force on 1 July 2002. Unlike the circumstances with which the judges
       had to grapple in the case of Erdemovic, a definition of the concept
       of duress is now given  in  the  binding  international  instrument,
       along with a statement that an  individual  who  acts  under  duress
       shall not be criminally responsible. As Professor  Schabas  observed
       in his 1998 article on General Principles of  Criminal  Law  in  the
       International Criminal Court Statute (6 EUR.J.Crime.L & Crim.J.):

                 "The fourth and final defence enumerated in Article  31  is
duress. An                   exhaustive judgement of the Appeals Chamber  of
the  International       Criminal               Tribunal  for   the   former
Yugoslavia, in 1996, determined by a  majority  of                     three
to two, that duress is  not  admissible  as  a  defence  to  crimes  against
            humanity. The consequence of the provision in the  Rome  Statute
is to set                    aside the judgement of the Court."

   53. A similar observation can be found in chapter 24.4 of  Volume  I  of
       The Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court: A  Commentary,
       edited by Cassese and others (published  in  2002),  at  page  1044.
       There it is noted that the remaining question is no  longer  whether
       duress can be invoked  in  the  case  of  the  killing  of  innocent
       persons, but what the requirements of such a defence are. It is also
       noted that Judge Cassese's dissenting opinion in Erdemovic in effect
       became the model for the terms of Article 31 paragraph 3(d)  of  the
       ICC Statute. A detailed discussion of the nature and requirements of
       the "defence" is given in Triffterer and Ambos - The Rome Statute of
       the International Criminal Court: A Commentary (3rd edition 2015) at
       pages 1149 - 1154.

   54. In light of the plain words of the ICC Statute, and the commentaries
       referred to above, we cannot accept that the  Secretary  of  State's
       undeveloped reference to the case of Erdemovic permits  us  to  give
       weight to her submission that duress is not a  complete  defence  in
       international criminal law. We therefore propose to  determine  this
       case in the following ways. First, upon the understanding  that  the
       appellant would be entitled to challenge the  Secretary  of  State's
       conclusion that she was excluded from the protection of the  Refugee
       Convention by arguing that she was acting  under  duress.  Secondly,
       upon the understanding  that  if  the  appellant  was  acting  under
       duress, as properly understood, she would be entitled to succeed  in
       her appeal.

   55. The view just explained of course leads into questions of burden  of
       proof, as presaged by the  High  Court's  observations  in  granting
       permission to proceed  in  the  Judicial  Review.  Once  again,  the
       Secretary of State's position is somewhat stark.  It  is  of  course
       correct to say that it is for  the  court  to  adjudicate  upon  the
       question of whether a defence applies but we  do  not  think  it  is
       correct to characterise the role of the ICC  as  inquisitorial.  The
       ICC would adjudicate, as the domestic court does, on  the  basis  of
       the information brought before it by the prosecuting  authority  and
       in the context of the burden of proof resting on the prosecutor.

   56. In our own domestic criminal procedure a defence  of  duress  (where
       available) is treated no differently from any other  defence.  There
       is an evidential burden resting on the accused to  raise  or  engage
       the defence but if this is done the persuasive burden of  satisfying
       the court that the defence  should  be  rejected  remains  with  the
       prosecutor - R  v  Hasan  [2005]  2  AC  467  at  paragraph  20.  In
       particular it should be  noted  that  in  domestic  proceedings  the
       necessary evidential burden does not impose a need for  the  accused
       to establish duress on a balance of probabilities.

   57. As we noted earlier, The  Secretary  of  State  submitted  that  the
       decision of  the  Canadian  Federal  Court  in  Oberlander  provided
       support for the contention that the burden  of  establishing  duress
       lies on the appellant. Article 66 of the ICC Statute  provides  that
       the presumption of innocence applies to the accused, that  the  onus
       is on the prosecutor to prove guilt and that the standard  of  guilt
       must be established beyond reasonable doubt. Article  67  identifies
       the rights of the accused and provides:

                 "1. In the determination of any charge, the  accused  shall
be entitled to a                        public  hearing,  having  regard  to
the provisions  of  this  Statute,  to  a  fair                      hearing
conducted  impartially,  and  to  the  following  minimum   guarantees,   in
full equality:

                 (i) not to have imposed on him or her any reversal  of  the
burden of                         proof or any onus of rebuttal"

        This provision would seem to  undermine  the  Secretary  of  State's
        contention. In       addition, Rule 80 of the ICC Rules of Procedure
        and Evidence provides that the  defence must give notice to both the
        Trial chamber and the Prosecutor if it     intends to raise a ground
        for excluding criminal  responsibility  under  article  31.      The
        purpose  of  this  notice  is  to  give  the   Prosecutor   adequate
        opportunity to prepare for trial. The Rule also  provides  that  the
        Trial Chamber may give the            Prosecutor an  adjournment  to
        address the ground of defence  raised.  All  of  this       goes  to
        further  underpin  the  statement  that  the  onus  remains  on  the
        prosecution to disprove any defence validly raised.

   58. Further guidance might be found in the decisions of other  tribunals
       applying international law. The impact of the defence of duress  has
       been considered by the United Nations Special Panel for  East  Timor
       in the context of cases prosecuted before it where  the  definitions
       of the crimes and the available defences replicate  those  found  in
       the ICC Statute. In the Court of Appeal  decision  in  the  case  of
       Prosecutor v Julio Fernandes No. 7 of 2001 Judge Egonda-Ntende  gave
       an opinion in which he dissented in part from the majority  decision
       of the court. On duress however the court was unified. In  paragraph
       11 of his decision Judge Egonda-Ntende said the following:

                 "In order for the defence of duress to succeed  there  must
be  evidence                        before  the  court  that  supports   the
existence of the above five   elements[1].                      Counsel  for
the appellant  submits  that  all  the  accused  has  to  do  is  raise  the
defence of duress, and it is the duty of  the  prosecution  to  negative  or
            disprove its existence. The duty to prove the  indictment  rests
on the                       prosecution all the time.  If  any  defence  is
raised the prosecution, in order  to                 succeed  must  demolish
the   defence.   But   that   is   not   all,   in    my    view.    In    a
defence of this kind, like that of self-defence,  an  evidential  burden  of
proof                  shifts to the accused to put the  defence  in  issue.
It is not just enough to claim               that  he  acted  under  duress.
Evidence has to be produced by  the  person                      seeking  to
take advantage of  this  defence  that  establishes  the  existence  of  the
      five elements referred to above. He need  not  establish   the  matter
beyond                       reasonable doubt but may do so on  the  balance
of probabilities. It is then for             the  prosecution  to  establish
beyond reasonable (sic) whether that defence is                available  or
not to the accused in answer to the indictment."

   59. These comments seem to us to provide support for the contention that
       in international criminal law the issue of duress would fall  to  be
       considered in a manner similar to that which we set out in paragraph
       56 above. The only difference is  the  suggestion  that  the  person
       claiming to be acting under duress might require  to  establish  the
       circumstances underpinning  the  defence  to  the  standard  of  the
       balance of probabilities. It is not  clear  from  his  decision  why
       Judge Egonda-Ntende put the matter this way. This  imposition  of  a
       persuasive burden would seem to be inconsistent with  the  terms  of
       article 67. Further support for our own view can  be  found  in  the
       passage in Ambos's Treatise on  International  Criminal  Law  relied
       upon by Ms Pickup and as quoted in paragraph 36 above.

   60. The remaining question is whether the case  of  Oberlander  provides
       the support which the Secretary of  State  contends  for.  We  would
       understand the Secretary of State to be referring to the lengthy and
       detailed decision of Mr Justice Russell issued on 13  January  2015,
       reported as Oberlander  v  Canada  (Attorney  General)  2015  FC  46
       (CanLII). The passages from his decision quoted in the  respondent's
       skeleton argument are all taken from the submissions of the Attorney
       General as made to Mr Justice Russell, rather than from the  section
       of the decision in which he gives own analysis  and  reasoning.  The
       Secretary of State does not assist with how these  submissions  were
       dealt with in the decision.

   61. Whilst unhelpful, this  is  not  the  most  pressing  difficulty  in
       assessing the import of this case. The case of  Oberlander  concerns
       an issue of Judicial Review in which the applicant has sought, since
       2000, to challenge the decision of the Canadian Governor in  Council
       to revoke his Canadian citizenship under  the  applicable  statutory
       provisions. The litigation has had the most lengthy  and  remarkable
       history, having been through the Federal Court to the Federal Appeal
       Court and back to the Governor in Council on a number of  occasions,
       at least once in light of a re-statement of the law by  the  Supreme
       Court of Canada. Mr Justice Russell's own  decision  was  challenged
       before the Federal  Appeal  Court  and  by  its  decision  dated  15
       February 2016, reported as Oberlander v  Canada  (Attorney  General)
       2016 FCA 52 (CanLII), the Federal Appeal court allowed  the  appeal,
       set aside the decision and remitted  the  issue  of  complicity  and
       duress to the Governor in Council for re-determination in accordance
       with the law. We do not therefore find it helpful to place  reliance
       on the submissions of  one-party  presented  before  a  judge  whose
       decision  was  subsequently  overturned  with  the  critical   issue
       requiring to be revisited.

   62.  Having  considered  the  matter  in  the  light  of   the   various
       authorities, textbooks and commentaries set out above, as explained,
       we propose to proceed upon the basis that article 31 paragraph  1(d)
       of the ICC Statute makes available a defence  of  duress  which  the
       appellant is entitled to state  in  response  to  the  Secretary  of
       State's claim that there are serious reasons  for  considering  that
       she has been guilty  of  crimes  against  humanity.  We  propose  to
       proceed upon the view that an evidential burden is  imposed  on  the
       appellant to raise the existence  of  circumstances  such  as  would
       permit the defence to be given effect to, and that if that burden is
       met a persuasive onus shifts to the Secretary of State to  establish
       that there are serious reasons for considering  that  the  appellant
       did not act under duress. We would treat the phrase "serious reasons
       for considering" in this  context  as  having  the  same  autonomous
       meaning as before. We consider that this approach is  in  line  with
       the terms of the ICC Statute, with the  views  of  the  Commentators
       mentioned and with the interpretation of international criminal  law
       by the United Nations Special Tribunal for East Timor, subject  only
       to an adjustment on the approach to onus of proof.


Our assessment of the appellant's claim to have acted under duress

   63. There are five requirements of the defence of duress as specified in
       article 31 of the ICC Statute. They are these:


           i. There must be a threat of imminent death or of continuing  or
              imminent serious bodily harm;
          ii.  Such  threat  requires  to  be  made  by  other  persons  or
              constituted by other circumstances beyond the control of  the
              person claiming the defence;
         iii. The threat must be directed against the person  claiming  the
              defence or some other person;
          iv. The person claiming the  defence  must  act  necessarily  and
              reasonably to  avoid this threat;
           v. In so acting the person claiming the defence does not  intend
              to cause a greater harm than the one sought to be avoided.

                  The  requirements  are  cumulative,  all  require  to   be
satisfied.

    64. The appellant's position is that she  did  not  seek  out  promotion
        within the prison and that she was only given it as a consequence of
        the discipline which she brought to her  work  and  the  fact  of  a
        senior post requiring to  be  filled.  This  process  receives  some
        general support from the expert report prepared for the appellant by
        Ms Enayat. Nevertheless, the appellant worked as a prison  guard  in
        the prison for a period of well over ten  years,  holding  a  senior
        position for the last two of these years.


    65. The appellant's evidence was that she did not approve of the way the
        prisoners were treated but that having signed the contract she could
        not resign. She stated variously that she thought about leaving  her
        job many times, that she was waiting for an  opportunity  to  leave,
        that she was thinking of getting early retirement, that if there had
        been any possibility for her to leave her job she would have done so
        and  that  one  could  not  leave  unless  fired.  Her  reasons  for
        continuing to perform her duties require to  be  carefully  measured
        against the requirements of duress.


    66. The appellant's position was that her conduct had first of all to be
        seen in context. She stated that  the  requirement  for  a  civilian
        employee of the Revolutionary  Guard  Corps  was  that  she  had  to
        complete her term of service before she would be allowed  to  leave.
        The only people she knew who left the  prison  were  those  who  had
        retired after  the  end  of  their  term  of  service  or  who  were
        transferred to another prison establishment. She  stated  that  when
        her employment commenced she was required  to  sign  a  contract  of
        employment and told that she had to continue to work at  the  prison
        until her retirement, unless she was transferred somewhere else.

    67. This evidence of context received  a  degree  of  support  from  the
        evidence of Ms Enayat who provided a quote from article 136  of  the
        Revolutionary Guards Employment Law of 1991 which provides:

            "Should the resignation of personnel be a personal  request  and
      they        have undergone twice  the  duration  of  studies  and  the
      duration of service has      been at least  the  minimal  duration  of
      service as determined in the                 employment  contract  and
      not less than five years, it is acceptable with the           approval
      of the authorities mentioned in Article 87."

    68. In her evidence before us the appellant  claimed  that  her  minimum
        duration of service was 25 years which, as  Ms  Isherwood  observed,
        was the first time that this claim had been made. However this focus
        on the "employment law" aspect of the appellant's circumstances does
        not advance her claim to have been acting  under  duress.  For  this
        what matters is what would have happened had she not  complied  with
        her duties.

    69. The essence of the defence of duress is that  the  criminal  conduct
        which it is sought to excuse has been directly caused by the threats
        which are relied upon. The  first  question  for  the  appellant  to
        answer then is which threats does she rely  on?  The  appellant  has
        never claimed that she was told by anyone or  in  any  circumstances
        that she would be subject to any form of ill treatment if she failed
        to comply with her duties. At  one  passage  in  her  statement  she
        explains she feared that if she did not continue with her duties her
        child would have problems in the future,  such  as  being  prevented
        from entering university and the marriage  prospects  of  her  child
        might be diminished. Plainly this is of no relevance. The closest to
        any form of threat which the appellant identifies is in paragraph 18
        of her April 2014 statement where she states:

            "... and I was quite sure that if I was to leave, I  would  have
      had a serious          problem with the Revolutionary Guard.  I  think
      that even if I   had just asked   to leave, this would have  raised  a
      lot of suspicions. I would have been         suspected of having  sold
      out or having passed on information about the            prison  which
      was secret. If I had  left  without  permission,  I  would  have  been
      treated as a traitor for having acted against the Revolution and  this
      would            have resulted in a harsh punishment: I am sure that I
      would have been        imprisoned and tortured and I was  very  afraid
      of the prospect of being          tortured and     raped."

   70. The appellant deals with two separate situations  in  this  passage,
       first her concerns about asking to leave and secondly  her  concerns
       about leaving without permission. Her concern about leaving  without
       permission receives a level of support from the expert testimony  of
       Ms Enayat who  explains  that  absence  from  the  appellant's  post
       without permission would be penalised as desertion, with  a  penalty
       from six months to two years  imprisonment  in  circumstances  where
       there was a high likelihood of torture and severe  ill-treatment  in
       pre-trial detention. However,  the  position  with  the  appellant's
       first concern is much more ambivalent. Ms  Enayat  explains  in  her
       report that resignation is possible but is only acceptable after the
       minimum duration of service as determined in the employment contract
       and not less than five years. It is also subject to the approval  of
       the commander of the relevant division and that approval  is  likely
       to depend upon the view of  the  security  units.  She  states  that
       someone in  the  appellant's  position  employed  in  a  politically
       sensitive role:

            "..would obviously face suspicion,  investigation  and  possibly
      threats          should they apply to resign."

    71. The defence of duress in terms of article 31 of the ICC  Statute  is
        framed in light of the conduct which the defence  addresses,  namely
        genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes.  It  is  therefore
        unsurprising that  it  is  available  only  in  respect  of  conduct
        resulting from the threat of imminent  death  or  of  continuing  or
        imminent serious bodily harm. A merely abstract danger or simply  an
        elevated probability that a dangerous situation  might  occur  would
        not suffice and the threat relied on must be objectively  given  and
        not merely exist in the perpetrator's mind - see Triffterer &  Ambos
        page 1151.


    72. The appellant's concern was that if she had sought to resign  or  be
        moved to other duties this would have given her  a  serious  problem
        with the Revolutionary Guard leading  to  suspicion.  She  does  not
        point to the evidence of what became of anyone else  who  sought  to
        resign or be moved. Even if the evidence of her concern is  accepted
        it amounts to an anticipation on her part rather than  any  form  of
        express threat. Even if we proceed upon the basis  that  an  implied
        threat would be  sufficient,  it  is  impossible  to  see  that  the
        consequence which the appellant identifies would meet  the  standard
        of threat required  by  article  31.  This  is  not  evidence  which
        reflects her acting  under  the  threat  of  imminent  death  or  of
        continuing  or  imminent  serious  bodily  harm.  Neither  does  the
        evidence of Ms Enayat that  she  might  have  been  the  subject  of
        suspicion, investigation and possibly threats had she  made  such  a
        request provide the necessary foundation evidence.


    73. A separate requirement of the defence of duress is that the  accused
        must act necessarily and reasonably to avoid this threat. As is said
        in Triffterer & Ambos at page 1153:


            "This, undisputedly, means that the act  directing  at  avoiding
      the threat must  be  necessary  in  terms  of  no  other  means  being
      available and reasonable for      reaching the desired effect."


        Another way of looking at this is that the defence of duress is only
        available if the individual cannot be fairly expected  to  withstand
        or assume the risk. A threat results in duress only  if  it  is  not
        otherwise avoidable  i.e.  if  a  reasonable  person  in  comparable
        circumstances would not have  submitted  and  would  not  have  been
        driven to the relevant criminal conduct.  It  is  therefore  neither
        required to show special valour, prowess or heroism, nor does a weak
        will or weakness of character exclude the criminal responsibility of
        a defendant. This is not to say that one may simply follow the  most
        convenient way out, rather has the  coerced  person  to  seek  every
        reasonable, not too distant evasive  alternative  for  avoiding  the
        commission of a crime - Triffterer & Ambos, again at page 1153.

    74. These observations are entirely in keeping with domestic law - see R
        v Hassan paragraph 21:

            "The defendant may excuse his criminal  conduct  on  grounds  of
      duress           only if, placed as  he  was,  there  was  no  evasive
      action he could reasonably        have been expected to take."

    75. It seems clear from what is contained in Ms Enayat's report that  it
        is possible to resign from the Revolutionary Guard Corps in  certain
        circumstances. In light of the fact that the appellant only  claimed
        for the first time before us that her minimum term contract  was  25
        years we are not inclined to accept her evidence on this point.  The
        appellant does not claim to have ever even raised  the  question  of
        resignation or transfer to different duties or to a different  post.
        In her own statement the appellant talks of prison  employees  being
        transferred to another establishment and of being told on commencing
        work that she might  be  transferred  elsewhere.  It  seems  obvious
        therefore that there were at least some opportunities for  movement.
        By her own testimony the appellant never explored  the  availability
        of any such opportunity.


    76. The  weakness  of  the  appellant's  position  is  revealed  in  the
        submission which Ms Pickup was forced to make on her behalf  to  the
        effect that if in reality permission to resign would not  have  been
        given it would not be reasonable to have expected the  appellant  to
        have made that request. It is implicit in  what  the  appellant  has
        herself said about the circumstances within the prison that  it  was
        possible to leave. She refers both to the  possibility  of  transfer
        and of being fired. It is also plain from the evidence of Ms  Enayat
        that there were circumstances in which it was  possible  to  resign.
        The appellant neither sought to explore the availability of any such
        opportunity or to engineer circumstances in which she was fired.  On
        the  contrary,  she  conducted  herself  with  such  exemplary   and
        continuous diligence that she was promoted without  even  having  to
        apply.


    77. The appellant is an intelligent, articulate and qualified woman. She
        is also resourceful. The account which she gives of her escape  from
        Iran is illuminating. On learning that her relative had been brought
        to the prison she spoke with other family members that evening.  She
        obtained some form of medicine from another family member, a doctor,
        which she then secretly passed to her  relative  at  the  prison  in
        order that this would induce a temporary period of  vomiting.  As  a
        consequence of this, her relative was transferred to  the  infirmary
        section of the prison. Knowing that the resident doctor left at 3:30
        pm the  appellant  contacted  the  infirmary  after  this  time  and
        instructed  the  nurse  to  transfer  her  relative  to  an  outside
        hospital. In order to sanction  this  arrangement  she  required  to
        forge the signature of the head of the prison on  a  temporary  exit
        form. The appellant then collected her belongings and returned  home
        from where she contacted the hospital.  She  instructed  the  prison
        escort to return to the prison leaving only  a  single  male  escort
        sitting outside her  relative's  room.  She  then  attended  at  the
        hospital taking  clothes  for  her  relative  to  change  into.  She
        instructed the remaining escort that she would take over observation
        and released him from duty to go and get  some  refreshment  and  to
        pray. She then escorted her relative out of  the  hospital  room  to
        meet with another family member waiting outside. After the appellant
        returned to the hospital room she confirmed by  telephone  that  her
        relative had been collected safely and waited for the return of  the
        remaining escort. When he returned she locked the door,  handed  him
        the key and instructed him to wait there until the morning,  knowing
        that as a male member of the Revolutionary Guard he would not  enter
        the room of a female patient. The appellant then left and  met  with
        her husband and  child  before  making  an  illegal  exit  from  the
        country.


    78. The reality of the appellant's account of  acting  under  duress  is
        that for a period of many years she  took  no  steps  whatsoever  to
        avoid  compliance  with  her  duties  in  the  prison,  despite  her
        knowledge  of  the  consequence  for  those  taken  to  the  torture
        facility. Even despite being off work after the birth of  her  child
        for a lengthy period of time she chose  not  to  explore  any  other
        option but to return to her duties in the prison. She  continued  in
        those duties accepting promotion along the way. The immediacy of her
        reaction on learning of her relative's detention  and  the  combined
        manner of the transfer to hospital and subsequent escape is evidence
        of a cunning and resourceful  nature,  along  with  an  ability  and
        willingness to take appropriate steps when she chose to do so.

    79. We are perfectly satisfied that the  defence  of  duress  cannot  be
        engaged on the  basis  of  the  evidence  which  the  appellant  has
        adduced. It is untenable on the basis of the vague  and  speculative
        consequence which she has associated with making  a  request  to  be
        allowed to resign, leave or transfer. It is equally untenable on the
        basis of the appellant's own evidence of having made  no  effort  of
        any description to extricate herself from her duties at  the  prison
        over a period of many years. The harm which the appellant  knew  she
        was causing was out of all proportion to the risk to  herself  which
        she has identified as befalling her if she had made efforts to leave
        short of desertion.


    80.  In  these  circumstances  we  are  satisfied  that  the   necessary
        evidential burden has not been discharged by the appellant  and  she
        has advanced no valid answer to the serious reasons for  considering
        that she has committed a crime against humanity as identified by the
        Secretary of State. Since  we  were  otherwise  satisfied  that  the
        Secretary of State was well entitled to  arrive  at  the  conclusion
        which she did, the  appellant's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of
        State's decision of 2 October 2012 must fail. The same outcome would
        be reached if we viewed the  matter  in  the  way  suggested  by  Ms
        Pickup. If we ask ourselves whether the Secretary of State has shown
        that there are serious reasons for considering  that  the  appellant
        did not act under duress, then the answer is that she has, upon  the
        same basis as we have just set out in paragraph 79 above.

    81. We therefore uphold  the  Secretary  of  State's  certificate  under
        Section 55 of the Immigration Asylum and Nationality Act  2006.  The
        appellant's  claims   under   the   Refugee   Convention   and   the
        Qualification Directive are excluded by reason of article  1F(a)  of
        the  Refugee  Convention  and  article  12.2  of  the  Qualification
        Directive and therefore cannot succeed.

Decision

    82.  The  appellant  is  excluded  from  protection  under  the  Refugee
        Convention  and  the  Qualification  Directive.   The   respondent's
        certificate in relation to exclusion by reason of article 1F of  the
        Refugee Convention and article 12.2 of the  Qualification  Directive
        is upheld.


    83. The appeal is dismissed on Refugee Convention grounds.




  Signed:


  Alan D. Turnbull


  19/7/16


   Judge of the Upper Tribunal

-----------------------
[1] Those set out in article 31 paragraph 1 (d).

