

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

         Vasconcelos (risk- rehabilitation) [2013] UKUT 00378 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at  Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 9 July 2013                                |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                   THE PRESIDENT, THE HON MR JUSTICE BLAKE
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SOUTHERN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     LEANDRO SANTOS DE SA E VASCONCELOS
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Claimant: E. Yerokun of A and A Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

     1) In assessing whether an EEA national represents a current threat to
        public policy by reason of a risk of  resumption  of  opportunistic
        offending, the Tribunal should consider any statistical  assessment
        of re-offending provided by NOMS but is not bound by such  data  if
        the overall assessment of the evidence supports the  conclusion  of
        continued risk;
     2) A failure by a respondent to an appeal to comply  with  directions,
        serve a  respondent's  notice  in  time,  or  indicate  what  fresh
        evidence is sought to be adduced to  update  the  tribunal  in  the
        event that a decision is re-made, is likely to mean an  adjournment
        to supply witness statements  and  adduce  such  evidence  will  be
        refused.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
Introduction

1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against a decision of a panel  of
   the First-tier Tribunal (FtT) dated 8 March 2013 allowing an appeal by Mr
   Vasconcelos (whom we shall refer to as the claimant) from a decision made
   in November 2012 to deport him.


2. The claimant is a Portuguese national born in  Angola  in  January  1990.
   His father is Portuguese and his mother Angolan. At  some  point  in  his
   childhood, his father went to Portugal to work and  called  the  claimant
   over to live with him. He said he was 17 when he went  to  Portugal.  His
   mother remained in Angola. He was still 17 when in July 2007 he  said  he
   came to the United Kingdom.


3. He lived with his father at an address in Cyprus Close, Salford from  his
   arrival in the United Kingdom to March 2010. There  seems  to  have  been
   some family tension between father and son during this period.  He  moved
   into his own accommodation provided by a housing association  at  Clayton
   Street, Failsworth, Manchester at the end of March 2010. He was joined by
   a girl friend, Leila  Filipe,  also  a  Portuguese  national  of  Angolan
   origin, and she remained there until February 2011 when she  returned  to
   live with her parents, as the relationship was  having  difficulties  and
   she wanted to focus on her studies.

4. The claimant studied at City College Manchester in 2008 and  was  awarded
   a certificate of basic proficiency at Entry  Level  2  in  English  as  a
   second language (ESOL) in June 2008. There was  limited  evidence  before
   the Tribunal of employment as a cleaner for a period of a week. Otherwise
   it appears that he supported himself from job-seekers' allowance.

5. He has a maternal  aunt  (Ms  Miguel)  living  in  the  Salford  area  of
   Manchester with whom he has remained in contact during his  residence  in
   the United Kingdom.

6. On 9 August 2011 the claimant was arrested for offences of  burglary  and
   theft from a jeweller's shop that was  looted  during  extensive  rioting
   that took place in the city of Manchester at that time. He entered a plea
   of not guilty although he had been identified on CCTV as one of group  of
   people attempting to steal property. He made a late  change  of  plea  to
   guilty on 12 January at the Manchester Crown Court  and  on  15  February
   2012 was sentenced to 30 months imprisonment. He has remained in  custody
   ever since, most recently in immigration detention following  service  of
   his criminal sentence.

7. The  panel  heard  from  the  claimant  and  his  aunt.  His  father  was
   apparently aware of the  deportation  proceedings  but  had  returned  to
   Angola in the winter of 2012 and  had  provided  no  statement  or  other
   support for the claimant's appeal. Leila Filipe had provided a  statement
   in support of the claimant but did not attend the appeal, the panel  were
   informed that she had  been  taken  ill  that  day  although  no  medical
   evidence was provided to them or ourselves.

8. The panel concluded that the claimant was an unreliable witness and  gave
   a number of examples where he had attempted to mislead the  Secretary  of
   State and his interviewing probation officer.

9. The panel found at [43] that on balance the  claimant  is  a  person  who
   remains at risk of opportunistic  offending  such  as  occurred  on  this
   occasion  and  that  accordingly  he  presents  a  present  genuine   and
   sufficiently serious threat to the interests of public policy.

10. The panel noted that the claimant had not established an entitlement  to
   permanent  residence  and  there  was  very  little  other  evidence   of
   integration [42] and [45].

11. It can be observed:

        i. If his claim of entry in July 2007 is accurate, the claimant had
           been resident in the United Kingdom for 4  years  and  7  months
           before he started his 30 month sentence.  Very  little  of  this
           residence  was  lawful  residence  within  the  meaning  of  the
           Directive, namely studying, working or remaining as a  dependent
           family member. There was little evidence before the panel of him
           even seeking employment.


       ii. He had not been a member of his father's household  since  March
           2010 and his father had now  left  the  United  Kingdom  without
           supporting any appeal by the claimant to remain.

      iii. He had not been living with his girlfriend since February  2011;
           she had gone to Portugal with her family for an  extended  visit
           between June 2011 and September 2011  and  had  then  worked  in
           London for two months in the summer of  2012.   There  was  some
           evidence of contact with the claimant whilst he was serving  his
           sentence but little else.

       iv. There was no history of employment, advanced studies,  or  close
           community ties. His level of English was such that he  preferred
           to give evidence through an interpreter.

  12. The panel did however note the recent decision of the CA  in  R  (Daha
      Essa) v Upper Tribunal and SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 1718 and concluded  at
      [46] that the claimant's prospects of rehabilitation were better in UK
      than Portugal. They accordingly allowed the appeal on this basis.

  13. The SSHD appeals on the basis that the panel made a material error  of
      law in coming to this conclusion.

 Error of Law

  14. Shortly, before the hearing of this appeal the  Upper  Tribunal   (UT)
      published its decision in Daha Essa [2013] UKUT 316  (IAC)  which  the
      Court of Appeal had remitted to us. Mr Essa had been resident  in  the
      United Kingdom for approximately 12 years and it was accepted  by  the
      Home Office had a  permanent right of residence. At [23]  to  [36]  of
      the decision, the UT considered the class of  persons  for  whom  'the
      risk of compromising the social rehabilitation of the Union citizen in
      the state in which he has become genuinely integrated' was a  material
      consideration. It concluded:

         2. The Court of Justice's reference in Case  C-145/09  Land  Baden-
         Wurtemberg v Tsakouridis [2011] CMLR  11  to  genuine  integration,
         should mean people who have resided lawfully in the Host state  for
         five years and so have the right  to  permanent  residence,  rather
         than people who have resided for ten years.


         3. For those who at the time  of  determination  are  or  remain  a
         present threat to public policy but where the factors  relevant  to
         integration  suggest  that  there  are  reasonable   prospects   of
         rehabilitation, those  prospects  can  be  a  substantial  relevant
         factor in the proportionality balance as to whether deportation  is
         justified. If the claimant cannot constitute a present threat  when
         rehabilitated, and is well-advanced in  rehabilitation  in  a  host
         state where there is a substantial degree of  integration,  it  may
         well very well be disproportionate to proceed to deportation.


         4. At the other end of  the  scale,  if  there  are  no  reasonable
         prospects of rehabilitation, the claimant is a present  threat  and
         is likely to remain so for the indefinite future, it cannot be seen
         how the prospects of rehabilitation could constitute a  significant
         factor  in  the  balance.  Thus,   recidivist   offenders,   career
         criminals, adult offenders who have failed to engage with treatment
         programmes, claimants with propensity to commit sexual  or  violent
         offences and the like may well fall into this category.

  15. On the basis of this decision, Mr  Wilding developed  his  submissions
      in the support of his first ground of appeal as follows:

        i. The FtT had treated the comparative prospects of  rehabilitation
           as a decisive factor in the  proportionality  balance,  when  it
           could only be one factor in the balance.


       ii. The FtT had given decisive weight to  this  factor  despite  the
           fact that the claimant had not acquired the right  of  permanent
           residence, represented a current threat to  public  policy,  was
           not well integrated into UK society, and his prospects of future
           rehabilitation here were uncertain.

  16. When asked to respond to Mr Wilding's  succinct  submissions  on  this
      issue, Mr Yerokun accepted that in the light of the UT's  decision  in
      Essa, the FtT had made an error of law.  We recognise, of course, that
      the panel did not have the benefit of the UT's considered opinion, and
      that the previous references to the issue in earlier decisions of  the
      Court of Appeal were limited in scope.

  17. We accordingly find that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      involved an error of law.  Since  the  error  was  in  respect  of  an
      important issue in the appeal, it was a material error,  of  the  kind
      that would normally lead us to exercise its discretion to  remake  the
      decision under s.12 (2) (a) Tribunal Courts and Enforcement Act  2007.
      This is subject to Mr Yerokun's submissions that we consider  in  this
      section of this determination below.

  18. We add that we see no merit in the second ground of appeal,   advanced
      by the Secretary of State,  namely that  the  Tribunal  had  erred  in
      their assessment of the human rights element of the case by failing to
       have regard to Appendix FM,

  19. Mr Wilding recognised that the panel stated that the decision was  not
      in accordance with the law, because it failed  to  properly  apply  EU
      law. It made no positive assessment of human  rights  outside  the  EU
      context. In reality we fail to see how any such  assessment  could  be
      made. Length of residence, family ties, and other factors relevant  to
      the Article 8 balance are all catered for  in  regulation  21  of  the
      Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006  and  identify  the  issues  to  be
      considered. Appendix FM is not brought to bear in the EEA assessment.

  20. Mr Wilding recognised:-

        i. Appendix FM has  no  application  to  EEA  cases  that  apply  a
           discrete code including human rights inside the EEA assessment;


       ii. At best it is a statement of executive policy that may have some
           persuasive effect in cases falling outside EEA law, or where EEA
           law permits regard being had to such policies.

  21. We can see no room for the application of Appendix FM in this case. In
      particular the Court of Justice has made it plain that the concept  of
      threat  to  public  policy,  serious  threat  to  public  policy,  and
      imperative grounds of public  policy  cannot  be  assessed  simply  by
      reference to the length of sentence imposed.


The factual basis for re-making the decision

  22. We would normally re-make a decision flawed by error  of  law  in  the
      light of the facts found by the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  were  not
      affected by the error and any up-dating evidence that the claimant had
      asked us to take into account that was  not  available  to  the  panel
      below.

  23. We were satisfied that the hearing  before  the  First-tier  had  been
      fair; the claimant was legally represented by his  present  solicitors
      who had had the opportunity to respond to  the  detailed  Home  Office
      decision letter of 5 November 2012 and present  any  evidence  in  the
      appeal that he thought appropriate.

  24. Mr Yerokun submitted that we should not adopt this course because  the
      panel's findings that the claimant's evidence was unreliable and  that
      he remained a personal risk to public policy were not open to them  as
      a matter of law. On 8 July 2013 he had served on  the  Home  Office  a
      response under rule 24 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
      Rules 2008. We will consider this  notice  further  in  the  following
      sections of this determination.  For present  purposes  we  note  that
      paragraph 2.4 of the  notice  claims  that  the  First-tier  Tribunals
      findings were 'perverse and unsafe' and at  2.9  'notwithstanding  the
      adverse credibility findings ...the panel has not made material errors
      of law sufficient to occasion a different conclusion'.

  25. This rather broad-based attack of the  panel's  factual  findings  was
      developed at the hearing before us. We reject Mr Yerokun's submissions
      on this issue. We will explain our reasons under the three headings of
      reliability, risk and integration.

Reliability

  26. As to the claimant's reliability, each of the six reasons given by the
      panel at [38] of its decision accurately reflected the evidence before
      them and together entitled them to conclude that there was  deliberate
      misrepresentation by the claimant rather than a sequence  of  innocent
      errors.

  27. The first two reasons given were the inaccurate information  given  by
      the claimant in the faxed response dated 9 October to  the  notice  of
      liability questionnaire served on him in detention.  At Q 6 he  stated
      he entered the United Kingdom in July 2006 and at Q 12  he  stated  he
      had a daughter. Neither statement is true. Mr Yerokun  submitted  that
      the panel had failed to take into account  that  the  claimant  speaks
      Portuguese and the letter of 12 June 2012 was in English as  were  the
      manuscript answers. Nowhere in his witness statement or  in  his  oral
      evidence did the claimant address the October answers or  explain  why
      they differed from his account in the witness statement. In particular
      he never said that someone else completed the form without  consulting
      him; that he did not understand the questions  because  they  were  in
      English; or that he made a  mistake  through  his  weak  knowledge  of
      English.  If the claimant does not address the apparent discrepancy in
      his account in his later evidence it is open to the panel to  identify
      the contradiction and assign such weight as is appropriate.

  28. The third reason given was the conflicting accounts of how he came  to
      be involved in the offence. The panel noted at [34] that the  claimant
      had told his probation officer in February 2012 that  he  was  walking
      from Salford to Failsworth with a friend when they met up with a group
      of people who were committing the offence;  he  became  involved  with
      them and put his hand in the broken window before changing  his  mind.
      In his witness statement of February 2013 at [8] 'it was during one of
      my hang outs with my friends  that  I  got  into  all  these  problems
      although my aunty wanted me not to go into town that day....I had been
      having a drink with my friends earlier  so we  all  got  carried  away
      with the euphoria of the moment when got to the town'.   In  his  oral
      evidence he reverted to the version given to the probation officer and
      stated he had been with one friend only and that they  had  got  drawn
      into a group of other people.  We agree with the panel  that  the  two
      versions are not  the  same,  and  reject  that  submission  that  the
      drinking had been with more than one friend but the walking into  town
      was a reference to one friend only.

  29. The fourth issue was that Ms Felipe's statement at [10] said that  the
      claimant 'got Portuguese by birth but lived in Angola before coming to
      the UK'. There is no mention of a period of stay  in  Portugal  before
      coming to the UK. Ms. Felipe's source of information was the claimant.
      The omission of a period of residence in Portugal is  consistent  with
      an attempt to advance his period of residence in the  UK  by  a  year.
      Although  small  points  in  themselves,  taken  together   they   are
      consistent with an attempt to misrepresent the primary facts.

  30. The fifth point was that although the claimant stated that on  release
      he proposed to stay with his aunt; Ms Miguel's statement at [19]  says
      'I will do my best to support him to begin a  new  life  and  be  more
      responsible' but she did not offer in the  witness  statement  or  her
      oral evidence to provide a  home  for  her  nephew.  If  this  was  an
      important part of the plan for the claimant's  rehabilitation  it  was
      reasonable to expect her to say so.

  31. The sixth point was that the claimant's evidence that his  father  did
      not know of his deportation was contradicted by  Ms  Miguel  who  said
      that he did but he had done nothing about  it.  It  was  open  to  the
      Tribunal to draw the inference that either the claimant was misleading
      them about what he knew of his father's response  to  the  deportation
      decision or that he had  not  been  frank  about  the  break  down  of
      relations  between  claimant  and  father  which  explained  lack   of
      communication between them and expression of concern by the father.

  32. In addition to these points, the panel had previously noted  that  the
      claimant had not been frank with the probation officer  whom  he  told
      that in February  2012  that  prior  to  his  remand  in  custody  (we
      understand in January 2012 on his plea of guilty) that his girl friend
      was still living with him at a time when the clear evidence  was  that
      she had left the flat they once shared in February 2011.

  33. In summary the panel's conclusions on this issue were not irrational.

Risk

  34. Further the panel were entitled to bring these negative conclusions to
      bear on the assessment of whether at the time of  the  hearing  before
      them the claimant represented a personal risk to public  security.  In
      so far as his claims of reformation and rehabilitation depended on his
      own evidence, they were entitled to reject it.

  35. In our judgment the panel were fully entitled to find on balance  that
      the appellant  remained  a  risk  of  opportunist  offending  such  as
      occurred in the index offence and thus a source of a genuine threat to
      public policy by his personal conduct.

  36. The panel had before it  the  trial  judge's  sentencing  remarks.  He
      stated:-

        'I have seen the CCTV footage showing the burglary  of  those  shop
        premises by you when you were in the company of  others.  You  were
        part of a large group of perhaps 20  or  more,  predominantly  male
        offenders, who late at night, just before  11.00pm  attacked  those
        premises and you were a party to forcing an entry  into  the  shop;
        that is clear from the CCTV footage which shows  you  as  you  were
        wearing distinctive clothing. Moreover you sought on  a  number  of
        occasions to reach into the  shop  to  steal  property.  No  stolen
        property was found on you subsequently when you  were  arrested  by
        the police shortly thereafter and I deal with you on the basis that
        you were part of a large group participating in the burglary  where
        the group as a whole, stole property. You were part  of  the  first
        wave of offenders; attacking the premises and stealing  what  could
        be stolen from it. The shop owners suffered a great deal  of  loss;
        property to a value of �20,000 was stolen and  there  was  a  large
        amount of damage.'

  37. It is clear  that  his  account  to  the  probation  officer  and  the
      repetition of a version of that account  to  the  panel  involved  the
      claimant minimising  his  culpability  considerably.  His  failure  to
      acknowledge that this was an offence committed as part of a group  and
      was not a single instant of opportunistic theft of picking  up  looted
      goods does him no credit. It suggests that he has  not  addressed  his
      offending behaviour and the conduct and associations that led  him  to
      offend.

  38. He had disputed guilt in the face of the video evidence until  a  late
      stage, and  thereby  deprived  himself  of  the  opportunity  to  show
      remorse, contrition and address his conduct  pre-sentence.  There  was
      evidence that his aunt had warned him about the poor influence of  the
      peer group he was associating with prior to the  offence  and  he  had
      continued to associate  with  the  group  and  offended  despite  this
      advice. The Pre-Sentence Report showed  there  were  risk  factors  of
      spontaneous crime in the presence of a group of  bored  youths  losing
      self control.  Until these factors are  acknowledged  they  cannot  be
      addressed.

  39. Mr Yerokun submits that it was not open to the panel to find that  the
      claimant was a medium risk of re offending in  February  2013  in  the
      light of the assessment of the Pre-Sentence Report in February 2012 of
      an offender group reconviction score (OGRS) of static risk factors  of
      a 19% likelihood of reconviction in a 24  month  period;  and  a  NOMS
      assessment based on this report of a low risk  of  reconviction  using
      OASys scoring although no OASys assessment was  referred  to  in  this
      report.

  40. We note that  OGRS is assessed out  of  100  and  OASys  out  of  168,
      rendering both as a percentage,  the low risk group encompasses scores
      of 0-24%; medium risk 25-59% and high 60-100%. 19% is thus on the high
      end of the low range for risk.

  41. The claimant relied on the authority of Flaneur [2011]  NICA  72.  But
      the Northern Ireland Court of Appeal explains at [24]  and  [25]  that
      neither the Secretary of State  nor  the  Tribunal  are  bound  by  an
      assessment of NOMS; all sources of evidence and  inference  should  be
      examined.  We accept that any expert  opinion  should  be  taken  into
      account and any contrary conclusion sufficiently explained.

  42. The panel noted that no OASys assessment in custody had been performed
      or was available. It was aware that the  claimant  had  misrepresented
      the strength of his community ties to the probation officer (residence
      of Ms Filipe in January 2012; intention  to  return  to  his  father's
      house on release).  It had before  it  direct  evidence  of  continued
      minimising of culpability and no evidence it  considered  reliable  of
      remorse,  rehabilitation  or  addressing  offending  behaviour  or   a
      coherent plan for work, place of residence,  response  to  licence  or
      stable social factors in his life.

  43. The panel reached a conclusion on the evidence as a whole and one they
      were entitled to reach on that evidence. We  would  have  reached  the
      same conclusions on the same material.

Integration

  44. All the above are relevant to  the  degree  of  integration  that  the
      claimant has  with  the  United  Kingdom.  There  is  no  evidence  of
      integration by way of work; course of professional  study,  or  family
      ties with his father. He has not cohabited with Ms Felipe since 2011.

  45. We recognise that he is being deported to Portugal  where  he  appears
      not to have relatives residing and has only spent a few months, but it
      would always be open to him to return to Angola where he  resided  for
      the first 17 years of his life and where both his parents are.

  46. His limited  knowledge  of  English  was  considered  an  obstacle  to
      employment in the Pre-Sentence  Report.   He  may  have  improved  his
      knowledge of English whilst in custody but it is significant  he  gave
      evidence to the panel through an interpreter.

  47. We, therefore, propose to  re-make  the  decision  applying  the  same
      factual conclusions as  the  First-tier  Tribunal  reached  about  the
      credibility of the claimant's account, his prospects  of  re-offending
      the lack  of  evidence  of  integration  and  good  prospects  of  re-
      facilitation.

Further evidence

  48. Paragraph 3.0  of the respondent's notice states:

          'The Respondent would  request  an  oral  hearing  and  where  the
         Tribunal is minded to find a material error of law,  permission  to
         adduce additional evidence  to show that he has sufficient  support
         in the UK for his successful rehabilitation'.

  49. This is quite hopeless for a number of reasons.

  50. Judge Chohan granted permission to appeal on 8  May  2013.  Notice  of
      this was sent to  the  respondent  on  9  May  2013   with  the  Upper
      Tribunal's standard directions requiring the  respondent  to  indicate
      within 28 days of that notice whether fresh evidence would  be  relied
      on in the event of the appeal being remade.  The  respondent's  notice
      was served on the Tribunal on 7 July 2013.  It was  outside  both  the
      period of one month set by the  Tribunal  procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
      Rules 2008  (rule 24 (2)) and the 28 period set by the directions.  No
      explanation of the failure to meet the time limit and  no  application
      for an extension of stay was made in the notice, contrary to  rule  24
      (4).

  51. Paragraph 3 of the notice does not state what fresh evidence  will  be
      adduced, and whether it relates to  events  before  February  2013  or
      subsequently.  The purpose of the standard directions is to enable the
      Tribunal to receive relevant supplementary material (if any) in a case
      where up to date evidence may be needed on the relevant issues in  the
      appeal. It is not intended to give the claimant a  second  opportunity
      to present his primary case. The  information  is  needed  so  further
      directions can be given about how and  when  the  evidence  is  to  be
      received depending on whether it is admitted or contested.  This  very
      late and vague notice achieves none of these purposes  and  singularly
      fails to comply with the standard directions.

  52. All parties need to be reminded that if there is  serious  failure  to
      comply with the rules and directions, it is improbable that extensions
      of time or adjournments will be granted even if relevant and  credible
      fresh evidence might be available.

  53. Updating evidence is admissible and potentially relevant in  EU  cases
      concerned with risk of offending, integration and  strength  of  ties,
      but none has been presented to us or no prior indication given of what
      it might be.

  54. It is particularly important that  there  is  prompt  compliance  with
      rules and directions where the claimant is in custody. Prolongation of
      custody is neither in the public nor the claimant's interest.

  55. We were somewhat surprised to hear that  the  claimant  was  still  in
      custody given that he had succeeded in his appeal on 8 March 2013; the
      absence of a previous record or an index offence to  violence  to  the
      person.

  56. It appears that his representatives made no bail  application  on  his
      behalf in March; instead they took a  point  about  whether  the  Home
      Office application for permission to appeal was in time.

  57. We were informed that the claimant had made two bail applications  and
      were provided with some documentary material.  The first was made on 7
      May and then withdrawn and the second proceeded to  a  hearing  on  20
      May. The judge's reasons for the decision indicate that there  was  no
      evidence that the proposed accommodation was approved  by  NOMS;  that
      the claimant can be trusted to comply with conditions; that the  first
      surety (a paternal aunt) has any funds  or  been  in  touch  with  the
      claimant for the past three years; or  that  the  second  surety  (Ms.
      Miguel his maternal aunt) has understanding of the duties of a surety.
       It is probably very  unfortunate  that  the  claimant  did  not  have
      professional assistance in preparing such applications  but  there  is
      certainly  no  positive  evidence  of  rehabilitation  or  integration
      arising from this.


  58. At the hearing we were  informed  that  Ms  Miguel  and  Leila  Felipe
      attended and were sitting at the back of the hearing room. No  witness
      statement  from  either  had  been  prepared.  Mr   Yerokun   accepted
      responsibility for the failure to  prepare  and  supply  supplementary
      evidence. He stated that a decision  had  been  taken  to  resist  the
      appeal on the basis of the evidence below, but that the UT's  decision
      in Essa had obliged a change of approach. He  proposed  to  call  both
      women.

  59. We were aware of the potential contribution a stable relationship  can
      make to integration and rehabilitation: see Batista  [2010]  EWCA  Civ
      896 [27].  We asked Mr Yerokun what Ms Felipe could add.  He indicated
      that  she  might  be  willing  to  consider  a   resumption   of   her
      relationship. We were informed that her failure to appear  before  the
      First-tier Tribunal was  because  she  was  suffering  from  menstrual
      cramps on the day of the hearing, but did not  need  to  seek  medical
      attention.  None  of  this  suggested  the  existence  of   a   strong
      relationship  likely  to  prove  relevant  to  the  issues   we   were
      considering.

  60. We note that Ms Miguel's address was an  address  in  the  first  Home
      Office response to bail dated 9 May 2013, in the a sense that if  bail
      were to be granted this was the address where the  Home  Office  would
      propose that he would reside. Inferentially it suggests that the  aunt
      has expressed a willingness to accommodate the claimant on release.

  61. We will take the limited data arising from the bail  application  into
      account, but refuse an adjournment for the claimant to supplement  his
      evidence. He has failed to adduce the  relevant  evidence  before  the
      panel; failed to avail himself of the opportunity to update  his  case
      by  complying  with  the  directions,  has  served  a  very  late  and
      inadequate notice and provides no information to  suggest  that  there
      have been significant material developments.

  62. Further, there is a compelling case for this  appeal  to  be  resolved
      finally as promptly as possible consistent with  the  requirements  of
      fairness, in the light of his continued detention.

  63.  In  the  event  that  credible  evidence  of  a  material  change  of
      circumstances does come to light, it is always open to the claimant to
      apply to the Secretary of State to revoke the deportation or exclusion
      order but only if such application is made from abroad (see regulation
      24 A (2)  and  (3)  of  the  Immigration  (EEA  Regulations)  2006  as
      amended).  We cannot see that the  claimant  would  be  worse  off  in
      Portugal than in detention.

The time point

  64. At the conclusion of his submissions Mr  Yerokun  raised  whether  the
      Home Office application for permission to appeal was made in time.  We
      were surprised at this course, because no intimation of  it  had  been
      given in the respondent's notice (late as that was).

  65. The normal position where a judge considers whether a notice has  been
      served in time and considers that it has been, this is not a  decision
      on which there is a right of appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.  It  is  a
      decision on a preliminary matter and therefore an  excluded  decision:
      see ss. 11(1) and 11(5)(f) Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007,
      read together with 3(m) the Appeals (Excluded Decisions) Order 2009 as
      amended  by  the  Tribunals,   Courts   and   Enforcement   Act   2007
      (Miscellaneous Provisions) Order 2010[1]. If an excluded  decision  is
      challenged such a challenge can only be brought  by  way  of  judicial
      review.

  66. When a First-tier judge fails to appreciate that  the  application  is
      out of time and has not  therefore  considered  whether  to  grant  an
      extension of time, the grant of leave remains conditional  unless  and
      until such extension  is  granted  by  the  Upper  Tribunal,  in  this
      instance sitting as a First-tier judge: see Samir (FtT  Permission  to
      appeal; time) [2013] UKUT 3 (IAC).

  67. What appears to have happened here is that on receipt of  the  panel's
      decision, the respondent made a  prompt  request  for  reconsideration
      under rule 60 of the First-tier Procedure Rules, on the basis that  as
      she had won on the disputed issues of fact she believed that the panel
      had intended to  dismiss  the  appeal.  Unfortunately,  there  was  no
      response to this application until 10 April 2013 by when time to  seek
      permission to appeal had expired unless  the  decision  was  modified.
      The panel might have intended to amend the decision by  re-serving  it
      as they invited the respondent to apply for permission to appeal.  The
      respondent lodged such application promptly on 15 April  within  three
      working days.

  68. Rule 60(3) provides that:

           "The time within which a  party  may  apply  for  permission  to
           appeal against, or for review of, an amended determination  runs
           from the date on which the party  is  served  with  the  amended
           determination."

  69. Judge Chohan applied that  rule  and  concluded  the  application  for
      permission to appeal was in time. By its terms the rule  only  applies
      where  the  panel  has  amended  its  decision  in  response   to   an
      application, but an applicant will not know whether a decision  is  to
      be amended until the time for making an application for permission  to
      appeal has passed. We conclude that fairness would generally require a
      panel who has received a bona  fide  request  to  amend  the  decision
      because of incompleteness or ambiguity  to  preserve  the  applicant's
      ability to seek permission to appeal; from  a  decision  that  is  not
      amended in  substance,  either  by  re-promulgating  the  decision  or
      extending time for permission to appeal.

  70. The claimant gave no indication from the grant of permission until the
      date of the hearing that he intended to take a point on time.  At  the
      end of the hearing when the matter was raised before us  we  indicated
      summarily that this was too late to raise the matter.  No  substantive
      discussion of the legislative scheme or the above history took  place.



  71. We have no doubt that  the  interests  of  justice  require  the  Home
      Secretary to be afforded a reasonable opportunity to  appeal,  and  if
      the only way that this could be achieved would be for us  to  consider
      the matter as a First-tier Tribunal  judge  and  extend  time  in  the
      circumstances above we would do so.

  72. Having not heard submissions on it we can reach no concluded  view  of
      the true meaning of rule 60 or what the panel  intended  by  their  10
      April 2013 decision, but we would be inclined  to  conclude  that  the
      panel had acted in the way  discussed  at  [69]  above  and  that  his
      decision should not now be re-opened in this appeal.

  73. There was no prejudice caused to  the  claimant  in  the  respondent's
      conduct.  His position could and should have been protected by a  bail
      application. His own conduct in taking no action on  the  point  after
      grant of permission to appeal, is likely to have misled the respondent
      into thinking that the matter was no longer in issue.

  74. For the avoidance of doubt, in the event that it is needed, we  extend
      time for the respondent's application.

Re-making the decision

  75. For the reasons given by the panel we cannot rely  in  the  claimant's
      unsupported assertions.

  76. There is no evidence  of  any  stable  future  employment  that  would
      provide him with funds to live  off  and  a  disciplined  life  style.
      Indeed there is very little evidence to suggest that he was exercising
      Treaty rights as a worker at all before this imprisonment. He has  not
      acquired permanent residence.  The basic public policy test applies to
      him.

  77. There is little or no evidence of  integration  by  reason  of  strong
      family ties with his father or that side  of  his  family  or  with  a
      partner. The strength of his connection with his maternal aunt or  her
      ability to promote his rehabilitation is contentious and has not  been
      proven.


  78. Nothing has emerged since the panel's decision to throw doubt on their
      conclusion that the claimant presented an  unacceptable  risk  of  re-
      offending; and that his presence is a genuine and sufficiently serious
      threat on one of the fundamental interests of society apart  from  the
      mere fact of his conviction.

  79. The criteria for making a decision to deport in  accordance  with  the
      EEA Regulations are thus met. Having  regard  to  his  age,  state  of
      health, family, economic considerations, length of UK  residence,  and
      degree of social  and  cultural  integration,  an  exclusion  decision
      taking  affect  as  if  it  were  a   deportation   order   would   be
      proportionate. We accept that his present links with Portugal  do  not
      appear to be strong apart from his nationality and  ability  to  speak
      the language but that single factor does not suffice to outweigh other
      ones.

  80. His future prospects of rehabilitation are uncertain and whatever they
      are cannot be a weighty factor in the balance  given  the  absence  of
      integration and a right of permanent residence.

  81. We will re-make the decision by dismissing the claimant's appeal. Both
      members of the panel have contributed to this decision.





                               Signed                     Date 15 July 2012




                                President of the Upper Tribunal
-----------------------
[1] Excluded decision includes:
(m) any procedural, ancillary or preliminary decision made in relation to
an appeal against a decision under section 40A of the British Nationality
Act 1981(m), section 82, 83 or 83A of the Nationality, Immigration and
Asylum Act 2002(n), or regulation 26 of the Immigration (European Economic
Area) Regulations 2006(o).


