


                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal


(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


Mohamoud (paras 352D and 309A - de facto adoption) Ethiopia [2011] UKUT
00378(IAC)


                             the immigration Acts

Heard at: Field House
On 21 April 2011
Determination promulgated


                                    Before


                            Senior Immigration Judge Gill




                                  Between


                        Entry Clearance Officer, Addis Ababa

                 Appellant


                                                   And


                        Master Ahmed Mohamed Mohamoud



                                                        Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Alim, of Step Stones Visas
For the Respondent:       Ms  F  Saunders,  Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
                 Officer.



For the purposes of paragraph 352D of the Immigration  Rules,  an  adopted
child can include a de facto adoption under paragraph 309A  but  a  parent
who is a refugee will normally not be able to meet the residence and  care
requirements of paragraph 309A.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



1.    The background to this appeal is as  follows:  On  15  February  2010,
     Master Mohamoud applied for entry clearance together  with  a  Mr.  Ali
     Mohamed Wadour, in order to join Maryan Mohamoud Jimale (the  Sponsor),
     who was granted refugee status in the United  Kingdom  on  6  September
     2007.  Mr.  Wadour,  born  on  9  September  1965,  applied  for  entry
     clearance as the spouse of the Sponsor.  Master  Mohamoud  applied  for
     entry clearance as the child or adopted child or nephew of the Sponsor.
     Their applications were refused by the Entry  Clearance  Officer  on  5
     March 2010. Both appealed.

2.    The two  appeals  were  heard  before  the  Immigration  Judge  Vaudin
     d'Im�court, who allowed the appeals.  The  appeal  of  Mr.  Wadour  was
     allowed under paragraph  352A  of  the  Statement  of  Changes  in  the
     Immigration Rules HC 395 (as  amended)  (the  Immigration  Rules).  The
     appeal of Master Mohamoud was allowed under paragraph 352D and on human
     rights grounds (Article 8 ECHR).

3.    The Entry Clearance Officer did not challenge the Immigration  Judge's
     decision to allow the appeal of Mr. Wadour but he sought permission  to
     challenge his decision to allow the appeal  of  Master  Mohamoud  under
     paragraph 352D and under Article 8.  I  will  hereafter  refer  to  the
     Respondent as the ECO and Master Mohamoud as Mohamoud.

4.    Ms. Saunders informed me  that  she  did  not  intend  to  pursue  the
     challenge to the  Immigration  Judge's  decision  to  allow  Mohamoud's
     appeal on human rights grounds (Article 8). Mr. Alim did not pursue any
     appeal under the Immigration Rules based on Mohamoud being  the  nephew
     or step-nephew of the Sponsor. Accordingly, the sole issue before me is
     whether the Immigration Judge  materially  erred  in  law  in  allowing
     Mohamoud's appeal under paragraph 352D.  This  turns  on  the  question
     whether he qualified under paragraph 352D as a "child" of the Sponsor.

5.    Mohamoud's case, as presented to  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer,  was
     that he was the Sponsor's  nephew  or  step-nephew  (according  to  the
     answers to questions 7.3 and 7.4 of the visa application form)  or  her
     adopted child (according to a letter from Pinidiya Solicitors dated  20
     January 2009).

6.    Before the Immigration Judge, it was argued on Mohamoud's behalf  that
     he was "at the very least a de facto adopted child of the  family"  and
     that his appeal should be allowed under Article 8. However, as  I  have
     said above, the Immigration Judge allowed his  appeal  under  paragraph
     352D of the Immigration Rules as well as Article 8.

7.    The relevant provisions are paragraphs 309A, 352D and  the  definition
     of "parent" in paragraph 6, which I will now quote:

      "adoption" unless the contrary intention appears, includes a de  facto
      adoption in accordance with the  requirements  of  paragraph  309A  of
      these Rules, and "adopted" and "adoptive parent" should  be  construed
      accordingly.


      "a parent" includes


      (a)   the stepfather of a child whose father is dead and the reference
           to stepfather includes  a  relationship  arising  through  civil
           partnership;
      (b)   ......,
      (c)   ......,
      (d)   an adoptive parent, where a child was adopted in accordance with
           a decision taken by the competent  administrative  authority  or
           court in a country whose adoption orders are recognised  by  the
           United Kingdom or where a child is the subject  of  a  de  facto
           adoption in accordance with the requirements of  paragraph  309A
           of these Rules (except that an adopted child or a child  who  is
           the subject of a de facto adoption may not make  an  application
           for leave to enter or remain in  order  to  accompany,  join  or
           remain with an adoptive parent under paragraphs 297-303);
      (e)   [not relevant].


      309A. For the purposes of adoption  under  paragraphs  310-316C  a  de
           facto adoption shall be regarded as having taken place if:
      (a)   at the time immediately preceding the making of the  application
           for entry clearance under these Rules  the  adoptive  parent  or
           parents have been living abroad (in applications  involving  two
           parents both must have lived abroad together)  for  at  least  a
           period of time equal to  the  first  period  mentioned  in  sub-
           paragraph (b)(i) and must have cared for the child for at  least
           a period of time equal to the second period material in that sub-
           paragraph; and
      (b)   during their time abroad, the adoptive parent or parents have:
            (i)   lived together for a minimum period of 18 months, of which
                 the 12 months immediately  preceding  the  application  for
                 entry clearance must have been spent living  together  with
                 the child; and
            (ii)  have assumed the role of the child's  parents,  since  the
                 beginning of the 18 month period, so that there has been  a
                 genuine transfer of parental responsibility.


      352D. The requirements to be met by a person seeking leave to enter or
           remain in the United Kingdom in order to join or remain with the
           parent who has been granted asylum in  the  United  Kingdom  are
           that the applicant:
            (i)   is the child of a parent who has been  granted  asylum  in
           the United Kingdom; "

8.    The Immigration Judge's determination records  that  the  letter  from
     Pinidiya Solicitors states that Mohamoud was  adopted  by  the  Sponsor
     from the time he lost his parents in the civil war as a child and  that
     the Sponsor said in answer to question 5.1 of her  screening  interview
     in connection with her asylum claim that she had one child. At question
     5.2 of her screening interview, she was asked the question:  "Have  you
     had responsibility for any other children? For examples nieces, nephews
     etc" and she replied "No".   At  the  hearing  before  the  Immigration
     Judge, the Sponsor said that Mohamoud was her nephew  (paragraph  7  of
     the determination). She said her brother died in 1996 and that she  has
     taken care of Mohamoud since he was one year old and that  he  regarded
     her as his mother. She gave evidence of her contact with Mr. Wadour and
     Mohamoud and of monies remitted to them.

9.    The ECO was not satisfied that Mohamoud was related as claimed to  the
     Sponsor. The Immigration Judge gave his reasons for allowing Mohamoud's
     appeal at paragraphs 14 to 17, which read:

     "14.   With regards to the second appellant I was  satisfied  that  the
           appellant qualified as a de facto adopted child in  that  I  was
           satisfied that at the time immediately preceding the  making  of
           the application  for  entry  clearance  under  these  Rules  the
           adoptive parent or parents had been living abroad for at least a
           period of time equal to  the  first  period  mentioned  in  sub-
           paragraph (b)(i) and must have cared for the child for at  least
           a period of time equal to the second period material in that sub-
           paragraph and (b) during their time abroad, the adoptive  parent
           or parents have:


      (i)   lived together for a minimum period of eighteen months, of which
                 the twelve months immediately preceding the application for
                 entry clearance must have been spent living  together  with
                 the child; and


      (ii)  have  assumed  the  role  of  the  child's  parents,  since  the
                 beginning of the eighteen month period, so that  there  has
                 been a genuine transfer of parental responsibility.


     15.    I was satisfied that the second appellant had been a  member  of
           the first appellant and sponsor's family since he was aged 1.  I
           was satisfied that both his parents were deceased  and  that  he
           has been brought up by the first appellant and  his  wife  until
           the sponsor left  Kenya  in  2005.   I  was  satisfied  that  he
           remained a family member of the first appellant's family through
           this time.  I am satisfied that he is under the age of 18 and  I
           am also satisfied that he has not  been  living  an  independent
           life.


     16.    Given that I was satisfied that  the  second  appellant  was  an
           adopted child of the sponsor and her  husband,  I  am  satisfied
           also that he qualifies for entry clearance under the  provisions
           of paragraph 352D in as much as I do not distinguish between  an
           adopted child and a child for the purpose of paragraph 352D  and
           construe that paragraph as applying equally to an adopted child.


     17.    Alternatively, if I am  wrong  regarding  my  interpretation  of
           paragraph 352D of the Immigration Rules, I  find  that  for  the
           purpose of Article 8 the second appellant has family  life  with
           his adoptive father in Ethiopia and I also find that  he  was  a
           family member of the sponsor's family prior to her departure and
           that she has remained caring for that child  and  that  she  has
           continued to have family life with him.  I find that to  exclude
           him from entry clearance would breach his rights to respect  for
           his family life with his parents or adoptive parents  and  would
           breach the sponsor's right to family life with him and the first
           appellant's family life with him applying the  decision  in  the
           case  of  Beoku-Betts  -v-  SSHD  [2008]  UKHL   39.    In   the
           alternative, therefore, I would also  allow  this  appeal  under
           Article 8."

10.   The grounds of application for permission to appeal contend  that  the
     Immigration Judge erred in law in finding that Mohamoud was a de  facto
     adopted child under  paragraph  309A  because  (it  is  contended)  the
     requirement in paragraph 309A(b)(i) could not be met.  This,  in  turn,
     was because the "adoptive parent" (the Sponsor)  had  not  been  living
     with Mohamoud for 12 months immediately preceding the application.

11.   At the hearing before me,  Mr.  Alim  reminded  me  that  the  Sponsor
     arrived in the United Kingdom in June 2005, having already entered into
     a marriage with Mr. Wadour on 7 February 2005. She was granted  refugee
     status on 6 September 2007.  He  submitted  that  there  was  de  facto
     adoption of Mohamoud by the Sponsor when he was one year old  (i.e.  in
     1996), albeit that paragraph 309A was not satisfied.  This is the  form
     of de facto adoption relied upon in the instant case.

12.   If it is accepted that Mohamoud was de facto adopted  by  the  Sponsor
     in 1996, then Mr. Alim submitted Mr. Wadour was his stepfather. If this
     is accepted, then the care provided by Mr. Wadour  can  be  taken  into
     account in order to  decide  whether  paragraph  309A(a)  and  (b)  are
     satisfied. Mr. Alim submitted that the words in brackets  in  paragraph
     309A(a) do not cause a difficulty because the instant application  only
     involved one parent, not two. Mr. Alim  submitted  that  the  words  in
     brackets only apply when two British citizens wish to adopt a child. In
     those circumstances, the parents have  to  show  that  they  have  both
     resided abroad with the child for the relevant period.

13.   Mr. Alim submitted  that,  in  any  event,  Mohamoud  qualified  under
     paragraph 352D as the child of the Sponsor, because he was a  de  facto
     adopted child as this term is  normally  understood.  This  is  because
     paragraph 352D is not mentioned in the definition of "adoptive parent".
     Mr. Alim submitted that a de facto adoption "in the  old  sense"  would
     qualify under paragraph 352D.

14.   In response, Ms. Saunders submitted that, given  that  paragraph  352D
     requires a child to be  the  child  of  a  parent,  the  definition  of
     "parent" in paragraph 6 becomes relevant. Notwithstanding the fact that
     the opening line of the definition of "parent" states  that  "a  parent
     includes...",   Ms.  Saunders  submitted,  in  order  to  satisfy   the
     definition of "parent" in paragraph 352D, the Sponsor  had  to  satisfy
     one or more of the  alternatives  in  the  definition  of  "parent"  in
     paragraph 6. She submitted that this was an exhaustive list of the ways
     in which an individual can be regarded as a "parent" for  the  purposes
     of the Immigration Rules, including  paragraph  352D.  The  Immigration
     Rules  were  meant  to  protect  children.  Accordingly,  Ms.  Saunders
     submitted that the definition of "parent" and "adoption" should not  be
     widely interpreted. She accepted that a de facto adoption will  qualify
     under paragraph 352D but she submitted that paragraph 309A  had  to  be
     satisfied before an adoption is regarded as a de facto adoption for the
     purposes of paragraph 352D.

15.   Ms. Saunders submitted that  the  relevant  adoptive  parent  was  the
     Sponsor. She is the person who was granted refugee status. Accordingly,
     in order for Mohamoud to succeed under paragraph 352D,  it  had  to  be
     shown that he was the adopted child of the Sponsor. This meant that  it
     had to be shown that the  Sponsor  satisfied  the  residence  and  care
     requirements set out in paragraph 309A. She  submitted  that  the  care
     provided by Mr. Wadour did not qualify because he was  not  the  person
     who had been granted refugee status.

16.   Ms. Saunders submitted that the term "stepfather" should be given  its
     natural meaning. She submitted that a stepparent is one who is  married
     to the parent of the child. Accordingly, she submitted  that,  for  Mr.
     Wadour to be regarded as Mohamoud's stepfather, it had to be shown that
     the Sponsor was the adoptive parent, which meant  that  paragraph  309A
     had to be satisfied.

17.   Ms. Saunders submitted that, if it was possible  for  a  genus  of  de
     facto adoption to satisfy the requirements of paragraph  352D  even  if
     paragraph 309A was not satisfied, it  would  have  been  necessary  for
     paragraph 352D or paragraph 309A to say so. It would  otherwise  set  a
     dangerous precedent.

18.   In response, Mr. Alim submitted that the fact that paragraph  352D  is
     not mentioned in  the  words  in  brackets  in  paragraph  (d)  of  the
     definition of "parent" means that  paragraph  352D  is  a  stand  alone
     provision, with the result that an adoption can come  within  paragraph
     352D if it is a de facto adoption even  if  it  does  not  satisfactory
     paragraph 309A.  Mr. Alim submitted that it was necessary  to  bear  in
     mind the purpose of paragraph 352D. It was  to  reunite  families  that
     were separated due to persecution. If, as in this case, it was accepted
     that Mohamoud enjoyed family life with  the  Sponsor  before  she  fled
     Somalia to seek asylum, then he should succeed under paragraph 352D, if
     he was de facto adopted and even if  the  de  facto  adoption  did  not
     fulfil the requirements of paragraph 309A.

19.   Mr. Alim requested me to issue a direction, given that Article  8  was
     conceded on the ECO's behalf and that the Sponsor was  not  well,  that
     Mohamoud be granted entry clearance in line with the  Sponsor's  leave,
     so that he would not need to make another application for leave after 6
     months.

20.   I reserved my decision.

      Assessment

21.   Unfortunately, neither Mr. Alim nor Ms. Saunders referred  me  to  the
     judgment of the Court of Appeal in MK (Somalia) & Ors v Entry Clearance
     Officer [2008] EWCA Civ 1453, paragraph 17 of which reads:

      "17.  In the present case (and, I accept, many others), this  test  of
           de facto adoption is not satisfied because it requires that both
           adoptive parents have spent at least 18 months living  with  the
           child immediately prior to the  child's  application  for  entry
           clearance, whereas in  an  asylum  case  at  least  one  of  the
           parental figures will usually be in the United  Kingdom,  having
           successfully sought asylum."

22.   Although paragraph 17 was not the ratio of the case and  is  therefore
     not binding  upon  me,  it  is,  of  course,  very  persuasive.  It  is
     consistent with the reasoning in SK ("adoption" not recognised  in  UK)
     India [2006] UKAIT 00068 and  MN  (Non-recognised  adoptions:  unlawful
     discrimination?) India [2007] UKAIT 00015, albeit that  the  issues  in
     those cases were not the same. I have concluded that  paragraph  17  of
     the judgment in MK (Somalia) sets out the correct answer to the instant
     case. In giving my reasons, I shall deal with the  submissions  of  the
     parties before me, to which I now turn.

23.   The starting point is the wording of paragraph  352D.  This  makes  it
     clear that it is necessary for it to be shown  that  Mohamoud  is  "the
     child of a parent who has been granted asylum in the  United  Kingdom".
     Mr. Wadour has not been granted refugee status. It is the  Sponsor  who
     has been granted refugee status. Accordingly, in my view,  it  must  be
     shown that Mohamoud is the child of the Sponsor,  for  him  to  succeed
     under paragraph 352D. In other words,  the  relevant  parent,  for  the
     purposes of paragraph 352D, is the Sponsor.

24.   The next point to consider is the meaning of the word "parent".   This
      is defined in paragraph 6. This sets out five different ways in  which
      an individual can be regarded as  "a  parent"  under  the  Immigration
      Rules. Mr. Alim relied on paragraph (d) of the definition of  "parent"
      in paragraph 6.  In my judgment, the words in parenthesis in paragraph
      (d) of the definition of "parent", which read:

      "(except that an adopted child or a child who is the subject of  a  de
           facto adoption may not make an application for leave to enter or
           remain in order to accompany, join or remain  with  an  adoptive
           parent under paragraphs 297-303)"


      do not have the  effect  of  changing  the  meaning  of  an  "adoptive
      parent". The effect these words have  is  that  any  application  made
      under paragraphs 297 to 303 by an adopted child (whether one  who  was
      adopted  in  accordance  with  a  decision  taken  by  the   competent
      administrative authority or court in a country whose  adoption  orders
      are recognised by the United Kingdom or who is the  subject  of  a  de
      facto adoption in accordance with the requirements of paragraph  309A)
      cannot be successful. There is a simple reason for this.  It  is  that
      paragraphs 297 to 303 are intended to set out the requirements  to  be
      met by biological children.  Applications for entry clearance or leave
      by biological children are to be considered under  paragraphs  297  to
      303 and those by adopted children  or  children  to  be  admitted  for
      adoption are to be considered  under  paragraphs  310-316C.  In  other
      words, it is not possible to circumvent  the  protection  afforded  to
      children who are adopted by lodging applications under paragraphs  297
      to 303.

25.   Since paragraph 352D is  not  mentioned  in  the  parenthesis  of  the
     definition of "parent" in paragraph 6, an adopted  child  (whether  one
     who was adopted in accordance with a decision taken  by  the  competent
     administrative authority or court in a country  whose  adoption  orders
     are recognised by the United Kingdom or who is  the  subject  of  a  de
     facto adoption in accordance with the requirements of  paragraph  309A)
     is not precluded from the ambit of paragraph 352D. Accordingly,  in  my
     view, Ms. Saunders rightly accepted  that  "child"  in  paragraph  352D
     includes adopted children.

26.   I agree with Ms. Saunders  that  (a)  to  (e)  of  the  definition  of
     "parent" represents  an  exhaustive  list  of  the  ways  in  which  an
     individual can be regarded as a parent  under  the  Immigration  Rules,
     notwithstanding the word "includes" at the beginning of the definition.
     I also agree with Ms. Saunders that the meaning of "de facto  adoption"
     set out at paragraph  309A  applies  to  paragraph  352D,  as  well  as
     paragraphs 310-316C, notwithstanding the fact that paragraph 309A  does
     not specifically say so. To decide  otherwise  would  be  to  put  into
     jeopardy the objective of protecting children from the  risk  of  being
     passed from the control of one adult  to  another  without  appropriate
     safeguards and, further, the risk  of  being  trafficked  into  another
     country. Given that "de facto adoption" has been given a  specific  and
     restrictive meaning for the purposes of  paragraphs  310  to  316C,  it
     would be very odd if this existed side-by-side with  a  less  demanding
     meaning for other purposes under the  Immigration  Rules.  If  it  were
     possible for a different genus of "de facto adoption"  to  satisfy  the
     requirements of paragraph 352D, this would mean that refugees would  be
     able to circumvent the protection afforded  to  children  by  paragraph
     309A but non-refugees would not.

27.   For all of these reasons, I have concluded  that  there  is  only  one
     meaning of a "de facto adoption" under the Immigration Rules, and  that
     is the meaning given to this term in paragraph 309A, which  applies  to
     paragraph 352D as well as paragraphs 310 to 316C,  notwithstanding  the
     fact that paragraph 352D is not mentioned in paragraph 309A. Whilst  it
     may well be the case that adoptive parents who are refugees may find it
     difficult to satisfy the residence and care requirements  in  paragraph
     309A, this does not justify departing from  these  requirements,  given
     that Article 8 is available in appropriate cases.

28.   Given  that  the  parent  in  respect  of  whom  the  requirements  of
     paragraph 352D must be satisfied is the parent  who  has  been  granted
     asylum in the United Kingdom, it does not help the  case  advanced  for
     Mohamoud to rely upon paragraph (a) of the definition of "parent", that
     is, to say that Mr. Wadour is his stepfather. It is not possible, in my
     view to get around paragraph 352D in this way.

29.   Accordingly, the Immigration Judge  was  correct  to  apply  paragraph
     309A when deciding whether Mohamoud was a "child" who  qualified  under
     paragraph 352D. However, since the Sponsor was  the  relevant  "parent"
     under paragraph 352D, the definition had to be shown to be satisfied in
     relation to her. I do not accept that the care provided by  Mr.  Wadour
     can be taken into account to satisfy the definition of paragraph  309A,
     even if he could properly be  regarded  as  an  adoptive  parent  under
     paragraph 309A. The rule clearly provides that both parents  must  have
     lived abroad together and  there  is  no  basis  for  restricting  that
     requirement to British citizens as Mr. Alim sought to argue.  The  only
     sensible interpretation of paragraph 309A is that it had  to  be  shown
     that  the  refugee  adoptive-parent  satisfied  the  requirements   for
     residence abroad with the child and care of the child, as  set  out  in
     paragraph 309A(a) and (b).

30.   The Immigration Judge found, at paragraphs 14  to  16,  that  Mohamoud
     was a de facto adopted child within paragraph 309A. However, he did not
     explain how it  is  that  he  found  that  the  Sponsor  satisfied  the
     residence and care conditions of paragraph 309A. It  is  impossible  to
     see how the Immigration  Judge  could  have  been  satisfied  that  the
     Sponsor and Mohamoud had lived together for the  period  of  12  months
     immediately preceding the application for entry clearance. In  reaching
     the findings he did,  that  this  condition  of  residence  abroad  was
     satisfied, he must have considered the residence of Mr. Wadour as being
     sufficient to satisfy paragraph  309A.  In  doing  so,  he  misdirected
     himself in law.

31.   For the reasons given above, I have  concluded  that  the  Immigration
     Judge materially  erred  in  law  in  allowing  the  appeal  under  the
     Immigration Rules.  I have proceeded to re-make the decision. There  is
     no evidence that the Sponsor had lived with and cared for Mohamoud  for
     the periods specified in paragraph 309A. Accordingly, I have  concluded
     that Mohamoud has not shown that he  is  the  subject  of  a  de  facto
     adoption, as this term is defined in paragraph  309A.  Accordingly,  he
     has not shown that he is a "child" of a parent  who  has  been  granted
     refugee status.

32.   As I have said above, the Immigration Judge also  allowed  the  appeal
     under the Article 8. Ms.  Saunders  did  not  pursue  the  Respondent's
     challenge  to  that  decision.  Accordingly,  the  Immigration  Judge's
     decision to allow the appeal on human rights grounds, with  respect  to
     Article 8, stands.

33.   I have considered Mr. Alim's request for a direction that Mohamoud  be
     granted entry clearance in line with the Sponsor's leave. Section 87(1)
     of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  (as  amended)
     confers on the Tribunal a discretion  to  issue  a  direction  for  the
     purpose of giving  effect  to  its  decision.  I  do  not  consider  it
     necessary to issue a direction to give effect to the decision to  allow
     Mohamoud's appeal on human rights grounds. The period for  which  entry
     clearance is granted is a matter for the ECO.

34.   Decision:

      The decision of the Immigration Judge insofar as  it  related  to  the
      decision under the Immigration Rules involved the making of  an  error
      on a point of law such that it falls to be set aside. I have proceeded
      to remake the decision. My decision  is  that  the  appeal  under  the
      Immigration Rules is dismissed.


      Accordingly, the Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal fails.


Signed

Senior Immigration Judge Gill
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Approved for electronic distribution



