
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

TG (Interaction of Directives and Rules) [2016] UKUT 00374 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 | Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 23 February 2016                  | On 18 May 2016                      |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                          THE HONOURABLE LORD BURNS
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

                                     TG
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Jorro (Counsel instructed by Wilson Solicitors
LLP)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


The interpretation of paragraph 334 of the Immigration Rules is  subject  to
the Qualification Directive and the Procedures Directive.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, whose date of birth is [date], is an ethnic Tibetan from
    the People's Republic of China.  He has  appealed  against  a  decision
    dated 30 September 2014 to  remove  him  to  India  consequent  to  the
    refusal of his protection claim (for asylum made on 25  January  2013).
    The appellant appeals on the basis that he is a refugee  whose  removal
    from the UK  would  breach  the  UK's  obligations  under  the  Refugee
    Convention and/or that such removal would be unlawful  as  incompatible
    with his human rights.

 2. This matter comes before us for a hearing de novo. In  a  decision  and
    reasons promulgated on 6  January  2016  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Shaerf found that there had been a material error of law by the  First-
    tier Tribunal and directed that the First-tier  Tribunal  decision   be
    set aside in its entirety and for the appeal to be heard afresh. At the
    hearing before us both  representatives  confirmed  that  they  had  no
    objection to the appeal being heard before  this  Tribunal.   Mr  Jorro
    took specific instructions from his client and confirmed that they were
    ready for the hearing to proceed and were content for the matter to  be
    dealt with by the Upper Tribunal.

Appellant's claim

 3. The appellant claims that as an ethnic Tibetan from China  he  faces  a
    real risk of persecution on return  (SP  &  others  (Tibetan-  Nepalese
    departure - illegal- risk) Peoples Republic of  China  CG  [2007]  UKUT
    00021).  He argues that  the  exclusionary  provisions  in  Article  1E
    (Refugee convention) and the  Qualification  Directive  (339C)  do  not
    apply as he is unable to return to India and would not be recognised as
    having the same or equivalent rights to an Indian National.  The burden
    is on the respondent to show that he could be readmitted to India where
    there would be sufficient protection available.

Reasons for refusal

 4. In a letter dated 30.9.2014 the respondent accepted the  reason  (race)
    for claiming asylum as valid but did  not  accept  that  the  appellant
    faced a fear of persecution in India. The respondent accepted that  the
    appellant was from China.  The  respondent  did  not  accept  that  the
    appellant had obtained a registration certificate (RC) through an agent
    and/or that he obtained using on false information in 2001.  It was not
    accepted that the appellant was born in Tibet and went to India at  the
    age of 7 years. As to readmission to India, the  respondent  considered
    that the appellant would be able to return  to  India  relying  on  the
    stamp in his I certificate (IC) which showed his legal residence  as  a
    Tibetan refugee.

 5. The respondent did not accept the appellant's claim to  have  protested
    outside the Chinese embassy  in  Delhi,  when  considered  against  the
    background material.

 6. As to fear of return to China the respondent relied on  the  Swiss  FMO
    cited at paragraph 64 of the refusal  letter  and  in  the  COIR  which
    stated that there were no reported deportations of Tibetan refugees  to
    China  and  that  the  Indian  government  provided   protection.   The
    respondent considered that the appellant faced  no  risk  as  a  failed
    asylum seeker in India.   Section 8 Asylum & Immigration (Treatment  of
    claimants etc) Act 2004 was relied on because of the delay in  claiming
    asylum in the UK.  Human rights were considered  under  the  Rules  and
    outside of the rules, and rejected.

Grounds of appeal

 7. The appellant's detailed claim is set out in a skeleton argument.  As a
    Tibetan  from  China  the  appellant  does  not  have  the  rights  and
    obligations which are attached  to  Indian  nationality  or  equivalent
    rights and obligations.  Accordingly he ought not to be  excluded  from
    the benefits of the Refugee Convention pursuant to Article 1E  and  the
    Qualification Directive (Directive 2004/83/EC) (QD) pursuant to Article
    12(1).  The appellant claims that he is a refugee  in  accordance  with
    the Refugee Convention and  pursuant  to  the  Qualification  Directive
    chapters (ii) and (iii) and that therefore he should be granted refugee
    status pursuant to the Qualification Directive Article 13.  Further the
    Immigration Rules at paragraph 334(v) sets out the requirements  for  a
    grant of refugee status cannot lay down any conditions for a  grant  of
    refugee status in the UK that are "less  generous"  than  or  are  more
    restrictive than, or are incompatible with, the conditions for a  grant
    of refugee status in the EU as per the Qualification Directive and  the
    Procedures Directive (Directive  2005/85/EC)  (PD).   Paragraph  334(v)
    envisages a person who is a refugee nonetheless being  refused  refugee
    status on the basis that such refusal would not require him to  go,  in
    breach of the Geneva Convention, to a country  in  which  his  life  or
    freedom would be threatened on account of race, religion,  nationality,
    political opinion or membership of a particular social group,  must  be
    applied and interpreted in compliance  with  the  Procedures  Directive
    Sections (ii) Articles 25 to 27.

The Hearing

 8. For the hearing the appellant produced a  lever  arch  file  containing
    authorities listed from tab one to  tab  eight.   The  bundle  for  the
    hearing  consisted  of  bundle  A,  an  updated  bundle  index  to  the
    appellant's documents and Sections A to  D.   That  bundle  included  a
    skeleton argument dated 10 June 2015 and  some  updated  evidence  from
    pages 1 to 7 including a witness statement from Emma Terenius dated  17
    February 2016.   A  supplementary  bundle  sent  on  19  February  2016
    included  the  appellant's  supplementary  witness   statement,   email
    correspondence, an application form  Nepal  1992  and  the  appellant's
    mother's Chinese ID card together  with  certificate  and  translation.
    Additional evidence was produced by way of a letter dated  22  February
    2016 which included an addendum to expert report by Dr Anand  dated  21
    February 2016,  photographs  of  the  appellant.   Counsel  produced  a
    detailed skeleton argument dated 19 February 2016 which  contained  all
    the relevant legal provisions including  the  Refugee  Convention,  the
    Qualification and  Procedures  Directives  and  the  Immigration  rules
    paragraph 334.  We refer to the  same  and  have  not  reproduced  that
    material in this decision.

 9. The respondent's bundle included the Reasons for  Refusal  Letter,  the
    appellant's screening interview and substantive interview.  Mr  Wilding
    relied on MA (Ethiopia) [2009] EWCA Civ 289 and  a  Swiss  report  from
    Focus entitled "The Tibetan Community in India" dated 30 June 2013.

10. We heard oral evidence from the appellant who  relied  on  his  witness
    statements and the evidence given to the FTT in June 2015.  In addition
    there was written evidence from Mrs H and Miss Terenius which  was  not
    challenged.  The appellant relied on an expert report from Dr Anand. Mr
    Jorro relied on his skeleton argument. Mr Wilding made oral submissions
    on the evidence from the appellant and prepared written  submission  on
    the legal issues. We have received those written  submissions  together
    with submissions in response from Mr Jorro.

The Appellant's Evidence

11.  The appellant  relied  on  his  previous  witness  statements  and  the
    responses made in Home Office interview.   He  relied  on  his  witness
    statement responding  to  the  Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter  dated  30
    September 2014.  He confirmed  that  he  had  told  the  truth  at  the
    previous hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  June  2015.   He
    relied on his third witness statement dated 19 February 2016  in  which
    gave an explanation as to how he  obtained  further  documentation  and
    photographic evidence.

12.  He identified himself in the photographs shown  with  the  Dalai  Lama.
    The photograph was taken  in  Oxford.   Other  photographs  showed  the
    appellant at a protest demonstration in Central London.    He  referred
    to page 55, bundle C which showed a photograph taken in Calcutta of him
    with Denzin Dsundu taken in 2005/2006.

13.  In cross-examination the appellant confirmed  that  the  identification
    certificate (IC) allowed him to travel internationally and he  used  it
    as a passport.  That document stated incorrectly that he  was  born  in
    India.  He did not have a copy of  his  registration  certificate  (RC)
    which was left in India, having been submitted to the  local  authority
    in support of his application for an exit permit  to  go  abroad.   The
    procedure had changed since 2005.  In 2012 he came to the  UK  with  an
    exit permit.  He had come to the UK with the intention to claim asylum.



14.  When he obtained his RC he had given  false  information  that  he  was
    born in India and that his  parents  were  dead.   In  support  of  his
    application he produced a letter from his school  which  confirmed  the
    false details and he paid some bribe money through an agency.   He  had
    also handed in an exam certificate.  He acknowledged  that  the  school
    had supported the lie on his behalf.  He explained that  there  were  a
    few Tibetan students who did not have permanent residence in India  and
    were forced to do this in order to get a residence certificate.

15.  He acknowledged that a more recent letter from the school (tab  A  page
    2) confirmed that he was a student in India, he was from Lassa,  Tibet,
    his date of birth and place of birth.   He had  applied  for  a  RC  in
    2001. He did not know whether he could have applied at an earlier time.
      He used his RC in order to obtain his IC.  For  that  application  he
    had stated that he was born in India.  He was assisted by an  agent  to
    fill out the form.  He believed that  the  agent  was  working  in  the
    registration office where he had seen him on  several  occasions.   The
    appellant did not use an agent for any other  applications.   He  would
    get his certificate renewed yearly by taking the  book  and  money  for
    payment.

16.  The appellant attended the Indian High  Commission  in  London  on  two
    occasions and on both occasions had not got past the security  officer.
    He had given details about his case and the security officer  had  told
    him that they would not be able to help him because he had committed  a
    fraud.  The appellant  confirmed  that  he  had  not  requested  a  new
    identification  certificate.   His  letters  (tab  C  pages  2  and  3)
    contained requests for information about re-admission  to  India  only.
    The appellant confirmed that he had a better human rights projection in
    the UK than in India.

17.  He referred to his green  booklet  which  was  issued  by  the  Tibetan
    authorities to show his Tibetan identity.

18.  He attended at protest demonstrations outside the  Chinese  Embassy  in
    2008.   He confirmed that he had climbed  over  half  of  a  wall.  The
    police attended the demonstration.   He and two friends  were  detained
    for a period of five or six days.   After that he had  attended  vigils
    but with different friends and he tried to keep a low profile.   He had
    been able to renew his registration certificate two or three times  and
    had not experienced problems with renewal or with  obtaining  an  exist
    visa.

19.  He obtained new documentation (in part  A  of  the  bundle)  by  making
    contact by email and telephone.  He asked whether there was any  record
    of him in Tibet; he gave his details and copies of his green book.   He
    had then received the letter in response.

Oral Submissions

20.  Mr Wilding submitted that the central issue  was  whether  or  not  the
    appellant could return to India. Having heard the appellant's  evidence
    it was accepted that the appellant was born in Tibet and left Tibet  to
    go to India.  In the light of the  country  guidance  case  Mr  Wilding
    accepted that the appellant was a refugee from China.  He conceded that
    if the appellant was not re admitted in India the  decision  to  remove
    him  would  effectively  be  unlawful.   He  would  be  relying  on  MA
    (Ethiopia) and the Swiss NGO report.    He  proposed  to  set  out  his
    submissions in writing to deal with  Article  1E,  334(v)  and  Article
    33(1) of the Refugee Convention.

21.  Mr Jorro submitted that the rights the appellant may or  may  not  have
    did not exclude him  under  Article  1E.   The  respondent  having  now
    conceded that the appellant was a refugee, the issue was whether  there
    was a country to  which  the  appellant  could  be  removed  (paragraph
    334(v)) which has to be read in  accordance  with  Article  26  of  the
    Directive.  MA (Ethiopia) was of relevance to the question of the  bona
    fide efforts made by a claimant to see if he could  go  elsewhere,  and
    focused on nationality.  The main issue for consideration and  response
    by the Secretary of State was set out in the skeleton argument as issue
    D from paragraph 32.  Mr Jorro submitted that the evidential burden was
    upon the respondent to demonstrate that an  exclusion  clause  such  as
    under Article 1E/Article  12(1)(b)  applied  and  that  the  respondent
    failed to discharge this burden with any evidence.  He  submitted  that
    the weight of the evidence produced by the appellant demonstrated  that
    Tibetans in India do not have rights that come remotely close to  those
    attached to possession of Indian nationality or equivalent to the same.
      Reliance was placed on the expert report and  background  reports  on
    Tibetans in India.  These  included  being  considered  as  foreigners,
    living in a state of legal limbo, not being able  to  open  an  account
    without obtaining Reserve Bank approval, lacking  civil  and  political
    rights and having limited or closed employment opportunities.  Reliance
    was placed on the Federal Court of Canada judgment in Tendzin Choezom v
    MCI [2004] FC 1608.  Given the current position that the appellant  was
    in the UK as an asylum seeker with no  Indian  residence  documents  he
    would face major problems in the event  of  a  return  to  India  as  a
    Tibetan without a registration card.   It was submitted on  that  basis
    that the appellant could not be excluded under Article 1(8) or  Article
    12(1)(b).

22.  The UK's obligations under the Refugee Convention must  be  met  having
    regard to the concession that he is effectively a refugee qua  China  -
    his only country of nationality - prior to his claim for asylum in  the
    UK. In terms of the Procedural Directive  and  Articles  25  to  27  he
    submitted that Article 25 had no bearing as the appellant's application
    has not been treated as inadmissible.  Under Article 27 India was not a
    party to the Refugee Convention and there was no  possibility  for  the
    appellant  to  request  refugee  status  and  receive   protection   in
    accordance with the Convention.   There was  no  evidence  to  indicate
    that India is a country to which the UK  has  applied  the  safe  third
    country concept.

23.  Mr Jorro submitted that Article 26 treating India as a  "first  country
    of  asylum"  did  not  apply.   The  expert  and  background   evidence
    established that the appellant would not enjoy sufficient protection in
    India if he were returned there now.   The burden in terms  of  Article
    26 as to re-admissibility  to  India  lies  on  the  respondent.    The
    respondent needed to demonstrate that India can be considered to  be  a
    first  country  of  asylum  for  the  appellant  and  to  that  end  to
    demonstrate that he will be readmitted to India.

The Respondent's Written Submissions

24.  In submissions dated 10 March 2016 it was accepted that  the  appellant
    is a Chinese national who travelled from Tibet to  India  in  1992  and
    following the country guidance case (SP and Others (Tibetan -  Nepalese
    departure - illegal - risk) People's Republic of China CG [2007]  UKAIT
    00021) the appellant is a refugee from China.  The respondent  did  not
    advance submissions that the appellant  was  excluded  from  protection
    because of Article 1E. The written submissions therefore focused on the
    question of whether the appellant can return to India for the  purposes
    of paragraph 334(v) of the Immigration Rules and under Article 33(1) of
    the Refugee Convention.  It was accepted that the appellant was not  an
    Indian national.  Article 26 of the Procedures Directive  was  directly
    analogous with Article 33(1) of the Refugee Convention.

25.  It was submitted that the appellant has lived in  India  from  1992  to
    2012 and has since 2001 had an RC meaning that he was  lawfully  living
    in India.  He obtained an IC which has since  expired.   The  appellant
    would be able to return to India and resume residence there.  He failed
    to take reasonable steps to pursue enquiries as to whether  or  not  he
    could apply to renew his identity  card  and/or  residence  card.   The
    respondent contended that it was for the appellant to show that he  was
    unable to  return  to  India,  on  the  balance  of  probabilities  (MA
    (Ethiopia) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 289).  The appellant has not made any
    application to be re-admitted to India and has relied on evidence  that
    is insufficient to demonstrate that the Indian authorities will not re-
    admit him.  Reliance was placed on the Swiss report which  states  that
    it is possible to renew or extend an IC in India foreign missions.

26.  As to sufficiency of protection in India  it  was  submitted  that  the
    background material points to the situation that the Indian authorities
    currently have no interest  in  removing  Tibetans  unlawfully  in  the
    country.  Little weight should be placed on the expert report which did
    not consider the question of whether the fact that  the  Appellant  has
    lived in India since 1992 the RC would be  able  to  be  renewed.   The
    respondent submitted that there was no corroboration of the appellant's
    claim that he obtained the RC using false information and in any  event
    it would seem unlikely the authorities would refuse such an application
    given that the appellant can show residence  since  1992  having  moved
    from Tibet.

The Appellant's Written Submissions in Reply dated 17 March 2016

27.  The submissions set  out  in  detail  the  contentious  issues  as  per
    submissions E to H in the  skeleton  argument  and  with  reference  to
    paragraph 334(v) upon which the respondent relies.   It  was  submitted
    that the respondent and indeed the Tribunal were  bound  to  apply  the
    terms of the two EU Directives; the QD and the PD, and that  the  inter
    relationship between the Directives was  relevant  to  the  appellant's
    submission that the burden of proving the appellant's  re-admissibility
    to India as an asserted "first country asylum", lies on the respondent.
     It was submitted that if the respondent asserts that India  is  to  be
    treated as a first country of asylum for the appellant then it was  for
    the  respondent  to  establish  on  the  evidence  that  the   relevant
    conditions required by Article 26 apply, namely that he (otherwise than
    as  a  recognised  refugee)  enjoys  sufficient  protection  in  India,
    including benefiting from the principle of non-refoulement; and that he
    will be re-admitted to India.   Given  that  the  appellant  is  now  a
    refugee and has been accepted as so by the respondent, it was  for  the
    respondent to prove and establish that the appellant's claim for asylum
    was in effect inadmissible pursuant to Article 26 and Section  (ii)  of
    the Procedures Directive.

28.  The evidence, on the balance of  probabilities,  established  that  the
    appellant was not re-admissible to India.  Reliance was placed  on  the
    appellant's unchallenged evidence that he handed over  his  RC  to  the
    Indian authorities in order to obtain an IC to  travel  out  of  India.
    That IC was obtained on the basis of documents falsely  asserting  that
    the appellant was born in India.  Reliance was  placed  on  the  expert
    evidence of Dr Anand (paragraph 9) where it was made clear that Tibetan
    organisations in India will assist  Chinese  born  Tibetans  to  obtain
    documents such as the RC on a fraudulent basis by falsely stating  that
    the person was born in India.  In support reliance was  placed  on  the
    evidence from the  appellant  as  to  approaches  made  to  the  Indian
    authorities  in  the  United  Kingdom  together  with  that  from   his
    solicitors representative, which was unchallenged.  Secondly, there was
    the expert evidence of Dr Anand which makes clear that the Indian  High
    Commission will not re-issue the appellant with an IC because they  are
    aware that it was obtained through false information.  The  respondent'
    submissions on the issue of re-admissibility  were  predicated  on  the
    basis that the appellant resided  legally  in  India  and  legitimately
    obtained his residence and identification certificates.  In  conclusion
    the respondent cannot demonstrate that India is  a  "first  country  of
    asylum" for the appellant because it cannot demonstrate on the evidence
    that he will be re-admitted to India.

29.  The respondent dealt with  sufficiency  of  protection  by  considering
    whether or not the appellant would benefit from the principle  of  non-
    refoulement.  Such  protection  was  not  limited  to  protection  from
    refoulement under Article 33.  Reference was made  to  the  rights  and
    protections guaranteed  under  the  Convention  (paragraph  26  of  the
    submissions).  Reliance was placed on evidence that Tibetans  in  India
    were at best tolerated and subjected  to  restricted  rights  (skeleton
    argument paragraph 17).  Furthermore reliance was placed on the  expert
    evidence that the appellant individually will be at particular risk  on
    return to India owing to his  now  known  history  of  having  obtained
    identity documents on a false claim to have been born in  India.   This
    would render him open to prosecution and persecution and  he  will  not
    find it possible to get a RC and his status will be that of a paperless
    and stateless alien which would make it impossible to secure employment
    or basic social services in any legal manner.

Discussion and Decision

30.  We have decided to allow the appellant's appeal on asylum grounds.   We
    accept the arguments put in the appellant's skeleton argument  and  the
    written submissions in reply. The  respondent  has  accepted  that  the
    appellant is of Tibetan ethnic origin and was born in China (Tibet)  to
    Chinese national (Tibetan) parents. The respondent  has  conceded  that
    the appellant is outside of China owing to a well-founded fear of being
    persecuted for a Convention reason and is a refugee.  Furthermore it is
    accepted that he is not a citizen of India and cannot be excluded  from
    protection under  Article  1E/  Qualification  Directive  Art  12(1)(b)
    because the background evidence does not show that a Tibetan  in  China
    has the "rights and obligations which are attached to the possession of
    the nationality " of India, or  equivalent.   The  determinative  issue
    that we have considered is whether the appellant can  return  to  India
    pursuant to paragraph 334(v) and  Article  33  Refugee  Convention.  In
    other words will  he  be  re  admitted  to  India  and/or  is  there  a
    sufficiency of protection either against persecution in India  or  from
    refoulement to China? We take the  view  that  the  burden  is  on  the
    respondent and the standard is the balance of probabilities.  We  adopt
    the argument put by Mr Jorro (paragraph 11  written  submissions)  that
    this  appeal  is  distinct  from  MA  (Ethiopia)   which   focused   on
    nationality.  We conclude that the two limbs of  Article  26  have  not
    been showed to have been met.

31.  In terms of  fact  finding  we  find  the  appellant's  account  to  be
    entirely credible.  We find that he was born in Lhasa on [date] and  in
    1992 at the age of 7 was sent by his parents to go to India to join the
    Tibetan exile community.  He attended school in India and was sponsored
    by an English woman named Mrs H.  In 2001 at the age of 16 he  used  an
    agent to obtain an Indian  RC.   He  obtained  RC  by  making  a  false
    assertion that his parents were dead and that he was born in India.  He
    was able to obtain an IC by relying  again  on  false  information.  He
    became active in Tibetan politics whilst in  India  and  took  part  in
    various protests outside the Chinese Embassy in  Delhi.   He  was  also
    arrested and detained in 2008.  He married in October 2011.  He entered
    the UK as a visitor in August 2012 and claimed asylum in January  2013.
    Prior to that claim his solicitors wrote to the Indian High  Commission
    and   returned   his   identification   certificate   (IC).   In   that
    correspondence it was admitted that he  was  not  entitled  to  the  IC
    because  he  had  obtained  it  using  false  information.   He  sought
    confirmation from the High Commission as to whether  he  would  be  re-
    admitted to India.  The IC was returned to the appellant on 26 February
    2013.  His solicitors wrote again on 28 February 2013, 2 February  2015
    and on 18 May 2015 in the same terms.  In June 2015 the appellant  went
    in person with his wife to the Indian High Commission but did not  gain
    entry beyond having a conversation with a security guard.  He  attended
    again on 24 August 2015 together with  his  solicitors'  representative
    Miss Terenius.  We accept the account given by the  appellant  and  his
    legal representative.  He spoke to the same guard who made  clear  that
    the appellant was "not going to  get  anything  from  the  Indian  High
    Commission and that he would not be re-admitted to India".

32.  We find that the appellant came to the  UK  from  India  where  he  had
    previously lived illegally.  We find that as a Tibetan exile from China
    he does not have the rights  and  obligations  which  are  attached  to
    Indian nationality or rights and obligations equivalent  to  those  and
    accordingly he benefits from the Refugee Convention. Article 1E and the
    Qualification Directive pursuant to Article 12(1)(b) do  not  apply  on
    the grounds that he is not recognised  by  the  Indian  authorities  as
    having such rights.  We  find  that  the  appellant  is  a  refugee  in
    accordance with the  definition  in  Article  1  and  pursuant  to  the
    Qualification Directive chapters (ii) and (iii).  We conclude  that  he
    should be granted refugee  status  under  the  Qualification  Directive
    Article 13.

33.  We reject the respondent's submission that the Qualification  Directive
    and Procedures  Directive  draw  their  own  status  from  the  Refugee
    Convention.  We accept the appellant's position that  these  Directives
    impact on  the  interpretation  of  the  Refugee  Convention  and  that
    paragraph 334 must be read in line with the Directives.

34.  We find that the appellant has acted bona fide (by  telling  the  truth
    about his previous deception) and taken all  reasonable  and  practical
    efforts have been made both in terms of personal visits and by  way  of
    correspondence to pursue  enquiries  with  the  Indian  Embassy  as  to
    whether or not he would be re-admitted to  live  in  India.   We  place
    weight on the expert evidence of Dr Anand (paragraph 9)  who  concluded
    that the Embassy will now  not  reissue  an  IC  because  of  the  past
    falsehood and the appellant will be vulnerable.  He  also  states  that
    the appellant would not be able to  get  an  IC/RC  through  legitimate
    means. We are satisfied that contrary to the submissions  made  by  the
    respondent that the appellant lived illegally in India because he  used
    false information as to his background details, in order to obtain  his
    RC and IC. The Indian authorities are aware  that  the  appellant  used
    deception in the past  and  this  would  fundamentally  impact  on  his
    readmission to India.  We find no evidence to establish that the Indian
    authorities would turn a blind eye to the past  deception  and  illegal
    residence and agree to readmit him. We consider that  the  respondent's
    position is premised on the fact that  the  appellant  was  treated  as
    living legally in India whereas we have found  significantly  that  his
    residence was unlawful and that he used deception.   These  facts  have
    been brought to the attention of the Indian Embassy and the evidence of
    the visits to the Embassy is that the appellant will not be readmitted.
    We accept that his IC has now expired and that he has made no  specific
    formal application for a renewal  of  the  same  or  his  RC.   We  are
    satisfied that such applications would be considered in  the  light  of
    his past illegal residence from 1992 -2012 and  use  of  deception.  We
    place weight on the expert evidence  of  Dr  Anand.  The  Swiss  report
    focuses in the main  on  the  treatment  of  Tibetans  who  have  legal
    residence in India.

35.  We further conclude that in the context  of  paragraph  334(v)  of  the
    Immigration Rules, the appellant's application for refugee  status  has
    not been considered to be inadmissible as  per  Article  25.  Secondly,
    India cannot be treated as a safe third  country  as  per  Article  27.
    Thirdly India is not a first country of asylum as per  Article  26  and
    finally that in any event the  respondent,  upon  whom  the  burden  is
    placed, has not shown on balance of probabilities that the appellant is
    re-admissible to India. On the evidence before  us  we  find  that  the
    appellant is not re-admissible to India.

36.  As to sufficiency of protection we again accept  the  submissions  made
    on behalf of the appellant in this  regard.  The  appellant  cannot  be
    recognised as a refugee in India  as  India  is  not  a  party  to  the
    Convention. We  adopt  the  argument  as  to  the  extensive  scope  of
    protection provided by the Convention  under  Articles  2-34.   We  are
    satisfied that such protection extends beyond refoulement to China.  We
    conclude that the  evidence  fails  to  establish  that  the  appellant
    otherwise enjoys sufficient protection in India.  We  accept  that  the
    Swiss report does show that in general undocumented  Tibetans  are  not
    deported and those without valid RC's in general face arrest and fines.
    However, the respondent has cited from the Swiss  report  one  instance
    where the Indian authorities arrested a Tibetan exile, without a  valid
    RC, on criminal charges and left him at the border with China. Dr Anand
    also cites similar examples where deportation has in practice  occurred
    and it is his view that there is a  recent  trend  towards  deportation
    (paragraph  10).  We  conclude   that   the   given   the   appellant's
    circumstances that his residence in India  was  unlawful  there  is  no
    basis to  support  the  respondent's  view  that  he  would  simply  be
    readmitted because of his past "lawful" residence.  We place weight  on
    the expert (paragraph 5 & 11) and background evidence that demonstrates
    effectively that Tibetans in India are at best  tolerated  and  do  not
    have  rights  that  come  remotely  close  to  those  attached  to  the
    possession of Indian nationality or equivalent to the same.  The expert
    report and UNHCR ref World Report set out the circumstances of Tibetans
    living in India including being considered as  a  foreigner  and  which
    establish those persons as living in a  state  of  legal  limbo,  being
    subject to restrictions in terms of buying property and  lacking  civil
    and  political  rights  and  having  limited   or   closed   employment
    opportunities. We also accept the evidence of Dr Anand at paragraphs 12
    to  14  where  consideration  is  given  to  the  appellant's  specific
    situation in the event of him returning to India in the  light  of  the
    fact that it is known that he has made a false claim in  the  past.  Dr
    Anand concluded that this would cause him to face significant  problems
    and difficulties on return given the resultant paperless and  stateless
    circumstances.

37.  In conclusion we conclude that the respondent has  failed  to  show  on
    both limbs that India is a first country of asylum.  We  are  satisfied
    that the appellant's removal from the UK to either India  or  to  China
    would breach the UK's obligations under  the  Refugee  Convention.   We
    allow the appeal.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 12.5.2016

GA Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date 12.5.2016

GA Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black

