
IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL



R(on the application of Shou Lin  Xu)v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department (Legacy cases - "conclusion" issue) IJR [2014] UKUT 00375(IAC)

                                                        Monday, 21 July 2014

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE gill

                                   Between

                    R (on the application of shou lin xu)

                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
                               - - - - - - - -

The applicant appeared in person at 11.00 a.m.

Mr J Lewis, instructed by the Treasury Solicitor appeared on behalf of the
Respondent.


      1) It is plainly wrong to contend that a case under  the  respondent's
         so-called "legacy programme" can be "concluded" only by  the  grant
         of leave or by actual removal, given that there was no amnesty that
         applied to such cases; they fell to be decided under  the  relevant
         Immigration Rule (para 395C or 353B, as the case may  be)  and  the
         guidance in chapter 53 of the Enforcement Instructions and Guidance
         that applied as at the date of the review of  the  case  under  the
         legacy programme.


      2) It follows that, in the event that consideration  of  the  relevant
         Immigration Rule and  guidance  produced  a  negative  answer,  the
         rationale of the Supreme Court at [25]-[35] of Patel v Secretary of
         State for the Home Department [2013] UKSC 72 applies, that is,  the
         Secretary of State is entitled to proceed on the basis  that  those
         unlawfully in the UK will leave of their own  accord;  she  is  not
         obliged to remove an individual or issue a removal decision.



      3) It is unarguable that the expressed aim to "conclude" cases in  the
         legacy programme by either the grant of leave  or  by  removal  was
         anything other an aim or aspiration to remove all  individuals  who
         had no basis of stay. In particular,  it  is  unarguable  that  the
         expressed aim or aspiration was  addressed  to  individuals  and/or
         that it amounted to an irrevocable and  unambiguous  commitment  to
         grant leave to anyone who did not  meet  the  requirements  of  the
         relevant rule (395C/353B, as the case may be)  and  the  applicable
         chapter 53 guidance and who was not removed.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                         APPLICATION FOR PERMISSION

                                  JUDGMENT

                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

JUDGE gill: It is 4:00pm.  The applicant is not present, nor is anyone  here
    to represent him.  It is appropriate for me to narrate today's  events.



2.   At 11:00 a.m. this morning the applicant was present.  With him  was  a
    Mr A Fouladvand of Migrant Advisory and Advocacy  Service  (MAAS).   Mr
    Fouladvand did not have a right of audience nor is MAAS  authorised  to
    conduct litigation in the High Court, see rule 11(5A).   I  noted  that
    MAAS had filed the renewal grounds when they  were  not  authorised  to
    conduct such litigation. The applicant did not speak English,  although
    it was clear that he understood some limited English.  It was therefore
    not possible for Mr. Fouladvand to act as a McKenzie  friend.  Thus,  I
    was placed in the position whereby either I permitted Mr. Fouladvand to
    address the court and conduct litigation or I adjourn the hearing.  Mr.
    Fouladvand then informed me  that  MAAS  has  two  solicitors  who  are
    authorised to conduct litigation in the High Court. He said he  may  be
    able to arrange for one Ms. A to be present in two hours  and  that  he
    would make some enquiries.  However, having  made  such  enquiries,  he
    informed me that Ms A had other professional engagements  that  morning
    as a consequence of which she would  not  be  able  to  travel  to  the
    hearing centre. The second solicitor similarly  could  not  attend  the
    centre.

3.   As Mr Fouladvand did not have a  right  of  audience,  I  attempted  to
    ascertain from the applicant what language he speaks so  that  I  could
    make an informed  decision  as  to  how  best  to  progress  his  case,
    including the options of the Tribunal adjourning the matter so that  he
    could obtain representation by someone who had a right of  audience  or
    the  applicant  proceeding  as  a  litigant  in  person  or  with   Mr.
    Fouladvand's  assistance  as  a  McKenzie  friend  or  otherwise.    In
    response, the applicant said that he spoke Chinese but  not  from  Hong
    Kong. As that was insufficiently precise, I said that  that  would  not
    do. I asked him whether he spoke Mandarin.  He  would  neither  confirm
    nor deny, yet he clearly understood me when I asked him if he had  paid
    for representation today, saying, without hesitation, that he  had  not
    done so.  I said  I  would  arrange  an  interpreter  in  the  Mandarin
    language to be present today to assist  the  Tribunal  in  ascertaining
    what language interpreter was needed and  how  this  claim  was  to  be
    progressed.

4.   Shortly afterwards,  at  about  12:45pm,  the  clerk  was  told  by  Mr
    Fouladvand with the applicant standing next to him, nodding,  that  the
    applicant wanted to withdraw his claim.  The applicant  said  something
    about "cancelling" the case.  It is not clear whether he was  referring
    to  a  withdrawal  of  his  claim  or  whether  he  was  referring   to
    "cancellation" of the hearing in the  sense  of  an  adjournment.   The
    clerk explained to Mr Fouladvand and the applicant that  the  applicant
    should be present in court at 2:00pm.

5.   At 2:00pm, the applicant did not attend.  Mr. Fouladvand was not to  be
    seen either. At 2:45pm there was still no sign of  the  applicant.   At
    that point I came into the hearing room on account of the fact that  Mr
    Lewis had a professional engagement elsewhere and needed to  leave  the
    hearing centre by 2:50pm. I released Mr. Lewis on the  basis  that,  if
    the applicant attended later that afternoon and it transpired  for  any
    reason that I required the  assistance  of  the  respondent  to  fairly
    determine this claim, I would adjourn the hearing.

6.   I then waited for the interpreter (who had  by  then  been  booked)  to
    arrive.

7.   After the interpreter arrived, the court re-convened to hear this  case
    at 4:00pm.  There was still no sign of the applicant who appears to  be
    unwilling to be questioned by  the  Tribunal  even  to  the  extent  of
    ascertaining what language he speaks.   The  applicant  appears  to  be
    unwilling to co-operate with the Tribunal in this respect.

8.   As it is, there is no appearance by the applicant  at  the  hearing  of
    this case at this time, i.e. 4pm. He appeared  this  morning  but  with
    someone who  had  no  right  of  audience  and  had  not  requested  an
    interpreter in advance of the hearing.  In all of the circumstances,  I
    have decided to exercise my  discretion  and  proceed  to  decide  this
    renewed application for permission in the absence of the applicant  and
    any representation on his behalf.  In reaching this  decision,  I  have
    taken the underlying merits of the case into account.

9.   The applicant seeks permission to challenge  what  he  asserts  is  the
    respondent's excessive delay in granting him leave to remain under what
    has now become known as the respondent's legacy programme.

10.  The first ground is that the decision to refuse leave under the  legacy
    programme is unlawful  because  the  applicant's  case  could  only  be
    "concluded" under the legacy programme by either the grant of leave  or
    by removal.  The applicant has had four  letters  from  the  respondent
    informing him that he had  no  outstanding  decisions  and  no  further
    submissions  that  required  consideration  or  reconsideration.    The
    letters are dated 24 March 2011, 14 June 2011, 9  August  2013  and  30
    August 2013.

11.  The term "concluded" was  considered  by  Simler  J  in  R  (Hamzeh)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWHC 4113 (Admin)  at
    [41]-[46] and Ouseley J in R (Jaku & Others) v Secretary of  State  for
    the  Home  Department  [2014]  EWHC  605  (Admin)  at  [14]-[16].   The
    applicant's submission that a case can only be "concluded" by the grant
    of leave or by actual removal  ignores  the  fact  that  there  was  no
    amnesty that applied to cases dealt with under the legacy programme  as
    has been made clear in a line of cases: R (Hakemi) v Secretary of State
    for the Home  Department  [2012]  EWHC  1967  (Admin),  R  (Geraldo)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]  EWHC  2763  (Admin),
    Hamzeh, Jaku & Others and recently RN (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 938.

12.  As there was no  amnesty,  it  follows  that  cases  under  the  legacy
    programme fell to be decided under the relevant Immigration Rule  (para
    395C or 353B, as the case may be) and the guidance in chapter 53 of the
    Enforcement Instructions and Guidance that applied at the date  of  the
    review of the case under the legacy programme.

13.  It also follows that, in the event that consideration of  the  relevant
    Immigration Rule and guidance produced a negative answer, the rationale
    of the Supreme Court at [25]-[35] of the judgment in Patel v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2013] UKSC 72 applies, that  is,  the
    Secretary of State is entitled to  proceed  on  the  basis  that  those
    unlawfully in the UK will leave of their own accord; she is not obliged
    to remove an individual or issue a removal decision.

14.  This applicant has had four letters informing him that he had no  basis
    of stay. To suggest that he should nevertheless have been granted leave
    solely because he had not been removed is to ignore the fact that there
    was no amnesty.

15.  Furthermore, the expressed aim to conclude cases by July 2011 has  been
    held not to amount to an irrevocable and unambiguous commitment  to  do
    so in respect of any particular individual by a particular date such as
    to give rise to a legitimate expectation to that effect on the part  of
    the individual (see Geraldo). Similarly,  it  is  unarguable  that  the
    expressed aim to "conclude" cases in the legacy programme by either the
    grant of leave or by removal was anything other an aim or aspiration to
    remove all individuals who had no basis of stay. In particular,  it  is
    unarguable that the  expressed  aim  or  aspiration  was  addressed  to
    individuals and/or that it amounted to an irrevocable  and  unambiguous
    commitment to grant leave to anyone who did not meet  the  requirements
    of the relevant rule (395C/353B, as the case may be) and the applicable
    chapter 53 guidance and who was not removed.

16.  I am aware of the grant of permission by Elias LJ  in  R  (Aberaham)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department (aka BA (Ethiopia))  on  the
    issue as to what might constitute a "conclusion" for  the  purposes  of
    the legacy programme.  I  am  also  aware  that  the  Court  of  Appeal
    considered the renewed applications  for  permission  in  R  (Hamzeh  &
    Others) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2014]  EWCA  Civ
    956. The Court of Appeal decided to list the Hamzeh case for hearing on
    a rolled-up basis with BA (Ethiopia) and to stay the Ghlam case on  the
    same issue pending a decision in BA (Ethiopia).

17.  However, I  do  not  consider  that  the  grant  of  permission  in  BA
    (Ethiopia) means that the "conclusion" ground is arguable. Elias LJ did
    not have the benefit of the decision of the Court of Appeal  to  refuse
    permission in Geraldo.  Secondly, Geraldo applies unless and until  the
    Court of Appeal decides that it is wrong. Thirdly, the Court of  Appeal
    said at [9] of the permission decision in Hamzeh & Others:

     "9.  In order to  emphasise  that  we  have  not  ourselves  reached  a
             positive view that the issues in question are arguable I would
             not grant permission and would make the direction on a rolled-
             up basis. (That may also go some  way  to  address  a  concern
             expressed by Ms Anderson that claimants in  pending  cases  in
             the Administrative Court would exploit any grant of permission
             in these cases as an indication that the issues apparently now
             put to bed in Geraldo might be free to stalk  the  corridors
             again.)"

18.  I turn  to  the  second  ground,  which  is  that  the  respondent  has
    unlawfully failed to apply her policy of granting indefinite  leave  to
    individuals whose cases were considered under the legacy  programme  if
    they have resided in the UK for six years or more. This ground is  also
    unarguable.  It ignores the fact that there was no such policy  and  no
    amnesty, as Hakemi and Geraldo make clear.

19.  The final ground  is  that  the  respondent  has  acted  unlawfully  in
    failing to grant the applicant indefinite leave to remain  because  she
    has granted indefinite leave to remain to other individuals whose cases
    were progressed under the legacy programme.  Again, this ground ignores
    the reasoning in the judgments I have referred to.   The  "consistency"
    argument was rejected by the Court of Appeal in the permission decision
    in Hamzeh & Others as hopeless ([16]).

20.  Rule 44(4B) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
    requires me to consider whether to grant permission to  appeal  to  the
    Court of Appeal.  I have done so. I refuse permission to appeal to  the
    Court of Appeal because there  is  no  arguable  error  of  law  in  my
    decision.  ~~~~0~~~~
