
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Saimon (Cart Review: "pending") [2017] UKUT 00371 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 July 2017                               |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Md JAKIR HUSSAN SAIMON
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Saini, instructed by Londonium, Solicitors


An appeal in respect of which a Cart judicial review has quashed a refusal
of permission to appeal is again "pending" within the meaning of
s.104(2)(a) of the 2002 Act.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. In this case the appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal  against
    a decision of 9 December 2013 to refuse to  vary  his  leave  and  give
    directions for his removal.  Judge Turquet dismissed that appeal in the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The appellant then sought permission to appeal to
    this Tribunal.  Permission was refused on application to the First-tier
    Tribunal by First-tier Tribunal Judge Ford and on reapplication to  the
    Upper Tribunal by Upper Tribunal Judge  Freeman.   The  appellant  then
    brought judicial review proceedings challenging the decision  of  Judge
    Freeman.  Those proceedings were successful in the sense that the  High
    Court was persuaded that  the  decision  of  Judge  Freeman  should  be
    quashed.  The order of the Court is signed by the judge and  sealed  on
    13 May 2015.  Some time in August 2015 the appellant  left  the  United
    Kingdom.

 2. No further action appears to have  been  taken  until  the  matter  was
    listed before Judge Canavan in this Tribunal.  Her decision is dated 12
    January 2017.  On that date  she  (a)  "for  the  avoidance  of  doubt"
    granted permission to appeal to this Tribunal and (b) decided that  the
    appeal had been abandoned by the appellant's departure from the  United
    Kingdom about eighteen months previously.  There is now  before  us  an
    application for permission to appeal against, or for  review  of,  that
    decision.

 3. The question that arises in relation to  this  appeal  is  whether  the
    appellant's departure from the United Kingdom caused his appeal  to  be
    abandoned.  If so, then  since  that  date  the  Tribunal  has  had  no
    jurisdiction to deal with it.

 4. There has been some difficulty, identified by Mr Saini, who appears for
    the appellant, in determining precisely which provisions  of  the  2002
    Act as amended or as not amended, apply to this appeal.  There  is,  in
    our judgment, no doubt that bearing in mind the date of  the  Secretary
    of State's decision, the un-amended provisions of s 104 of the 2002 Act
    (before amendment by the 2014 Act) have effect.  In the Immigration Act
    2014 (Commencement No.3,  Transitional  and  Saving  Provisions)  Order
    2014, SI 2771/2014 the whole of part V  of  the  2002  Act  (containing
    sections 81 to 117) is part of the group of provisions  called  by  art
    1(2)(e) of that order the "saved provisions". The effect of part II  of
    the order is that the saved provisions remain in force in  relation  to
    appeals against what  may  be  described  as  "old  decisions"  of  the
    Secretary of State and there is, no doubt, that the decision which  the
    appellant in this case sought to appeal was for those purposes an  "old
    decision".  It follows that the provisions of s 104 before amendment in
    2014 apply to this case.  If the  appellant  left  the  United  Kingdom
    while his appeal was pending then it is to be treated as abandoned.  We
    should say that if the amended provisions applied it appears  that  the
    same effect would be caused by s 92(8) of the 2002 Act (as amended).

 5. The question therefore is the extent of the application  of  s  104  to
    this appeal.  The relevant provisions read as follows:

           "104 pending appeal

               1)  An appeal under  section  82(1)  is  pending  during  the
                  period -

                  (a)  beginning when it is instituted, and

                  (b) ending when it is finally  determined,  withdrawn  or
                     abandoned (or when it lapses under section 99).

              2)    An appeal under section 82(1) is not finally  determined
                 for the purpose of subsection (1)(b) while -

                  (a) an application for permission to appeal under section
                     11 or 13 of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act
                     2007 could be made or is awaiting determination,

                  (b) permission to appeal under either of  those  sections
                     has  been  granted  and   the   appeal   is   awaiting
                     determination, or

                  (c) an appeal has been remitted under section 12 or 14 of
                     that Act and is awaiting determination."

 6. Those provisions, we should say, were inserted into  the  Act  from  15
    February 2010 as a result of the migration of the Immigration  Tribunal
    system into  the  system  established  by  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007.  As we have indicated, the history of this appeal
    is that there was a determination of the application for permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal which was made by Judge Freeman and, if it
    had not been challenged would,  as  we  accept,  have  been  the  final
    determination in this appeal.  However, what happened subsequently  was
    that Judge Freeman's decision was quashed; and it was after  that  that
    the appellant left the United Kingdom.  Mr Saini has done his very best
    to persuade us that following the decision of Judge Freeman the  appeal
    subsequently had to be regarded as finally determined and therefore  no
    longer pending, whatever happened.

 7. We have the very gravest of difficulty in  accepting  that  submission.
    We should say that nothing decided here should be taken as  a  decision
    as to whether an appeal is  pending  after  a  decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal refusing permission to appeal has been given but before it has
    been quashed in any judicial review proceedings brought in  respect  of
    it.  During that time we agree with Mr Saini  that  it  may  be  rather
    difficult to say that the appeal is pending: but we make no decision on
    that.  That is not this case.  In this case the question is whether the
    appeal was pending at the time  when  the  appellant  left  the  United
    Kingdom, which was after Judge Freeman's  decision  had  been  quashed.
    The effect of the quashing of Judge Freeman's decision was that from 13
    May 2015 the position was that there had been no  lawful  determination
    of the application for permission to appeal made to the Upper Tribunal.
     That application, previously thought to have been determined, was  now
    awaiting decision or determination.  Indeed, in proceedings before this
    Tribunal, Judge Canavan granted permission.  If she had  not  done  so,
    the appeal could not be before us.  But she could only  do  so  on  the
    basis  there  was,  following  the  judgment  of  the  High  Court,  an
    application for permission outstanding and awaiting determination.

 8. Although the argument put by Mr Saini might have effect if confined  to
    the interpretation of s 104(1)(b),  it  simply  cannot  stand,  in  our
    judgment, against 104(2) because leaving out the  words  which  do  not
    apply precisely to this appeal, the position is that "an appeal under s
    82(1) is not finally determined for the purposes of sub-s 1(b) while an
    application for permission under s 11  of  the  2002  Act  is  awaiting
    determination".   That  is  precisely  the  position  of  this  appeal,
    following the 13 May 2015 decision of the High Court;  the  application
    for permission was awaiting determination, the determination which  was
    in due course apparently made by Judge Canavan on 11 January 2017.

 9. It follows that the appeal was pending at the time when  the  appellant
    left the United Kingdom in August 2015.  By leaving the United  Kingdom
    he abandoned his appeal and since that date there has  been  no  appeal
    before the Tribunal; it fell to be treated as abandoned from that date.
     All subsequent  proceedings  in  it  are  therefore  invalid  and  the
    position is that the appeal having been abandoned,  the  appeal  to  us
    cannot succeed.

10. We therefore refuse permission to appeal to the Court of  Appeal.    It
    follows that no proceedings in the Tribunal since August  2015  can  be
    valid and whatever be the precise position  in  relation  to  decisions
    made by Judge Canavan, the appeal is to be treated  as  abandoned  from
    that date.




                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                         Date: 8 August 2017








