
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


  MS (Para 277 - age restriction - knowledge) Somalia [2010] UKUT 377 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



Heard at: Field House
On: 4 October 2010

                                   Before

                        The Hon. Mr Justice Cranston
                        Senior Immigration Judge Gill

                                   Between

                                     MS
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, ADDIS ABABA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:           Ms N Brissett, of Counsel, instructed  by  Aden
                       & Co. Solicitors.
For  the  Respondent:                     Ms  J   Isherwood,   Home   Office
                 Presenting Officer.

1. Requiring a person with limited leave to remain  to  travel  to  a  third
 country to spend time with his wife who is  under  21  is  a  sufficiently
 serious interference with the right to respect for family life to  require
 justification.
2. The interference is in accordance  with  the  law  as  it  complies  with
 Immigration Rules that were       publicly available at the material  time
 even if the appellant did not know of them.

3. The decision was for a legitimate purpose and proportionate in the  light
 of the fact that the     sponsor had been able to visit his spouse in  the
 third country and there were no obstacles to his continuing to do so until
 she was 21.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The Appellant is a national of Somalia, born on 1  February  1990.  By
     an application dated 18 June 2009, she applied for entry  clearance  in
     order to join her husband, Mr. Hassan Saeed Abdallah (the sponsor),  in
     the United Kingdom. The sponsor is also a Somali national,  born  on  1
     January 1989. Her application was refused by the Respondent on 30  June
     2009 on the ground that she was under 21 years of age and therefore too
     young to meet the age requirement in paragraph 277 of the Statement  of
     Changes in the Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended) ('the  Immigration
     Rules'). In addition, the  Respondent  refused  her  application  under
     Article 8 of the 1950 European Convention for the Protection  of  Human
     Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (ECHR).

2.    The Appellant's appeal was heard on 3 March  2010  before  Immigration
     Judge Blake, who dismissed the appeal under the Immigration  Rules  and
     on human rights grounds. His decision under the Immigration  Rules  was
     not  challenged.  On  5  May  2010,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  granted
     permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, limited to  Article  8.  It
     was considered arguable that  the  Immigration  Judge  failed  to  make
     proper findings or give legally adequate reasons  for  concluding  that
     the Appellant's exclusion did not contravene her rights  under  Article
     8.

3.    On 10 August 2010, Senior Immigration Judge Perkins issued  directions
     which (to the extent relevant) state:


      "1)   Having regard to all the circumstances, including the failure of
           the respondent to serve within the  permitted  time  a  response
           which adequately explains why the  decision  of  the  First-tier
           Tribunal does not contain an error of law and should not be  set
           aside, or any response, the Upper Tribunal, pursuant to rule 34,
           has decided without a hearing that the decision  of  the  First-
           tier Tribunal does contain an error of law, as identified in the
           grant of permission, read with the grounds of  application,  and
           should be set aside and re-made by the Upper Tribunal.


        2)  The appeal will accordingly proceed to a hearing for the purpose
           of  considering  evidence  relevant  to  the  re-making  of  the
           decision and the following directions are hereby given.


        3)  The parties shall prepare for the hearing on the basis that none
           of the findings of fact of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.


        4)  [not relevant]


        5)  Notwithstanding point 3 above, at the hearing of the appeal  the
           parties will be invited to agree core facts. It seems that  they
           are not in issue."

4.    The sponsor arrived in the United Kingdom on 22 February 2006. He  was
     recognised as a refugee by the Secretary of State who, on 25 June 2007,
     granted him limited leave to remain until 21  June  2012.  The  sponsor
     first met the Appellant on 2 February 2005, whilst they were both still
     living in Somalia. They lost contact with each other after the  sponsor
     fled to the United Kingdom. However,  they  regained  contact  in  2007
     after the Appellant fled to Ethiopia. They  formed  a  relationship  by
     telephone and continued  it  by  e-mail.  In  June  2009,  the  sponsor
     travelled to Addis Ababa. He married the Appellant on 15 June  2009  in
     Addis Ababa. They lived together as husband and wife  until  1  October
     2009, when the sponsor returned to the United Kingdom. The sponsor said
     that he was not aware of the age limit.

5.    In his written statement, the sponsor said that he has  been  employed
     since November 2007  full  time  by  Asda  superstore  as  a  warehouse
     operator, earning approximately �12,650.00 per annum without overtime.

6.    The sponsor gave oral  evidence  before  us  through  an  interpreter,
     interpreting in the Somali language. His wife does not have  any  legal
     status in Ethiopia. His mother, his brother and two cousins are in  the
     United Kingdom. His mother is 71 or 72 years old. His brother is twenty
     years old. The sponsor does his mother's shopping for her and takes her
     to the doctor whenever necessary. He helps her as and  when  necessary.
     His brother has two children; the older is 6 years old and the  younger
     a few months old.

7.    Under  cross-examination,  the  sponsor  said  that  he  has  been  to
     Ethiopia twice. The first occasion was from  February  or  March  2005,
     when he fled the war in Somalia. He stayed in Ethiopia  until  June  or
     July 2005, when he returned to Somalia. Asked whether  facilities  were
     made available to him in Ethiopia, the sponsor said that he had nothing
     in Ethiopia.

8.    In 2006, he left Somalia again to travel to the United Kingdom. On  11
     June 2009, he travelled to Ethiopia from the United Kingdom. He  stayed
     there for six months, until 1 October 2009. He  stayed  in  the  market
     where Somalis live in Ethiopia and where his wife currently lives. They
     rented a room in a hotel belonging to Somalis.  His  wife  survives  on
     what he sends her. Asked whether facilities were made available to  him
     in Ethiopia during this visit, the sponsor said that  he  had  what  he
     took with him from the United Kingdom.

9.    The sponsor wants to be reunited with his wife. He is unable  to  live
     alone without a woman. He could not live in Ethiopia. He does not  have
     any legal status in Ethiopia. He has a job and a  life  in  the  United
     Kingdom. He has family in the United Kingdom.

10.   We asked the sponsor whether he would be able to visit  the  Appellant
     in the period before she reached her 21st birthday, when she  would  be
     able to lodge another application for entry  clearance  as  spouse.  He
     said that it is good for a couple to live together in the  same  place.
     He is worried that everything he has built up might  break  up  in  the
     next few months. Asked to explain this, he said that he was afraid that
     "something dark" might  come  into  their  relationship  and  that  the
     Appellant might think that he has not been trying hard enough  for  her
     to join him. He worries about the Appellant constantly.  He  feels  bad
     whenever he sees other people together. He has had a holiday since  his
     last holiday in Ethiopia but he chose not to visit the Appellant.  This
     was because she feels heartbroken when he leaves her.

11.   Ms. Isherwood relied upon the Refusal Notice dated 14  December  2009.
     She submitted that the sponsor was capable of going to Ethiopia to live
     with the Appellant or to visit her. It would not be disproportionate to
     expect the sponsor to do so in the period before her 21st birthday.

12.   Ms. Brissett submitted that it would not be  proportionate  to  refuse
     the Appellant entry to the United Kingdom. It  was  not  reasonable  to
     expect the sponsor to live in Ethiopia with the Appellant  because  the
     sponsor and the Appellant do not have any legal status in Ethiopia. The
     sponsor has a job and  accommodation  in  the  United  Kingdom.  He  is
     involved in caring for his mother.  His  departure  would  impact  upon
     members of his family in  the  United  Kingdom.  At  the  date  of  the
     decision, the Appellant was 19 and a half years old. Accordingly, as at
     the date of the decision, she and the sponsor would have  had  to  wait
     one and a half years before the Appellant was  eligible  for  entry  as
     spouse under the Immigration Rules.

13.   We reserved our decision.

      Assessment

14.   By virtue of section 85(5) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
     Act  2002,  we  must  determine  this   appeal   by   considering   the
     circumstances appertaining as at the date of the decision. We  reminded
     ourselves that we must decide whether there  were  substantial  grounds
     for believing that the Respondent's decision to refuse the  Appellant's
     application for entry clearance would be in  breach  of  any  protected
     rights under Article 8 of  the  ECHR.  We  followed  the  step-by  step
     approach explained at paragraph 17 of the  judgment  of  the  House  of
     Lords in R v SSHD ex parte Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27.  Pursuant  to  the
     guidance given in Beoku-Betts v SSHD [2008] UKHL 39, the  human  rights
     of each party affected by the decision and  who  enjoys  any  protected
     rights within Article 8 (1) must be considered.

15.   In relation to the first  of  the  five  questions  we  must  consider
     (whether family life within Article 8 (1) is being enjoyed),  we  noted
     that  the  Respondent  did  not  consider  whether  the  marriage   was
     subsisting in  reaching  his  decision  under  the  Immigration  Rules.
     However, for our part, we saw no reason to doubt that the Appellant and
     the  sponsor  have  a  genuine  marriage  and  that  the  circumstances
     appertaining as at the date of the decision were such that they enjoyed
     family life together within the meaning of Article 8 (1).  In  reaching
     this finding, we took into account the sponsor's evidence that he lived
     with the Appellant from the date of the marriage in June 2009 until his
     return to the United Kingdom in October 2009. We took into account  the
     photographs of the couple on file and the sponsor's  evidence  that  he
     has sent the Appellant money for her support. However, we did not  find
     that the relationship between  the  sponsor  and  his  mother  or  that
     between him and his brother, older nephew (the younger nephew  was  not
     born at the date of the decision) or cousins was such as to  amount  to
     family life within Article 8 (1). Whilst the sponsor gave  evidence  of
     helping his mother by  doing  her  shopping  and  (whenever  necessary)
     taking her to the doctor, we did not find that the evidence showed that
     there was dependency going beyond the normal  emotional  ties.  In  our
     view, there was nothing out of  the  ordinary  in  the  assistance  the
     sponsor gave to his mother. The sponsor did not give  any  evidence  of
     any dependency going beyond normal emotional ties in  his  relationship
     with his brother, older nephew or cousins.

16.   In  relation  to  the  second  of  the  five  questions  (whether  the
     interference will have consequences of such gravity as  potentially  to
     engage the operation of Article 8),  we  reminded  ourselves  that  the
     threshold of engagement was not an especially high one and that it  was
     only necessary to show that the interference is real (paragraphs 27 and
     28 of AG (Eritrea) v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 801).

17.    Nevertheless, we were not persuaded that the decision  made  in  June
     2009 violated the Article 8 rights of the Appellant and the sponsor. As
     Burnett J said in Diego Andres Aquilar Quila and another v SSHD  [2009]
     EWHC 3189 (Admin), those with a right to be in the United Kingdom  were
     always going to face a dilemma if leave to enter or remain as a  spouse
     is refused. Burnett J said that this could not  be  sufficient  in  all
     cases to justify the conclusion that an immigration decision interfered
     with family life if it might lead to separation, if one  chose  not  to
     follow, or go to be with, the other. For the reasons given at paragraph
     17 below, we did not place any weight on the sponsor's evidence that he
     did not have actual knowledge of the age restriction. For  the  reasons
     given below, it has not been shown that it would  be  unreasonable  for
     the Appellant and the sponsor to enjoy  their  family  life  with  each
     other by way of visits during  the  period  between  the  date  of  the
     decision and the Appellant's 21st birthday. On the other hand,  if  the
     decision is maintained, any enjoyment by the Appellant and the  sponsor
     of their family life will have to take place in Ethiopia, where neither
     has any immigration status, whereas, if the decision is reversed,  they
     will be able to enjoy family life within the United Kingdom  where  the
     sponsor has leave to remain as a refugee. In  these  circumstances,  we
     were satisfied that, if the decision is  maintained,  the  interference
     with the family life between the Appellant and the  sponsor  will  have
     consequences  of  sufficient  gravity  as  potentially  to  engage  the
     operation of Article 8.

18.   In relation to the third question (whether  the  interference  was  in
     accordance with the law), it was relevant  to  consider  the  sponsor's
     evidence in his written statement that he did not know  about  the  age
     restriction when he entered into his marriage. It is evident  that  the
     claimant and his wife in Quila were well aware that  the  claimant  did
     not qualify for entry under paragraph 277 of the Immigration  Rules  at
     the time they entered into their marriage. Whilst we saw no  reason  to
     take issue with the sponsor's evidence that  he  did  not  have  actual
     knowledge of the age restriction when he  married  the  Appellant,  the
     jurisprudence of the European Court of Human Rights does not require it
     to be shown  that  there  was  actual  knowledge  on  the  part  of  an
     individual of the relevant rule or legal provision.  It  requires  that
     the relevant rule or legal provision  be  sufficiently  accessible  and
     precise so as to enable citizens to regulate their conduct by it. It is
     evident from the judgment in  Quila  that  information  about  the  age
     restriction was available on the UK Border  Agency  website.  Effective
     from 27 November 2008, the Immigration Rules were amended so  that  the
     age restriction was raised from 18 to 21. It was reasonable  to  expect
     the sponsor to make reasonable enquiries  about  the  applicable  rules
     and, if necessary, take legal advice. If he had done so,  there  is  no
     doubt that the age restriction would have come to his notice before  he
     and the Appellant were married on  15  June  2009.  We  were  therefore
     satisfied that the age restriction in paragraph  277  was  sufficiently
     accessible. We  were  also  satisfied  that  the  age  restriction  was
     expressed in sufficiently precise terms to enable the sponsor  and  the
     Appellant to regulate their conduct by it. The Respondent's decision to
     refuse the  Appellant  entry  clearance  was  in  accordance  with  the
     provisions of paragraph 277 of the Immigration Rules.  Accordingly,  we
     have concluded that the decision was in accordance with the law for the
     purposes of Article 8(2), notwithstanding the fact that the sponsor was
     not personally aware of the age restriction.

19.   We turn to the fourth and fifth steps. In EB (Kosovo) [2008] UKHL  41,
     the House of Lords  explained  that  the  fourth  and  fifth  questions
     (whether the interference is necessary  in  a  democratic  society  and
     whether it is proportionate) are expressed somewhat differently in  the
     Strasbourg jurisprudence, where proportionality is subsumed within  the
     fourth question. For a  decision  to  be  "necessary  in  a  democratic
     society", it must be both "justified by a  pressing  social  need"  and
     "proportionate to the legitimate aim pursued". This involves conducting
     a balancing exercise.  We apply the guidance in Huang [2007]  UKHL  11,
     in which case  the  House  of  Lords  said  that  the  Tribunal  should
     "consider and weigh all that tells in favour of the  refusal  of  leave
     which is challenged, with particular reference to  justification  under
     article  8(2)"  (paragraph  16  of  the  Opinion),  "take  account   of
     Strasbourg jurisprudence" (paragraph  18  of  the  Opinion),  and  then
     consider the question of proportionality, that is to say, "whether  the
     refusal of leave, in circumstances where the life of the family  cannot
     reasonably be expected to be enjoyed elsewhere taking full  account  of
     all considerations weighing in favour of the  refusal,  prejudices  the
     family life of the applicant in a manner sufficiently serious to amount
     to  a  breach  of  the  fundamental  rights  protected  by  article  8"
     (paragraph 20 of the Opinion).

20.   The legitimate public aim pursued by  the  Respondent's  decision  was
     immigration control. In this particular case, the  aim  of  immigration
     control was underpinned by the  policy  consideration  of  discouraging
     forced marriages (see the judgment of Burnett J in Quila). We gave some
     weight to the state's interest in immigration control,  notwithstanding
     the fact that the marriage between the Appellant and  the  sponsor  was
     not a forced one.

21.   The Respondent's decision prevented  the  sponsor  and  the  Appellant
     from living together in the United Kingdom. However,  the  sponsor  has
     already availed himself of the opportunity of visiting the Appellant in
     Ethiopia and living with her there for some months. In  the  period  of
     one and a  half  years  between  the  date  of  the  decision  and  the
     Appellant's 21st birthday, it has been (and will continue to  be)  open
     to him to do so again. We acknowledge the sponsor's  evidence  that  he
     did not have "facilities" when he visited the  Appellant.  However,  it
     was clear from his evidence that he and  the  Appellant  were  able  to
     secure accommodation. He did not give evidence of any  difficulties  in
     living in Addis Ababa from day-to-day. We acknowledge that, at the date
     of the decision, he had (and still has) a job and accommodation in  the
     United Kingdom. However, he  has  been  in  his  employment  with  Asda
     superstore since November 2007. It appears that he was able  to  return
     to employment with the same company after his visit  to  the  Appellant
     from June to October 2009. We have not been told  why  there  would  be
     difficulties with his employment if he were to make  another  visit  to
     the Appellant, even if that were to be an extended visit. At  the  date
     of the decision, the sponsor was a tenant under the terms of an assured
     shorthold tenancy agreement but we have not been told why it was not be
     open to  him  to  secure  alternative  accommodation  if  he  lost  the
     accommodation.

22.   We acknowledge that neither the sponsor  nor  the  Appellant  has  any
     immigration status in Ethiopia.  However,  this  did  not  prevent  the
     sponsor from staying with the Appellant from June until  October  2009.
     It did not prevent him from living in Ethiopia  for  a  few  months  in
     2005. The sponsor did not contend that he would be unable to visit  the
     Appellant in Ethiopia, although he said that he  chose  not  to  do  so
     because the Appellant becomes upset when he leaves  her.   The  sponsor
     gave evidence that he was afraid that "something dark" might come  into
     their  relationship.  We  found  this  rather  vague  and  speculative,
     although we did not doubt that  the  separation  as  a  result  of  the
     sponsor's choice to remain in the United Kingdom, rather than  be  with
     the Appellant in Ethiopia, has upset them both.

23.   However, in all of the circumstances and for  the  reasons  given,  we
     did not find that the circumstances appertaining as at the date of  the
     decision were such that it was unreasonable to expect the  sponsor  and
     the Appellant to continue to enjoy their family life with each other in
     the short period between the date of the decision and  the  Appellant's
     21st birthday through visits.

24.   On the whole of the evidence (including the evidence not  specifically
     referred to above) and having given each of the factors such weight  as
     we considered appropriate, we  found  that  the  Respondent's  decision
     would not prejudice the Appellant's and the sponsor's rights to  family
     life in a manner sufficiently serious as to amount to a breach  of  any
     protected rights under Article 8.


Decision


25. The making of the previous decision on this appeal involved the  making
    of an error on a point of law. We  therefore  set  aside  the  previous
    decision insofar as the previous  decision  concerned  the  Appellant's
    human rights claim and re-make the decision. Our decision is  that  the
    Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision  is  dismissed  on
    human rights grounds (Article 8).






Senior Immigration Judge GILL
Judge of the Upper Tribunal             Date:
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Approved for electronic distribution

