

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

             VN (EEA rights - dependency) Macedonia [2010] UKUT 380 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |                             |
|On 28 July 2010                               |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE STOREY



                                   Between

                                     VN

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss P Yong of Counsel instructed by Zaidi
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms F Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer

The judgment in Pedro [2009] EWCA Civ 1358 establishes that  in  respect  of
family members who are dependent direct  relatives  as  defined  by  Article
2.2(d) of Directive 2004/38/EC, proof  of  dependence  in  the  host  Member
State (the United Kingdom) can suffice for them to qualify for  a  right  of
residence. However, this judgment does not have application to the  case  of
"Other  family  members"  (OFMs)  as  defined  by  Article  3.2(a)  of   the
Directive. In order to  establish  a  right  of  residence  the  latter  are
required to show both dependence in the country from which  they  have  come
and dependence in the UK.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant is a citizen of Macedonia born on  10  April  1986.  On  25
September 2009 the respondent decided to refuse the  issue  of  a  residence
card as confirmation of  his  right  of  residence  as  an  extended  family
member, He is the brother-in-law of Giuseppe  Alessi,  an  Italian  national
who is in the United Kingdom exercising Treaty rights.  The  respondent  was
not satisfied that the appellant had shown  he  was  dependent  on  his  EEA
sponsor either prior to or since his arrival in the UK on 17  December  2007
on a visitor's visa. The appellant appealed. In a determination notified  on
17 February 2010 Immigration Judge (IJ) Sangha dismissed his appeal. The  IJ
did accept that the appellant was dependent on his EEA  brother-in-law  (and
his sister) since arrival in the UK (para 29). However, in relation  to  the
situation prior to arrival in the UK, the IJ found  that  in  Macedonia  (i)
the EEA brother-in-law had never lived with  the  appellant;  and  (ii)  the
appellant had not been financially dependent upon his EEA sponsor (paras 23-
26). The IJ accepted that when the appellant was still living  in  Macedonia
with his parents the appellant's sister and his EEA brother-in-law had  sent
money to them (his parents) but did not accept that this was to support  the
appellant. In reaching that decision the IJ attached  particular  weight  to
the fact that the money transfers  were  in  the  name  of  the  appellant's
parents and that the appellant's and his witnesses' explanations for why  no
transfers had been sent to him were  unsatisfactory  (in  particular,  there
was a conflict between the appellant's evidence that the reason was  because
he had no ID and his sister's evidence, which at  least  at  one  point  was
that the appellant did have ID). At para 29 the IJ also  found  that  whilst
the respondent's decision may interfere with the appellant's  family/private
life under Article 8 of the European Convention of Human Rights (ECHR),  any
interference  was  proportionate  because  there  was  no  reason  why   the
appellant could not return to Macedonia as  an  adult  and  seek  employment
there and maintain himself.

2. The appellant was successful  in  obtaining  a  grant  of  permission  to
appeal which is how the matter comes  before  me.  The  appellant's  grounds
were twofold. Ground 1 submitted that the IJ had  applied  the  wrong  legal
test by imposing a requirement that the appellant  be  able  to  show  prior
residence in another Member State.  Bigia and Ors [2009]  EWCA  Civ  79  was
cited in support.

3. Ground 2  submitted  that  in  commenting  on  the  appellant's  previous
application for a visitor visa the IJ failed to show procedural fairness  as
this matter  had  not  been  raised  by  either  party  at  the  hearing  or
beforehand. I can deal with this point straightaway.  This  was  a  case  in
which someone who was a third-country national had arrived in the  UK  on  a
visitor's visa and very shortly after made an application  for  a  residence
card on the basis of an EEA link. It was clearly foreseeable that on  appeal
the appellant would be asked questions about why he had come to the  UK  and
in particular why, if as he  claimed  he  had  been  dependent  on  his  EEA
brother-in-law prior to coming to the UK, he had not sought to  apply  under
reg 12(2) of the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006
("the 2006 Regulations"). Further, the appellant was represented by  Counsel
and was clearly given adequate opportunity to address  the  questions  asked
in cross-examination about this matter.

4. I can also deal now with an additional ground which Miss Yong  sought  to
raise before  me  challenging  the  Immigration  Judge's  findings  of  fact
relating to the appellant's financial  situation  in  Macedonia.  I  do  not
consider that I should entertain this ground. It was not identified  in  the
grounds for permission to appeal and even if the second paragraph of  ground
2  suggested  some  concern  about  the  Immigration   Judge's   credibility
findings, it raised no specific challenge to  this  important  part  of  the
evidence. In any event, even if I had entertained this ground, I would  have
found that  it  failed,  since  the  Immigration  Judge's  findings  on  the
appellant's circumstances in Macedonia were entirely sound.   In  particular
I am satisfied that the IJ reached those findings on the basis of a  rounded
assessment  of  the  written  and  oral  evidence  (including  that  of  the
appellant's sister in law).

Legal framework

5. Before proceeding further  it  is  necessary  to  set  out  the  relevant
European and national legislation.
6. Article 18 of the European  Community  Treaty  [now  Article  21  of  the
Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU)] provides that:
      "1. Every citizen of the Union shall have the right to move and reside
      freely within the territory of the Member States, subject to the
      limitations and conditions laid down in this Treaty and by the
      measures adopted to give it effect."
7. Relevant provisions of Directive 2004/38/EC (the "Citizens' Directive")
are as follows:
      "Article 1
      This Directive lays down:
      (a) the conditions  governing  the  exercise  of  the  right  of  free
      movement and residence within the territory of the  Member  States  by
      Union citizens and their family members;
      (b) the right of permanent residence in the territory  of  the  Member
      States for Union citizens and their family members;
      (c) the limits placed on the rights set out in  (a)  and  (b)  on  the
      grounds of public policy, public security or public health.
      Article 2
      For the purposes of this Directive:
      1) "Union citizen" means any person having the nationality of a Member
      State;
      2) "Family member" means:
      (a) the spouse;
      (b)  the  partner  with  whom  the  Union  citizen  has  contracted  a
      registered partnership...
      (c) the direct descendants  who  are  under  the  age  of  21  or  are
      dependents and those of the spouse or partner as defined in point (b);
      (d) the dependent direct relatives in the ascending line and those  of
      the spouse or partner as defined in point (b);
      3) "Host Member State" means the Member State to which a Union citizen
      moves in  order  to  exercise  his/her  right  of  free  movement  and
      residence."
      Article 3
      1. This Directive shall apply to all Union citizens  who  move  to  or
      reside in a Member State other than that of which they are a national,
      and to their family members as defined in point 2  of  Article  2  who
      accompany or join them.
      2. Without prejudice to any right to free movement and  residence  the
      persons concerned may have in their own right, the host  Member  State
      shall, in accordance with its national legislation,  facilitate  entry
      and residence for the following persons:
      (a) any other family members, irrespective of their  nationality,  not
      falling under the definition in point 2  of  Article  2  who,  in  the
      country from which they have come, are dependents or  members  of  the
      household of the Union citizen having the primary right of  residence,
      or where serious health grounds strictly require the personal care  of
      the family members by the Union citizen;
      (b)  the  partner  with  whom  the  Union  citizen   has   a   durable
      relationship, duly attested.
      The host Member State shall undertake an extensive examination of  the
      personal circumstances and  shall  justify  any  denial  of  entry  or
      residence to these people."
   8. Article 8 deals with "Administrative formalities for Union citizens."
      "1...for periods of residence  longer  than  three  months,  the  host
      Member State may require Union citizens to register with the  relevant
      authorities...
      ...5. For the registration certificate to be issued to family  members
      of Union citizens...Member States may require the following  documents
      to be presented:...
      ...(b)  a  document  attesting  to   the   existence   of   a   family
      relationship...
      ...(d) in cases falling under points (c)  and  (d)  of  Article  2(2),
      documentary evidence that the conditions laid down therein are met;
      (e) in cases falling under Article 3(2)(a), a document issued  by  the
      relevant authority in the country of origin...certifying that they are
      dependents..."
   9. Also pertinent are recitals 5 and 6 of the Preamble:
      "(5) The right of all Union citizens to move and reside freely  within
      the territory of the Member States should, if it is  to  be  exercised
      under objective conditions of freedom and dignity, be also granted  to
      their family members, irrespective of nationality. For the purposes of
      this Directive, the definition of "family member" should also  include
      the registered partner if the legislation of  the  host  Member  State
      treats registered partnership as equivalent to marriage.
      (6) In order to maintain the unity of the family in  a  broader  sense
      ... the situation of  those  persons  who  are  not  included  in  the
      definition of family members ... should be examined by the host Member
      State on the basis of its own national legislation, in order to decide
      whether entry and residence could be granted to such  persons,  taking
      into consideration their relationship with the Union  citizen  or  any
      other circumstances, such as their financial or physical dependence on
      the Union citizen."
10. The 2006 Regulations, which seek to implement the Directive in  national
law, define "Family members" in reg 7 in terms consistent with  Article  2.2
of the Directive. "Other family members" (OFMs) are dealt  with  in  reg  8,
which is headed "Extended family members". Regulation 8(2) provides:
         "A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if  the  person
         is a relative of an EEA national, his spouse or his  civil  partner
         and -
         (a) the person is residing  in  an  EEA  State  in  which  the  EEA
         national also resides and is dependent upon the EEA national or  is
         a member of his household;
         (b) the person satisfied the condition  in  paragraph  (a)  and  is
         accompanying the EEA national in the United Kingdom  or  wishes  to
         join him there; or
         (c) the person satisfied the condition in paragraph (a), has joined
         the EEA  national  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  continues  to  be
         dependent upon him or to be a member of his household."
11. Regulation 17(4) then deals with the circumstances under which the
Secretary of State may issue a residence card to an extended family member.
12. In the UK the three principal authorities dealing with the  position  of
extended family members are  KG (Sri  Lanka)  and  AK  (Sri  Lanka)  v  SSHD
[2008] EWCA Civ 13, Bigia and Ors and SM (India) v Entry  Clearance  Officer
(Mumbai) [2009 EWCA Civ 1426.  In relation to the appellants  in  Bigia  and
Ors who were OFMs, Maurice Kay LJ addressed the question  whether  what  was
said in KG and AK required modification in the light of the  European  Court
of Justice ruling in Metock (Case C-12708):
   "The OFM appeals: TS (Sri Lanka) and GT (India) and others
   1. It is first necessary to put a little more flesh on the factual  bones
      to which I referred in paragraphs 7 and 8, above.
   1. TS arrived in the United Kingdom from Sri Lanka in 2002, since when he
      has remained  here.  His  uncle,  who  was  originally  a  Sri  Lankan
      national, moved from that country to Germany in 1984, at which time TS
      was about three years of age. The uncle acquired  German  nationality.
      Whilst in Germany, he sent  money  for  the  benefit  of  his  family,
      including TS. In March 2006, the uncle exercised  his  right  of  free
      movement and came to this country. TS applied for a  residence  permit
      in 2006, relying on his uncle's presence  in  this  country.  At  that
      time, he was dependent on his uncle. However,  he  had  never  been  a
      dependant or a member of the household of the uncle in Germany or, for
      that matter, in Sri Lanka. He was simply one of the family members  to
      whom the uncle sent money from time to time, initially  in  Sri  Lanka
      and latterly in  the  United  Kingdom.  His  appeal  to  the  AIT  was
      dismissed by an Immigration Judge on 19 December 2006 and by a  Senior
      Immigration Judge on reconsideration on 10 June 2008.
   1. GT and his five siblings are of Indian nationality. Their uncle  moved
      from India no later than 2002. He has Portuguese nationality.  He  has
      lived in the United Kingdom since October 2002. The appellants applied
      for family permits in August 2004. The Entry Clearance Officer refused
      their application because he was not satisfied that  they  were  their
      uncle's dependants or that they were members of his household.  On  15
      December 2005, the Immigration Judge dismissed their  appeals  because
      they had not lived with their uncle in another  EEA  country  and,  on
      reconsideration, in a determination promulgated on 24 July  2008,  two
      Senior Immigration Judges found no error of law in  the  determination
      of the Immigration Judge. That was the day before the judgment of  the
      ECJ in Metock.
   1. In both cases,  the  reconsideration  hearing  took  place  after  the
      decision of the Court of Appeal in KG and AK but before  the  judgment
      of the ECJ in Metock. It  is  plain  to  see  that,  even  before  one
      considers the strength or weakness of their cases on "dependency"  and
      "household", the appellants in both cases are bound  to  fail  if  the
      construction of Article 3.2(a) of the Directive is as determined by KG
      and AK. We are, of course, bound by that authority unless and  to  the
      extent that it is inconsistent with the later decision of the  ECJ  in
      Metock.
   1. At no point in the judgment in Metock does the ECJ expressly  consider
      OFMs. Indeed, in the extracts from the Directive  which  it  carefully
      set out, Article 3.2(a) is omitted. However, it is accepted on  behalf
      of the Secretary of State  that  the  reasoning  which  underlies  the
      conclusion that, in relation to Article 2.2 "family members", there is
      no need for prior lawful residence in another Member State, must  also
      apply to OFMs. To that  extent,  the  fourth  and  sixth  propositions
      expounded by Buxton LJ in KG and AK (see paragraphs 10 and  11  above)
      require modification. This stems from the ECJ's reconsideration of and
      departure from Akrich. It follows that the provisions in Regulations 8
      and 12 of the 2006 Regulations, to the extent that they require an OFM
      to establish prior lawful residence in another Member  State,  do  not
      accord with the Directive. It cannot be the case that the policy which
      produced the result in relation  to  Article  2.2  family  members  in
      Metock is inapplicable in relation to OFMs.
   1. The policy, even before the Citizens' Directive, was to recognise "the
      importance of ensuring the protection of the family life of  nationals
      of the Member States in order to eliminate obstacles to  the  exercise
      of the fundamental freedoms  guaranteed  by  the  EC  Treaty"  (Metock
      paragraph 56). The same interpretation "must be  adopted  a  fortiori"
      with respect to  the  Citizens'  Directive,  it  being  apparent  from
      recital (3) in the preamble that "it aims in particular to 'strengthen
      the right of free movement and residence of all Union  citizens'  ..."
      (Metock, paragraph 59).  The  scheme  of  the  Directive  is  then  to
      distinguish between Article 2.2 "family members" of the Union  citizen
      and OFMs. The former, if they accompany or join the Union citizen when
      he exercises his rights of free movement and residence,  benefit  from
      his rights and from the policy that he is not to be  discouraged  from
      exercising them by national immigration rules that impact adversely on
      his "family members". OFMs, on the other hand,  are  provided  with  a
      lesser protection. The host Member State must  "facilitate  entry  and
      residence" for them and "undertake an  extensive  examination  of  the
      personal  circumstances  and  ...  justify  any  denial  of  entry  or
      residence  ..."  (Article  3.2).  Moreover,  to  benefit  from   their
      procedural rights, the OFMs must be persons who, "in the country  from
      which they have come, are dependants or members of  the  household  of
      the Union citizen having the  primary  right  of  residence"  (Article
      3.2(a)). It was these provisions, in particular, that were  considered
      in KG and AK. They raise difficult issues of construction  which  were
      determined in that case which (subject to the  need  for  any  further
      reconsideration in  the  light  of  Metock)  is  authority  for  these
      propositions:
      (1) "The tight relationship between the  exercise  of  rights  by  the
      Union citizen and  the  requirement  that  the  OFMs  accompanying  or
      joining him  should  have  been  his  dependants  or  members  of  his
      household in the country from  which  they  have  come  very  strongly
      suggests that the relationship should have existed in the country from
      which the Union citizen has come, and thus  have  existed  immediately
      before the Union citizen was accompanied or joined by the  OFM."  (per
      Buxton LJ at paragraph 65).
      (2) "It seems very likely that the assumption is  that  the  household
      will indeed be that of the Union citizen, that  is,  that  he  was  in
      colloquial terms head of it, the relations were under his roof, and on
      that basis he can reasonably wish to be accompanied by the members  of
      it when he leaves for another country." (per Buxton  LJ  at  paragraph
      77).
      (3) "Article 3(2)(a) is expressed in the present tense: in the country
      from which they have come are dependants or members of  the  household
      of the Union citizen ... while it will not literally be the case  that
      [the OFM] is at that time [viz the time of  accompanying  or  joining]
      still dependent on the Union citizen or a member of his  household  in
      the country from which he has come, it makes sense that he should have
      been so dependent or a household member very recently." (per Buxton LJ
      at paragraph 79, emphasis added)."
      The question now  is  whether  any  of  these  propositions  has  been
      undermined by Metock.
   1. In my judgment, Metock does not impact on these propositions. I accept
      that Article 3.2(a) is based on  the  same  policy  considerations  as
      Article 2.2 - "ensuring the protection of the family life of nationals
      of the Member States in order to eliminate obstacles to  the  exercise
      of the fundamental freedoms guaranteed by the  EC  Treaty"  (here  the
      right of free movement and residence of the Union citizen) and  aiming
      "to strengthen the right of free movement and residence of  all  Union
      citizens". That is why the Directive goes beyond  Article  2.2  family
      members and makes provision, albeit in  a  different  way,  for  OFMs.
      However, the emphasis remains  on  elimination  of  obstacles  to  the
      Treaty rights of the Union citizen rather  than  a  policy  of  family
      reunification. Thus, OFMs who seek to travel from a different  country
      to that from which the Union citizen is moving or has  recently  moved
      cannot without more be said to be members of his household. Similarly,
      whilst an OFM in a non-Member State may be financially dependent  upon
      a Union citizen because he is provided with  accommodation  or  living
      expenses by the Union citizen,  there  is  no  reason  why  the  Union
      citizen's movement to the host Member State would be discouraged.  The
      OFM could continue to benefit from the  accommodation  or  the  income
      after the Union citizen has exercised his rights in  the  host  Member
      State. I accept Mr Palmer's submission that it is only those OFMs  who
      have been present with the Union citizen in the country from which  he
      has most recently come whose ability or inability  to  move  with  him
      could impact on his exercise of his primary right. This also  explains
      Buxton  LJ's  requirement  of  very  recent  dependency  or  household
      membership. Historic but lapsed dependency or membership is irrelevant
      to the Directive policy of removing obstacles to the  Union  citizen's
      freedom of movement and residence rights. Unlike Article  2.2  "family
      members", it cannot be said of them that "the  refusal  ...  to  grant
      them a right of residence is equally liable to discourage [the]  Union
      citizen from continuing to  reside  in  that  Member  State"  (Metock,
      paragraph 92). Accordingly, I conclude that these aspects  of  Article
      3.2(a) are not affected by Metock and that, in these respects, KG  and
      AK remains good law.
   1. This conclusion renders the  position  of  the  appellants  in  TS(Sri
      Lanka) and GT(India) and others hopeless. In each case  they  fail  on
      dependency and household membership and they fail on  the  chronology.
      TS's alternative appeals to the Immigration Rules and Article 8 of the
      ECHR are also unsustainable. The Senior Immigration Judge did not fall
      into any legal error."
13. In SM (India) Sullivan LJ (correcting the approach of  the  Tribunal  in
AP and  FP  (India)  [2007]  UKAIT  00048)   clarified  that  the  test  for
dependency in the Directive and in the EEA Regulations is  to  be  found  in
the European Court of Justice cases of Lebon [1987] ECR 2811 and Jia,  (Case
C-1/05). Jia concerned Chinese  parents-in-law  of  a  German  national  who
worked on a self-employed basis in Sweden; they sought  to  establish  their
dependence on the German national for the purposes of Directive 73/148/EEC.
14. In light of the submissions mention must also be made of  another  Court
of Appeal judgment: Pedro v Secretary of State for Work and Pensions  [2009]
EWCA Civ 1358. In Pedro the Court was concerned with a claim by the 62  year
old mother of an EEA national who had been refused state pension  credit.  A
social security tribunal ruling in her  favour  had  been  overturned  by  a
Deputy Commissioner in July 2008,  but  the  Court  of  Appeal  allowed  her
appeal. Noting that the Deputy Commissioner had  found  that  it  had  never
been suggested that the claimant was dependent on her son  before  she  came
to join him in the United Kingdom, Goldring LJ stated at para 12 that:
   "The fundamental issue in this appeal is whether in order to  succeed  in
   her claim the appellant had to  show  a  need  for  material  support  in
   Portugal, or whether it was sufficient that she has become  dependent  on
   her son since leaving Portugal and in the United Kingdom."
15. At para 59 he concluded:
      "59. As  Metock  suggests,  if  a  particular  interpretation  of  the
Directive would mean that a  national of a Member State might  realistically
be discouraged from leaving that state and   going to another  Member  State
to work or if, when working or having worked, in another      Member  State,
he might be encouraged to leave, that  would  not  be  consistent  with  the
purpose of the Directive, or give effect to it. It  seems  to  me  there  is
substance  in  Miss       Mountfield's  submission  that  the  Secretary  of
State's interpretation  of  Articles  2(1)  and   3(1)  could  realistically
result in a person deciding not to move to another Member State     to  work
or, having moved, to be encouraged to return  to  his  state  of  origin.  A
Union       citizen who wishes to  work  in  another  Member  state  may  be
deterred from doing so if    he   knows  that  his  elderly,  but  not  then
dependent mother, will  not  be  regarded  as  his       dependent  for  the
purposes of Article 2(2) if  she  joins  him  and  later  becomes  dependent
upon him. If, in spite of that, he has left his  state  of  origin,  he  may
then be     encouraged to leave his host state for his state  of  origin  to
enable his then dependent    mother  to  be  supported.  As  Eind  [Case  C-
291/05] and Metock make clear, no       impediment should be placed  in  the
way of a Union citizen which might realistically   deter him  from  choosing
to work in (for example) a city in another Member  State,  as    opposed  to
one in his state of origin. If in the first case his dependent mother  would
not   be supported and in the second  she  would,  that  would  in  my  view
amount to such an      impediment.
        60.  Moreover, if the Secretary of State is right, were  Mrs.  Pedro
to have become dependent     upon  her  son  in  Portugal  and  he  to  have
supported her, she could have come to the    United Kingdom to join  him  as
a dependent and enjoy her derived benefits, yet if she    becomes  dependent
in the United Kingdom she cannot.  It  is  difficult  to  see  a  principled
distinction between the two situations.
   61...
  62.  In short, I have concluded that proof of dependence by Mrs. Pedro  on
      her son in the   United Kingdom will suffice under Article 2(2)(d)."
Discussion
16. It  can  be  seen  that  the  Directive  distinguishes  between  "family
members" as defined in Article 2.2 and "other family members" who are  dealt
with in Article  3.2(a).  The  2006  Regulations  refer  to  the  latter  as
"extended family members". It is clear from the  analysis  of  the  relevant
legislation made in KG and AK, Bigia and Ors, SM (India) and Pedro that  the
protection the Directive affords to OFMs is significantly less than that  it
affords family members as defined by Article 2.2.  Furthermore,  whereas  in
relation to Article 2.2 family members other  provisions  of  the  Directive
lay down the conditions under which they qualify for  rights  of  entry  and
residence, the obligation imposed on the host Member State  in  relation  to
OFMs is limited to a duty  to  "facilitate  their  entry  and  residence  in
accordance with its national legislation"; see also recital  6.  That  means
that there is a considerable discretion left to  Member  States  as  to  the
circumstances under which those who qualify under  Article  3.2  are  to  be
granted entry or residence. So long as the host Member State discharges  the
duty to facilitate and the duty imposed by the last sentence of Article  3.2
- to "undertake an extensive examination of the personal  circumstances  and
shall justify any denial of entry or residence to these people" -  it  is  a
matter for its national law what requirements it applies to OFMs. In the  UK
that means that the eligibility of OFMs for EEA rights is  governed  by  the
2006 Regulations.
 17. Since all of the above matters appear to  be  acte  clair  I  have  not
considered it appropriate for me to make  a  preliminary  reference  to  the
Court of Justice of the European Union (CJEU) under Article 267.
18. So far as concerns the meaning of dependency, that is  also  acte  clair
as a result of the ECJ judgment in Jia which stated at para 35 that:
    "...the status of 'dependent' family member is the result of a  factual
    situation characterised by the fact  that  material  support  for  that
    family member is provided by the Community national who  has  exercised
    his right of free movement or by his spouse...".
19. The ECJ in Jia was concerned with a relative in the  ascending  line  of
the spouse of a Community national, and so a person who, had her  case  been
decided now, would have  fallen  to  be  considered  under  Article  2.2(d).
Furthermore, it is safe to assume that dependency has the  same  meaning  in
Directive 2004/38/EC as it has in the Community provisions examined in  Jia,
that is Directive 73/148/EEC. It is also safe to assume that dependency  has
the same meaning in Article 3.2 as it has  in  Article  2.2(d)  and  (c)  of
Directive 2004/38/EC.  At para 37 of Jia the ECJ stated that:
    "In order to determine whether the relatives in the ascending  line  of
    the spouse of a Community national are dependent  on  the  latter,  the
    host Member State must assess whether, having regard to their financial
    and  social  conditions,  they  are  not  in  a  position  to   support
    themselves..."
20. In light of the above I now turn to examine the appellant's grounds  for
permission to appeal.

21. As  regards  the  first  ground,  I  am  prepared  to  accept  that  the
Immigration Judge erred in law  in  para  26  when  he  appeared  to  attach
significance to the fact that  the  appellant  "has  never  lived  with  his
sister and  brother-in-law  in  another  EEA  state".  Everywhere  else  the
Immigration Judge appears to have  focussed  (correctly)  on  the  issue  of
whether the appellant was financially dependent on the EEA sponsor prior  to
coming to the  UK,  but  the  offending  sentence  muddies  the  waters  and
suffices to persuade me that the Immigration Judge erred in  law.  As  noted
by Maurice Kay  LJ  at  para  41  of  Bigia  and  Ors,  "the  provisions  in
Regulations 8 and 12 of the  2006  Regulations,  to  the  extent  that  they
require an OFM to establish prior lawful residence in another Member  State,
do not accord with the Directive...".

22. However, for reasons already explained there is no basis for  revisiting
the Immigration Judge's finding  that  the  appellant  was  not  financially
dependent on the EEA sponsor prior to coming to the UK.  To  paraphrase  the
wording of the ECJ in Jia at para 35, the appellant was properly  found  not
be have been dependent in Macedonia because he had failed to show  that  his
factual situation there was characterised by the fact  of  material  support
for him provided by his EEA brother-in-law.

23. The question arises, therefore, whether the  Immigration  Judge's  error
was a material one.

24. Miss Yong submitted that it was. She argued that even  if  the  Tribunal
did not accept any dependency by the appellant  on  his  EEA  brother-in-law
prior to the appellant coming to the  UK,  his  appeal  still  stood  to  be
allowed on the strength of the principle  established  in  Pedro.   However,
that submission rests on a plain misconception of the ratio in Pedro.  Pedro
concerned  a  family  member  as  defined  by  Article  2.2   of   Directive
2004/38/EC, not an OFM as defined by Article 3.2.  Indeed, in coming to  the
conclusion that in the case of an Article 2.2 (d)  ascendant  family  member
dependency in the host Member  State  (the  UK)  could  suffice,  the  Court
expressly relied on the contrasting position of OFMs under Article 3.2:
      "61. I do accept, as Mr.  Blundell  submitted,  that  the  distinction
      between "family members" under Article 2(1) of Directive  2004/38  and
      "any other family members" in article 3(2) is not new. That  is  clear
      from  the  previous  European  legislation.  It  was  present  in  the
      legislation considered by the court in Jia. It is clear  too  that  in
      both KG and AK and Bigia, the Court of Appeal proceeded on  the  basis
      that Jia was still good law. However, in neither case was the  present
      argument raised. KG and AK did not concern Article 2  family  members.
      When in Bigia  Maurice Kay LJ applied the test in Jia to  the  Article
      2(2) family member, he did so, as I have indicated, in the context  of
      the alleged support having been provided in  India  by  Mr.  Bigia  in
      circumstances where that was the only basis of the dependency alleged.




      62. As Lebon [[1987] ECR 2811] made clear,  whether  someone  has  the
      status of a dependant family member is a  question  of  fact.  Such  a
      status is characterised by the material support for that family member
      provided by the Union national who has exercised  his  free  right  of
      movement. Why the family member is dependent does not matter. The fact
      that Jia [Case C-1/105] itself concerned the  derived  rights  of  the
      alleged dependents of a self-employed citizen is not  significant.  In
      its reasoning the Court relied on Lebon and Article 4(3) of  Directive
      68/360, which did not concern those who are self employed. There is no
      justification in principle for  distinguishing  between  the  two  for
      present purposes.


      63. When in Jia the court referred (as relevant to the  present  case)
      to the need for material support having  to  exist  in  the  state  of
      origin, it did so on the basis of what was said in Article 4(3)(e)  of
      Directive 68/360. It said as much in paragraph 38. I do not accept Mr.
      Blundell's submission to the contrary. What was said in  that  Article
      may be contrasted  with  what  is  said  in  Article  8(5)(d)  of  the
      Citizens' Directive. That says nothing  to  suggest  that  documentary
      evidence of an Article 2(2)(d) dependency need emanate from the  state
      of origin. That is  in  specific  contrast  to  "other  family  member
      cases," where under Article 8(5)(e)  the  relevant  authority  of  the
      country of origin is referred to. The basis of the  decision  in  Jia,
      insofar as it concerns family members, therefore falls away in a  case
      involving the Citizens' Directive.


      64. In short, the basis of the conclusion in Jia as to  the  need  for
      material support to exist in the state of origin is not present  in  a
      case such as the present brought under  the  Citizens'  Directive.  It
      lends support to Miss Mountfield's contention that that Directive  did
      strengthen the right of free movement.


      65. Moreover, on  the  rather  extreme  facts  of  Jia,  the  question
      revolved around the basis on which dependency was to be  assessed;  in
      particular, whether by reference to the country of origin or of normal
      residence. That is very different from a case such as the present.
      66. It does not seem to me relevant that Jia  was  decided  after  the
      Citizens' Directive became law. The decision  was  not  taken  on  the
      basis of it.
      67. Article 2(2) does not specify when  the  dependency  has  to  have
      arisen. Neither does it require that the relative must be dependent in
      the country of origin. Article 3(2)(a), on the  other  hand,  requires
      actual dependency at a particular time and place. That difference,  as
      I have said, is reflected by Article 8(5)(d) as compared with 8(5)(e).
      It cannot be an accident of drafting. It contemplates, as it seems  to
      me, that where in an  Article  2(2)(d)  case  reliance  is  placed  on
      dependency, it can be proved by a document from the host state without
      input from the state of origin. Taking Article 2(2)(d)  together  with
      Article 8(5)(d), suggests that dependency in the state of origin  need
      not be proved for family members. It is sufficient if, as  is  alleged
      here, the dependency arises in the host state. Such an  interpretation
      reflects the policy of the Directive to strengthen  and  simplify  the
      realisation of  realistic  free  movement  rights  of  Union  citizens
      compatibly with their family rights. On the  one  hand,  close  family
      members of Union citizens can move  freely  with  Union  citizens  who
      might otherwise be inhibited from  exercising  their  rights  of  free
      movement. On the other, Member States  are  merely  obliged,  as  Miss
      Mountfield put it, to give open-minded consideration to those extended
      family members who have demonstrable need. Such an interpretation,  as
      well as being  in  accordance  with  the  language  of  the  Citizens'
      Directive, is consistent with the approach of the  European  Court  of
      Justice in Metock [84-9]. "
 25. Hence the clear conclusion to  be  drawn  from  Pedro  is  that  whilst
financial dependency on the sponsor since arrival in the UK may  suffice  to
benefit a family member as defined by Article 2.2(d), it  will  not  benefit
an OFM as defined by Article 3.2(a).

26. Even leaving to one side the guidance given in  KG  and  AK,  Bigia  and
Ors, SM (India) and Pedro, it is clear that both the Directive and the  2006
Regulations require, in the case of OFMs,  that  dependency  must  be  shown
both in the county of origin and in the host Member  State.  Article  3.2(a)
applies only to OFMs (other than those in respect of whom there are  serious
health grounds) "who,  in  the  country  from  which  they  have  come,  are
dependents or members of the household  of  the  Union  citizen  having  the
primary right of residence..." (This is underlined by Article 10.2(e)  which
permits Member States to require of OFMs "a document issued by the  relevant
authority in the country of origin or country from which they  are  arriving
certifying that they are dependants...".) The use of the  present  tense  is
to be noted.  Correspondingly, reg 8(2)(c) requires  an  applicant  to  show
that the extended family member who has  joined  the  EEA  national  in  the
United Kingdom "continues to be dependent upon him or to be a member of  his
household". As was clearly in the mind of Buxton LJ in KG  and  AK,  use  of
the word "continues" denotes that the dependency must have  existed  in  the
recent past and must still exist once here.

27. In seeking to support her submission in relation to the appellant's  EEA
rights under the Directive and/or the 2006 Regulations, Miss Yong  contended
that  the  IJ  should  have  concluded  that  in  view  of  the  appellant's
dependency on his brother-in-law in the UK it would be  disproportionate  as
a matter of EU law as informed by Article 8 ECHR  to  refuse  to  issue  him
with  a  residence  card.  No  doubt  she  was  influenced  in  putting  her
submission in this way by the fact that the grounds applying for  permission
did not raise any Article 8 ECHR point as such.

28. I am unable to accept that contention in substance.

29. Miss Yong is right,  of  course,  that  we  must  give  effect  to  EHCR
provisions  within   Community/Union   law   and   that   Article   8   ECHR
considerations are relevant in determining EEA rights: see  e.g.   Carpenter
(Case C-60/00) [2002] ECR I-6279; MRAX (Case  C-459/99)  [2002]  ECR-I-6591;
and    Zhu    and    Chen    (Case    C-200/02)    [2004]    ECR     I-9925.


30. At a general level it is right to express matters tentatively, as  there
is a lack of case law. However, I think Miss Yong  must  also  be  right  in
reasoning that in the context of the  Directive  and  the  2006  Regulations
Article 8 ECHR cannot only be relevant to Article  2.2  family  members:  it
must also be of potential assistance to OFMs under Article  3.2.  Article  8
ECHR has universal application.

31. I would also accept that in respect of OFMs it is  arguable  that  there
may be inbuilt reasons why Article 8 ECHR might be of  some  importance,  in
that Article 3.2 OFMs are by definition persons who already have  been  able
to  establish  some  significant  factual  content  to  their   relationship
(whether family life or private life)  with  the  EEA  national:  they  have
either established dependency; membership of the household;  serious  health
grounds  requiring  personal  care;  or   the   existence   of   a   durable
relationship. At the same time, the starting point for  OFMs  is  different.
They are persons who are considered to have ties with the Union  citizen/EEA
national that are less close than  those  of  Article  2.2  family  members.
Hence, even in order to receive a lesser form of protection,  they  have  to
prove more; the existence of the tie itself is not enough.

32. So it would not seem that there are necessarily any clear  demarcations,
at least for Article 8 ECHR-related purposes, between Article 2.2(d)  family
members and OFMs. However, what is clear is that even if for Article 8  ECHR
purposes there are no bright lines, in certain circumstances a  decision  as
to whether persons in either  category  qualify  for  protection  under  the
Directive  or  the  Regulations  will   require   an   assessment   of   the
proportionality of the measure in question.

33. In am fortified  in  taking  this  view  by  the  observations  made  by
Advocate General Sharpston in a very recent Opinion in   Zambrano  v  Office
national  de  l'emploi  (ONEM)  (Case  C-34/09),  30  September  2010   when
discussing the  situation  of  a  third-country  national  ascendant  family
member (the parent clearly falling into the  Article  2.2(d)  family  member
category). At paras 107-111 she states:
    "107. There are, clearly, situations in which the exercise of rights by
    an EU citizen is not contingent upon the grant of residence  rights  to
    an ascendant family member. Thus, an EU citizen who  has  attained  his
    majority is able to exercise his rights to travel and to reside  within
    the territory of the European Union without it being necessary to grant
    his parent(s) concurrent rights  of  residence  in  the  chosen  Member
    State.
    108. In  my  view,  therefore,  the  potential  interference  with  EU
    citizenship rights that arises if an ascendant family member  does  not
    enjoy an automatic derivative right of residence in  the  EU  citizen's
    Member State of nationality is acceptable in principle. However, it may
    not  be  a  permissible  interference  in  certain  circumstances   (in
    particular, because it may not be proportionate).
    Proportionality
    109. As the Court has stated in Micheletti, Kaur and more recently in
    Rottmann, although the grant of nationality  is  a  matter  that  falls
    within the competence of each Member State, it  must,  none  the  less,
    when exercising that competence, comply with [EU] law. The same result
    was reached in Bickel and Franz  when  it  came  to  criminal  law  and
    procedure, in  Garc�a  Avello  as  regards  national  rules  governing
    surnames and in Schempp, concerning direct taxation -  all  sensitive
    areas in which Member States still exercise significant powers.
    110. Here, as so often, the situation is one that involves exercise of
    a  right  and  a  potential  justification  for  interfering  with  (or
    derogating from) that right; and the question  comes  down  to  one  of
    proportionality. Is it proportionate,  in  the  circumstances  of  this
    case, to refuse to recognise a right of residence for Mr Ruiz Zambrano,
    derived from his children's rights as EU citizens? Whilst the  decision
    on proportionality is (as usual) ultimately a matter for  the  national
    court, some brief remarks may be of assistance.
    111. Application of the principle of proportionality  in  the  present
    case (as in Rottmann) requires 'the national  court  to  ascertain  ...
    whether the ... decision at issue in the main proceedings observes  the
    principle of proportionality so far as  concerns  the  consequences  it
    entails for the situation of the person concerned in the light of  [EU]
    law' (in addition to any examination of  proportionality  that  may  be
    required under national law).  As the Court went on to explain in  that
    case, '[h]aving regard to the importance which primary law attaches  to
    the status of citizen of the Union ... it is necessary,  therefore,  to
    take into account the consequences that the decision  entails  for  the
    person concerned and, if relevant, for the members of his  family  with
    regard to the loss of the rights enjoyed by every citizen of the Union.
    In this respect it is necessary to establish,  in  particular,  whether
    that loss is justified ...'. "
34. The obligation on the decision-maker in respect of an  ascending  family
member to conduct an assessment of proportionality based on  the  individual
case is very similar to  the  obligation  imposed  in  respect  of  OFMs  by
Article 3 of Directive 2004/38/EC final paragraph, which states:  "The  host
Member State shall  undertake  an  extensive  examination  of  the  personal
circumstances and shall justify any denial of entry or  residence  to  these
people". Recital (6) of the Directive also enjoins the need  in  respect  of
such  person  for  decision-makers  to  take   into   consideration   "their
relationship with the Union citizen or  any  other  circumstances,  such  as
their financial or physical dependence on the Union citizen".
35. How do such considerations, whether considered as required  directly  by
the Directive or the Regulations or indirectly on the  basis  of  Article  8
ECHR, apply to the appellant's particular case? Bearing in  mind  that  this
question is,  as  Advocate  General  Sharpston  reminds  us,  a  matter  for
national courts to decide on the  facts  of  the  individual  case,  several
matters appear of particular importance.

36. First, it was  a  clear  finding  of  the  Immigration  Judge  that  the
appellant had not shown  that  his  situation  when  in  Macedonia  was  one
characterised by the fact that material support for him was provided by  his
EEA brother-in-law.

37. Second, there is absolutely  nothing  to  indicate  that  refusal  of  a
residence card would have any material effect on the way in  which  his  EEA
brother-in-law continued to exercise his Treaty rights here.  They  had  not
previously lived in the same household. There was nothing  to  suggest  that
he would feel impelled to accompany the appellant back to Macedonia.  Indeed
the evidence was that he had been ordinarily residing in the UK  (exercising
Treaty rights) since 2005/6  at  least  and  that  previously  he  had  been
content to remain in contact with his brother-in-law by way of returning  to
visit Macedonia on very few occasions.

38.Third, the Immigration Judge found that when in Macedonia  the  appellant
was a healthy young man who had been able to play football  on  a  part-time
basis (for which he was paid a small amount) and there was  "no  reason  why
[he] could not seek employment there".

39. A fourth matter is this. It is true  that  the  appellant  and  his  EEA
brother-in-law and his sister refer to living  together  in  the  UK  in  "a
close and loving relationship" and that the Immigration Judge  said  nothing
to dissent from that. It  is  also  true  that  he  has  been  found  to  be
financially dependent on them in the UK. But the appellant is 24  years  old
and has no known health problems and was found by the Immigration  Judge  to
have come to the UK for no other reason than that  he  found  the  life  and
employment prospects in Macedonia to  be  inferior.  The  evidence  did  not
establish that in  Macedonia  the  appellant  would  be  unable  to  support
himself. In my assessment, even  assuming  the  evidence  demonstrated  that
there was a family and private life relationship between the  appellant  and
his EEA brother-in-law  within  the  meaning  of  Article  8  and  that  the
decision refusing a residence card amounted to  an  interference  with  that
relationship, such considerations do not establish that the decision  was  a
disproportionate one. I see no error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
finding that the appellant's Article 8 rights were not  breached.  Nor,  for
the reasons given, do I see that in the  particular  circumstances  of  this
case  Article  8  considerations  add  anything  of  significance   to   the
assessment of proportionality required by EU law.

40. For the above reasons I conclude that:

The IJ materially erred in law.

The decision I remake is to dismiss the appellant's appeal.





                               Signed                               Date




                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                               (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

