
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

 MN and others (Ahmadis - country conditions - risk) Pakistan CG [2012]
UKUT 00389(IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 26, 27 and 29 March, 28, 31 May, 19 and    |                             |
|20  June 2012                                 |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

                                     MN
                                     NH
                                     ZN
                                     SB
                                     HQ

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellants:    MN - Mr P Jorro succeeded by Mr D Lemer both
                    instructed by Rolens Solicitors
      NH - Mr C Yeo, instructed by Wimbledon Solicitors
      ZN - Ms S Jegarajah, instructed by Wimbledon Solicitors
      SB - Mr M Gill, QC instructed Thompson and Co Solicitors
      HQ - Mr D Lemer, instructed by Thompson and Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Z Malik instructed by Treasury Solicitors

 1. This country guidance replaces previous guidance in MJ & ZM (Ahmadis  -
    risk) Pakistan CG [2008] UKAIT 00033, and IA & Others (Ahmadis: Rabwah)
    Pakistan CG [2007] UKAIT 00088. The guidance we give  is  based in part
    on the developments in the law including the decisions of  the  Supreme
    Court in HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31, RT (Zimbabwe) [2012] UKSC 38 and the
    CJEU decision in Germany v. Y (C-71/11) & Z  (C-99/11).   The  guidance
    relates principally to Qadiani Ahmadis; but as the legislation which is
    the background to the issues raised in  these  appeals  affects  Lahori
    Ahmadis also, they too are included  in  the  country  guidance  stated
    below.

 2. (i)  The background to the risk faced by Ahmadis  is  legislation  that
    restricts the way in which they  are  able  openly  to  practise  their
    faith. The legislation not only prohibits preaching and other forms  of
    proselytising  but  also  in  practice  restricts  other  elements   of
    manifesting one's religious beliefs, such  as  holding  open  discourse
    about  religion   with   non-Ahmadis,   although   not   amounting   to
    proselytising. The prohibitions include openly referring to one's place
    of worship as a mosque and to one's religious leader  as  an  Imam.  In
    addition, Ahmadis are not permitted to refer to the call to  prayer  as
    azan nor to call themselves Muslims or refer to their faith  as  Islam.
    Sanctions include a fine and imprisonment and if  blasphemy  is  found,
    there is a risk of the death penalty which to date has not been carried
    out although there is a risk of lengthy incarceration if the penalty is
    imposed.  There is clear evidence that this legislation is used by non-
    state actors to threaten and harass Ahmadis. This includes  the  filing
    of First Information Reports (FIRs) (the first  step  in  any  criminal
    proceedings) which can result in  detentions  whilst  prosecutions  are
    being pursued. Ahmadis are also subject to attacks by non-state  actors
    from sectors of the majority Sunni Muslim population.

    (ii)    It is, and has long been, possible in general  for  Ahmadis  to
    practise their faith on a restricted basis  either  in  private  or  in
    community with other Ahmadis, without infringing domestic Pakistan law.

 3. (i) If an Ahmadi is able  to  demonstrate  that  it  is  of  particular
    importance to his religious identity to practise and manifest his faith
    openly in Pakistan in defiance of  the  restrictions  in  the  Pakistan
    Penal Code (PPC) under sections 298B and 298C, by engaging in behaviour
    described in paragraph 2(i) above, he or she is likely to be in need of
    protection, in the light of the serious nature of  the  sanctions  that
    potentially apply as well as the risk of prosecution under section 295C
    for blasphemy.

    (ii) It is no answer to expect an Ahmadi who fits the description  just
    given to avoid engaging in behaviour described in paragraph 2(i)  above
    ("paragraph 2(i) behaviour") to avoid a risk of prosecution.

 4. The need for protection applies equally to men and women. There  is  no
    basis for considering that Ahmadi women as a whole are at a  particular
    or additional risk; the decision that they should not attend mosques in
    Pakistan was made by the Ahmadi  Community  following  attacks  on  the
    mosques in  Lahore  in  2010.  There  is  no  evidence  that  women  in
    particular were the target of those attacks.

 5. In light of the above, the first question the decision-maker  must  ask
    is (1) whether the  claimant  genuinely  is  an  Ahmadi.  As  with  all
    judicial fact-finding the judge will need to reach conclusions  on  all
    the evidence as a whole giving such weight to aspects of that  evidence
    as appropriate in  accordance  with  Article  4  of  the  Qualification
    Directive.  This is likely to include an enquiry whether  the  claimant
    was registered with an Ahmadi community in Pakistan and worshipped  and
    engaged there on a regular basis. Post-arrival activity  will  also  be
    relevant.  Evidence likely to be relevant  includes  confirmation  from
    the UK Ahmadi  headquarters  regarding  the  activities  relied  on  in
    Pakistan and confirmation from the local community in the UK where  the
    claimant is worshipping.

 6. The next step (2) involves an enquiry into the claimant's intentions or
    wishes as to his or her  faith,  if  returned  to  Pakistan.   This  is
    relevant because of the need to establish whether it is  of  particular
    importance to the religious identity of the Ahmadi concerned to  engage
    in  paragraph  2(i)  behaviour.  The  burden  is  on  the  claimant  to
    demonstrate that any intention or wish to practise and manifest aspects
    of the faith openly that are not permitted by the Pakistan  Penal  Code
    (PPC) is genuinely held and of particular importance to the claimant to
    preserve his or her religious identity.  The decision  maker  needs  to
    evaluate all the evidence. Behaviour since arrival in the UK  may  also
    be relevant. If the claimant discharges this burden he is likely to  be
    in need of protection.

 7.  The  option  of  internal  relocation,  previously  considered  to  be
    available in Rabwah, is not in general reasonably open  to  a  claimant
    who genuinely wishes to engage n paragraph 2(i) behaviour, in the light
    of the nationwide effect in Pakistan of the anti-Ahmadi legislation.

 8.  Ahmadis who are not able to show that they practised  their  faith  at
    all in Pakistan or  that  they  did  so  on  anything  other  than  the
    restricted basis described in paragraph  2(ii)  above  are  in  general
    unlikely to be able to show that their genuine intentions or wishes are
    to practise and manifest their faith openly on return, as described  in
    paragraph 2(i) above.

 9. A sur place claim by an Ahmadi  based  on  post-arrival  conversion  or
    revival  in  belief  and  practice  will  require  careful   evidential
    analysis. This will probably include consideration of evidence  of  the
    head of the claimant's local United Kingdom Ahmadi Community  and  from
    the UK headquarters, the latter particularly in cases where  there  has
    been a conversion. Any adverse findings in the claimant's account as  a
    whole may be relevant to the assessment of likely behaviour on  return.



10. Whilst an Ahmadi who has been found to  be  not  reasonably  likely  to
    engage or wish to engage in paragraph 2(i) behaviour  is,  in  general,
    not at real risk on return to Pakistan, judicial  fact-finders  may  in
    certain cases need to consider whether that person  would  nevertheless
    be reasonably likely to be targeted by non-state actors on  return  for
    religious persecution by reason  of  his/her  prominent  social  and/or
    business profile.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


                                   Paragraph

INTRODUCTION     1-8
APPELLANTS' CASE HISTORIES   9-25
EXTRACTS FROM THE PAKISTAN PENAL CODE   26-27
REPORTS BY THE AHMADIYYA ASSOCIATION OF INCIDENTS  28-33
INTRODUCTION TO THE EXPERT AND OTHER WITNESSES     34-35
UNHCR ELIGIBILITY GUIDELINES FOR ASSESSING THE INTERNATIONAL PROTECTION
NEEDS OF MEMBERS OF RELIGIOUS MINORITIES FROM PAKISTAN  DATED  14  MAY  2012
36-40
THE US DEPARTMENT OF STATE, INTERNATIONAL RELIGIOUS FREEDOM REPORT FOR  2011
41-42
SUMMARY OF SUBMISSIONS 43-45
OUR CONCLUSIONS ON THE EXPERT AND OTHER EVIDENCE   46-66
JUDGMENT OF SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN (ZAHEERUDDIN)      67-72
PREVIOUS COUNTRY GUIDANCE, RELEVANT CASE LAW AND OUR GENERAL CONCLUSIONS
73-117
COUNTRY GUIDANCE 118-127
DETERMINATION OF THE APPEALS: GENERAL   128
DETERMINATION OF THE APPEALS - THE FIVE APPELLANTS       129-159

SCHEDULE I -EXPERT AND OTHER EVIDENCE   160-268
SCHEDULE II - SUBMISSIONS    269-284
SCHEDULE III - SUPPLEMENTARY SUBMISSIONS     285-288

APPENDICES:
      APPENDIX A - GLOSSARY       APPENDIX B -COPY OF ORDINANCE XX
      APPENDIX C - DOCUMENTATION PLACED IN EVIDENCE      APPENDIX D-EXTRACT
FROM "PERSECUTION OF AHMADIS IN PAKISTAN 2011"

INTRODUCTION

 1. The Ahmadiyya[1] sect was established in  19th  century  India  by  its
    eponymous founder Hadrat Mirza Ghulam Ahmad (1835-1908).  On his death,
    the institution of Khalifat was established providing for  the  members
    of the sect to elect a successor to carry on his work  and  to  be  the
    spiritual and worldly head of the community.   The current  Khalifa  is
    based in the United Kingdom where the headquarters were established  in
    1984.  The Ahmadis have had a presence  in  this  country  since  1913.
    There  are  Ahmadi  centres  worldwide  including  the  United  States,
    Mauritius, Germany, Canada, Russia and Japan.

 2. A core belief of the Ahmadi is that their founder is the Imam Mahdi and
    the promised Messiah.   His  advent  was  prophesied  by  Mohammed  the
    prophet.   This  is  a  heresy  to  mainstream  Sunni   Muslims   whose
    fundamental belief  is  that  God  no  longer  speaks  after  Mohammed,
    (Khatamun Nabiyyeen - literally, the last prophet).  The  Ahmadi  claim
    that although all Muslims are required to propagate  their  faith,  the
    Ahmadi are required to do so by personal example and  by  encouragement
    with no compulsion. They call this tabligh. The Ahmadi contend that for
    mainstream Muslims, the jihad (holy war) is an obligation to be pursued
    with force.  Mainstream Muslims regard the Ahmadi as non-believers  and
    non-Muslims.

 3. Following independence in 1947 when British  India  was  divided  along
    religious lines, Ahmadis established themselves in West Pakistan  later
    Pakistan.  Tensions have grown in Pakistan between the Ahmadi and  non-
    Ahmadi, particularly with  the  development  of  Khatme-e-Nubuwat  (the
    Association for the Safety of the Finality of Prophethood).  Their  aim
    is to exclude the Ahmadi sect from the "pale of Islam".   In  1953  the
    religious right in Pakistan declared Ahmadis as non-Muslims.   In  1973
    the Pakistan parliament amended the constitution, effectively declaring
    Ahmadis (together with a number of other minority religions[2])  to  be
    non-Muslims.  Legislation passed in 1984  limited  the  ways  in  which
    Ahmadis were able to express and propagate their faith (Ordinance XX of
    the Pakistan Penal Code (the  PPC))[3].  This  included  making  it  an
    offence to hold oneself out as a Muslim when not  entitled  to  do  so.
    Ahmadis are not permitted to refer  to  their  centres  of  worship  as
    mosques nor are those centres permitted to  demonstrate  their  Islamic
    heritage by, for example, calling the faithful to prayer or  portraying
    the Kalma (proclamation of faith) above the entrance to  their  mosque.
    In 1986 an amendment to the PPC (and the Code of Criminal Procedure)[4]
    made it an offence to make derogatory remarks that defile  the  Prophet
    Mohammed (the blasphemy law) punishable by death or  life  imprisonment
    and a fine.

 4. In the light of the evidence indicating an increase in the  nature  and
    extent  of  the  hostility  towards  Ahmadis  in   Pakistan   and   the
    implications of the Supreme Court decision in HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC  31
    as to the ability of Ahmadis to  practise  their  faith  freely,  these
    appeals have been identified as suitable  for  country  guidance.  This
    determination  is  therefore  intended  to  replace  existing   country
    guidance on the situation for Ahmadis in Pakistan  last  considered  by
    the Tribunal in MJ & ZM (Ahmadis  -  risk)  Pakistan  CG  [2008]  UKAIT
    00033, a case which looked at earlier guidance in IA & Others (Ahmadis:
    Rabwah) Pakistan CG [2007] UKAIT 00088.  We are  aware  the  Strasbourg
    Court  has  adjourned   the   Court's   proceedings   in   four   cases
    (applications  numbered  17085/12,  16668/12,  6071/12  and   70682/11)
    pending the out come in the appeals before us.

 5. The format of our determination is as follows.  We  set  out  the  case
    histories of each appellant and thereafter extracts from  the  Pakistan
    Penal Code to assist in understanding the evidence.  This  is  followed
    by an analysis of reports by the Ahmadiyya Association on incidents  in
    Pakistan.  Thereafter, we introduce  the  expert  and  other  witnesses
    whose evidence is detailed in Schedule I.  Because of its importance in
    these appeals we reproduce relevant  parts  of  the  UNHCR  Eligibility
    Guidelines for religious minorities in Pakistan of 14 May 2012 and  the
    US Department of State International Religious Freedom report for 2011.
     This is only two of a number of background  documents  we  have  taken
    into account, a full list of which is in  Annex  C.   There  follows  a
    brief summary  of  the  submissions,  full  details  of  which  are  in
    Schedules II  and  III.   The  supplementary  submissions  are  on  the
    decisions in RT (Zimbabwe) [2012]  UKSC  38  and  Federal  Republic  of
    Germany v Y (C-71/11) &  Z  (C-99/11).   After  that  we  set  out  our
    conclusions on the expert and other evidence before turning to previous
    country guidance and the case law and set out our general  conclusions.
    This is followed by new guidance.  A summary of  the  evidence  of  the
    four  appellants  who  gave  evidence  at  the  hearing  precedes   our
    determination on  each  appeal.   In  addition,  Annex  A  comprises  a
    glossary defining a number of the terms  used  in  this  determination.
    Annex B sets the constitutional changes as well as  the  blasphemy  and
    anti-Ahmadi legislation which are important matters in  these  appeals.
    Annex C lists the documentation before us.

 6. The hearing took place on dates in March, May and June  2012.   Matters
    of procedural note were few.  Against the background of our observation
    that we were not proposing to hear evidence about the facts as found by
    the First-tier Tribunal in each of the appeals before us, we heard  up-
    dating evidence from appellants MN,  NH,  JB,  and  HQ.   Ms  Jegarajah
    confirmed that ZN would not be called.

 7. The parties were aware of our approach as indicated in  the  directions
    previously issued.  These were based on the error of law  decisions  by
    the Upper Tribunal not to disturb the primary findings of fact  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  This was of evident disappointment  to  Mr  Malik
    who, particularly in respect of MN, wanted to cross-examine  him  about
    matters in his witness statements.  After referring him to the error of
    law decision  (referred  to  below),  and  upon  reflection,  Mr  Malik
    accepted the position.

 8. A complaint made early on was that the Secretary  of  State's  position
    was not apparent from a brief skeleton provided  by  Mr  Malik  and  he
    himself complained that he  had  had  only  limited  time  to  consider
    material provided by the appellants.  We took account of these  matters
    and no party indicated any residual difficulties in the way  the  cases
    developed over the several days they  were  heard.   We  reiterate  our
    thanks to all the parties for the contributions made in these appeals.



THE APPELLANTS' CASE HISTORIES

 9. Each appellant arrived in the United Kingdom with entry  clearance  for
    varying purposes, the earliest being HQ in 2007 and the most recent  SB
    in 2011.  Each was unsuccessful in  their  appeals  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the refusal of asylum.  We set out below a summary  of
    each appellant's circumstances.

MN

10. MN was born on 10 October 1966 and is from Lahore.  He and  his  family
    (a wife and four children) last arrived as visitors on 15 July 2010 and
    claimed asylum on 25 August.  The basis of his claim is  the  level  of
    harm encountered by Ahmadis and in particular the risks that  he  would
    face as the result of being a prominent Ahmadi businessman and  in  the
    light of the publicity he received as a result  of  being  one  of  the
    victims in the Lahore mosque attacks in 2010.  There  was  a  televised
    interview of him by the Interior Minister whilst MN was recovering from
    his injuries in hospital.  While accepting his religion, the  Secretary
    of State did not believe that he had been injured in the mosque attack.
     Although he may have spent some time in hospital, it was not  accepted
    it had been for injuries sustained in such an attack and/or that he had
    not been personally targeted as claimed.

11. In reaching his findings, First-tier Tribunal Judge I F Macdonald  took
    into account concessions made by the Presenting Officer which  included
    not only that the  appellant  had  been  present  in  the  mosque  when
    attacked on 28 May 2010 in Modeltown, Lahore but also that he  was  one
    of the wounded and was taken to Jinnah  Hospital  for  treatment.   The
    Presenting  Officer  further  accepted  that  whilst   receiving   that
    treatment he was visited on  29  May  2010  by  Mr  Rehman  Malik,  the
    Interior Minister, which was recorded in a TV broadcast.  It  was  also
    accepted that two days  later  the  hospital  itself  was  attacked  by
    extremists during which a number of people were killed.

12. The judge did not accept the claim that the attack on the hospital  had
    been carried out at the behest of the authorities because the appellant
    had dared to confront the Interior Minister.  He  saw  nothing  in  the
    brief two second video clip, which showed the  appellant  to  be  in  a
    hospital bed, to support his claim to have been identified  as  someone
    who should be "done away with".  He found it significant that  none  of
    the Ahmadi patients in the hospital was attacked  or  harmed  and  were
    clearly not therefore the targets.  He concluded  that  the  terrorists
    were prepared to attack  and  kill  any  member  of  the  community  in
    Pakistan including the authorities themselves who disagree  with  their
    fundamentalist views.  Whilst finding that the appellant  had  been  an
    active  member  of  his  Ahmadi  community,  to  whom  he  had  donated
    significant sums of money over the years, the judge assessed  that  his
    activities had been carried out within the community itself.  There was
    no evidence he had a profile outside that community or that his  Ahmadi
    background or activities were otherwise known.

13. The judge observed  that  there  was  no  evidence  the  appellant  had
    personally suffered any  significant  discrimination  since  the  anti-
    Ahmadi Ordinance in 1984; the appellant had been able to  complete  his
    education and find  employment  before  setting  up  his  own  business
    without any problem.  The extent of those problems had been confined to
    one incident in 1984, when he was threatened at  college,  and  another
    had occurred in  1997,  when  a  complaint  was  made  by  one  of  his
    subordinates to his boss  when  he  was  preaching  to  others  in  the
    department.  The appellant denied the charge and the  judge  understood
    from the evidence that this had been accepted.  He further  found  that
    at no time had the appellant openly "proselytised" his faith to  people
    generally in Pakistan but accepted that he had discreetly proselytised,
    only discussing his faith with people he believed he  could  trust  and
    according to his wife he would do so within the  confines  of  his  own
    house.  The judge  concluded  that  the  ill-treatment  by  individuals
    feared by the appellant was not of sufficient  severity  to  cross  the
    threshold of persecution and furthermore there  was  a  sufficiency  of
    protection available from the state.

14. Following a grant of permission to appeal,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Dawson sitting as a deputy judge of the Upper Tribunal  concluded  that
    the FtT judge had erred in failing to make a  finding  as  to  how  the
    appellant would conduct himself so far as his faith  was  concerned  on
    return and had failed to apply the principles  in  HJ  (Iran)  to  this
    exercise. Judge Dawson was however satisfied that  the  FtT  judge  had
    given sustainable reasons for his conclusion that the  appellant  would
    not be at risk if returned (based on his  findings  on  events  in  the
    past) and his findings on this aspect  were  to  stand.   Judge  Dawson
    indicated that the focus of the adjourned  hearing  would  be  how  the
    first appellant would conduct himself in practising  his  faith  as  an
    Ahmadi if returned  and  whether  any  modification  to  his  behaviour
    engaged the Refugee Convention.

NH

15. This appellant, who was born on 28 February 1969, is unmarried.  She is
    from Lahore and has been a regular visitor to the United Kingdom.   She
    last entered on 21 October 2010 and made her claim for asylum four days
    later based on an account of harm  attributable  to  her  Ahmadi  faith
    which she  feared  would  recur  were  she  to  return.   Although  the
    Secretary of State accepted the appellant's faith, her account of  what
    happened to her was rejected and her claim refused on 25 November 2010.
     On 4 November 2011, First-tier Tribunal Judge W  Grant  dismissed  her
    appeal because he did not believe her account of  difficulties.   On  a
    hypothetical basis, he considered that even if he were to find she  was
    in fear for her safety, protection was available.

16. Following a grant of permission to appeal, the  Upper  Tribunal  (Upper
    Tribunal Judge Jarvis and First-tier Tribunal Judge  Dawson)  took  the
    view that the judge erred in his decision  dated  4  November  2011  in
    failing to examine whether the appellant, as  an  acknowledged  Ahmadi,
    notwithstanding the rejection of the core account of her  claim,  would
    modify her behaviour on return to Pakistan.  Furthermore, were  she  to
    do so, it was necessary to ask the reason  why  in  the  light  of  the
    evidence which, it was argued, showed an  increased  risk  for  Ahmadis
    since promulgation of the Tribunal's decision in MJ & ZM.

17. The appeal was then adjourned for the decision to  be  re-made  on  the
    basis of the appellant being an undisputed Ahmadi who would  be  living
    in Lahore in a property owned by her  family  and  who  had  previously
    proselytised by having handed out books to  friends  whom  she  thought
    might be interested and who she had invited to watch an Ahmadi  channel
    on her television at home, such  activities  in  the  past  not  having
    resulted in any adverse attention.  It was observed that there had been
    no evidence before the judge of any particular threats directed to  the
    appellant personally in the context of her claim that she had not  been
    threatened prior to 28 May 2010 "other than as a victim of the sort  of
    abuse directed at Ahmadis".

ZN

18. This appellant was born on 12 January 1982 and arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom with entry clearance as a Tier 4 Migrant under the points-based
    system on 29 December 2010 accompanied by  her  husband  and  daughter.
    She claimed asylum on  4  January  2011  with  her  family  members  as
    dependants.  She is from Lahore where she  qualified  as  a  doctor  of
    homeopathy in 2002.  She owned  a  private  clinic  where  her  husband
    worked as a receptionist.  The Secretary of State accepted that she  is
    an Ahmadi by birth but rejected the  truthfulness  of  her  account  of
    having been   targeted  by  Khatme-e-Nabuwat  and  in  the  alternative
    asserted that  internal  flight  was  available  to  either  Rabwah  or
    Karachi.  A decision was made to remove her as an illegal entrant on  1
    February 2011.

19. First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Bagral  disbelieved  the  account  of  the
    appellant and her husband, which had included a  claim  that  they  had
    preached to patients and that he had been injured during the attack  on
    the mosque in Lahore on 28 May 2010.  The  judge  concluded  that  this
    appellant did not have a well-founded fear of persecution in  her  home
    area of Lahore.  Following the grant of permission to appeal, the Upper
    Tribunal (Upper Tribunal Judges Storey and Kebede)  although  satisfied
    that the judge's adverse credibility findings were sound,  decided  the
    First-tier Tribunal judge had materially erred in law on the  basis  by
    failing in her reasoning to refer to current country  information  when
    concluding that she should  continue  to  apply  the  existing  country
    guidance in MJ & ZM, although she had noted the further  evidence  when
    summarising the parties' submissions.  As with the other appeals before
    us, the hearing was adjourned for the decision to be re-made.

SB

20. This appellant was born on 7 January 1971 and was widowed in 1991.  She
    is from Sialkot and had previously lived in Daska.  She has  a  son  in
    the United Kingdom who is a student and also has a  brother  living  in
    this country.  On her arrival in the United Kingdom on 20  March  2011,
    with entry clearance to undertake an ACCA course,  she  explained  that
    she had no intention of following the course and claimed  asylum.   The
    Secretary of State accepted that she is an Ahmadi and that she had been
    employed  by  the  Pakistani  government  as  a  senior  female  health
    technician.  In essence, the basis of the appellant's  claim  was  that
    she had been targeted by Khatme-e-Nubuwat because of positions she  had
    held in the Ahmadi community and because she had been a preacher of the
    faith.  The Secretary of State did not accept the  appellant  had  held
    the position she claimed,  nor  was  it  accepted  that  she  had  been
    preaching at gatherings.  It was not accepted  that  she  had  received
    threatening telephone calls or that the police had visited her home  in
    December 2010 informing her that a  complaint  had  been  made  against
    preaching the faith to wives of two  men  and  so  she  was  refused  a
    variation of leave to remain on 12 April 2011.

21. First-tier Tribunal Judge Widdup accepted the  appellant  had  preached
    over the preceding twelve years, but not to the extent she had claimed.
     He too did not  accept  that  she  had  held  posts  with  the  Ahmadi
    Association as claimed which would have made  her  high  profile.   Her
    preaching had been confined to Ahmadis and those who  were  trusted  by
    her.  He dismissed the appeal.

22. After permission to appeal  was  granted,  the  Upper  Tribunal  (Upper
    Tribunal Judges Goldstein  and  Perkins),  found  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had erred in law for reasons given in their decision dated  18
    November 2011.  Whilst upholding the  judge's  findings  of  fact,  the
    panel nevertheless found the judge had erred in law by failing to apply
    the principles of HJ (Iran) in accordance with the guidance given in NT
    (Ahmadi - HJ (Iran)) Pakistan [2011] UKUT 277 (IAC).

HQ

23. This appellant was born on 1  March  1968.   Although  originally  from
    Pakistan, between January 2005 and May 2007  he  had  been  living  and
    working in the United Arab Emirates.  Whilst he was in the United  Arab
    Emirates, the appellant's wife and children had remained  in  Pakistan.
    The appellant's account included a claim that on his final return  from
    the United Arab Emirates in May 2007 he had started a garment  business
    in Rabwah and had rented a place six miles away.  He left Pakistan on 2
    October 2007 and arrived in the United Kingdom the following  day.   He
    claimed asylum two days later.  The Secretary  of  State  accepted  the
    appellant is an Ahmadi.  It was not accepted that the appellant  was  a
    nurse, or that he had worked in a hospital, and furthermore it was  not
    accepted that he had been threatened by a  mullah  from  the  Khatme-e-
    Nabuwat or that he had left Pakistan for the Emirates due to a fear  of
    persecution.  It appears the respondent did not accept the  threats  it
    is said they had received.  As to events in 2007, it was  not  accepted
    that the appellant had preached to an individual who later converted to
    the Ahmadi faith, nor that this individual  had  subsequently  informed
    the mullahs he had become an Ahmadi and that the appellant had preached
    to him.  Additionally, it was  not  accepted  that  the  appellant  had
    preached to another individual which had resulted  in  similar  adverse
    attention.  The rejection of  the  claim  led  to  a  decision  by  the
    respondent dated 23 December 2009 to remove him as an illegal entrant.

24. First-tier Tribunal Judge S Taylor disbelieved the appellant's  account
    of harm in Pakistan and also his account of harm  in  the  United  Arab
    Emirates, another limb to his claim.  She accepted  the  appellant  was
    currently involved in the UK Ahmadi community  and  would  wish  to  be
    fully involved in the practice  of  his  religion.   But  she  did  not
    consider it credible that he would continue to risk his life  and  that
    of his family and be separated from his family by openly proselytising.
     After permission to appeal was  granted,  the  Upper  Tribunal  (Upper
    Tribunal Judges P Lane and Kopieczek) found  an  error  of  law  on  HJ
    (Iran) grounds.  The appellant's family remains in Pakistan.

25. The evidence we heard  from  four  of  the  above  appellants  and  our
    conclusions on it are  set  out  in  paragraphs  129  to  159  of  this
    determination.

THE PAKISTAN PENAL CODE

26. Certain provisions of the penal code are  relevant  to  the  issues  in
    these appeals since they relate to the way in which Ahmadis are able to
    practise their faith.  We set them out[5]:

         "298B. Misuse of epithets, descriptions and titles, etc.,  reserved
         for certain holy personages or places.
         (1)     Any person of the Quadiani group or the Lahori  group  (who
         call themselves Ahmadis' or by any other name) who by words, either
         spoken or written, or by visible representation;
             (a) refers to, or addresses, any person, other than  a  Caliph
             or companion of the  Holy  Prophet  Muhammad  (peace  be  upon
             him),as    'Ameerul     Mumineen',     'Khalifa-tui-Mumineen',
             'Khalifatul-Muslimeen', 'Sahaabi' or 'Razi Allah Anho'
             (b) refers to, or addresses, any person, other than a wife  of
             the Holy Prophet Muhammad  (peace  be  upon  him)  as  'Ummul-
             Mumineen'
             (c) refers to, or addresses, any person, other than  a  member
             of the family (Ahl-e-Bait) of the Holy Prophet Muhammad (peace
             be upon him), as 'Ahl-e-Bait'; or
             (d) refers to, or names, or calls, his  place  of  worship  as
             'Masjid';
         shall be punished with imprisonment of  either  description  for  a
         term which may extend to three years and shall also  be  liable  to
         fine.
         (2)     Any person of the Quadiani group or Lahori group (who  call
         themselves Ahmadis or by any  other  name)  who  by  words,  either
         spoken or written, or by visible representation, refers to the mode
         or form of call to prayers followed  by  his  faith  as  'Azan'  or
         recites Azan as  used  by  the  Muslims,  shall  be  punished  with
         imprisonment of either description for a term which may  extend  to
         three years, and shall also be liable to fine.
         (3) 298C.     Person of Quadiani  group  etc.,  calling  himself  a
         Muslim or preaching or propagating his faith.

         Any person of the Quadiani group or  the  Lahori  group  (who  call
         themselves 'Ahmadis' or  by  any  other  name),  who,  directly  or
         indirectly, poses himself as Muslim, or calls, or  refers  to,  his
         faith as Islam, or preaches or propagates  his  faith,  or  invites
         others to accept his faith, by words, either spoken or written,  or
         by visible representations, or in any  manner  whatsoever  outrages
         the  religious  feelings  of  Muslims,  shall  be   punished   with
         imprisonment of either description for a term which may  extend  to
         three years and shall also be liable to fine."


         295-C.   Use of derogatory remarks, etc. in  respect  of  the  Holy
         Prophet.
         Whoever  by  words,  either  spoken  or  written,  or  by   visible
         representation, or by any  imputation,  innuendo,  or  insinuation,
         directly or indirectly, defiles the sacred name of the Holy Prophet
         Muhammad (peace be upon him)  shall  be  punished  with  death,  or
         imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine."

27. Consistent with much of the evidence, where we refer to the anti-Ahmadi
    laws, it is with reference to sections 298B and  298C.   The  blasphemy
    law is a reference to section 295C.  The provisions at  298B  and  298C
    are also referred to as Ordinance XX which appears in  places  in  this
    determination.

REPORTS BY THE AHMADIYYA COMMUNITY OF INCIDENTS OF HARM

28. We have been provided by the appellants with  a  spreadsheet  recording
    reports of incidents and problems  encountered  by  Ahmadi  individuals
    between 25 June 2006 and 1 March 2012.  The  sources  include  extracts
    from www.thepersecution.org and www.persecutionofahmadis.org, which are
    websites maintained by the Ahmadiyya Association, and in addition  from
    newspaper reports and from the Asia Human Rights Commission.  Focussing
    on 2012 and 2011 (and in summary):

      i) In March 2012 an 80 year old lawyer is reported to have  been  shot
         dead and his grandson injured.  Complying with demands from locals,
         the police barred Ahmadis from entering their "worship  centre"  in
         Satellite Town Rawalpindi.  On 7 March, an  Ahmadi  individual  was
         stopped by unknown assailants who fired on him.  He died.

     ii) On 25 February hundreds of  locals  assembled  outside  the  Ahmadi
         place of worship in Rawalpindi demanding the removal of  barricades
         and closed circuit television.  In the same month, the  Lahore  Bar
         Association banned (Ahmadi-owned) Shezan  drinks  from  subordinate
         court complexes.  The source of all these incidents is  the  press,
         largely the Express Tribune.

    (ii)   Seven incidents are reported to have occurred  in  January  2012
         ranging from a killing of an individual by unknown persons riding a
         motorcycles, the kidnapping of an individual  going  to  work,  the
         firing of an Ahmadi schoolteacher  as  well  as  expulsion  of  his
         children, a refusal  to  allow  Ahmadis  to  undertake  the  burial
         formalities of a convert, a provocative pamphlet against an  Ahmadi
         academy and the removal by a crowd  of  50  men  accompanied  by  a
         policeman of Islamic titles  fixed  to  an  individual's  house  in
         Lahore.

    (iii)  December 2011 includes reports of a killing of a mother of three
         by a group in the context of individuals wanting to take  over  the
         Ahmadi  residential  area.   At  a   Khatme-e-Nabuwat   conference,
         offensive language was used against the founder  of  the  Ahmadiyya
         community.  20 Ahmadi  graves  were  desecrated.  The  reports  are
         otherwise of low level harassment and discrimination.

    (iv)   In November 2011 nine incidents are reported  variously  in  the
         press and on the websites, including the  registration  of  a  case
         against the father of a student for describing his son as a Muslim.
          That son had  been  beaten  up  for  allegedly  making  derogatory
         remarks about the Prophet.  An individual  was  hospitalised  after
         being shot at on return from prayers and a student  was  beaten  up
         for preaching in his hostel.  The report is otherwise of low  level
         incidents of discrimination.

    (v)    Twenty incidents are reported to have occurred in October  2011,
         including the abduction of a senior surgeon and  his  11  year  old
         son, and a number of expulsions of  medical  students  from  Punjab
         Medical College attributed to extremist religious leaders spreading
         anti-Ahmadiyya awareness in the  area.   There  was  also  a  fatal
         shooting of a schoolteacher following the registration  of  an  FIR
         against him due to his faith.  Dr M,  ex-President  of  the  Ahmadi
         community in Kotli, with his son,  were  kidnapped  when  returning
         home from a family dinner.  A  mullah  demanded  that  minarets  be
         removed from the Ahmadi mosque and  that  Ahmadis  be  banned  from
         burial in the common graveyard.

    (vi)   There was an attempted kidnap of a married couple, a doctor  and
         his wife in September 2011  amongst  the  ten  incidents  reported.
         These include the murder of a technician  in  Faisalabad.   Another
         individual in Rachna Town was fired on and hospitalised,  remaining
         in a critical condition.  Following protests staged by clerics, the
         municipal administration in Jannat Wala razed to the ground  a  new
         Ahmadi place of worship which was under construction.

    vii) In August 2011,  five  incidents  were  reported,  including  death
         threats to the proprietor of a hairdressing shop during a visit  by
         the banned group Lashkre Taiba and a doctor's name appearing on  an
         Ahmadi hit-list produced by extremists  in  Faisalabad.   Otherwise
         the incidents were of low level harassment and discrimination.

   viii) In July 2011, a lawyer was shot by  an  unidentified  assailant  in
         Nawabshah and in Sialkot, an individual was kidnapped by  militants
         and held captive.  On release, he  is  reported  to  have  fled  to
         Thailand where he was arrested and sent to  a  detention  cell  for
         seven months. A judge was transferred to Bahawalpur, after which he
         received threats from Tahrik-e-Taliban.

    (viii)  June  2011  saw  twelve  incidents,  some  involving  violence,
         including the firing of shots at a clinic in Mardan: the doctor and
         his brother who were affected escaped unharmed and are reported  to
         have fired back. Other incidents are largely of discrimination  and
         abuse as well as harassment.

    (ix)   In April 2011, there were two reports of serious threats against
         Ahmadis and also an individual was arrested in  Mugalpura  when  he
         was found to be wandering outside an Ahmadi  mosque  with  a  fully
         loaded pistol.  Demands were made for the removal of the  principal
         of a law college who had recited the Kalma during his speech.

    (x)    March 2011 saw the murder in Sanghar of an individual, Mr Z,  by
         two unknown assailants, on his return home after Friday prayers.  A
         Mr L, a farmer, was also returning  home  in  Rabwah  when  he  was
         intercepted by the son of a mullah.  That son's father arrived  and
         attacked the farmer with an axe.  A contingent  of  nine  policemen
         are reported to have gone to a village in  Faisalabad  and  sprayed
         black paint on Quranic verses written on tombstones.  Otherwise the
         remaining incidents of the six  reported  were  of  harassment  and
         discrimination.

    (xi)   Nine incidents  were  reported  in  February  2011.   These  are
         largely reports  of  threats,  harassment  and  discrimination  but
         include a farmer in Badin encountering troubles when his crops were
         set on fire and two truckloads of his cotton seized with the demand
         of half a million rupees in ransom.  The police  were  reported  to
         have arrested someone but further detail is  not  provided  in  the
         spreadsheet.

    (xii)  In January 2011,  six  incidents  were  reported  including  the
         arrest in Karachi of a student who  was  charged  under  Pakistan's
         blasphemy law.  There is a report of mullahs  in  District  Sahiwal
         routinely demanding the removal of the Kalma  from  Ahmadi  mosques
         and Ahmadis in Sialkot  being  stopped  from  reconstructing  their
         mosque by the police at the request of a local mullah.

29. A similar range of incidents is reported in earlier years  although  we
    observe nothing in December or October 2010.

30. The 'objective bundle' provided  by  the  appellants  contains  varying
    reports from newspaper and other sources as well  as  NGO  and  country
    reports.  This includes the Ahmadiyya community's own  report  entitled
    "Persecution of Ahmadis in Pakistan during the year  2011".   It  is  a
    lengthy document containing observations on a number of incidents  that
    have occurred[6].  At Appendix C of this determination we have set  out
    a summary of police  cases  registered  on  religious  grounds  against
    Ahmadis during 2011 as appears in the report.

31. The report also provides an analysis of a number of  murders,  assaults
    and  "attempts"  in  2011  that  are  said  to  have  been  religiously
    motivated, fleshing out the more  serious  incidents  reported  in  the
    spreadsheet from the websites described above in  [28].   Six  killings
    are analysed and a similar detailed analysis  of  some  eighteen  other
    incidents,  largely  serious.  There  is  reference  to  police  taking
    enforcement action, including a "prompt and fruitful" response  to  the
    attack on Dr Rafiq Ahmed and his brother in Mardan  on  June  15  2011,
    which resulted in their attackers being arrested from the residence  of
    a mullah who had provided them with protection.  On 29 June, a judge is
    said to have released the assailants on bail.  They were re-arrested in
    another case, in which  a  policeman  had  been  killed  a  few  months
    earlier, but it was later learned the two were again  released  by  the
    court.  The police registered a criminal case following the assault  on
    an Ahmadi farmer and his son who was intercepted by a mullah in  Rabwah
    on 12 March 2011 with violence.

32. With reference to the murder of the Ahmadi woman on 5 December 2011  in
    District Layyah Chobara, a police sub-inspector  is  reported  to  have
    helped attackers flee.  Reference is made to an incident in Baghbanpura
    District, Lahore on 31 August 2011 when a Mr Rehman, an Ahmadi, went to
    a restaurant with eight non-Ahmadi friends.  A religious zealot,  Tuti,
    created disorder in the restaurant and then in the street  and  managed
    to assemble a large number of anti-Ahmadi sympathisers.  When Mr Rehman
    and his friends decided to leave the three of them were held and beaten
    up until the police arrived and rescued  them.   The  mullahs  insisted
    that Mr Rehman should be charged with blasphemy.  His friends  did  not
    agree to accuse him of proselytising.  Efforts for  reconciliation  are
    reported to have gone on until morning when the police obtained a peace
    deal from the two parties.

33. As to the student who was beaten  up  by  a  gang  of  students  on  23
    November 2011, the dispute that arose led  to  a  charge  of  blasphemy
    against him and his father and brother were also booked  under  section
    298C of the Penal Code to placate the extremist mullahs.

INTRODUCTION TO THE EXPERT AND OTHER WITNESSES

34. We heard evidence from four expert witnesses, two members of the Ahmadi
    faith and in addition  a  witness   who  has  been  granted  asylum  as
    follows:

    i.     Dr W who is a Doctor of Philosophy from the University of Punjab
         and a historian.  He holds a post at  the  Centre  of  South  Asian
         Studies and he is also a fellow at a College at the  University  of
         Cambridge. He was anonymised with the consent of the respondent.

    ii.    Imam Rashed was born in Qadian, India. Since 1983  he  has  been
         stationed in London  as  Imam  of  the  London  Ahmadi  Mosque  and
         missionary  in  charge,   planning   and   supervising   missionary
         activities in England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland.

    iii.   Dr Sarah Ansari, who is a Reader in the history of South Asia at
         the Department of History, Royal Holloway, University of London.

    iv.    Dr Zahida Hamid, a national of Pakistan who is a medical  doctor
         and who has been granted asylum.

    v.     Dr Iftikhar Ayaz who is a senior  member  of  the  UK  Ahmadiyya
         Muslim Association and was National President of the UK Chapter.

    vi.    Dr Martin Lau, a barrister and  a  Reader  in  Law  at  the  law
         department  of  the  School  of  Oriental  and   African   Studies,
         University of London where he teaches courses on South Asian law at
         postgraduate and undergraduate level.

    vii.   Ms Asma Jahangir, President of the Supreme Court Bar Association
         of Pakistan. In 2004, she  was  appointed  United  Nations  Special
         Rapporteur on Freedom of Religion or Belief of the Council of Human
         Rights.

35. Their evidence is  set  out  in  Schedule  I:  "The  Expert  and  other
    Evidence." Our conclusions on their evidence are set out below at [46].

UNHCR ELIGIBILITY GUIDELINES  FOR  ASSESSING  THE  INTERNATIONAL  PROTECTION
NEEDS OF MEMBERS OF RELIGIOUS MINORITIES FROM PAKISTAN DATED 14 MAY 2012

36. These guidelines provide helpful background material. They are  current
    and as will become clear later, they have  had  an  important  role  in
    shaping our thinking.  To summarise, key points include (using in  part
    the actual text from the document) :

      a. The population of Pakistan is stated to  be  over  187  million  of
         which 95% profess to be Muslim.  75% are Sunni and  20%  are  Shia.
         The remaining 5 % includes 1.85% Hindus, 1.59% Christians and 0.22%
         Ahmadis, with 0.7% belonging to other religious minorities[7].

      b. Since September 2008 under  the  lead  of  the  late  Minister  for
         Minorities  Affairs,  Shahbaz  Bhatti,  the  government  has  taken
         positive steps towards ensuring  religious  freedom  and  tolerance
         including  the  official  celebration  of  the  festivals  of   ten
         religious minorities, the introduction of a  5%  quota  in  federal
         employment  for   members   of   religious   minorities   and   the
         establishment of a 24 hour  hotline  to  report  acts  of  violence
         against religious groups.  There is also reference  to  a  National
         Commission for Minorities  which  will  review  laws  and  policies
         concerning  minorities  as  well  as  investigate  allegations   of
         discrimination and abuse.  No indication is  given,  however,  when
         this will be established and there is nothing to suggest  that  the
         positive steps apply to Ahmadis

      c. The Pakistan legal system is based on English law and Islamic  law.
         The Federal Sharia't Court has the power to examine  and  determine
         whether a law is repugnant to the injunction of Islam as well as  a
         power to review decisions by criminal courts and decide  on  Hudood
         cases.[8]  Decisions of the Federal Sharia't Court are  binding  on
         the lower courts but are subject to review of  the  Supreme  Court.
         Sharia't law was imposed in designated parts  of  the  provincially
         administered tribal areas where  judges  are  assisted  by  Islamic
         scholars.  There is reference to lower courts remaining plagued  by
         endemic corruption  and  to  judges  being  said  to  be  prone  to
         intimidation by local officials, powerful individuals  and  Islamic
         extremists.  A heavy backlog of cases can result  in  lengthy  pre-
         trial  detention.   According  to  a  footnote,  that  backlog   is
         estimated to be some 1.5 million cases.

      d. A First Information Report (FIR), the legal basis for all  arrests,
         can be issued by the police at the request of a complainant upon  a
         reasonable proof  that  a  crime  has  been  committed  and  allows
         detention of a suspect for 24 hours.  The report observes  that  in
         principle, only a magistrate can extend such  a  detention  for  an
         additional fourteen days although it is reported  that  the  police
         routinely  hold  suspects  without  charge  until  a  detention  is
         challenged before the courts.  Trials  are  reported  to  routinely
         start six months after the filing of charges despite the fact  that
         by law someone must appear before a court within 30 days of arrest.
          Prisons  are  reported  to  be  overcrowded  and  conditions  were
         generally poor.

      e. Criminalisation of blasphemy (and in particular section 295C  under
         the Criminal Law (Amendment) Act 1986 which  provides  that  anyone
         who  "by  words,  either  spoken  or   written,   or   by   visible
         representation, or by  any  imputation,  innuendo  or  insinuation,
         directly or indirectly, defiles the sacred name of the holy prophet
         Mohammed") is liable on  conviction  to  the  death  penalty,  life
         imprisonment  or  a  fine.   Since  1991,  such  offences  carry  a
         mandatory capital punishment, however we have seen  no  reports  of
         any death sentence being carried out.

      f.  Attempts  by  successive  governments  to  reform  or  repeal  the
         blasphemy  laws  have  failed  under  the  pressure  of   hard-line
         religious groups.  The  Constitution  of  Pakistan  guarantees  the
         rights of religious minorities but it  effectively  segregates  the
         country's citizens on the basis of religion.

      g. Bail is not generally granted in blasphemy  cases  on  the  grounds
         that persons facing the death penalty are likely to abscond.   Such
         prosecutions are reported to be notoriously slow and suspects often
         ultimately spend lengthy periods in prison.

      h. The effect of anti-Ahmadi laws (Ordinance number XX)  is  described
         in these terms:

             "The overall effect of sections 298B and 298C is to render  it
             illegal for Ahmadis to

             (i)       refer to themselves as Muslims  or  refer  to  their
                  founder as a Prophet;

             (ii)      refer to their places of worship as mosques;

             (iii)     use the traditional Muslim form of greeting;

             (iv)      use the Muslim call to prayer, known as the azhan;

             (v) use the Qur'an or observe Islamic rites; and

             (vi)      preach or 'propagate' the Ahmadi faith."

37. As is further observed in the Guidelines:

         "Alongside the blasphemy provisions, section 298B and 298C  of  the
         Penal Code impose severe limitations on the exercise of the  Ahmadi
         faith.   These  restrictions,  which  encompass  a  prohibition  to
         proselytise, were found to be incompatible with international human
         rights  law  (by  the  UN   Sub   Commission   on   Prevention   of
         Discrimination and Protection of Minorities) in 1985 (including the
         right to freedom of thought, expression,  conscience  and  religion
         and the right of religious minorities to profess and practise their
         own religion).   This  has  led  many  human  rights  observers  to
         question whether sections 298B and 298C can  be  justified  on  the
         ground of public order or safety.  Furthermore,  the  vagueness  of
         language reportedly opens 298B and 298C to the same type  of  abuse
         as the blasphemy laws."

38. Specifically in respect of Ahmadis, the Guidelines state that there  is
    a well-documented history of violence and discrimination against  them.
    A conservatively estimated population of 600,000 live in  Pakistan  and
    they represent  over  97%  of  the  population  in  Rabwah.   There  is
    reference to a finding by the National Commission of Justice and  Peace
    Human Rights Organisation sponsored by the Catholic Church of  Pakistan
    that at least 1,060 people, including 456 Ahmadis  were  charged  under
    blasphemy laws between 1986 and  2010.   The  Guidelines  refer  to  67
    Ahmadis reportedly charged with blasphemy in 2010 and 57 in 2009.  Only
    two new cases of blasphemy offences have been reported against  Ahmadis
    in 2011 but  there  is  also  reference  to  an  upsurge  in  blasphemy
    allegations, including those against  Ahmadis  reported  following  the
    high profile assassination  of  Governor  Taseer  and  Minister  Bhatti
    earlier in 2011.  There is reference also to reports of members of  the
    Ahmadi  community  often  being  charged  with  religious  offences  on
    spurious grounds or to settle personal disputes, the source  being  the
    UK Parliament, House of Commons All Party Group.

39.  Violence  against  Ahmadis  has  reportedly  increased  with  specific
    reference to the mosque attacks in May 2010.   There  are  difficulties
    for Ahmadis who marry outside their faith and  the  Guidelines  observe
    there is little or no  protection  reportedly  afforded  by  the  state
    authorities  with  crimes  and  acts  of  violence  against  them   not
    consistently investigated due to intimidation tactics and pressure from
    Islamic  fundamentalist  groups.   Perpetrators  of  such  crimes   are
    reportedly rarely brought to justice.

40. The concluding paragraphs from page 23 are in these terms:

         "Anti-Ahmadi sentiment is reportedly tolerated by the  authorities.
         For example, the Punjab Government allowed Muslim religious leaders
         to hold an anti-Ahmadi conference in Rabwah on 7 September 2008, on
         the anniversary of  the  constitutional  amendment  which  declared
         Ahmadis  to  be  non-Muslim.   Rallies  and   campaigns   promoting
         intolerance and discrimination  against  Ahmadis,  whether  through
         traditional media, or distribution of pamphlets,  use  of  stickers
         and wall graffiti, are reported across the  country.   It  is  also
         reported that  hate  speech  and  incitement  to  violence  against
         Ahmadis, including by Islamic scholars,  remain  largely  unchecked
         and/or unpunished by the authorities.

         Areas  where  discrimination  against  the  Ahmadi   community   is
         institutionalized reportedly  include  issuance  of  passports  and
         national  identity  cards,  voting,  property  rights,  access   to
         education and freedom of expression and press.

         The  Government  designates  religious  affiliation   on   national
         identity cards and passports, and requests religious information in
         national  identity  card  applications.  Designation  as   'Muslim'
         requires a written denunciation of the founder of the Ahmadi  faith
         as a false prophet.  This requirement has a  particularly  negative
         impact on Ahmadis and effectively prevents them from  participating
         in the hajj or other Islamic  pilgrimages.   It  also  affects  the
         distribution of cash assistance for internally  displaced  Ahmadis.
         A Government initiative to  abolish  the  religious  identification
         column  in  Pakistani  passports  was  abandoned  in  March   2005,
         allegedly in response to pressure from Islamist religious  parties.
         Pakistani citizens are also required to take an oath denouncing the
         founder of the Ahmadi movement in order to be listed as 'Muslim' on
         the electoral roll.  Ahmadis, who refuse to disavow their claim  to
         being   Muslim,   are   thus   effectively   disenfranchised   from
         participating in elections.  It is further reported that,  pursuant
         to a scheme to be introduced by the Punjab provincial  authorities,
         Ahmadis may be required to identify themselves as 'Qadiani' on  the
         national identification cards, which, if implemented, may put  them
         at greater risk of being targeted.

         The Constitution prohibits discrimination on religious grounds with
         regard  to  admission  to  State-funded  educational  institutions.
         Prospective  students  must,  however,  declare   their   religious
         affiliation on the application form.  Those who identify themselves
         as Muslim must declare in writing that they believe in the finality
         of  the  Prophethood,  a  requirement  that  singles  out  Ahmadis.
         Furthermore, it is reported that Ahmadis, alongside other religious
         minorities, continue to face discrimination  in  access  to  higher
         education.  Ahmadis also appear to face discriminatory practices in
         public sector employment.  It  is  reported  that  some  Government
         departments refuse to hire or retain Ahmadis, who are also unlikely
         to be promoted in senior positions within the civil service.

         Although pursuant to section 298B(1) of the Penal Code Ahmadis  are
         forbidden from calling their places of worship mosques,  no  formal
         restrictions on establishing places of worship exist.  In practice,
         however, local authorities often refuse Ahmadis permission to build
         places  of  worship,  and  existing  ones  are  at  times   closed,
         destroyed, desecrated  or  illegally  expropriated.   In  addition,
         Ahmadis have been barred  from  holding  public  conferences  since
         1983.  Their publications are banned  from  public  sale,  and  the
         publishing  houses  are  sometimes  closed  down  and  their  staff
         harassed.

         Denial of shelter and/or relief aid to forcibly  displaced  members
         of the Ahmadi community from  Dera  Ghazi  Khan,  Muzaffargarh  and
         Rajanpur districts in the context of massive floods in South Punjab
         in August 2010 was also reported.

         The existence of laws which are discriminatory and/or otherwise  in
         breach of international human rights standards does not, of itself,
         amount to persecution within the meaning of the 1951 Convention and
         its 1967 Protocol.  An assessment  of  the  implementation  of  the
         blasphemy, anti-Ahmadi  and  other  discriminatory  provisions  and
         their  effect  is  critical  to   establishing   persecution.    In
         determining whether restrictions on the right to freedom of  belief
         and religion rise to the level of persecution, the breadth  of  the
         restrictions and the severity of the punishments incurred  must  be
         considered.  The importance or centrality of  the  practice  within
         the  religion  and/or  to  the  individual  concerned  is   equally
         relevant.

         In light of the foregoing, UNHCR  considers  that  members  of  the
         Ahmadi community, including those  targeted  by  Islamic  extremist
         elements or charged with criminal offences under the  blasphemy  or
         anti-Ahmadi provisions, are likely to be in need  of  international
         refugee protection on account of their religion, depending  on  the
         individual circumstances of the case."

THE US DEPARTMENT OF STATE, INTERNATIONAL RELIGIOUS FREEDOM REPORT FOR 2011

41. On 30 July 2011 the  United  States  Department  of  State,  Bureau  of
    Democracy, Human Rights and Labor  released  its  annual  International
    Religious Freedom Report for 2011.

42. The following key points emerge in the report ( using the  actual  text
    in large part) :

    (i)    Religious parties oppose  any  amendments  to  the  constitution
         affecting its Islamic clauses,  especially  the  ones  relating  to
         Ahmadis.

    Section II, Status of Government Respect for Religious Freedom

    Legal/Policy Framework

    (ii)   In cases  in  which  a  minority  group  claimed  its  religious
         feelings were insulted, the blasphemy laws are rarely enforced, and
         cases are rarely brought to the legal system.  A 2005 law  requires
         that a senior  police  officer  investigate  any  blasphemy  charge
         before a complaint is filed.

    (iii)  A citizen must have a national identity  card  to  vote.   Those
         wishing to be listed as Muslims must swear their  belief  that  the
         Prophet Muhammad is the final prophet, and denounce  the  Ahmadiyya
         movement's founder as a false prophet and  his  followers  as  non-
         Muslims.  This provision  prevents  Ahmadis  from  obtaining  legal
         documents and puts pressure on members of  the  community  to  deny
         their beliefs in order to enjoy citizenship rights,  including  the
         right to vote.  Many Ahmadis are  thus  effectively  excluded  from
         taking part in elections.

    (iv)    There  is  no  official  restriction  on  the  construction  of
         Ahmadiyya places of worship; however Ahmadis are forbidden to  call
         them mosques.  The government also has shut down Ahmadi  gatherings
         if neighbours report hearing the citation of Quranic verses.

    (v)     The  previous  Federal  Ministry  for  Minorities   which   was
         established in 2008 was dissolved in June  2011.   In  August,  the
         government created the Ministry of National Harmony, a stand alone,
         cabinet level body responsible for  the  oversight  of  policy  and
         legislation regarding interfaith harmony, international  agreements
         relating  to  religious  freedom  and   interfaith   harmony,   and
         commitments with respect to all religious communities.

    (vi)   The Constitution specifically prohibits discriminatory admission
         to  any  governmental  educational  institution  solely  based   on
         religious  affiliation,  however  students   must   declare   their
         religious affiliation on application forms, a requirement also  for
         private educational institutions including universities.   Students
         who identify themselves as Muslim must declare in writing that they
         believe the Prophet Muhammad is the final prophet, another  measure
         that singles out Ahmadis.

    (vii)   The  government  does  not  restrict  religious  publishing  in
         general; however,  the  sale  of  Ahmadi  religious  literature  is
         banned.

    (viii) Missionaries (except Ahmadis) are permitted  to  proselytise  as
         long as there is no preaching against Islam  and  the  missionaries
         acknowledge that they are not Muslim.

    (ix)   There are reserve seats for religious minority members  in  both
         the National and Provincial Assemblies.

    Government Practices

    (x)    The government generally  enforced  existing  legal  and  policy
         restrictions on religious freedom particularly on Ahmadis.   Abuses
         under the blasphemy and other discriminatory  laws,  such  as  "the
         anti-Ahmadi laws", continued.  The government did not take adequate
         measures to prevent these incidents or undertake reform measures to
         prevent the abuse of the laws.  The killing  of  those  accused  of
         blasphemy or those publicly  criticising  the  blasphemy  laws  and
         calling for their reform continue throughout the year.

    (xi)   The killing of Ahmadis for  their  religious  beliefs  continued
         throughout the year.  Non-governmental organisations  have  alleged
         that  the  anti-Ahmadi  sections  of  the  penal  code  and   other
         government policies fostered  intolerance  against  this  community
         and, together with a lack of police action, created  a  culture  of
         impunity.  According to a spokesman for  the  Ahmadiyya  community,
         since the promulgation of anti-Ahmadi laws  in  1984,  207  Ahmadis
         have been killed on religious grounds.  During the year,  according
         to Ahmadiyya  leaders,  five  Ahmadis  were  murdered  in  targeted
         killings because of their faith.  Authorities did not arrest anyone
         for the murders by the year's end.

    (xii)  Punjab Chief Minister, the  President  and  the  Prime  Minister
         criticised  the  terrorist  attacks  on  the  two  separate  Ahmadi
         congregations on 28 May 2010 and ordered an immediate enquiry.  The
         Punjab Government established an enquiry commission but the  Ahmadi
         community had not been contacted by any commission  representatives
         by the year's end, nor had they provided any updates regarding  the
         status of the investigation.

    (xiii) Religious minorities generally  faced  serious  difficulties  in
         getting police assistance, especially in rural  areas,  and  police
         reportedly tortured and mistreated persons in custody on  religious
         charges and were accused of at least one extrajudicial killing in a
         blasphemy case during the year (a  Christian  who  died  in  police
         custody in Karachi).

    (xiv)   Laws  prohibiting  blasphemy  continue  to  be   used   against
         Christians,  Ahmadis,  and  members  of  other  religious   groups,
         including Muslims.  Some individuals brought  charges  under  these
         laws  to  settle  personal  scores  or  to  intimidate   vulnerable
         individuals including Muslims, members of religious minorities  and
         sectarian opponents.  Lower courts often did not  require  adequate
         evidence  in  blasphemy  cases,  which  led  to  some  accused  and
         convicted persons spending  years  in  jail  before  higher  courts
         eventually overturned their convictions  and  ordered  them  freed.
         The regional trial courts usually denied bail  in  blasphemy  cases
         claiming that because defendants could face the death penalty  they
         were likely to flee; however, the state has never  executed  anyone
         under the blasphemy laws.  Judges and magistrates, seeking to avoid
         confrontation with or violence  from  extremists,  often  continued
         trials indefinitely.  Lower  courts  conducted  proceedings  in  an
         atmosphere of intimidation by extremists and refused  bail  due  to
         fear of reprisal from extremist elements.

    (xv)   Of the  49  cases  registered  under  blasphemy  laws  in  2011,
         according to data provided by the National Commission  for  Justice
         and Peace, eight were against Christians, two were against  Ahmadis
         and 39 were against Muslims.

    (xvi)  Non-Muslim prisoners generally were accorded  poorer  facilities
         than Muslim inmates.

    (xvii)  Ahmadiyya  leaders  stated  that  for  religious  reasons   the
         government used sections of the Penal Code against  their  members.
         They alleged that the government used anti-Ahmadi  laws  to  target
         and harass Ahmadis, frequently accusing converts to  the  Ahmadiyya
         community of blasphemy, violations of anti-Ahmadi  laws,  or  other
         crimes.  The vague wording of the provision  that  forbids  Ahmadis
         directly or indirectly identifying themselves  as  Muslims  enabled
         officials to bring charges against Ahmadis for using  the  standard
         Muslim greeting and for naming their children Muhammad.   According
         to Ahmadiyya leaders, during the year 36 Ahmadis were implicated in
         eight different cases.  By year's end, two Ahmadis were in  prison,
         one for allegedly defiling the Quran, and  the  other  for  alleged
         murder.  The Ahmadiyya community claimed that most of  the  arrests
         were groundless and based on the detainees' religious beliefs.

    (xviii)The Constitution provides  the  right  to  establish  places  of
         worship and trained clergy but in  practice  religious  minorities,
         especially Ahmadis,  suffered  from  restrictions  of  this  right.
         Ahmadis also reported incidents in which authorities tried to block
         construction or renovation of their places of worship.  As  Ahmadis
         were not allowed to recite or  relate  to  the  Kalima[9]  (Islamic
         testimony of faith), authorities forcibly removed the  Kalima  from
         Ahmadi places of worship in some instances.   District  governments
         often refuse to grant Ahmadis permission to hold  events  publicly;
         they instead hold meetings in members' homes.

    (xix)  Although the Constitution  provides  for  freedom  of  assembly,
         Ahmadis have been prohibited from holding conferences or gatherings
         since 1983.  They are also banned from preaching.   The  government
         has banned Ahmadiyya publications from public sale but the umbrella
         Ahmadiyya  organisation   published   religious   literature   that
         circulated only within Ahmadi communities. Generally, sacred  books
         for religious minorities, except Ahmadis were imported freely.

    (xx)   Due to the passport requirements to list  religious  affiliation
         and denounce the Ahmadi prophet, Ahmadis were restricted from going
         on the Hajj because they were prohibited from declaring  themselves
         Muslims.

    (xxi)  The public school curriculum  included  derogatory  remarks  and
         textbooks about minority religious  groups,  particularly  Ahmadis,
         Hindus and Jews and  the  teaching  of  religious  intolerance  was
         widespread.  The government continued to revise the  curriculum  to
         eliminate such teachings and remove Islamic  content  from  secular
         subjects.

    (xxii)  Societal elements also used anti-Ahmadi provisions of the Penal
         Code to justify abuse and discrimination against Ahmadis.

    Section 3, Status of Societal Respect for Religious Freedom

    (xxiii)Societal elements also used anti-Ahmadi provisions of the  Penal
         Code to justify abuse and discrimination against Ahmadis.

    (xxiv)Media, particularly the vernacular  press,  published  derogatory
         reports of minorities, especially of Ahmadis.

    (xxv)  Ahmadi individuals and institutions were  victims  of  religious
         violence,  much of it organised by religious extremists.  Tehrik-e-
         Khatme-e-Nabuwwat, a Deobandi group, had actively opposed Ahmadiyya
         beliefs and individuals issued a 2011 calendar with hate propaganda
         characterising Ahmadis as infidels, cursed and apostates and  urged
         persons to cleanse their streets of Ahmadis.

SUMMARY OF SUBMISSIONS

43. The detail of all the  submissions  including  that  relating  to  each
    appellant is set out in Schedules II and III the  latter  dealing  with
    matters arising after the hearing.

44. In essence Mr Malik argued:

      a. There had been no material change since MJ.

      b. There is no reliable evidence that a mere  general  application  of
         anti-Ahmadi laws amounts to persecution.

      c. The state has little interest in prosecuting those who  breach  the
         anti-Ahmadi laws

      d. The state provides protection to Ahmadis

      e.  There  is  no  evidence  that  the  Khatme-e-Nabuwat  incites   or
         participates in the persecution of Ahmadis in Pakistan.

      f. There is no reliable evidence that those Ahmadis who live openly in
         Pakistan are being persecuted

      g. The way in which a person is able to conduct himself in the  United
         Kingdom, such  a  person  should  not  expect  the  same  level  of
         tolerance in his country of origin.

      h. Ahmadi women are not more vulnerable than men.

      i. The situation for Ahmadis in Pakistan generally is  not  such  that
         would bring them within the possible parameters of  a  flagrant  or
         fundamental breach of Article 9 of the Human Rights Convention.

45. The combined submissions of Mr Gill and Mr Lemer (for MN, SB,  and  LQ)
    and of Ms Jegarajah and Mr Yeo (for  ZN  and  NH)  were  based  on  the
    argument that the  restrictions  on  the  Ahmadis  were  in  themselves
    persecutory.  Furthermore the evidence demonstrated that Ahmadis are at
    risk of persecution in Pakistan were they to openly express their faith
    in contravention of the Pakistan Penal code which  would  result  in  a
    real risk of prosecution amounting to persecution and or  attract  harm
    from non-state actors hostile to their faith. The submissions we  heard
    were detailed as disclosed in our summary of what we heard and read  in
    the skeleton arguments but were all based on this central argument.

OUR CONCLUSIONS ON THE EXPERT AND OTHER EVIDENCE

46. We make this assessment of Dr W's evidence.  We are  satisfied  he  has
    considerable strength as a historian and through his evidence  we  have
    acquired a better understanding of the background and reasons  for  the
    increasing hostility towards the Ahmadi.  His evidence, however, on the
    current situation does not carry  quite  the  same  authority.   It  is
    surprising that although  he  lived  in  Lahore,  and  had  an  ongoing
    interest in Ahmadis, he was unaware of  the  number  of  Ahmadi  prayer
    houses or  mosques.   His  evidence  that  although  a  well-documented
    community, such information was not  available  to  non-Ahmadis  brings
    into question the extent of his knowledge and his sources.  He appeared
    to be not so much in contact with the Ahmadi community but instead more
    reliant on third party sources, as illustrated in his report.   We  are
    uncertain how he arrived at his estimate of 1 million or  less  than  1
    million Ahmadis in Pakistan and his understanding that this growth from
    the figures stated by Mr Lemer of 291,000  in  1998  had  been  through
    conversion.  There was some imprecision in  Dr  W's  evidence  relating
    particularly to the incident at the Rawalpindi  mosque.   Nevertheless,
    Dr W fared well in questions which might have been better  aimed  at  a
    legal expert regarding the Pakistan Constitution and Penal Code as well
    as the history of any prosecutions.  He did  not  have  any  statistics
    relating to  the  number  of  those  charged  with  blasphemy  offences
    resulting in convictions and although we consider Mr Malik was entitled
    to be concerned about this the other evidence we have heard shows  that
    such data is not readily available.

47. The evidence given by Imam  Rashed  at  the  hearing  was  lengthy  and
    helpful regarding the core beliefs and practices of the  Ahmadi  faith.
    He is foremost an Imam who is able to speak with  authority  about  his
    religion.  He last spent a  substantial  period  of  time  in  Pakistan
    between 1973 and 1975 and his understanding of the circumstances  faced
    by Ahmadis  is more likely therefore to be informed by what he has read
    or has been told, although  there  are  no  footnotes  identifying  his
    sources to the answers which he gave.  He is not  therefore  a  country
    expert and in fairness to him has not been called as such.

48. Imam Rashed's evidence about his past experiences in Rabwah and Sialkot
    was graphic, but also showed a lack  of  knowledge  about  the  current
    restrictions in Pakistan and the way in which the Ahmadi  community  is
    able to function,  particularly  at  prayer.  This,  coupled  with  the
    passage of time since he has been there, reduces the weight that we are
    able to give to Imam Rashed's evidence about the current  situation  in
    Pakistan  and  recent  events  other  than  his  own   limited   direct
    experiences some time  ago.   He  is  not  an  expert  on  the  current
    situation. As  we  have  observed  above,  we  nevertheless  found  his
    evidence helpful regarding the obligations of Ahmadis, in particular in
    relation to tabligh which is an important issue in  these  appeals.  On
    this aspect with reference to the Bai'at, none  immediately  identifies
    tabligh as  an  obligation.   They  read  something  akin  to  the  Ten
    Commandments  in  the  Judaic/Christian  faiths  with   strictures   on
    falsehood,  fornication,  adultery,  un-Islamic  customs  and   lustful
    inclinations and require the adherer to give up pride and vanity and to
    hold the faith dear  and  to  be  occupied  in  the  service  of  God's
    creatures, pledging obedience.

49. Turing to Dr Ansari, her expertise is  primarily  in  relation  to  the
    situation of women in Pakistan and the circumstances  that  they  face.
    She readily acknowledged at the beginning of her evidence that  she  is
    not an expert on Ahmadis and therefore not qualified to give an opinion
    on the specific circumstances of Ahmadis.  Accordingly, this diminishes
    the assistance which we are able to obtain from her evidence.

50. We noted prevalence in her  report  of  broad  generalisations  on  the
    subject of Ahmadi women.  These  need to be assessed in the context not
    only  of  Dr  Ansari's  acknowledged  lack  of   expertise   but   more
    particularly in the light of the close knit community system enjoyed by
    the Ahmadi to which she makes no reference.  On her evidence as a whole
    regarding women in Pakistan, it is significant that she was unaware  of
    the Tribunal's most  recent  country  guidance  decision  on  women  in
    Pakistan, KA and Others (domestic violence - risk on  return)  Pakistan
    CG [2010] UKUT 216 (IAC).  In summary, therefore, Dr Ansari has been of
    limited assistance.

51. Dr Hamid was called to give an inside picture of  life  for  an  Ahmadi
    woman working in the medical profession in Pakistan.  Although  not  an
    expert her evidence contributes to our understanding of  the  situation
    for Ahmadis.

52. She now practises in the UK.  She held a  position  in  Pakistan  as  a
    senior Doctor at the  Community's  Tahir  Heart  Institute  and  was  a
    teacher of the Quran for the Ahmadiyya Association.    She  was  veiled
    at the hearing  in  the  manner  as  to  which  we  heard  evidence  is
    characteristic of the majority of Ahmadi women in Pakistan.  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Eldridge heard evidence from Dr Hamid's mother, Dr Hamid
    and additional witnesses.  He was satisfied that Dr Hamid's father  had
    been killed for  his  faith  and  found  the  three  appellants  to  be
    credible.  He also accepted accounts of the incidents advanced  by  the
    three appellants.  Nevertheless, it is  significant  that  despite  the
    death of her father and the difficulties faced by the family, Dr  Hamid
    was able to complete her education and qualifications as a  doctor  and
    obtain employment in this role in a Jammat's hospital in Rabwah, a town
    where Ahmadis are in the majority.  She and her  family  encountered  a
    personal tragedy and her story is one which we do take  account  of  in
    deciding the issues we are seized of in these appeals.

53. Dr Hamid responded to questions from  Mr  Malik  in  a  forthright  and
    direct manner.  We are satisfied that  she  is  truthful  and  gave  an
    accurate account of her difficulties  in  Pakistan  which  have  had  a
    significant impact on  her.   Much  of  her  account  of  the  troubles
    encountered by Ahmadi women  was however anecdotal  or  un-sourced  and
    although it would not  be  correct  to  characterise  her  evidence  as
    partisan, nevertheless, she is at best a witness of fact as to her  own
    personal circumstances which have been accepted by  the  Tribunal.  Her
    experience as a doctor and an active member of the Ahmadi community  in
    Pakistan is the basis of what she had to say rather  than  an  academic
    background as a researcher.

54. Dr Ayaz's answers demonstrated a broad general knowledge;  however  his
    responses were conveyed in  a  manner  that  took  for  granted  as  an
    established fact that Ahmadis face persecution from  those  opposed  to
    their religion in Pakistan and that the police and judiciary are not of
    effective assistance.  This brings into focus the basis on which he has
    given his evidence.  Dr Ayaz's role in the Ahmadiyya Association UK  is
    to assist those seeking  refugee  status.   This  is  a  role  he  also
    discharges elsewhere in the world.  In that sense, and  understandably,
    he is here to champion the cause  of  Ahmadis  (for  which  we  do  not
    criticise him) but that being so, it cannot be said  that  he  has  the
    detachment and objectivity of an expert witness to  whose  opinions  we
    could give significant weight.  He does not always appear to  recognise
    the importance of careful sourcing. We see  his  report  and  the  oral
    evidence he gave as reflecting the views of the  Ahmadiyya  Association
    UK for whom he  is  their  commentator.  He  does  not  pretend  to  be
    otherwise.  As to factual matters, the weight we give to his account of
    events in Pakistan since 2008 as recorded in the report is  limited  by
    the fact that Dr Ayaz has never lived in Pakistan and  was  last  there
    some four years ago.

55. Dr Ayaz is of particular  assistance  however  in  describing  how  the
    Ahmadiyya Muslim Association UK has been established and how it is run.
     We have an understanding from his evidence how someone converts to the
    Ahmadi faith and of the extent to which the community is aware  of  its
    members.  We understand from answers that emerged in  cross-examination
    the purpose behind the two websites run by the Ahmadiyya, which Dr Ayaz
    candidly acknowledged, was simply to record incidents, rather  than  to
    show what  follow-up  there  had  been  in  respect  of  the  incidents
    reported. He was unable to help us with the reason  why  the  Ahmadiyya
    Association UK has not been able to  give  us  an  accurate  number  of
    Ahmadis currently registered with their communities in Pakistan and the
    number who have recently converted.

56. We are unable to give any real weight to the report and evidence by  Dr
    Ayaz on the anti-Ahmadi provisions of Pakistan's legislative code.  The
    first reason is that these are views expressed by someone who is not an
    expert in this field.  We of course accept Dr Ayaz's evidence  on  what
    he understands to be the restrictions on Ahmadis  arising  out  of  the
    legislation including Ordinance XX.  The examples he gave however  were
    not illustrated by any specific  cases.   In  response  to  a  question
    whether he  had  noted  a  wider  interpretation  of  what  amounts  to
    propagation of the faith by those who are against  the  faith  for  the
    purpose of launching actions under 298-C, the answer provided refers to
    misuse of Ahmadiyya specific laws to be quite common and frequent.  The
    response is in general terms and is of limited assistance to us.

57. Given that Dr Ayaz will have been dependent upon what he has been  told
    by others in the context of his role in  the  United  Kingdom  for  the
    Association, we are unable to give any  real  weight  to  his  evidence
    regarding recent key events relevant to Ahmadis in Pakistan since 2007.
    In the course of his  cross-examination  he  referred  to  350  Ahmadis
    having died as the result of violence since 1984.   He  was  unable  to
    give a source for this figure and  when  Mr  Lemer  referred  us  to  a
    document "Persecution of Ahmadis in Pakistan during the year 2011", the
    report prepared by the Ahmadiyya Association, we noted a  reference  to
    207 Ahmadis having been killed between 1984 and 31 December  2011.   Dr
    Ayaz was only able to surmise that this figure was calculated  to  2007
    and maintained that the figure to date was 350.

58. Despite our reservations, we accept that Dr Ayaz can only tell us  what
    he has been told and what  he  has  seen  reported.  We  need  to  look
    elsewhere for a  more  precise  and  closer  to  hand  account  of  the
    difficulties faced by the Ahmadi in Pakistan in our assessment  of  the
    risk Ahmadis generally face and in particular the appellants before us.

59. Dr Martin Lau is an established authority on Pakistani Law and we  give
    considerable  weight  to  his  analysis  of  the  motivation  for   the
    constitutional change in 1974 and subsequent amendments  to  the  Penal
    Code in 1984 and in 1986.  He is foremost a lawyer and  we  have  found
    his  evidence  helpful  on  matters  relating  to   legislation   which
    discriminates against Ahmadis and which  undermines  their  ability  to
    practise  their  faith  freely.   We   also   consider   his   evidence
    strengthened by the fact that he has been to Pakistan as part of  a  UK
    Parliamentary fact finding team in the  course  of  which  he  met  and
    interviewed a number of Ahmadis.

60. We accept his complaint that the data to which he has access is  either
    limited or simply not available to enable a complete  analysis  of  the
    way in which the provisions of the Penal Code directed against  Ahmadis
    are policed.  However as  he  makes  clear  in  his  article  'Law  and
    [In]equalities,' the paucity of comprehensive data does not  mean  that
    there is no information available on  decisions  relating  to  offences
    against religion in Pakistan.

61. Dr Lau is only able to express his views on the  information  that  has
    come to light. But his experience and knowledge leads us to accept  his
    views on matters even where there is a dearth of evidence.  We  are  in
    no doubt that Ahmadis are particularly vulnerable  to  prosecution  for
    religious matters in a way that the majority Sunni population are  not.
    This is in the light of  the  specific  legislation  against  them.  We
    accept from what we have heard from Dr Lau that they will  be  able  to
    obtain bail but not without some difficulty in some cases.  We  further
    accept:

    i.     that there is a real possibility if Ahmadis are prosecuted under
         the blasphemy laws or under 298B or C they face a real risk  of  an
         unfair trial in the lower courts although it is likely any  serious
         sentences will be overturned on appeal.  We accept that  the  lower
         judiciary at  least  are  unlikely,  largely  because  of  societal
         pressure, to guarantee a fair hearing for Ahmadis at first instance
         and

    ii.    such prosecutions have occurred  although  relatively  small  in
         number (based on the conservative estimate  of  an  overall  Ahmadi
         population of  600,  000  referred  to  in  the  UNHCR  Eligibility
         Guidelines quoted above)  and

    iii    nevertheless, their effect is clearly to send a deterrent signal
         to the Ahmadi community not to practise their religion openly.

62. Ms Asma Jahangir has a formidable curriculum vitae and she speaks  with
    authority about not only the difficulties faced by Ahmadis but also all
    religious minorities in Pakistan.  Her main  legal  work  has  been  on
    cases of Christians and we take account of her answer that she has  not
    in the last five years represented Ahmadis in proceedings.  She clearly
    is someone with first hand knowledge of  proceedings  in  Pakistan  but
    inevitably as a consequence of her seniority, her knowledge of  matters
    at trial court level is not detailed, as evidenced by  her  answers  at
    the hearing.  Similarly, she makes it clear that she is dependent  upon
    other sources for the data provided in her report and it  is  necessary
    for us to evaluate the reliability of  that  data  in  determining  the
    weight which we are able to give to her assessment of the  difficulties
    faced by the Ahmadi.

63. The conclusions we draw from her evidence and the expert evidence of Dr
    Lau is that the filing of an FIR does not  necessarily  result  in  the
    arrest of the accused.  It appears that the police do have a discretion
    which may be shaped by external pressure from interest groups  such  as
    the Khatme-e-Nabuwat but we are satisfied that that discretion may also
    be informed by their own investigations although this is not likely  to
    matter much where the motivation  behind  the  FIR  is  religion.   The
    police have power to grant bail for minor offences but they do not have
    such power for offences under sections 295C and 298C.   Bail  in  those
    circumstances is only available from the trial  court.   Timescales  in
    obtaining bail from the court can be lengthy, over several months.

64. Once the police have undertaken their investigation, a police report is
    prepared.  Recent changes in procedures in  Pakistan  indicate  that  a
    prosecutor may have a role in  determining  whether  matters  be  taken
    further.  The evidence was not however conclusive on this.  It  appears
    to us that once a police report has been prepared, it  is  very  likely
    that an unstoppable process (leaving aside the special procedures  that
    apply to women -see KA and Others (domestic violence - risk on  return)
    Pakistan CG [2010] UKUT 216 (IAC)) has begun in which the  trial  court
    frames the charge and further proceedings ensue.  If,  pursuant  to  an
    FIR, the police are  unable  to  arrest  the  accused,  they  can  make
    application to the trial court for a form  of  warrant  to  be  issued.
    Failure to respond to that  warrant  will  mean  the  accused  will  be
    considered to be an absconder and there is a real possibility he or she
    will be placed on the Exit Control List which is policed by immigration
    control in Pakistan not only for those who live in the country but  for
    arrivals.

65. We have been given evidence by the Ahmadi Association of the number  of
    Ahmadis in recent years against whom FIRs have been filed.[10]

66. The Ahmadiyya Association is a highly organised one and is  capable  of
    providing sophisticated information on the numbers who  have  converted
    to their faith, the number of members and  it  appears,  based  on  the
    information provided  on  its  website,  the  numbers  who  have  faced
    difficulties.  In addition, it appears that in the  main,  Ahmadis  are
    able to obtain representation in  the  proceedings  against  them.   Ms
    Jahangir's evidence was that Ahmadis are represented by Ahmadi  lawyers
    who would therefore be in a position to inform the communities  of  the
    outcome of proceedings  against  their  clients.   We  have  not  heard
    evidence from any such lawyer but instead a non-Ahmadi  lawyer  who  in
    recent years  at  least  has  not  represented  Ahmadis  herself.   The
    provincial FIR collection  centre  can  be  accessed  but  we  note  Ms
    Jahangir's  evidence  that  this  poses  a  risk  to  the   researchers
    themselves when seeking information relating to Ahmadis.   However,  if
    the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan  has  obtained  information  on
    which Ms Jahangir has drawn for her report as data, we do not know  how
    they did so if it was not making direct enquiries.

JUDGMENT OF SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN IN CRIMINAL APPEALS  NUMBERS  31-K  TO
35-K OF 1988, CIVIL APPEALS NO. 149 AND 150 OF 1989  AND  CIVIL  APPEAL  NO.
412 OF 1992 (Zaheeruddin)

67. This decision of the Supreme Court of Pakistan delivered on 3 July 1993
    was raised by Mr Malik with a number of the witnesses.  In his judgment
    at [1] Shafiur Rahman J identified the issue as follows:

         "The question of law of  public  importance  common  to  all  these
         appeals is whether  Ordinance  No  XX  of  1984,  the  Anti-Islamic
         Activities  of  the  Qadiani  Group,  Lahore  Group   and   Ahmadis
         (Prohibition and Punishment) Ordinance, 1984  is  ultra  vires  the
         Constitution.  If not, whether the  convictions  recorded  and  the
         sentences imposed in five criminal appeals are in  accordance  with
         Section 5 introduced by it."

68. At[16] he refers  to Article 260 of the Constitution  which  defines  a
    Muslim as meaning:

         "  a person who believes in  the  unity  and  oneness  of  Almighty
             Allah,  in  the  absolute  and  unqualified  finality  of  the
             Prophethood of Mohammed (peace be upon him), the last  of  the
             prophets and does not believe in, or recognise as a prophet or
             religious reformer, any person who claimed or claims to be,  a
             prophet in any  sense  of  the  word  or  of  any  description
             whatsoever, after Mohammed (peace be upon him)."

69. A non-Muslim is defined as:

         "  a person who is not a Muslim and includes a person belonging  to
             the Christian, Hindu, Sikh, Buddhist  or  Parsi  community,  a
             person of the Quadiani Group or the Lahori  Group  (who  calls
             themselves 'Ahmadis' or by any other name), or  Bahai,  and  a
             person belonging to any of the scheduled castes."

70. Reference is also made to Article 20 of the Constitution (of  Pakistan)
    in the chapter of fundamental rights:

         "20.     Freedom  to  profess  religion  and  to  manage  religious
             institutions - subject to law, public order and morality -

             (a) every citizen shall have the right  to  profess,  practise
                  and propagate his religion; and

             (b) every religious denomination and every sect thereof  shall
                  have the right  to  establish,  maintain  and  manage  its
                  religious institutions."

71. In his minority judgment, Shafiur Rahman J found that clauses (a),  (b)
    and (e)  of  section  298C  were  consistent  with  the  constitutional
    provisions, but he concluded that clauses (c) and (d)  of section 298-C
    of the Pakistan Penal Code  would  be  "violative  of  the  Fundamental
    Rights of religion's freedom and of equality and of the  speech  in  so
    far as they prohibit and penalize only the Ahmadis and  Quadianis  from
    preaching or propagating their faith by words written or spoken  of  by
    visible representation. " He declared  these  provisions  to  be  ultra
    vires the Fundamental Rights 20 and 25.

72. Abdul Qadeer Chadhry J delivered the  majority  judgment  holding  that
    Ordinance XX was not ultra vires the Constitution.  The essence of  his
    judgment is to be found at [88]:

         "...The Ahmadis like other minorities are  free  to  profess  their
         religion in this country and no-one can take  away  that  right  of
         theirs, either by legislation or by executive orders.   They  must,
         however, honour the Constitution and the  law  and  should  neither
         desecrate or defile the pious  personage  of  any  other  religions
         including Islam, nor should  they  use  their  exclusive  epithets,
         descriptions and titles and also avoid using  the  exclusive  names
         like mosque and practice like 'azan' so the feelings of the  Muslim
         community are not injured and the people are not misled or deceived
         as regards the faith."




PREVIOUS COUNTRY GUIDANCE, RELEVANT CASE LAW AND OUR GENERAL CONCLUSIONS

73. The Tribunal last provided country guidance on Ahmadis and  risks  they
    might face in MJ & ZM (Ahmadis - risk) Pakistan CG [2008] UKAIT 0033 in
    the following terms as reflected in the head note:

         "1.      The finding in IA and Others (Ahmadis: Rabwah) Pakistan CG
             [2007] UKAIT 00088 that the existence  of  a  majority  Ahmadi
             community in Rabwah does  not  justify  dismissing  an  appeal
             which would otherwise be allowed remains valid.  Rabwah is  no
             safer than elsewhere in Pakistan for Ahmadis, but the question
             whether it is an appropriate internal relocation option for an
             Ahmadi will always depend on the particular circumstances  and
             facts of that individual's situation.

         2. In Pakistan as a whole, whilst it is clear  that  from  time  to
             time local pressure is exerted to restrict the building of new
             Ahmadi mosques, schools and cemeteries, and that a very  small
             number of Ahmadis are arrested and charged with  blasphemy  or
             behaviour  offensive  to  Muslims,  the  number  of   problems
             recorded  is  small  and  has  declined  since  the  Musharraf
             Government took power.  Set against the number of  Ahmadis  in
             Pakistan as a whole, they are very low indeed.  The courts  do
             grant bail and all appeals against  blasphemy  convictions  in
             recent years have succeeded.

         3. There is very sparse evidence indeed of harm to Ahmadis from non-
             state  agents  (though  rather  more  anecdotal  evidence   of
             difficulties for Christians).    The  general  risk  today  on
             return to Pakistan for Ahmadis who propagate the Ahmadi  faith
             falls well below the level necessary to show a  real  risk  of
             persecution, serious harm or ill-treatment and thus to  engage
             any form of international protection.

         4. Where, exceptionally, the facts  of  a   particular  appellant's
             case indicate that such an appellant cannot be returned safely
             to their home area, the existence of  an  internal  relocation
             option, either to  Rabwah  or  elsewhere  in  Pakistan,  is  a
             question of fact in each such appeal."

74. More recently the Tribunal in MT (Ahmadi - HJ (Iran))  Pakistan  [2011]
    UKUT 00277 (IAC) gave this further guidance (although the case was  not
    a country guidance decision):

         "Where it is found that an Ahmadi will be 'discreet' on return  the
         reasons for such discretion will need to be considered in the light
         of HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31."

75. HJ  (Iran)  sets  out  the  approach  we  are  required  to  take  when
    considering circumstances where potential persecution may be avoided by
    concealment or the exercise of discretion as  opposed  to  or  part  of
    internal relocation.  The  Supreme  Court  was  concerned  with  issues
    surrounding gay men however the  principles  are  applicable  to  cases
    other than those involving sexual orientation, see RT (Zimbabwe) [2012]
    UKSC 38 which is discussed below.

76. Lord Hope in HJ (Iran) sets out the approach that should be adopted  by
    fact-finding Tribunals in which he describes it as necessary to proceed
    in stages.  The test is set out in [35] of his judgment:

         "35.     (a)  The first stage, of course, is  to  consider  whether
                  the applicant is indeed gay. Unless he can establish  that
                  he is of that orientation he will not be  entitled  to  be
                  treated as a member of the particular social group. But  I
                  would  regard  this  part  of  the  test  as  having  been
                  satisfied if the applicant's case is that he is at risk of
                  persecution because he is suspected of being gay,  if  his
                  past history shows that this is in fact the case.

            (b)   The next stage is to examine a group  of  questions  which
                  are directed to what his situation will be on return. This
                  part of the inquiry is directed to what will happen in the
                  future. The Home Office's Country of  Origin  report  will
                  provide the background. There will be little difficulty in
                  holding that in countries such as Iran and Cameroon  gays
                  or persons who are believed to be gay are  persecuted  and
                  that persecution  is  something  that  may  reasonably  be
                  feared. The question is  how  each  applicant,  looked  at
                  individually, will conduct himself  if  returned  and  how
                  others will react to  what  he  does.  Those  others  will
                  include everyone with whom he will  come  in  contact,  in
                  private as well as in public. The way he conducts  himself
                  may vary from  one  situation  to  another,  with  varying
                  degrees of risk. But he cannot and must not be expected to
                  conceal aspects of his  sexual  orientation  which  he  is
                  unwilling to conceal, even from those whom  he  knows  may
                  disapprove of it. If he fears persecution as a result  and
                  that fear is well-founded, he will be entitled  to  asylum
                  however unreasonable his refusal to resort to  concealment
                  may be. The question what is reasonably tolerable  has  no
                  part in this inquiry.

            (c)   On the other hand, the fact that the applicant will not be
                  able to do in the country of  his  nationality  everything
                  that he can do openly in the country whose  protection  he
                  seeks is not the test. As I said earlier  (see  para  15),
                  the Convention was not directed to reforming the level  of
                  rights in the country of origin. So it would be  wrong  to
                  approach the issue on the basis that the  purpose  of  the
                  Convention is to guarantee to an applicant who is gay that
                  he can live as freely and as openly as a gay person as  he
                  would be able to do if he were not returned. It  does  not
                  guarantee to everyone the human rights standards that  are
                  applied by the receiving country within its own territory.
                  The focus throughout must be on what will  happen  in  the
                  country of origin.

            (d)   The next stage, if it is found that the applicant will  in
                  fact  conceal  aspects  of  his  sexual   orientation   if
                  returned, is to consider why he will do so. If  this  will
                  simply be in response to social pressures or for  cultural
                  or religious reasons of his own choosing and  not  because
                  of a fear of persecution, his claim  for  asylum  must  be
                  rejected.  But  if  the  reason  why  he  will  resort  to
                  concealment is that he genuinely fears that  otherwise  he
                  will be persecuted,  it  will  be  necessary  to  consider
                  whether that fear is well founded.

            (e)   This is the final and conclusive question: does he have  a
                  well-founded fear that he will be persecuted? If  he  has,
                  the causative condition that Lord Bingham referred  to  in
                  Januzi v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006]
                  2 AC 426, para 5 will have been established. The applicant
                  will be entitled to asylum."

77. Lord Rodger too set out a test at [82]:

         "82.     When an applicant applies for asylum on the  ground  of  a
             well-founded fear  of  persecution  because  he  is  gay,  the
             tribunal must first ask itself whether it is satisfied on  the
             evidence that he is gay, or that he would be treated as gay by
             potential persecutors in his country of nationality.

            If so, the tribunal must then ask itself whether it is satisfied
             on the available evidence that gay  people  who  lived  openly
             would be liable to persecution in the applicant's  country  of
             nationality.

            If so, the tribunal must go on to consider what  the  individual
             applicant would do if he were returned to that country.

            If the applicant would  in  fact  live  openly  and  thereby  be
             exposed to a real risk of persecution, then  he  has  a  well-
             founded fear of persecution - even if he could avoid the  risk
             by living "discreetly".

            If, on the other hand, the tribunal concludes that the applicant
             would in fact live discreetly and  so  avoid  persecution,  it
             must go on to ask itself why he would do so.

            If the tribunal concludes that the  applicant  would  choose  to
             live discreetly simply because that was how he  himself  would
             wish to live, or because of social pressures, e g, not wanting
             to distress his parents or embarrass  his  friends,  then  his
             application should be rejected. Social pressures of that  kind
             do not amount to persecution and the Convention does not offer
             protection against them. Such a  person  has  no  well-founded
             fear of persecution because, for reasons that have nothing  to
             do with any fear of persecution, he himself chooses to adopt a
             way of life which means that he is not in fact  liable  to  be
             persecuted because he is gay.

            If, on the other hand, the tribunal concludes  that  a  material
             reason for the applicant living discreetly on his return would
             be a fear of the persecution which would follow if he were  to
             live openly as a gay man, then, other things being equal,  his
             application should be accepted. Such  a  person  has  a  well-
             founded fear of persecution. To reject his application on  the
             ground  that  he  could  avoid  the  persecution   by   living
             discreetly would  be  to  defeat  the  very  right  which  the
             Convention exists to protect - his right to  live  freely  and
             openly as a gay man without fear of persecution. By  admitting
             him to asylum and allowing him to live freely and openly as  a
             gay man without fear of persecution, the receiving state gives
             effect to that right by affording the  applicant  a  surrogate
             for the protection  from  persecution  which  his  country  of
             nationality should have afforded him."

78. Judgment was given by the Supreme Court in RT  on  25  July  after  the
    final hearing in this appeal.  We considered it relevant to the  issues
    we are required to determine and as  noted  above  we  invited  further
    submissions on its impact in these appeals.

79. The enquiry addressed by the Supreme Court was  whether  an  individual
    who has no political  views  and  who  does  not  therefore  support  a
    persecutory regime in his home country can be expected to lie and feign
    loyalty to that regime in order to avoid persecution to which he  might
    otherwise be subjected.  The Court was concerned with  appellants  from
    Zimbabwe and on the varying facts of the different  cases  whether  the
    appellants would be forced to lie in order to profess  loyalty  to  the
    ZANU-PF regime.  This was in the context of a finding by  the  Tribunal
    in RN (Returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2008] UKAIT 00083.  The  guidance  given
    in that decision was that those  at  risk  on  return  to  Zimbabwe  on
    account of imputed political opinion were no longer restricted to those
    who were perceived to be members or supporters of the MDC  but  include
    anyone who was unable to demonstrate support for or loyalty to the ZANU-
    PF regime.

80. After reviewing a number of  authorities,  including  HJ  (Iran),  Lord
    Dyson, with whom all their Lordships agreed, concluded at [45]:

         "There is no support in any of the human rights jurisprudence for a
         distinction  between  the  conscientious   non-believer   and   the
         indifferent non-believer, any more than  there  is  support  for  a
         distinction  between  the  zealous  believer  and  the   marginally
         committed believer.  All  are  equally  entitled  to  human  rights
         protection  and  to  protection  against  persecution   under   the
         Convention.  None of them forfeits these  rights  because  he  will
         feel compelled to lie in order to avoid persecution."

81. On whether there can be a distinction between core and marginal rights,
    he observed at [47] to [52]:

         "47.     Thirdly, Mr Swift's suggested distinction between core and
             marginal rights is based on a misunderstanding of what we said
             in HJ (Iran). In order to understand what Lord  Rodger  and  I
             said on the issue, it is necessary first to see what was  said
             by the New Zealand Refugee Status Appeals Authority in Refugee
             Appeal No 74665/03. At para 82, the Authority said that if the
             right sought to be exercised by the applicant is  not  a  core
             human right, the "being persecuted" standard of the Convention
             is not engaged. But if the right is a fundamental human right,
             the next stage is to determine "the metes and bounds  of  that
             right". The Authority continued:

                  "If the proposed action in the  country  of  origin  falls
                  squarely within the ambit of that right the failure of the
                  state of origin to protect  the  exercise  of  that  right
                  coupled with the infliction of serious harm should lead to
                  the conclusion that the refugee claimant has established a
                  risk of 'being persecuted.'"

         48.      The same point was made at para 90.  For  the  purpose  of
             refugee determination, the focus must    be  on  "the  minimum
             core entitlement conferred by the relevant right". Thus, where
             the risk of harmful action  is  only  that  "activity  at  the
             margin of a  protected  interest  is  prohibited,  it  is  not
             logically encompassed by the notion  of  'being  persecuted'".
             The point was repeated at para 120.

         49.      At paras 99, 101 and 102, the Authority gave  examples  of
             the kind of activity which were at the margin of  a  protected
             right. Prohibition on a homosexual from adopting  a  child  on
             the  grounds  of  his  sexual   orientation   would   not   be
             persecution, because adoption of a  child  was  "well  on  the
             margin" of the right enjoyed  by  homosexuals  to  live  their
             lives as homosexuals openly and  free  from  persecution.  The
             same point was made in relation to (i)  the  denial  to  post-
             operative transsexuals of the right to marry, (ii) the  denial
             to homosexuals of the right to marry and (iii) the prosecution
             of homosexuals for sado-masochistic  acts.  It  was  suggested
             that, whether or not any of these involved breaches  of  human
             rights, they could not be said to amount to persecution  since
             the prohibited activities in each case were at the  margin  of
             the protected right.

         50.      In HJ (Iran), Lord Rodger gave as another possible example
             the applicant who claimed asylum on the ground that he  feared
             persecution if he took part in a gay rights march. If a person
             would be able to live freely and openly as a gay man  provided
             that he did not take part in gay rights marches, his claim for
             asylum might well fail. At paras 114 and 115  of  my  judgment
             too, I was saying no more than that a determination of whether
             the applicant's proposed or intended action lay at the core of
             the right or at its margins was useful in deciding whether  or
             not the prohibition of it amounted to persecution. I remain of
             that view. The distinction  is  valuable  because  it  focuses
             attention on the important point that persecution is more than
             a breach of human rights.

         51.      What matters for present purposes is that nothing that was
             said in the  Authority's  decision  or  by  us  in  HJ  (Iran)
             supports the  idea  that  it  is  relevant  to  determine  how
             important the right is to the individual. There  is  no  scope
             for the  application  of  the  core/marginal  distinction  (as
             explained above) in any of the appeals which are  before  this
             court. The situation in Zimbabwe as disclosed  by  RN  is  not
             that the right to hold political beliefs is generally accepted
             subject  only   to   some   arguably   peripheral   or   minor
             restrictions. It is that anyone who is not  thought  to  be  a
             supporter  of  the  regime  is  treated   harshly.   That   is
             persecution.

         52.      For the reasons that I have  given,  I  would  reject  the
             restrictive approach suggested by Mr Swift to the  application
             of the HJ (Iran) principle to these cases  and  hold  that  it
             applies to applicants who claim asylum on  the  grounds  of  a
             fear of persecution on the grounds of lack of political belief
             regardless of how important their lack of belief is to them."

82. The legislative framework to these appeals includes  international  and
    European Union law comprising the Refugee Convention and  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights (the Human Rights Convention),  the  Charter
    of Fundamental Rights of the  European  Union  (the  Charter)  and  the
    Council Directive 204/83/EC (the Directive).

83. The Directive at Article 9 defines acts of persecution in these terms:

         "1.      Acts of persecution within the meaning of  Article  1A  of
             the Geneva Convention must

             (a) be sufficiently serious by their nature or  repetition  as
                  to constitute a severe violation of basic human rights, in
                  particular the rights from which derogation cannot be made
                  under Article 15(2) of the  European  Convention  for  the
                  Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms; or

             (b)  be  an  accumulation  of  various   measures,   including
                  violations of human rights which is sufficiently severe as
                  to affect an individual in a similar manner  as  mentioned
                  in (a).

         2. Acts of persecution as qualified  in  paragraph  1,  can,  inter
             alia, take the form of:

             (a) acts of physical or mental  violence,  including  acts  of
                  sexual violence;

             (b) legal, administrative, police,  and/or  judicial  measures
                  which  are  in  themselves  discriminatory  or  which  are
                  implemented in a discriminatory measure;

             (c) prosecution or punishment  which  is  disproportionate  or
                  discriminatory;

             (d) denial of judicial redress resulting in a disproportionate
                  or discriminatory punishment;

             (e) prosecution or punishment for refusal to perform  military
                  service in a conflict, where performing  military  service
                  would include crimes or acts falling under  the  exclusion
                  clauses as set out in Article Article 12(2);

             (f) acts of gender-specific or child-specific nature.

         3. In accordance with Article  2(c)  there  must  be  a  connection
             between the reasons mentioned in Article 10 and  the  acts  of
             persecution as qualified in paragraph 1."

84.  Article  10  of  the  Directive  sets  out  reasons  for   persecution
    illustrated in a number of ways including:

         "1(b)    The concept of religion shall in  particular  include  the
             holding of theistic, non-theistic and atheistic  beliefs,  the
             participation  in,  or  abstention  from,  formal  worship  in
             private or in  public,  either  alone  or  in  community  with
             others, other religious acts or expressions of view, or  forms
             of personal or communal conduct based on or  mandated  by  any
             religious belief."

85. Article 9 of the Human Rights Convention  provides:

         "1.      Everyone has the right to freedom of  thought,  conscience
             and religion;  this  right  includes  freedom  to  change  his
             religion or belief in freedom, either alone  or  in  community
             with others and in public or private, to manifest his religion
             or belief, in worship, teaching, practice, and observance.

         2. Freedom to manifest one's religion or beliefs shall  be  subject
             only to such limitations as are  prescribed  by  law  and  are
             necessary in a democratic society in the interests  of  public
             safety, for the protection of public order, health or  morals,
             or for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others."

86. Article 9 (1) of the Human Rights Convention is in the  same  terms  as
    paragraph I of Article 10 of the Charter.

87. We turn to the European case  law  of  particular  relevance  to  these
    appeals.

88. The fourth Section of the European Court of Human Rights in Z & T v the
    UK (Application  No.  27034/05)  was  concerned  with  appeals  by  two
    Christians from Pakistan in which Article 9  was  engaged.   The  Court
    took the view that:

         "While the Court would  not  rule  out  the  possibility  that  the
         responsibility  of  the  returning  State  might   in   exceptional
         circumstances be engaged under Article 9 of  the  Convention  where
         the person concerned ran a real risk of flagrant violation of  that
         Article in the receiving State, the Court share  the  view  of  the
         House of Lords in the Ullah that it would be difficult to visualise
         a case in which a sufficiently  flagrant  violation  of  Article  9
         would not also involve treatment in violation of Article 3  of  the
         Convention."

89. The route by which the Court reached  that  decision  is  reflected  in
    these extracts:

         "This case raises the question of what approach should  be  applied
         to Article 9 rights allegedly at risk on expulsion. The  applicants
         argue that a flagrant denial test should  not  be  applied  in  the
         context of Article 9, as was done by the House of Lords  in  Ullah,
         as this would fail to respect the primacy of religious rights;  and
         it is contended that effectively requiring  them  to  modify  their
         conduct, concealing their adherence to  Christianity  and  forgoing
         the possibility of talking about their faith and bearing witness to
         others, in order to avoid hostile attention would be  to  deny  the
         right per se.

         The Court's case-law indeed underlines  that  freedom  of  thought,
         religion and conscience is one of the foundations of  a  democratic
         society and that manifesting one's religion, including  seeking  to
         convince one's neighbour, is an  essential  part  of  that  freedom
         (Kokkinakis,  31). This is however first and foremost the standard
         applied within the  Contracting  States,  which  are  committed  to
         democratic  ideals,  the  rule  of  law  and  human   rights.   The
         Contracting States nonetheless have obligations towards those  from
         other  jurisdictions,  imposed  variously  under  the  1951  United
         Nations Convention on the Status of Refugees and under  the  above-
         mentioned Articles  2  and  3  of  the  Convention.  As  a  result,
         protection is offered to those who have a substantiated claim  that
         they will either suffer  persecution  for,  inter  alia,  religious
         reasons or will be at real risk of death or serious  ill-treatment,
         and  possibly  flagrant  denial  of  a  fair  trial  or   arbitrary
         detention, because of their religious affiliation (as for any other
         reason). Where however an individual claims that on return  to  his
         own country he would be impeded  in  his  religious  worship  in  a
         manner which falls short of  those  proscribed  levels,  the  Court
         considers that very limited assistance, if any, can be derived from
         Article 9 by itself. Otherwise it would be imposing  an  obligation
         on Contracting States effectively to act as indirect guarantors  of
         freedom of worship for the  rest  of  world.  If,  for  example,  a
         country outside the umbrella  of  the  Convention  were  to  ban  a
         religion but not impose any measure  of  persecution,  prosecution,
         deprivation of liberty or ill-treatment, the Court doubts that  the
         Convention could be interpreted as requiring a Contracting State to
         provide the adherents of that banned sect with the  possibility  of
         pursuing that religion freely and openly on their own  territories.
         While the Court  would  not  rule  out  the  possibility  that  the
         responsibility  of  the  returning  State  might   in   exceptional
         circumstances be engaged under Article 9 of  the  Convention  where
         the person concerned ran a real risk of flagrant violation of  that
         Article in the receiving State, the Court shares the  view  of  the
         House of Lords in the Ullah case that  it  would  be  difficult  to
         visualise a case in which  a  sufficiently  flagrant  violation  of
         Article 9 would not also involve treatment in violation of  Article
         3 of the Convention."

90. As it turned out for the appellants, they failed to make out a case  of
    persecution on religious grounds, the court reaching its conclusion  in
    these terms:

         "In the present application, the applicants have failed to make out
         a case of persecution on religious grounds or to substantiate  that
         they were at risk of a  violation  of  Articles  2  or  3.  Neither
         applicant had herself  been  subject  to  any  physical  attack  or
         prevented from adhering to her faith. Both  have  claimed  to  have
         received unpleasant telephone calls and to have  felt  at  risk  of
         attack. The essence of their case rests on the general situation in
         Pakistan where there have been, over the past few years, attacks on
         churches and Christians. The  domestic  authorities  however  gave
         weight to the fact that the Christian community in  Pakistan  was
         under no official  bar  and  indeed  had  their  own  parliamentary
         representatives and that the Pakistani law enforcement and judicial
         bodies respectively were  taking  steps  to  protect  churches  and
         schools and to arrest, prosecute and punish those who  carried  out
         attacks.

         The applicants have emphasised that the police themselves fear  the
         Islamic extremists and that the authorities have failed in the past
         to protect Christian churches despite  the  presence  of  guards.
         Nonetheless it is not apparent that the authorities  are  incapable
         of taking, or are unwilling to take, appropriate action in  respect
         of     violence     or     threats     of     violence     directed
         against Christian targets.

         In those circumstances, the Court finds that,  even  assuming  that
         Article 9 of the  Convention  is  in  principle  capable  of  being
         engaged in the circumstances of the expulsion of an individual by a
         Contracting State, the applicants have  not  shown  that  they  are
         personally at such risk or are members  of  such  a  vulnerable  or
         threatened group or in such a precarious position as Christians as
         might disclose any appearance of a flagrant violation of Article  9
         of the Convention."

91. The Grand Chamber of the Court of Justice  of  the  European  Union  in
    Federal Republic of Germany v Y (C-71/11) & Z (C-99/11)  had before  it
    references for a preliminary ruling concerning  the  interpretation  of
    Articles 2(C) and 9(1)(a) of the Directive relating to proceedings by Y
    and Z whose applications for  asylum  were  on  the  basis  that  their
    membership of the Muslim Ahmadiyya community  in  Pakistan  had  forced
    them  to  leave  their  country  of  origin.   The  questions  for  the
    preliminary ruling were worded in almost identical terms in both  cases
    as follows:

         "1.      Is Article 9(1)(a) of [the] Directive...to be  interpreted
             as meaning that not every interference with religious  freedom
             which infringes Article 9 of the ECHR constitutes  an  act  of
             persecution within the meaning of [the former provision],  and
             that a severe violation of religious freedom as a basic  human
             right arises only if the core area of that  religious  freedom
             is adversely affected?

         2. If question 1 is to be answered in the affirmative:

             (a) Is the core area  of  religious  freedom  limited  to  the
                  profession and practice of faith in the areas of the  home
                  and neighbourhood, or can there be an act of  persecution,
                  within  the  meaning   of   Article   9(1)(a)   of   [the]
                  Directive..., also in  cases  where,  in  the  country  of
                  origin the observance of faith in public gives rise  to  a
                  risk to  life,  physical  integrity  or  freedom  and  the
                  applicant accordingly abstains from such practice?

             (b) If the core area of religious freedom  can  also  comprise
                  the public observance of certain religious practices:

                  -    does it suffice in that case, in order for  there  to
                      be a severe violation of religious freedom, that  the
                      applicant feels that such observance of his faith  is
                      indispensible  in  order  for  him  to  preserve  his
                      religious identity,

                  -     or  is  it  further  necessary  that  the  religious
                      community  to  which  the  applicant  belongs  should
                      regard that religious observance  as  constituting  a
                      central part of its doctrine,

                  -    or can further restrictions  arise  as  a  result  of
                      other circumstances, such as the  general  conditions
                      in the country of origin?

         3. If question 1 is to be answered in the affirmative:

         Is there a well founded fear of persecution, within the meaning  of
         Article 2(c) of [the] Directive..., if it is established  that  the
         applicant will carry out certain religious practices -  other  than
         those falling within the core area - after returning to the country
         of origin, even though they will give rise to a risk to  his  life,
         physical integrity or freedom, or can the applicant  reasonably  be
         expected to abstain from such practices."

92. The following conclusions were reached by the court:

         "[57]    Freedom of  religion  is  one  of  the  foundations  of  a
         democratic society and is a basic human right.   Interference  with
         the right to religious freedom may be so serious as to  be  treated
         in the same way as the cases referred to in Article  15(2)  of  the
         ECHR, to which Article 9(1) of  the  Directive  refers  by  way  of
         guidance, for  the  purpose  of  determining  which  acts  must  in
         particular be regarded as constituting persecution.

         [58]      However,  that  cannot  be  taken  to   mean   that   any
         interference with the right  to  religious  freedom  guaranteed  by
         Article 10(1) of the Charter  constitutes  an  act  of  persecution
         requiring the competent authorities to grant refugee status  within
         the meaning of Article 2(d) of the Directive to any person  subject
         to the interference in question.

         [59]     On the contrary,  it  is  apparent  from  the  wording  of
         Article 9(1)  of  the  Directive  that  there  must  be  a  'severe
         violation' of religious freedom having a significant effect on  the
         person concerned in order for it to be possible  for  the  acts  in
         question to be regarded as acts of persecution.

         [60]     Acts amounting to limitations on the exercise of the basic
         right to freedom of religion within the meaning of Article 10(1) of
         the Charter which are provided for by law, without any violation of
         that right arising, are thus automatically  excluded  as  they  are
         covered by Article 52(1) of the Charter.

         [61]      Nor  can  acts  which  undoubtedly  infringe  the   right
         conferred by Article 10(1) of the Charter, but its gravity  is  not
         equivalent to that of an infringement of  the  basic  human  rights
         from which no derogation can be made by Article 15(2) of the  ECHR,
         be regarded as  constituting  persecution  within  the  meaning  of
         Article 9(1)  of  the  Directive  and  Article  1A  of  the  Geneva
         Convention.

         [62]     For the purpose of determining, specifically,  which  acts
         may be regarded as constituting persecution within the  meaning  of
         Article 9(1)(a) of the Directive, it is unnecessary to  distinguish
         acts that interfere with the 'core areas' ('forum internum') of the
         basic right to freedom of religion, which do not include  religious
         activities in public ('forum externum'), from  acts  which  do  not
         affect those purported 'core areas'.

         [63]      Such  a  distinction  is  incompatible  with  the   broad
         definition  of  'religion'  given  by  Article  10(1)(b)   of   the
         Directive, which encompasses all  its  constituent  components,  be
         they public or private, collective or individual.  Acts  which  may
         constitute a 'severe  violation'  within  the  meaning  of  Article
         9(1)(a) of the Directive include serious acts which interfere  with
         the applicant's freedom not only to practice his faith  in  private
         circles but also to live that faith publicly.

         [64]     That interpretation is likely to ensure that Article  9(1)
         of the Directive is applied in such  a  manner  as  to  enable  the
         competent authorities to assess all kinds of acts  which  interfere
         with the basic right of freedom of religion in order  to  determine
         whether, by their  nature  or  repetition,  they  are  sufficiently
         severe as to be regarded as amounting to persecution.

         [65]     It follows that acts which, on account of their  intrinsic
         severity as well as the severity  of  their  consequences  for  the
         person concerned, may be regarded as constituting persecution  must
         be identified, not  on  the  basis  of  the  particular  aspect  of
         religious freedom that is being interfered with but on the basis of
         the nature of the repression inflicted on the  individual  and  its
         consequences, as observed by the Advocate General at  point  52  of
         his Opinion.

         [66]     It is therefore the severity of the measures and sanctions
         adopted or liable to be adopted against the person concerned  which
         will determine whether a  violation  of  the  right  guaranteed  by
         Article 10(1) of the Charter  constitutes  persecution  within  the
         meaning of Article 9(1) of the Directive.

         [67]     Accordingly, a  violation  of  the  right  to  freedom  of
         religion may constitute persecution within the meaning  of  Article
         9(1)(a) of the Directive where an applicant for asylum, as a result
         of exercising that freedom in his country of origin, runs a genuine
         risk of, inter alia, being prosecuted  or  subject  to  inhuman  or
         degrading treatment or punishment by one of the actors referred  to
         in Article 6 of the Directive."

93. The court went on  to  observe  at  [69]  to  [71]  the  objective  and
    subjective factors to be taken into account:

         "[69]    Given that the concept of 'religion' as defined in Article
         10(1)(b) of the Directive also  includes  participation  in  formal
         worship in public, either alone or in community  with  others,  the
         prohibition of such participation  may  constitute  a  sufficiently
         serious act within the meaning of Article 9(1)(a) of the  Directive
         and,  therefore,  persecution  where,  in  the  country  of  origin
         concerned, it gives rise to a genuine risk that the applicant will,
         inter alia, be  prosecuted  or  subject  to  inhuman  or  degrading
         punishment by one of the actors referred to in  Article  6  of  the
         Directive.

         [70]     In assessing such a risk, the competent  authorities  must
         take account of a number of factors, both objective and subjective.
          The subjective circumstance  that  the  observance  of  a  certain
         religious practice in public, which is subject to the  restrictions
         at issue, is of particular importance to the  person  concerned  in
         order to preserve his religious identity is a relevant factor to be
         taken into account in determining the level of risk  to  which  the
         applicant will be exposed in his country of origin  on  account  of
         his religion, even if the observance of such a  religious  practice
         does not constitute a core  element  of  faith  for  the  religious
         community concerned.

         [71]     Indeed,  it  is  apparent  from  the  wording  of  Article
         10(1)(b) of the Directive that the scope of protection afforded  on
         the basis of persecution on religious grounds extends both to forms
         of  personal  or  communal  conduct  which  the  person   concerned
         considers to be necessary to him - namely those 'based on  ...  any
         religious belief' - and to those prescribed by religious doctrine -
         namely those 'mandated by any religious belief'."

94. The first two questions therefore were answered by the court  in  terms
    that Article 9(1)(a) of the Directive must be  interpreted  as  meaning
    that:

         "- not all interference with the right to freedom of religion which
             infringes  Article  10(1)  of  the  Charter  is   capable   of
             constituting an 'act of persecution'  within  the  meaning  of
             that provision of the Directive;

         -  there may be an act of persecution as a result  of  interference
             with the external manifestation of that freedom, and

         -  for the purpose of determining  whether  interference  with  the
             right to freedom of religion which infringes Article 10(1)  of
             the Charter  may  constitute  an  'act  of  persecution',  the
             competent authorities must ascertain,  in  the  light  of  the
             personal circumstances of the person concerned,  whether  that
             person, as a result of exercising that freedom in his  country
             of  origin,  runs  a  genuine  risk  of,  inter  alia,   being
             prosecuted or subject to inhuman  or  degrading  treatment  or
             punishment by one of the actors referred to in  Article  6  of
             the Directive."

95. Turning to the third question which the court considered concerned  the
    situation  where  an  applicant  has  not  already  been   subject   to
    persecution  or  direct  threats  of  persecution  on  account  of  his
    religion.  The court urged that the assessment of  the  extent  of  the
    risk, to be carried out with  vigilance  and  care  "...will  be  based
    solely on a specific evaluation of  the  facts  and  circumstances,  in
    accordance with the Rules laid down in particular by Article 4  of  the
    Directive".

96. Echoing the  approach  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  HJ  (Iran)  and  RT
    (Zimbabwe), the court observed at [78] to [80]:

         "[78]    None of those rules states that, in assessing  the  extent
         of  the  risk  of  actual  acts  of  persecution  in  a  particular
         situation, it is necessary to take account of the possibility  open
         to the applicant of avoiding the risk of persecution by  abstaining
         from  the  religious  practice  in  question   and,   consequently,
         renouncing the protection which the Directive is intended to afford
         the applicant by conferring refugee status.

         [79]     It follows that, where it is established  that,  upon  his
         return to his country of origin, the person concerned will follow a
         religious practice  which  will  expose  him  to  a  real  risk  of
         persecution, he should be granted  refugee  status,  in  accordance
         with Article 13 of the Directive.  The fact  that  he  could  avoid
         that risk by abstaining from certain  religious  practices  is,  in
         principle, irrelevant.

         [80]     In the light of the above considerations,  the  answer  to
         the third question referred in both cases is that Article  2(c)  of
         the Directive must be interpreted as meaning that  the  applicant's
         fear of being persecuted is well-founded if, in the  light  of  the
         applicant's  personal  circumstances,  the  competent   authorities
         consider that it may reasonably be thought that, upon his return to
         his country of origin, he will engage in religious practices  which
         will expose him to a real risk of  persecution.   In  assessing  an
         application for  refugee  status  on  an  individual  basis,  those
         authorities cannot reasonably expect the applicant to abstain  from
         those religious practices."

97. The court was ruling on the questions before it and we do not  consider
    that in para [79], it was limiting the risk category to  those  persons
    who are able to establish that they will follow a pattern of  behaviour
    that will expose them to persecution as opposed to those who would wish
    to but would not because of persecution risk. Otherwise the  obligation
    will be on a person to be unreasonably  expected  to  show  a  reckless
    intention despite the risks involved. That is not the  basis  on  which
    the right  to  religious  freedom  is  intended  to  be  preserved  and
    protected or the basis  on  which  protection  is  provided  under  the
    Refugee Convention. The Court of Justice makes clear as did the Supreme
    Court in HJ (Iran) that concealment is not an answer if the reason is a
    fear of harm.   Further, the use of the adverb  "reasonably"  in   para
    [80] is a reflection of the standard of proof rather than introducing a
    test  of  reasonableness  to  the  enquiry  how  someone  will  conduct
    themselves on return.  We do  not  see  therefore  that  the  Court  of
    Justice was suggesting a different approach from that  of  the  Supreme
    Court in HJ (Iran).

98. We are unable to accept Mr Malik's submission that there is an apparent
    tension between the approach of the Court of Justice  and  the  Supreme
    Court in RT (Zimbabwe) on the validity of the core/margin  distinction.
    Para [50] of the judgment Lord Dyson in RT needs to read with  [51]  in
    which he explains that there is no scope for  the  application  of  the
    core/marginal distinction.  We understand Lord Dyson's view to be  that
    there is legitimacy in looking at whether a proposed or intended action
    lay at the core or the margins to see if the  prohibition  amounted  to
    persecution.  The reach of the freedom of religion is a  wide  one  and
    although it is difficult to think of an example perhaps restrictions on
    Ahmadis marching down the main road with banners declaring their  faith
    would not be regarded as persecutory as such activity is outside  their
    established ritual and practices. Marginality may also be  relevant  if
    the restrictions are peripheral or minor.  Were there a fine of  a  few
    rupees for someone calling himself a Muslim, displaying  the  kalma  or
    preaching in a public place,  it  is  doubtful  this  would  amount  to
    persecution although it  might  by  repetition  acquire  the  level  of
    severity needed to engage the Refugee Convention.

99. We also do not accept the arguments of Mr Gill and Mr Lemer that  there
    can be acts which are so restrictive of the practice of  religion  that
    the intrinsic severity of the restriction itself is enough to amount to
    persecution  regardless  of  the  consequences.   If   legislation   is
    unenforced or the sanctions are of a minor or non-severe  nature  there
    is no need for protection. In the absence of the "harsh  treatment"  as
    observed by Lord  Dyson  in  RT  at  para  [51]  or  the  "severity  of
    ...consequences" and the nature of the repression as noted by the Court
    of Justice in Y & Z, there is no persecution.

100. We draw the following principles from the various authorities  we  have
    referred to.

    a.     For interference with the  right  to  the  freedom  of  religion
         guaranteed by Art 10(1) of the Charter and Art 9(1)  of  the  Human
         Rights Convention to constitute an act of  persecution  within  the
         meaning of Art 2(d) of the Directive, there must be  a  significant
         effect on the person concerned.

    b.     Acts which interfere with the right to the freedom of  religion,
         if not of the gravity equivalent to the protected human rights from
         which there can be no derogation  under  Art  15(2)  of  the  Human
         Rights Convention,  will  not  constitute  persecution  within  the
         meaning of Art 9(1) of the Directive and the Refugee Convention.

    c.     Limitations on the exercise of the Freedom of Religion  must  be
         provided for by law and respect  the  essence  of  the  rights  and
         freedoms recognised by the Charter.  They must be proportionate and
         made only if necessary and genuinely meet the objectives of general
         interest recognised by the Union or the need to protect the  rights
         and freedoms of others.  (Art 52 of the Charter)

    d.     There is no basis  for  distinguishing  interference  with  core
         aspects from interference with  marginal  areas  of  the  right  to
         freedom of religion.  This is because of the  broad  definition  of
         religion in Art 10(1)(b) of the Directive.

    e.     Nevertheless it is  only  serious  violation  of  the  right  to
         freedom of religion that will give rise to persecution  or  serious
         harm or ill-treatment and that will be determined by the nature  of
         the repression on the individual  concerned  and  its  consequences
         with reference to the severity of the measures and sanctions likely
         to be adopted.

    f.     If it is reasonably thought that an individual  will  engage  in
         religious practices (which may  include  public  manifestations  of
         that religion) or would wish to do so  because  of  the  particular
         importance to  the  person  concerned  in  order  to  preserve  his
         religious identity, the fact that an individual could avoid a  risk
         by abstaining from certain religious practices  which  will  expose
         him to a real risk of persecution is irrelevant.

101. The evidence before us shows that Ahmadis are  an  oppressed  religious
    minority in Pakistan.  The relevant provisions of  the  Pakistan  Penal
    Code set out above restrict the ways  in  which  Ahmadis  are  able  to
    express and practise their beliefs.  If defied, the  provisions  expose
    Ahmadis to the risk of prosecution coupled with  a  risk  of  detention
    pending trial.  In addition they face hostility  from  sectors  of  the
    majority of society which is made up of  Sunni  Muslims.   Disagreement
    with and disapproval of the beliefs of Ahmadis has intensified with the
    increased Islamisation[11]  of  Pakistan  as  well  as  the  growth  of
    fundamentalism.  In addition to vulnerability to terrorist threats from
    the Taliban, they face vehement opposition  from  the  Khatme-e-Nabuwat
    whose tactics not only include taking out FIRs against Ahmadis but also
    intimidation.  Their influence is pervasive in Pakistani  institutions.



102. The ability of Ahmadis to defend any prosecution that may  ensue  after
    faith-based FIRs have been issued under the PPC,  is  hampered  by  the
    risk of unfair treatment by the police  and  the  trial  courts.  These
    problems relate not only to the substance of any prosecution  but  also
    the ability of Ahmadis  to  readily  obtain  bail  prior  to  or  after
    proceedings have been brought.  According to the  respondent's  Country
    of Origin Information Report dated 7 June  2012  (published  before  we
    heard submissions although not  referred  to)  prison  conditions  vary
    dependant on  the  prisoner's  background  and  importance.   They  are
    described in the US Department of State Country Report on Human  Rights
    Practices 2011 (published 24 May 2012)  as  often  extremely  poor  and
    failed to meet international standards. On the other hand  Ahmadis  can
    be reasonably confident that on  appeal  to  higher  courts  unfair  or
    unreasonable decisions are likely to be overturned.

103. Harassment instigated by  the  Khatme-e-Nabuwat  and  other  non  state
    actors and the consequent exposure to police action is evidenced in the
    catalogue   of   events   collated   by   www.thepersecution.org    and
    www.persecutionofAhmadis.org and the Ahmadiyya Association  Persecution
    2011 report extracts from which we have set out above.   This  evidence
    reveals not  only  very  serious  matters  such  as  murders  but  also
    incidents where Ahmadis have encountered  discriminatory  hostility  in
    their everyday life.  As  a  precise  and  consolidated  catalogue  the
    reports leave much to be desired. Nevertheless, they are clearly  based
    on press reports and there is nothing to  suggest  that  those  reports
    exaggerate the incidents they record. We consider that the community is
    a highly organised one and  that  it  keeps  an  accurate  log  of  the
    incidents reported to it.  This is reflected in the  modest  number  of
    prosecutions the community reports for 2011.   We  give  weight  to  Dr
    Lau's expert opinion that there is neither under nor over reporting  by
    the Association.  All the more so  because  he  has  been  recently  in
    Pakistan as part of a formal fact  finding  mission.    We  accept  the
    evidence of the difficulties and dangers of seeking out  the  evidence.
    The UNHCR guidelines and the US  Dept  of  State  report  on  Religious
    freedom do not question the figures and catalogue  of  incidents.    Dr
    Lau's explanation that his own enquiries satisfied him  that  the  data
    was not exaggerated is consistent with the view of Ms Jahangir  another
    expert whose view we respect and give appropriate weight to.

104. In the context of the number of  incidents  recorded  in  the  past  24
    years, it may be thought that the risk to Ahmadis is not  as  great  as
    has been urged in these appeals.  We accept however the explanation  in
    the submissions from the appellants' representatives that  this  is  in
    part due to the way  in  which  Ahmadis  in  general  deal  with  their
    difficulties in Pakistan by self denial, civil obedience and by keeping
    a  low  profile.   Although  some  of   the   incidents   reported   on
    www.thepersecution.org and its sister site might suggest otherwise,  on
    the whole, it appears to have been a  successful  approach.  With  this
    moderation of the ways in which  Ahmadis  express  and  practise  their
    faith including its propagation, we accept that there have  been  fewer
    prosecutions and complaints made than might  otherwise  have  been  the
    case.  We accept the evidence of Dr W about the increasing Islamisation
    in Pakistan which undoubtedly would heighten the risks for Ahmadis  who
    chose to flout the law and we accept  that  the  need  to  keep  a  low
    profile is likely to have increased.

105. As Mr Yeo submitted, we should not treat Dr Ayaz,  Dr  Hamid  and  Imam
    Rashed as experts. They speak of their experience and understanding and
    so are better described  as  witnesses  of  fact.   Their  evidence  is
    consistent as between one another and also consistent with the experts.
     Together they describe a pattern of anti Ahmadi activity  directly  by
    or condoned by the authorities and non state actors.

106. Mr Malik candidly acknowledged on behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State
    that he did not accept that the anti-Ahmadi laws in the Pakistan  Penal
    Code were fair. It is  difficult  to  see  how  he  could  have  argued
    otherwise. There is some force in his contention that Ahmadis are  able
    to practise their faith by attending their places of worship (at  least
    so far as men are concerned) and  for  women  to  pray  at  home.   The
    evidence does not show that undemonstrative activity of this kind alone
    results in a risk of persecutory  treatment.  Ahmadis  have  access  to
    their own TV station broadcast via satellite from London. Their numbers
    appear to have increased  and  we  heard  evidence  of  conversions  in
    Pakistan.  The evidence varies as to the number of Ahmadis and the best
    we are able to say is  that  there  are  several  hundred  thousand  in
    Pakistan.

107. These arguably positive matters however do not  provide  an  answer  to
    important questions.   The  way  in  which  the  Ahmadi  faith  may  be
    practised emblematized and preached in Pakistan is constrained  by  the
    criminal law with potentially severe  sanctions  if  breached.   Is  it
    reasonable to expect Ahmadis to show restraint and not freely  manifest
    their  faith  in  areas  that  are  of  particular  importance  to  the
    individual concerned through obedience to the anti  Ahmadi  legislation
    to avoid prosecution?   It is established  law  that  this  is  neither
    permissible (HJ (Iran)) if the purpose is to avoid persecution  nor  is
    it relevant: (Germany v Y & Z), if there is the possibility open to the
    claimant to avoid the risk by abstention. Is it is reasonable to expect
    Ahmadis to exercise similar restraint and show appeasement in order  to
    avoid the potential for aggressive hostility from others who  form  the
    majority? The answer must be the  same.  Does  the  existence  of  such
    legislation constitute a fundamental  violation  of  their  freedom  of
    religion such that its very existence is persecutory in  the  light  of
    the consequences if it is breached? On this aspect we consider that  it
    is not simply the existence of the  legislation  but  the  severity  of
    consequences of the sanctions if and when  applied  that  dictates  the
    answer.  Can the aspects of the faith that might be seen objectively as
    peripheral  to  the  right  of  freedom  of  religion  mean  that   any
    restrictions no matter how discriminatory are not undermining the core?
     Such an approach would be incorrect and irrelevant: (RT (Zimbabwe) and
    (Germany v Y and Z).

108. In  our  view,  the  effect  of  the  anti-Ahmadi  legislation  is  the
    unthinkable equivalent of the UK parliament passing  legislation  under
    pressure from the other faiths restricting the Church of  Jesus  Christ
    of the Latter Day Saints from using the word church in its title and in
    references to its place  of  worship,  from  describing  themselves  as
    Christians and banning Mormon missionaries from spreading the  word  by
    calling  on  members  of  the  public.   Even  this  analogy  does  not
    adequately  reflect  the  difficulties  posed  for   Ahmadis   by   the
    legislation in Pakistan arising from the apparent ease with which anti-
    Ahmadi groups are able to exploit the legislation by  taking  out  FIRs
    against Ahmadis.

109. As with the Mormons,  the  Ahmadi  faith  is  comparatively  recent  in
    historical terms and one which is dependant on its beliefs being spread
    in order  to  grow.  We  accept  the  evidence  that  tabligh  plays  a
    significantly greater role in the Ahmadi faith than  for  religions  of
    greater antiquity.  Section 298C curbs  this  activity  entirely.   The
    opinions expressed by the majority of the Supreme Court of Pakistan  in
    Zaheeruddin betray views that increased  Islamisation  is  unlikely  to
    have diluted.

110. As observed earlier, the Strasbourg court in Z & T v the UK  emphasised
    that freedom  of  thought,  religion  and  conscience  is  one  of  the
    foundations of a democratic  society  and  that  "...manifesting  one's
    religion,  including  seeking  to  convince  one's  neighbour,  is   an
    essential part of that  freedom..."   This  was  the  standard  applied
    within the contracting states  and  as  to  those  states'  obligations
    towards those from other jurisdictions under the Refugee Convention and
    Articles 2 and 3 of the Human Rights Convention.

111. The court was satisfied that the impediment to religious worship  would
    need to meet the high threshold required by the Refugee  Convention  or
    the test in Articles 2 and 3 of the Human Rights Convention:

         "Where however an individual claims  that  on  return  to  his  own
         country he would be impeded in his religious worship  in  a  manner
         that falls short of these prescribed levels,  the  court  considers
         that very limited assistance, if any, can be derived from Article 9
         by  itself.  Otherwise  it  would  be  imposing  an  obligation  on
         Contracting states effectively to act  as  indirect  guarantors  of
         freedom on worship for the rest of the world."

112. The appellants Z and T were unsuccessful because the court  found  they
    had not shown that they were personally at risk or were members of such
    a vulnerable or threatened group or in such a  precarious  position  as
    might disclose any appearance of a flagrant  violation  of  Article  9.
    The facts before the court  were  that  both  applicants  had  received
    unpleasant telephone calls and had felt at  risk  of  attack.   It  was
    noted that the Christian community in Pakistan was  under  no  official
    bar and had  their  own  parliamentary  representatives  and  that  the
    Pakistan law enforcement and judicial bodies respectively  were  taking
    steps to protect churches and schools  and  to  arrest,  prosecute  and
    punish those who carried out attacks.

113. Mr Malik argues  in  his  skeleton  that  the  anti-Ahmadi  legislation
    should be looked at in context and the evidence makes it plain that the
    legislation is neither irrational, nor in itself persecutory. He argues
    that there were rational administrative and constitutional reasons  for
    parliament to legislate in this way and to define who is a Muslim.   We
    concur  that  it  is  unhelpful  to  talk  about  laws  per  se   being
    persecutory, but the extent to which they adhere to international human
    rights norms is a relevant consideration in deciding  whether  the  way
    the laws are applied is persecutory.  In this regard,  we  accept  that
    there is justification for the state to define who is a member  of  the
    state religion particularly where as in Pakistan there are  obligations
    on members of that religion illustrated by taxation and education.   We
    accept that the mere fact that there is  legislation  specific  to  the
    Ahmadi faith is not persecutory. But we do not accept that as a  matter
    of internal protection law, there is justification for denying  Ahmadis
    the right to call themselves Muslims and employ the  manifestations  of
    that faith, as well as preach, if the reason is simply to  appease  the
    majority when the basis is doctrinal disagreement.  There is nothing in
    the behaviour and beliefs of Ahmadis that impinges on the rights of the
    majority in any  way  that  justifies  the  repressive  effect  of  the
    legislation.  The anti-Ahmadi legislation may be a means of keeping the
    peace but the evidence shows that  it  is  the  violent  aggression  of
    sections of the majority population that needs to be curbed.  It is  no
    answer, as suggested by Mr  Malik,  that  there  is  other  legislation
    applying to individuals of all faiths which  can  be  said  to  provide
    equal protection to Ahmadis who alone have specific  laws  against  how
    the conduct and manifest their faith, the blasphemy law aside.

114. We are therefore unable  to  accept  Mr  Malik's  submission  that  the
    guidance in MJ & ZM (Ahmadis - risk) Pakistan can hold in the light  of
    the significant change  in  the  conditions  of  life  for  Ahmadis  in
    Pakistan.  Unlike the Tribunal in MJ & ZM, we have had the benefit of a
    considerable range of evidence and we have heard not only  from  senior
    members of the community but also  independent  experts.   Furthermore,
    the important legal developments in case law and  European  legislation
    drive us to the conclusions we have reached.

115. We earlier concluded that the  legislation  restricting  Ahmadis  is  a
    disproportionate measure that furthermore  undermines  the  fundamental
    right to religious expression.  It has been in place for some time  but
    over time the use of it  by  hostile  non-State  actors  has  made  its
    effects pernicious. It is impermissible to expect  Ahmadis  who  regard
    themselves as Muslims to comply with such legislation  that  undermines
    their fundamental identity and which, if  flouted,  runs  the  risk  of
    persecutory ill-treatment.  Furthermore, an  active  Ahmadi  cannot  be
    expected to be discreet about the practice  and  manifestation  of  his
    faith including its propagation if the decision to do so  is  to  avoid
    coming to the attention of the authorities or non-state actors who  are
    opposed to the fundamental tenets of the Ahmadi faith.

116. If an Ahmadi therefore, in the genuine pursuit of his faith, is  unable
    to practise that faith openly in ways that are of particular importance
    to him and his identity as an Ahmadi because of the restrictions placed
    on him by statute in Pakistan, he is in need of protection in the light
    of the evidence that defiance would lead to a real risk  of  an  unfair
    FIR under sections 298B or C or 295C of the Pakistan Penal Code leading
    to detention and the likelihood of an unfair trial  at  first  instance
    with a risk of prolonged imprisonment until matters can be resolved  on
    appeal.  The risks stem from the sanctions in  the  legislation  itself
    but also from non-state actors who use the law to pursue Ahmadis  in  a
    hostile way.  Together, these factors are capable  of  amounting  to  a
    state-approved or state-condoned act of persecution within the  meaning
    of the Qualification Directive and under the Refugee Convention.

117. The risk faced by an Ahmadi from Rabwah for whom  the  restrictions  in
    Pakistan means that they are unable  to  practise  and  manifest  their
    faith in ways that are of  particular  importance  to  their  religious
    identity is the same as for someone from elsewhere in Pakistan.  It  is
    national legislation and the way it is applied that  is  the  mischief.
    Even if it may thought that there is safety in numbers in  Rabwah,  our
    view is that such safety that there may be is precarious  evidenced  by
    the collective FIRs, although of questionable validity, that hang  over
    the town and the likelihood that such relative safety  is  achieved  by
    restraint which does not allow for the open expression of the religion.
     In the light of this, the option of internal flight to Rabwah  is  not
    reasonably available to an Ahmadi who is in need of protection.

COUNTRY GUIDANCE

118. This country guidance replaces previous guidance in MJ & ZM (Ahmadis  -
    risk) Pakistan CG [2008] UKAIT 00033, and IA & Others (Ahmadis: Rabwah)
    Pakistan CG [2007] UKAIT 00088. The guidance we give  is  based in part
    on the developments in the law including the decisions of  the  Supreme
    Court in HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31, RT (Zimbabwe) [2012] UKSC 38 and the
    CJEU decision in Germany v. Y (C-71/11) & Z  (C-99/11).   The  guidance
    relates principally to Qadiani Ahmadis; but as the legislation which is
    the background to the issues raised in  these  appeals  affects  Lahori
    Ahmadis also, they too are included  in  the  country  guidance  stated
    below.

119. (i)  The background to the risk faced by Ahmadis  is  legislation  that
    restricts the way in which they  are  able  openly  to  practise  their
    faith. The legislation not only prohibits preaching and other forms  of
    proselytising  but  also  in  practice  restricts  other  elements   of
    manifesting one's religious beliefs, such  as  holding  open  discourse
    about  religion   with   non-Ahmadis,   although   not   amounting   to
    proselytising. The prohibitions include openly referring to one's place
    of worship as a mosque and to one's religious leader  as  an  Imam.  In
    addition, Ahmadis are not permitted to refer to the call to  prayer  as
    azan nor to call themselves Muslims or refer to their faith  as  Islam.
    Sanctions include a fine and imprisonment and if  blasphemy  is  found,
    there is a risk of the death penalty which to date has not been carried
    out although there is a risk of lengthy incarceration if the penalty is
    imposed.  There is clear evidence that this legislation is used by non-
    state actors to threaten and harass Ahmadis. This includes  the  filing
    of First Information Reports (FIRs) (the first  step  in  any  criminal
    proceedings) which can result in  detentions  whilst  prosecutions  are
    being pursued. Ahmadis are also subject to attacks by non-state  actors
    from sectors of the majority Sunni Muslim population.

    (ii)    It is, and has long been, possible in general  for  Ahmadis  to
    practise their faith on a restricted basis  either  in  private  or  in
    community with other Ahmadis, without infringing domestic Pakistan law.

120. (i) If an Ahmadi is able  to  demonstrate  that  it  is  of  particular
    importance to his religious identity to practise and manifest his faith
    openly in Pakistan in defiance of  the  restrictions  in  the  Pakistan
    Penal Code (PPC) under sections 298B and 298C, by engaging in behaviour
    described in paragraph 2(i) above, he or she is likely to be in need of
    protection, in the light of the serious nature of  the  sanctions  that
    potentially apply as well as the risk of prosecution under section 295C
    for blasphemy.

    (ii) It is no answer to expect an Ahmadi who fits the description  just
    given to avoid engaging in behaviour described in paragraph 2(i)  above
    ("paragraph 2(i) behaviour") to avoid a risk of prosecution.

121. The need for protection applies equally to men and women. There  is  no
    basis for considering that Ahmadi women as a whole are at a  particular
    or additional risk; the decision that they should not attend mosques in
    Pakistan was made by the Ahmadi  Community  following  attacks  on  the
    mosques in  Lahore  in  2010.  There  is  no  evidence  that  women  in
    particular were the target of those attacks.

122. In light of the above, the first question the decision-maker  must  ask
    is (1) whether the  claimant  genuinely  is  an  Ahmadi.  As  with  all
    judicial fact-finding the judge will need to reach conclusions  on  all
    the evidence as a whole giving such weight to aspects of that  evidence
    as appropriate in  accordance  with  Article  4  of  the  Qualification
    Directive.  This is likely to include an enquiry whether  the  claimant
    was registered with an Ahmadi community in Pakistan and worshipped  and
    engaged there on a regular basis. Post-arrival activity  will  also  be
    relevant.  Evidence likely to be relevant  includes  confirmation  from
    the UK Ahmadi  headquarters  regarding  the  activities  relied  on  in
    Pakistan and confirmation from the local community in the UK where  the
    claimant is worshipping.

123. The next step (2) involves an enquiry into  the  claimant's  intentions
    or wishes as to his or her faith, if returned  to  Pakistan.   This  is
    relevant because of the need to establish whether it is  of  particular
    importance to the religious identity of the Ahmadi concerned to  engage
    in  paragraph  2(i)  behaviour.  The  burden  is  on  the  claimant  to
    demonstrate that any intention or wish to practise and manifest aspects
    of the faith openly that are not permitted by the Pakistan  Penal  Code
    (PPC) is genuinely held and of particular importance to the claimant to
    preserve his or her religious identity.  The decision  maker  needs  to
    evaluate all the evidence. Behaviour since arrival in the UK  may  also
    be relevant. If the claimant discharges this burden he is likely to  be
    in need of protection.

124.  The  option  of  internal  relocation,  previously  considered  to  be
    available in Rabwah, is not in general reasonably open  to  a  claimant
    who genuinely wishes to engage n paragraph 2(i) behaviour, in the light
    of the nationwide effect in Pakistan of the anti-Ahmadi legislation.

125.  Ahmadis who are not able to show that they practised  their  faith  at
    all in Pakistan or  that  they  did  so  on  anything  other  than  the
    restricted basis described in paragraph  2(ii)  above  are  in  general
    unlikely to be able to show that their genuine intentions or wishes are
    to practise and manifest their faith openly on return, as described  in
    paragraph 2(i) above.

126. A sur place claim by an Ahmadi  based  on  post-arrival  conversion  or
    revival  in  belief  and  practice  will  require  careful   evidential
    analysis. This will probably include consideration of evidence  of  the
    head of the claimant's local United Kingdom Ahmadi Community  and  from
    the UK headquarters, the latter particularly in cases where  there  has
    been a conversion. Any adverse findings in the claimant's account as  a
    whole may be relevant to the assessment of likely behaviour on  return.



127. Whilst an Ahmadi who has been found to  be  not  reasonably  likely  to
    engage or wish to engage in paragraph 2(i) behaviour  is,  in  general,
    not at real risk on return to Pakistan, judicial  fact-finders  may  in
    certain cases need to consider whether that person  would  nevertheless
    be reasonably likely to be targeted by non-state actors on  return  for
    religious persecution by reason  of  his/her  prominent  social  and/or
    business profile.



DETERMINATION OF THE APPEALS - GENERAL

128. We now set out the additional  evidence  we  heard  from  four  of  the
    appellants and our findings on all five appeals taking account  of  the
    specific  submission  on  their  appeals.  We  follow  this  with   our
    conclusions on each applying the guidance to their appeals  before  us.
    In all cases the appellants have not been found credible as to part  or
    the whole of their claims. Having heard the extensive evidence from the
    expert and other witnesses as to Ahmadi practices and circumstances  in
    Pakistan whose integrity is beyond doubt as well as the appellants  who
    gave evidence before us, we consider that had the First  tier  Tribunal
    Judges heard this new evidence it is possible that they might have come
    to different conclusions. We  make  it  clear  however  that  we  leave
    undisturbed the findings of the First tier  Tribunal  as  this  is  the
    basis on which we have conducted the appeals before us.  Given  however
    what we now understand to be the position for Ahmadis in Pakistan,  the
    negative findings by the earlier tribunals carry  less  weight  in  our
    assessment of the genuineness of the appellants' religious  convictions
    and what they would wish to do if returned than might otherwise be  the
    case.

Determination of the appeals - THE FIVE APPELLANTS

MN

129. The following matters have been agreed by the respondent:

    "(i)   The appellant MN is an Ahmadi.

    (ii)   He was a successful  businessman  in  Pakistan  with  sufficient
         wealth to enable him to donate significant sums  of  money  to  the
         Ahmadi community.

    (iii)  He was an active member  of  the  Ahmadi  community  within  the
         community in Pakistan.

    (iv)   The appellant "discreetly proselytised his faith" to non-Ahmadis
         in Pakistan but only to persons he could trust because he  was  not
         allowed to go and preach in Pakistan.

    (v)    The appellant was present  at  and  injured  in  the  attack  by
         Islamist extremists on the Ahmadi mosque in Modeltown, Lahore on 28
         May 2010.

    (vi)   He was taken to hospital and in hospital he was visited  [there]
         by the Interior Minister, Mr Rehman Malik, on 29 May 2010.

    (vii)  The appellant's speaking to the Minister - as a  victim  of  the
         attack - was shown on Pakistani television.

    (viii) On 31 May 2010 the hospital in which the appellant lay was  also
         attacked by Islamist extremists."

130. As to facts asserted but not agreed by  the  Secretary  of  State,  the
    appellant states that in early 2010 he received  two  threatening  text
    messages abusing him and calling him to abjure the Ahmadi  faith.   One
    sender  was  from  North  West  Frontier  Province.   Furthermore,  the
    appellant had been critical of the Minister and government  during  his
    conversation  (whilst   in   hospital)   in   relation   to   religious
    discrimination and a failure to protect Ahmadi mosques from the attack.
     It is also asserted but not agreed by the Secretary of State  that  MN
    is under a religious obligation to preach his faith which he takes very
    seriously.  The appellant also relies on his claims to have converted a
    Mr AJK and encountered trouble when preaching to the son of a hard-line
    anti-Ahmadi Punjab Court judge.  Following his appearance on  Pakistani
    television, people who did not previously know the appellant was Ahmadi
    discovered this and were shocked by  it,  resulting  in  his  brother's
    dismissal and beating.  Since July 2010, the appellant has been free to
    be an extremely active preacher of  the  Ahmadi  faith  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

131. MN gave his evidence in  English  and  relied  on  statements  dated  8
    September and 18 October 2010 prepared for the hearing before the First-
    tier Tribunal and a further statement dated 18 November  2011  prepared
    in anticipation of an earlier hearing.  In summary,  he  gave  evidence
    about his endeavours to establish an Ahmadi mosque in Leeds and the way
    in which he sought to propagate the Ahmadi faith in  that  city.   This
    includes maintaining a  stall  in  a  place  designated  by  the  local
    authority and on a less formal basis during the course of his  week  in
    his neighbourhood, as he travels and in his dealings with  others  over
    the previous sixteen to eighteen months.  As  to  the  success  of  his
    endeavours, Mr Jorro established the one example of an interested party
    who was undertaking research in blasphemy law  from  Hartlepool.   They
    were planning to meet at some time in the future.

132. Under cross-examination MN confirmed that if someone were  to  ask  him
    to identify his faith, it depended  upon  the  situation.   If  he  was
    obliged to tell the person concerned, then he would confirm he  was  an
    Ahmadi, but in informal situations care was needed and it depended  how
    long he had known his enquirer.

133. As to Ordinance XX, MN confirmed that he considered this unjust and  as
    to whether he had consulted any lawyer in Pakistan for a challenge,  MN
    explained that it had been challenged in the late  1980s  when  he  was
    part of the security team.  A case had been filed in the Supreme  Court
    who had directed it should be determined by the Shari'a Court.

134. As to the fate of his family members, MN thought that  his  sister  and
    brother-in-law had been persecuted before they left Pakistan (they live
    in Norway) and last year his brother had been beaten  and  sacked  from
    his job.  As to the restrictions on voting, MN explained  that  he  had
    not voted.  The last opportunity had been  in  1971  when  he  was  not
    eligible.  Now he could only vote as  a  minority.   Returning  to  the
    difficulties encountered by his brother, MN explained that he had  made
    no complaint about his problems with his employers in the light of  his
    character and he had not reported the matter to the police.

135. Cross-examination  turned  to  the  publicity  surrounding  the  Lahore
    mosque attacks and the evidence produced by  MN  in  support  of  this.
    Questions turned to  MN's  concerns  about  being  unable  to  live  in
    Pakistan because of outstanding FIRs against him.  He  explained  there
    was not one but two because of the mosque attacks incidents.  These had
    affected more than 100 people.  As to whether those identified were  in
    danger, his  response  was  that  it  depended  upon  their  particular
    circumstances but he regarded himself at particular risk because he was
    a well-known figure from the textile  industry  for  more  than  twenty
    years and it  was  very  easy  to  locate  someone  in  Pakistan.   The
    appellant went on  to  explain  that  in  his  view  it  was  pointless
    reporting to the police and  authorities  because  they  were  actively
    involved with  the  terrorists  or  took  money  from  them  and  their
    perception was that (anti-Ahmadi) activity was "religiously" good.   He
    also referred to the pointlessness of endeavouring to compel the police
    to respond by applying to the courts.

136. Questions referred to a retired general, an Ahmadi who had died in  the
    mosque terrorist  attacks  and  the  appellant  explained  that  senior
    military posts were no longer available to the Ahmadi  community  since
    1974 and especially after 1986.  Mr Malik asked MN about  the  fate  of
    Aamir Hussain, a former minister who had spoken out against Ahmadis and
    who had been expelled from his party as a result.   The  appellant  was
    unsure about this and made the  point  that  he  should  have  come  on
    television to apologise for what he had  said.   His  understanding  of
    this individual was that he was not a former minister but  a  religious
    scholar.

137. Mr Malik's concluding questions  related  to  the  opportunity  of  the
    appellant  exercising  internal  flight  by  living  in  Rabwah.    The
    appellant gave a summary of the difficulties faced by  the  Ahmadis  in
    that town and his understanding that it was no longer safe.

138. At the conclusion of this appellant's evidence, we were directed  to  a
    statement by Dr Asim Salim, the President of the Leeds  branch  of  the
    Ahmaddiya Muslim Association United Kingdom, in which it  reports  that
    membership has 90 devotees.  The appellant is described as one  of  the
    most active members and the most active preacher in their tabligh  team
    at Leeds.  The statement by Dr  Salim  also  refers  to  the  appellant
    having held several offices in Pakistan and Dubai at a  high  level  on
    behalf of the community.  Mr Salim was at the hearing, however Mr Malik
    had no questions and accordingly he was not called.

139. Our findings on the new evidence, taking into account the facts  agreed
    between the parties and the preserved conclusions of the  FtTm  are  as
    follows. (We disregard evidence that sought to reopen this  appellant's
    history before coming to  the  United  Kingdom.)   We  find  that  this
    appellant has a high profile in the light of his  business  connections
    in Pakistan and the publicity surrounding the injuries he sustained  as
    the result of the mosque attack in 2010. It is reasonably  likely  that
    were he in Pakistan now his presence would become generally  known.  We
    further find that  he  has  been  particularly  active  in  the  UK  in
    propagating his faith with  a  fervour  that  he  had  not  evinced  in
    Pakistan.  We accept that his reasons given for discretion  in  matters
    of propagation were because of the general disapproval of and hostility
    towards Ahmadis by the majority in Pakistan who are Sunni Muslims,  the
    legislative restrictions and sanctions and out of a fear of  harm  from
    extremists.  We are satisfied that he is an Ahmadi for whom  his  faith
    plays a fundamental role in his  life.   We  accept  that  the  matters
    restricted by  the  PPC,  in  particular  tabligh,  are  of  particular
    importance to his religious identity. He is in need of  protection  and
    his appeal is allowed on refugee grounds.

NH

140. This appellant adopted a  further  statement  dated  19  December  2011
    which had been prepared in anticipation of an earlier  hearing  of  her
    appeal in the Upper Tribunal.  Disregarding new  material  relating  to
    her past experiences we  noted  her  evidence  that  as  an  Ahmadi  in
    Pakistan she would be unable to hide her faith from anyone as they were
    easily recognised and would and could not live discreetly as  this  was
    not permitted by the faith.

141.  Mr  Yeo's   questions   in   examination-in-chief   established   this
    appellant's understanding of tabligh which  the  interpreter  explained
    was the word for preaching in  Arabic.   The  appellant  confirmed  she
    understood it to be a duty for Ahmadis to do tabligh.  As  to  how  she
    went about this, she referred to  sharing  the  message  of  peace  and
    acceptance of ideas  with  friends  and  others.   Examination-in-chief
    concluded with her evidence that were she to go back  to  Pakistan  she
    would not be able to take any steps to avoid problems because  as  part
    of her faith, she would have to carry on the duty (of preaching).

142. Under cross-examination, Mr Malik asked the appellant  to  explain  the
    difference  between  active  and  non-active  Ahmadis,  a   description
    appearing in her statement.  She explained that an active member is one
    who keeps in touch on a regular basis  with  the  Jama'at  (the  Ahmadi
    community) and on the instruction of the Jama'at to preach and also  to
    look after the children.  The appellant confirmed that if  asked  about
    her religion, she would respond saying she  is  an  Ahmadi.   Mr  Malik
    directed questions to the appellant concerning her statement  that  she
    would be unable to hide her faith in Pakistan.  Her  response  referred
    to the freedom everyone had about their faith  and  contrasted  matters
    (in Pakistan) with those in the United Kingdom.  She acknowledged there
    were places of worship for the Ahmadi in Pakistan but referred  to  the
    lack of a right to call it a mosque.  She used to go to a mosque  on  a
    regular basis to perform prayers but stopped after the  attacks  on  28
    May 2010.  Mr Malik's further questions resulted in confirmation by the
    appellant that she would not and could not live discreetly in Pakistan.



143. The appellant also clarified her evidence in  response  to  a  question
    from us.  As to how it is that (female) Ahmadis are recognised, it  was
    because they wear a hijab (a veil) and also because of  their  dealings
    with other people.  Through their "good manners" people  came  to  know
    who they are.  The appellant drew a  distinction  between  the  way  in
    which the veil was worn by Ahmadi women  and  by  Sunni  Muslim  women,
    explaining essentially that the veil took the form  of  a  scarf  which
    covered the upper and lower part of the face  in  contrast  with  those
    worn by Sunni women which was a simple one.

144. Mr Malik  pursued  the  point  that  there  was  nothing  stopping  the
    appellant from returning to Pakistan and living the way she  had  lived
    before.  However she reiterated the problems that she  had  there,  and
    that the police would not take action to  protect  her.   She  did  not
    believe the courts would do anything for them either.  She was a single
    person.  She had never been to the courts, something she  knew  nothing
    about.  Mr Malik returned to questions about why the  appellant  wanted
    to live in this country and she referred to  the  freedom  of  religion
    here.  Her remaining relatives in Pakistan included  a  paternal  uncle
    and two sisters, both of whom were married.  One lives  in  Lahore  and
    the other in  Rabwah.   As  to  whether  they  had  had  problems,  she
    explained they were unable to talk to anybody  about  their  faith  and
    they were unable to go to the mosque to perform  their  prayers.   They
    were called names.  She considered that  the  life  of  any  Ahmadi  in
    Pakistan was in danger.  She was however unable to confirm whether  any
    of her relatives had been charged or prosecuted.  As  to  herself,  she
    confirmed that in the United Kingdom she went  to  the  mosque  and  in
    terms of preaching  they  had  held  meetings.   She  also  distributed
    leaflets.  She had never voted in Pakistan as their Jamaat did not take
    part in  any  elections  there.   Mr  Yeo  had  no  questions  for  re-
    examination.  Our questions were confined to establishing  whether  her
    sisters were married or not, an aspect dealt with above.

145. We remind ourselves that this appellant had not  been  believed  as  to
    her past experiences.  The First tier Tribunal judge explained at  [26]
    of his determination that he did not intend to assess this  appellant's
    knowledge of her faith which had been accepted by  the  respondent  and
    tested at interview.  He found that her case " at its highest  is  that
    [in terms of preaching] she  handed  out  books  to  friends  whom  she
    thought might be interested and invited them to watch Ahmadi television
    but with one exception none of  these  activities  caused  any  adverse
    interest in her....".   Having  heard  her  evidence  we  accept  that,
    despite the earlier adverse findings, she is a devout Ahmadi  and  that
    she takes seriously the propagation of her faith as  evidenced  by  her
    activity in the UK.  She  had  been  discreet  in  this  previously  in
    Pakistan.  Her reasons for discretion in matters  of  propagation  were
    the same as many shared by Ahmadis who wish to propagate. It is because
    of a general disapproval  of  and  hostility  towards  Ahmadis  by  the
    majority who  are  mainstream  Muslims,  legislative  restrictions  and
    sanctions and to an extent out of a fear of harm  from  extremists.  We
    accept that the  matters  restricted  by  the  PPC  are  of  particular
    importance to her religious identity and that she cannot reasonably  be
    expected to abstain from manifesting them.  We conclude that she too is
    in need of protection and her appeal is allowed on refugee grounds.

ZN

146. As set out in a statement of facts relied on, it is  acknowledged  that
    this appellant's account of specific incidents of past persecution  had
    been mainly rejected. This was no longer in issue in the proceedings as
    permission was  not  granted  on  the  ground  challenging  credibility
    findings.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge had  found  that  neither  the
    appellant nor her husband had been open about their faith in public and
    made findings that they had not carried out the obligation to propagate
    to any degree and did not feel  obligated  to  propagate  their  faith.
    However, the First-tier  Tribunal  had  not  rejected  the  appellant's
    husband's assertion that he was injured in one of the mosque attacks in
    May 2010 nor the appellant's  assertion  that  her  mother's  house  in
    Lahore was subject to gunfire during the night on 24 June 2010.

147. We note that the First-tier Tribunal took the view that it  would  have
    been very difficult for the appellant to claim that the attack  on  her
    husband was personal given the widely reported events of the day  which
    indicate that it was a generalised attack against the Ahmadi sect.   We
    do not consider that as a matter of law, the judge was right to require
    evidence of personal targeting  in  the  context  of  an  attack  which
    targeted all Ahmadis at these  two  mosques.   As  to  the  appellant's
    mother's house  being  subject  to  gunfire,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    judge's acknowledgement of  this  was  somewhat  qualified.   His  view
    appeared to be that the appellant's claim that the gunmen were from the
    Khatme-e-Nabuwat was an attempt to exaggerate the evidence in order  to
    bolster the claim.

148. The judge found that that this  appellant  and  her  husband  were  not
    credible witnesses  but  accepted  that  both  are  Ahmadis.   Although
    finding that the appellant and her husband had never  been  open  about
    their faith in public  and  that  they  had  never  felt  obligated  to
    propagate their faith, the judge  also  concluded  that  the  appellant
    would not be at any greater risk than  any  other  Ahmadi  inclined  to
    propagate.  We heard no evidence from this appellant and  there  is  no
    evidential basis for us to reach a different conclusion from the  First
    tier Tribunal on the importance to this appellant of propagation.   She
    has failed to demonstrate that the restrictions on Ahmadis in  Pakistan
    on the practice of her  faith  are  of  particular  importance  to  her
    religious identity and she has not shown either an intention or wish to
    defy such restrictions.  Notwithstanding our observations at [128],  on
    the adverse credibility findings made as  a  whole  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal judges, there is  insufficient  evidence  to  show  that  this
    appellant meets the criteria we  have  set  out  in  our  guidance.  We
    dismiss her appeal.

SB

149. This appellant adopted a statement dated 26 March 2012.  She refers  to
    the greater freedom Ahmadis had prior to the Ordinance of 1974 and  the
    history of her involvement in preaching until 2011 to non-Ahmadis.   We
    bear in mind, however, that the First-tier Tribunal, although accepting
    the appellant would have preached to other Ahmadis,  had  not  accepted
    she would have taken the great risk of preaching to  non-Ahmadis.   The
    error of law decision of 18 November 2011 indicated that  the  findings
    of the First-tier Tribunal were to stand.

150. The appellant's statement also refers to her  activity  in  the  United
    Kingdom, which includes regular attendance at Friday prayers ("jummah")
    at the local Ahmadi mosque in Hounslow South and her attendance at  the
    annual Ahmadi convention in London in July as  well  as  attending  the
    month-long prayers in Ramadan.  She had been unable to  preach  in  the
    way that she had claimed to in Pakistan due to the language barrier but
    fully intended to improve her English and "resume" actively  preaching.
    Since November 2011 she has started handing out leaflets  around  Stock
    Road in Slough where a particular friend lives but  she  has  not  been
    able to go door to doorm as the Jama'at is not keen  for  women  to  do
    this for safety reasons.  She has also been involved in  an  exhibition
    organised by the local Ahmadi community which she took friends to.  The
    appellant states she would be unable to preach in the manner she has in
    the United Kingdom due to the fear  of  persecution  by  the  Khatam  e
    Nabuwat mullahs and the fear of imprisonment due to the blasphemy laws.
     Were she forced to return, she would try to continue to preach in  the
    manner she claims to have done before leaving Pakistan.

151. At the hearing the appellant adopted her statement and Mr Malik   asked
    why there were no statements from the friends she had  invited  to  the
    exhibition.  Her response was that if she had  asked  them  they  would
    have come to say that she had invited them.   The  appellant  explained
    she is living in her brother's house  and  receives  financial  support
    from NASS.  Mr Malik put it to her there was an opportunity  to  attend
    Ahmadi mosques in Pakistan.  Her response was that they used to go  but
    after the incidents on 28 May 2010, females were stopped by the Jamaat.
     Mr Malik pursued a line of questioning with the appellant  as  he  did
    with others asking why she had not spoken to a lawyer with  a  view  to
    challenging in the courts the restrictions on Ahmadis. The response was
    to  reiterate  the  difficulties  faced  by  Ahmadis.   Otherwise   the
    questions focused on the restrictions on  the  appellant's  ability  to
    preach in Pakistan.  There was no re-examination.

152. We are satisfied that the adverse findings by the First  tier  Tribunal
    mean she cannot be accepted as an  Ahmadi  who  has  preached  to  non-
    Ahmadis and we also consider Mr Malik entitled  to  ask  us  to  attach
    limited weight to her sur place activities.  Nonetheless, as  found  by
    the judge and from her evidence before us that whilst in Pakistan,  she
    practised her Ahmadi faith which she  preached  to  other  Ahmadis  (as
    found by the judge) and that she is a devout Ahmadi.   We  accept  that
    she has moderated her behaviour to protect herself from  arbitrary  and
    potentially persecutory treatment by the authorities at the instigation
    of  the  Khatme-e-Nabuwat  and  others  opposed  to  her   faith.   The
    restrictions in the PPC on her ability to live openly as an Ahmadi  are
    matters of particular importance to her religious identity. She  is  in
    need of protection and her appeal too is allowed on refugee grounds

HQ

153. This appellant adopted a statement dated 22  March  2012  in  which  he
    refers to his continued activity  with  the  Ahmadi  community  in  the
    United  Kingdom  having  held  two  formal  positions,  one  as  Sports
    Secretary between January and December 2009, and Census  Secretary  for
    Wimbledon Park branch between January and December 2010.   His  current
    position is that of Organiser for Preaching members over the age of  40
    (Ansarallah).  He organises teams to distribute leaflets and  organises
    preaching stalls.  He also refers to leafleting  in  various  parts  of
    London.  The appellant explains that since leaving Pakistan his  family
    have been unable to live in their  main  residence  in  Rabwah  and  he
    refers to  the  police  and  the  Khatam-e-Nabuwat  mullahs  constantly
    looking for him, information he has received from a  friend  living  in
    Rabwah.

154. We remind ourselves that the First-tier Tribunal did  not  believe  the
    appellant's account.  In particular it did not find  it  credible  that
    the appellant would openly preach and proselytise the Ahmadi  faith  if
    he genuinely considered it would put both his and his family's lives in
    danger.  In his error of law decision, UTJ P  Lane  observed  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge had given legally adequate reasons why he did
    not consider the appellant had suffered the persecutory  attentions  of
    anyone in Pakistan prior to his arrival in the United Kingdom  although
    he identified a clear error in that the judge did not consider  whether
    the fear which would stop the appellant from proselytising was  a  well
    founded one  and  if  it  were,  whether  it  could  be  eliminated  by
    relocation.

155. The appellant was tendered for  cross-examination,  in  the  course  of
    which he gave more detail about the  roles  he  played  in  his  Ahmadi
    community in the UK.  As to  his  job  in  charge  of  the  census,  he
    explained that this involved keeping a record of members, recording new
    arrivals and those who had left.  As to the purpose for this,  and  its
    connection with preaching, it enabled members to be  contacted  when  a
    programme was being arranged.  The appellant had referred to a Mr Ahmed
    from Mitcham whom he had invited to a  peace  conference  held  by  the
    community in 2011.  He explained to Mr Malik that he had not asked  him
    to produce a statement as it would not have been suitable  nor  did  he
    consider it was necessary.  The appellant explained why  his  wife  had
    not provided a statement explaining why she and  the  family  had  left
    their main residence (she did not know that it would be needed in  this
    country) and why there was no statement from the informant who had told
    him about the continuing adverse interest (one had already been given).
     The appellant confirmed that his family were hiding in Karachi due  to
    their fear but the appellant himself had never been to that  city.   As
    to the prospect of living there himself, the appellant referred to  the
    negative aspects of living in hiding.  When it  was  put  to  him  that
    there are a million Ahmadis living openly in  Pakistan,  the  appellant
    replied in terms that this may be so but he reminded Mr Malik that they
    are unable to call themselves  Muslim  and  they  cannot  preach  their
    faith.

156. Our questions for clarification established the way  in  which  records
    were kept of members in the appellant's Ahmadi community in the  United
    Kingdom.  It appears there are various categories including men over 40
    (majis, ansarullah), and a further group for males (known  as  khudamul
    Ahmadiyya) between 15 to 40, together with a group for those aged 7  to
    15 (atfalul Ahmadiyya), and finally a group for females over  15  years
    of age (lhamaimaullah).  The appellant also confirmed the way in  which
    positions of responsibility rotated in the community.  The President is
    elected and he appoints the officers, this position being the  same  in
    communities all over the world.

157. We accept that Mr Malik was entitled to ask us to attach little  weight
    to the appellant's sur place activities in the  light  of  the  judge's
    findings.  Nevertheless,  having  heard  the  appellant's  evidence  in
    particular that recorded above,  we  accept  that  this  appellant  has
    become actively involved in his faith in the UK because he is a  devout
    Ahmadi and we conclude  that  he  would  want  to  continue  with  this
    adherence to and manifestation of his faith if returned. He  has  shown
    that the restrictions on his ability  to  do  so  would  undermine  his
    religious identity and  the  matters  restricted  by  the  PPC  are  of
    particular importance to that identity. He is in need of protection and
    his appeal too is allowed on refugee grounds.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

158. By way of summary, therefore, the decisions of the First-tier  Tribunal
    in MN, NH, SB and HQ have been found to contain errors of law and  have
    been set aside.  We have remade the decisions in the appeals and  allow
    them on refugee grounds.

159. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal in ZN has also been  set  aside
    for error of law.  We have remade the decision but  come  to  the  same
    conclusion as the First-tier Tribunal and dismiss her appeal on refugee
    grounds.



Signed                                             Date    November 2012

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson
    SCHEDULE I

THE EXPERT AND OTHER EVIDENCE

DR W

160. Dr W is a Doctor of Philosophy from the  University  of  Punjab  and  a
    historian.  His current post is at the Centre of  South  Asian  Studies
    and he is also a fellow at Wolfson College University of Cambridge.  He
    has held previously senior posts at the Government  College  University
    in Lahore.  At the outset, Dr W explained that he is currently  working
    on the concept of the finality of the  prophethood  and  its  political
    implications in Pakistan.  It is a work  of  an  academic  nature.   He
    identified the finality of the prophethood as a basic contentious point
    between Ahmadis and the Sunni state in  Pakistan.   He  confirmed  that
    much of his current research related to the Ahmadi.

161. We have drawn on his report in setting out the summary of  the  history
    of the Ahmadi religion in the opening paragraphs of this determination.
    Additional key points we draw from his report include the following.

    (i)    Tabligh and da'wa (preaching and propagation of the  faith)  are
         for Ahmadis the lifeblood and raison d'tre of the movement.  Dr  W
         refers to this being the 'true jihad'.  He  explains  that  tabligh
         can take various  forms  as  well  as  direct  preaching  and  that
         "individual efforts, individual  actions  and  individual  personal
         examples  are  classed  as  'the  most  important  ingredients   of
         tabligh'".

    (ii)   As an important part of tabligh  and  "da'wa",  members  of  the
         "jama'at" are asked to distribute literature in abundance but  with
         discretion  and  "hiqmat"  (wisdom).   A  considerable  amount   of
         literature is produced by Ahmadis which is considered  the  biggest
         tool for  conversion.   The  Ahmadis  global  satellite  television
         station, Muslim TV Ahmadiyya International transmits programmes  24
         hours a day in various languages.

    (iii)  As to the history of the movement and the way in which hostility
         has become politicised, spilling over into  violence,  a  clash  at
         Rabwah (where 95% of the population is Ahmadi) between the  student
         wing of a religious party, Jamat-i-Islami and Ahmadi youth led to a
         countrywide  condemnation  of   Ahmadis.    Khatme-e-Nabuwat   (the
         spelling varies) is described as a conglomerate of different  Ulema
         (religious scholars).  Its call to "declare" Ahmadis  a  non-Muslim
         minority had a tangible response from the masses,  particularly  in
         the districts of Punjab.

    (iv)   The government under Z. A. Bhutto was not willing to  accede  to
         such a demand and so a judicial commission was formed to look  into
         the Rabwah incident.  Although findings of the commission were  not
         consistent with the accusations of the  Ulema,  pressure  continued
         and eventually on 7 September 1974 the National Assembly passed the
         resolution which declared that all Ahmadis in the country  were  to
         be regarded as a non-Muslim minority.

    (v)    Article 260 of the Pakistan constitution states that  'A  person
         who does not believe in the absolute and  unqualified  finality  of
         the prophethood of Muhammad is not a Muslim for the purposes of the
         constitution or law'.  Dr W observes:

             "However,  Ahmadis  were  subject  to   the   worst   possible
             persecution when Zia Ul Haq took over the reins of power after
             removing  Bhutto.  On  26  April  1984  Zia,   influenced   by
             reactionary elements, promulgated  Ordinance  XX  which  added
             sections 298(B) and 298(C) to the Pakistan  penal  code  Under
             this legislation it is an  offence,  punishable  by  a  prison
             sentence of up to three years, the imposition  of  a  fine  or
             both for an Ahmadi who:

                  directly or indirectly, poses  himself  as  a  Muslim,  or
                  calls, or refers to, his faith as Islam,  or  preaches  or
                  propagates his faith, or  invites  others  to  accept  his
                  faith, by words either spoken or written,  or  by  visible
                  representations, or in any manner whatsoever outrages  the
                  religious feelings of Muslims." (as quoted from Islam  and
                  the Ahmadiyya  Jamaat:  History,  Belief,  Practice  by  S
                  Valentine published in London in 2008.)

      He continues:

             "In  1986  Ahmadis  were  subject  to  even  more   repressive
             legislation when 295C was inserted into the Penal Code.   This
             stated that the penalties for blaspheming the prophet Muhammad
             were death or life imprisonment with fines.   This  was  later
             amended in 1991 to make the death penalty, the only punishment
             for blasphemy."

      Although the state had not executed anyone  under  these  provisions,
         religious extremists have killed some people accused,  citing  them
         (no source is given by Dr W for these assertions).

    (vi)   A person who does not believe in the  absolute  and  unqualified
         finality of the prophethood is not permitted to cast a  vote  as  a
         Muslim and the pro forma for obtaining a  Pakistani  passport  asks
         applicants to sign a declaration that they consider the founder  of
         the faith to be  an  imposter  and  that  they  also  consider  his
         followers to be non-Muslims.  Dr W refers  to  official  statistics
         revealed by Ahmadis that from April 1984 to April 2004  the  number
         of Ahmadis charged for  displaying  the  Kalima  was  756,  37  for
         calling "azan" and 404 for posing as  Muslims.   Finally  131  were
         charged for using Islamic epitaphs, 590 for preaching, 213  charged
         under blasphemy laws  and  845  for  various  other  cases  against
         Ahmadis under the anti-Ahmadi Ordinance 298(b)/(c).  His source  is
         a report of the Parliamentary Human Rights Group entitled  A  Place
         for Martyrs by J Ensor as Editor.  These statistics  appear  to  be
         from an annex to that report, being a summary of  cases  instituted
         against Ahmadis in Pakistan from April 1984 to December 2005.

    (vii)  There was also reference in the report to the previous  Minister
         for Religious Affairs declaring on 7 September 2008 in his role  as
         the anchor of a popular religious programme  that  members  of  the
         Ahmadi community were "wajibul qatl"  (obligatory  for  Muslims  to
         kill).  Within 48 hours of the  pronouncement  on  television,  two
         prominent Ahmadis were gunned down, the source cited by Dr W  being
         reports of the Jinnah Institute.

    (viii) It is common for Ahmadi students to be  ostracised  by  teachers
         and fellow students.  Since more and  more  Ahmadi  students  enrol
         each year, members of organisations such as  the  Jamiat  Talaba-i-
         Islam (the student offshoot of the Jamaat-i-Islami) gather lists of
         all Ahmadi students enrolled to  assist  with  targeting  them  for
         discrimination.  There is also reference to the Ahmadis  being  the
         subject of hate literature in the report which  although  short  on
         detail, it does identify a monthly magazine, Laulak.

    (ix)   The make-up of Khatme-e-Nabuwat is described as being  primarily
         composed of Sunni ("deobandi ulema")  although  its  membership  is
         said to include some prominent Shi'as as well.  It is said to  have
         ties to the Jamaat-i-Islami too.  Dr W makes the statement that:

             "It is quite active hounding Ahmadis in the UK, Suhail Bava is
             currently its leader.  There are some instances when  Khatm-i-
             Nabuwat operatives exhort on the  Muslims  to  boycott  Ahmadi
             shopkeepers.  From the oral source it has  been  learned  that
             some Ahmadis have moved to other vicinities  where  they  have
             their kins."

162. Dr W described when examined in  chief  by  Ms  Jegarajah  the  growing
    impact on the influence of Khatme-e-Nabuwat who are at the core of  the
    Islamisation process including the Islamisation of  the  "upper  middle
    classes".  The most recent attack on an Ahmadi mosque had been, as  far
    as he could recall, in the last days of January 2012.  He referred also
    to the linking by people of the Ahmadi to  "the  Christian  and  Jewish
    lobby".  He referred to the Ahmadis as having been regarded as  a  seed
    planted by the British to undermine Muslims.   In  contemporary  terms,
    events in the North West Provinces and in Afghanistan had  resulted  in
    hatred towards the West which had spilled over into  hostility  towards
    the Ahmadi.  He referred to there being at times collusion between  the
    state and the Khatme-e-Nabuwat, particularly at district administration
    level and illustrated this by referring to the Home  Secretary  of  the
    Punjab   stopping   the   Ahmadi   centennial   celebrations.     State
    functionaries have a partisan role towards the Ahmadi.

163. Ms Jegarajah turned her questioning to a reference in Dr W's report  to
    the Ahmadi population.  According to the 1981  census  it  was  104,244
    which had increased to 163,982 in 1992.   The  census  of  1998  showed
    religious minorities nearing 11 to 13 million with Ahmadis claiming  to
    have a population of 4 million.  Dr W estimated that the  figures  from
    Ahmadi sources had been exaggerated and appeared in  their  promotional
    literature.  He did not believe they (the Ahmadi)  had  carried  out  a
    statistical survey and as to his estimate, he would  not  go  beyond  1
    million Ahmadis in Pakistan settling on a range of "1 million  or  less
    than 1 million".  He described the migration of Ahmadis since 1984 when
    the Khaliph came to London as quite constant.  He characterised Ahmadis
    as educated people, professionals with  emphasis  on  education  having
    been made by the founder.  The only Nobel Laureate  from  Pakistan  had
    been an Ahmadi.  Because of religious pressure  Ahmadis  were  impeded,
    although not absolutely excluded, from  education  today,  even  though
    there were hazards.  He was not however aware of any extreme  examples.
    He went on to say that  students  had  been  taken  away  and  tortured
    although this was not just Ahmadis.   Once  this  had  been  a  regular
    practice but now matters are slightly better.  These practices  however
    had not been totally eliminated.  As to security, Ahmadis provided  for
    themselves.  Dr W considered this was limited to  Rabwah,  although  he
    did not consider this foolproof in the face of the "zeal and  zest"  of
    the anti-Ahmadi movement.

164. As to complaints against Ahmadis, in the context of  FIRs,  ever  since
    sections 298B and 298C had  been  added  to  the  Penal  Code,  certain
    incidents had risen to unprecedented levels in the  last  five  to  ten
    years, implicating Ahmadis and Christians.  These can arise in property
    disputes.  The mullahs used FIRs in large number and  will  go  to  the
    extent of threatening the attorney or lawyers, even the judge; (Dr  W's
    source for this being his analysis of the media and  reports).   As  to
    the frequency, he was unable to be specific other than  observing  that
    there were far too many, such FIRs not only  being  filed  individually
    but collectively also.  He considered 213 FIRs reported  for  blasphemy
    not a small number in the context of the death penalty.

165. Mr Jorro established in his questions that the  previous  Minister  for
    Religious Affairs who had declared it obligatory for  Muslims  to  kill
    members of the Ahmadi sect had a huge  following  with  the  youth  and
    although he has changed channel, he still has  a  television  presence.
    Dr W explained  that  prominent  Ahmadis  can  be  big  businessmen  or
    professionals and referred to the common discourse that the Ahmadi were
    promoting the interests of people not loyal to  Pakistan.   People  had
    been entreated not to go and buy things from Ahmadi shops. He confirmed
    that the Khatme-e-Nabuwat (by their  abbreviated  name)  did  not  have
    electoral power but they had "muscle power".  He did not  consider  the
    attacks on the Lahore mosques to have been  random.   An  attack  on  a
    mosque or prayer house is always well planned and targeted.

166. Mr Lemer asked for confirmation of  Dr  W's  earlier  answer  that  the
    situation  for  education  (of  Ahmadis)  had  improved  recently.   He
    confirmed it had generally.  When directed to reference in a report  by
    the Asian Human Rights Commission to the need for students,  apparently
    recently, to  identify  themselves  as  non-Muslims  if  Ahmadi,  Dr  W
    explained that since the power and presence of  the  Jameera  Islam  in
    education institutions had diminished quite  substantively,  harassment
    is not as great as it used to be in the 1980s and  90s.   He  confirmed
    that on identity cards and  forms  there  was  separate  provision  for
    religion, including such disclosure when applying for a  passport.   He
    concluded that the diminished number of students  who  have  a  leaning
    towards Islamised groups had made  "life  comfortable  for  the  Ahmadi
    student".

167. Mr Malik asked  Dr  W  whether  he  agreed  that  the  introduction  of
    amendments to the Constitution in 1974 had been the result of a  debate
    and parliamentary process.  Dr W accepted they  had,  although  in  his
    view that did not necessarily mean they were  rational.   Asked  by  Mr
    Malik about chapter 1 of  the  Constitution,  that  entrenched  certain
    fundamental constitutional rights, Dr W said he believed that there was
    inconsistency between the rights claimed  by  Mr  Malik  to  reside  in
    Articles  8  and  20  of  the  Constitution  and  the  change  to   the
    Constitution  and  the  blasphemy  laws  introduced  in  1984.   Dr   W
    highlighted that the blasphemy law remained in force and that the  real
    problem was that Ahmadis could not read the Quran  or  display  Quranic
    verses anywhere on their houses.

168. Mr Malik returned to questioning Dr W  about  the  reasons  behind  the
    change in the Constitution in 1974,.   Dr W's response was that he  was
    unable to recall any incident  in  history  when  the  decision  as  to
    whether someone was a Muslim or non-Muslim, Christian or  non-Christian
    has been agitated at the floor of a Parliament or  the  Senate.   Dr  W
    took the view that it was  not  unrest  in  the  country  but  clerical
    pressure which led to the change in the Constitution which proved to be
    decisive.  Mr Malik asked Dr W whether he agreed that the judiciary  in
    Pakistan is now "very independent".  Dr W said it was "relatively"  but
    not fully so because religious sectors of  society  had  a  bearing  on
    whatever decision was reached.

169. Mr Malik asked Dr W whether there  was  any  reason  in  principle  why
    Ahmadis or a group could not challenge  unjust  restrictions  on  their
    rights.  Dr W observed that Ahmadis had brought a challenge but had not
    been given any relief whatsoever.  The decision  had  been  by  Justice
    Khalil Ur Rahman which was available  on  the  internet.   Although  Mr
    Malik argued that this decision had been made in the 1980s and that the
    judiciary were now different, Dr W responded that he  considered  there
    was not enough spine in the judiciary to  come  up  with  such  a  bold
    decision in the light of current religious views in Pakistan.

170. Dr  W  acknowledged  that  Ahmadis  did  have  places  of  worship  but
    considered that that their  inability  to  call  them  mosques  was  an
    important symbolic restriction.  Such places were available  throughout
    the country.  He did not accept that Ahmadis  were  fully  entitled  to
    pray in view of the restrictions on them not praying as Muslims.

171. Questions then turned to an analysis of the  blasphemy  laws,  sections
    298B and C.  Dr W confirmed that these laws had been  deployed  against
    both Ahmadis and Christians and misused  in  the  context  of  property
    disputes.  Misuse was more the problem than the existence of  the  law.
    Asked whether he agreed that nobody had been  executed  under  Pakistan
    law for blasphemy, Dr W responded that society had done so, illustrated
    by the killing of  General  Taseer  who  had  spoken  out  against  the
    blasphemy law used in the conviction of a Christian.   Dr  W  explained
    his understanding of the legal process that had followed, in terms that
    he believed the bodyguard who had been arrested and imprisoned would be
    released when public interest had died  down.   He  accepted  that  the
    person had been convicted and sentenced.  He regarded it however, as an
    isolated incident and he  did  not  consider  the  government  and  the
    judiciary had the power to bring these extremists to justice.

172. Questions then turned to the ability of Ahmadis to vote.   In  essence,
    Dr W considered the system in place for Ahmadis who were unable to vote
    in the general election to be discriminatory in the extreme.   Although
    he acknowledged some Ahmadis had been able to make it  to  the  top  of
    certain professions, in Pakistan currently he did not know  anyone  who
    had done so and was still there.

173. Turning to the statistics relating to Ahmadis being charged as  appears
    in his report,  Dr  W  acknowledged  that  these  statistics  were  not
    independent and he stated  that  "there  was  hardly  anybody  who  was
    convicted by the court" although qualifying his answer  with  reference
    to the process in Pakistan whereby a person is put behind bars  in  the
    police station and the way they are treated which he  characterised  as
    torture.

174. As to increase in violence in the past three years  (  referred  to  in
    his report) , Dr W  observed  that  religious  sentiment  had  gone  up
    "incredibly" and the biggest indication  of  that  was  the  attack  on
    Ahmadi mosques.  He referred to 96 people being killed in a single city
    and that was good enough to prove  that  all  was  not  well  with  the
    Ahmadis.

175. Mr Malik put to Dr W the observation that the  statistics  advanced  in
    his report were for the period  April  1984  to  April  2004.   Dr  W's
    response was to refer to events between 2010 and 2012 and he  indicated
    that the information was available "in print" in the newspapers and one
    could see analysts speaking about it on YouTube for example.  As to the
    fate of the Federal Minister for Religious Affairs (Dr Hussain),  whose
    political career with MQM had been ended  when  he  spoke  out  against
    Ahmadis, Dr W acknowledged this  but  said  there  were  other  reasons
    relating to the validity of his PhD degree.

176. Returning to the May 2010 incidents in Lahore,  Mr  Malik  asked  Dr  W
    whether he agreed that  Sunni  and  Shia  mosques  too  had  also  been
    attacked by extremists (although it appears not on the same  occasion).
      Dr W accepted that in the past three years dozens of Shia  and  Sunni
    mosques had been attacked, resulting in the death  of  several  hundred
    people but said that the motivation for the attacks on  Ahmadi  mosques
    was different and he referred again to the Rawalpindi  incident,  which
    he considered had been  because  army  officers  were  offering  Friday
    prayer there.  He considered in any event that attacks on Shia  mosques
    were a symptom of religious exclusion which began with exclusion of the
    Ahmadis initially.  He recorded the context as absolutely different and
    that every attack had a particular history.   He  referred  to  threats
    against Ahmadis as starting in 1902 when the first fatwa  came  against
    them having a different trajectory altogether. Dr W maintained that the
    attacks on the mosques in Lahore in May  2010  had  not  been  properly
    investigated.

177. As to whether Ahmadis are doing well in Pakistan, Dr  W  observed  that
    most of the Ahmadis doing well were moving out of  Pakistan.  Mr  Malik
    put it to Dr W in respect of  hate  literature  that  it  was  open  to
    someone to make application to the courts for the document in  question
    to be banned.   He  was  not  aware  of  anyone  having  made  such  an
    application or believing it could succeed.

178. Dr W confirmed in response to a question from Mr Jorro that there  were
    no Ahmadi Ministers currently in the Pakistan  government.  He  thought
    there was no recruitment in the army or air force of Ahmadis within the
    past twenty to 30 years.

179. In our questions for Dr W, he confirmed that he was  last  in  Pakistan
    in December 2011 (between the 4th and 13th) and, prior to that, between
    February and March that year.  He took up his current position  in  the
    UK in June 2010 and prior to that he had been in Pakistan.  He had been
    living in Lahore and was there during the mosque attacks in May 2010.

180. Dr W explained that if an Ahmadi were in  a  place  in  Pakistan  where
    there was no prayer house or mosque for Ahmadis, his prayers  would  be
    done at home.  With reference to his  report  in  which  he  refers  to
    members of the Ahmadi Jama'at being asked to distribute  literature  in
    abundance but with discretion and "hiqmat" (wisdom),  Dr W  was  unable
    to  give  us  an  Urdu  word  for  discretion  but  instead  gave   the
    illustration that one would not distribute such leaflets to  those  who
    would be belligerently opposed or where their life can  be  threatened.
    He explained that hiqmat is an Arabic word.  Asked whether Ahmadis were
    under a religious duty to spread the faith, Dr W said that if one  gets
    to know there is a potential for conversion anywhere, one must go there
    and spread the word of God.  Dr  W  accepted  that  it  was  basic  for
    Ahmadis to spread the faith through personal conduct and example and he
    confirmed that Ahmadis did not agree with exerting any sort of pressure
    because they were a minority community  and  they  had  other  ways  of
    spreading (the word).  He confirmed  they  did  not  engage  in  "door-
    stepping", explaining that they could not afford to do that.

181. We also asked Dr W whether he knew the number of Ahmadis  in  the  1998
    census in the context of his report which identified  104,244  in  1981
    and 163,982 in 1992.  He explained that as far as  he  remembered,  all
    the minorities had been bracketed together.  Returning to his  estimate
    of 1 million Ahmadis, we asked whether the increase  had  been  through
    conversions.  He  confirmed  it  had.   He  did  not  know  the  Ahmadi
    population of Lahore before he left, there being no  figure  available.
    As to how many prayer houses or mosques there were in Lahore,  he  knew
    of two but he was sure there would be much more  than  that.   The  two
    mosques he knew of were those which had  been  attacked  and  were  the
    prominent mosques.  Returning to the number of Ahmadis, Dr W considered
    that many Ahmadis did not  reveal  where  they  were  such  for  safety
    reasons.  As to whether the communities knew how many members they had,
    he referred to them taking "full care" with  their  the  documentation.
    They were  the  most  documented  community  in  South  Asia  probably.
    Ironically, however, they did not reveal those facts to the non-Ahmadis
    and that was a real problem he had faced  when  working  on  them.   He
    confirmed in reply to our final question that the list of  the  wounded
    and dead had been published  in  non-Ahmadi  newspapers  following  the
    mosque attacks in Lahore in May 2010.

182. Mr Lemer referred Dr W to the COIS Report indicating that in  the  1998
    census it was estimated there were 291,000 Ahmadis.  Dr W said that  he
    was not aware whether Ahmadis  were  separately  "enumerated"  and  was
    therefore not in a position to comment on the  estimates  in  the  COIS
    Report.  He agreed, however, with the reports that stated that  Ahmadis
    represented 0.22% of the population.

183. Specific to  the  circumstances  of  NM,  with  his  name  having  been
    recorded, Dr W considered in reply to a question from Mr Jorro that his
    "concern" was more than general  because  he  now  qualifies  to  be  a
    prominent Ahmadi so that "trouble may knock at his door any moment". Mr
    Malik's final questions related to the consequences  of  the  appellant
    MN's name appearing in Al Faisal  newspaper  in  the  context  of  that
    newspaper no longer being published in Pakistan.   Dr  W's  answer  was
    that someone prominent would be at risk  of  a  targeted  killing.   He
    regarded important persons from the minority community as being all too
    easily trackable.

IMAM RASHED

184. Imam Rashed was born in Qadian, India.  In 1963 he  was  awarded  a  BA
    from Punjab University with a  Gold  Medal  in  Arabic  and  thereafter
    graduated first class with an MA in Arabic from the same university  in
    1965.  He further qualified with a Maulvi Faazil (a specialised  honour
    in Arabic at Punjab University) in 1966  and  in  1969  was  awarded  a
    shahid which is the equivalent to  a  Master  in  Divinity  in  Islamic
    Studies in Rabwah, described as training  as  a  missionary  of  Islam.
    Between 1970 and 1973, Imam Rashed was Deputy Imam at the London Ahmadi
    Mosque, the first built here in 1924.  In 1973 he returned to Rabwah to
    serve the affairs of the International Ahmadiyya Youth Organisation  as
    its President, a post he held until  1975,  and  thereafter  he  became
    missionary in charge in Japan until  1983.   Since  then  he  has  been
    stationed in London as Imam of the  London  Mosque  and  missionary  in
    charge, planning and  supervising  missionary  activities  in  England,
    Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland.

185. His report sets out his answers to a number of questions as follows:

    (1)    What are the fundamental tenets of the Ahmadi faith?

    (2)    Are Ahmadis Muslims?

    (3)    What are the points of difference from mainstream Sunni  Muslims
         in Pakistan?

    (4)    What are the points of  difference  between  the  Ahmadiyya  and
         Lahori groups?

    (5)    How fundamental is the duty to propagate or  spread  the  Ahmadi
         faith to non-Ahmadis?

    (6)    With reference to the text of the anti-Ahmadi blasphemy laws  in
         Ordinance XX, is it important for an Ahmadi to do any of the things
         prohibited by Articles 298-(b)(1)(2)  or  298(c)  (the  anti-Ahmadi
         Ordinances)?

    (7)    What are your views about the penalties imposed on  Ahmadis  for
         posing as a Muslim in Article 295(c)?

    (8)    What is the significance of being  prevented  from  doing  those
         things?  Do you consider that Ahmadis  are  obliged  to  carry  out
         those activities, notwithstanding that they are illegal?

    (9)    Do you consider that Ahmadis should adjust their conduct and the
         practice of their faith in order to avoid acts of persecution?

    (10)   How would you describe the duty  to  spread  the  Ahmadi  faith?
         Words  that  have  been  used   previously   include   "preaching",
         "proselytising", and "propagating".

    (11)   How fundamental is this duty  to  the  modern  practice  of  the
         Ahmadi faith?

    (12)   Is the sole purpose of "preaching" to 'convert'  non-Ahmadis  or
         is the duty more complex and if so how?

    (13)   Would you say that the  duty  to  spread  the  Ahmadi  faith  is
         greater or lesser than or the same as that within the Sunni  system
         of beliefs?

    (14)   In  the  light  of  the  restrictions  in  Pakistan  on  overtly
         proclaiming and  spreading  your  faith  what  would  be  tolerable
         methods of doing so?

186. In his answers,  Imam Rashed sets out the  fundamental  tenets  of  the
    Ahmadiyya faith, including the  one  which  is  at  the  heart  of  the
    hostility between Ahmadis and the Sunni majority in Pakistan:

         "The Ahmadi person will believe that Muhammad is khatamun nabiyyen,
         the seal of the all the prophets and will believe that Hadrat Mirza
         Ghulam Ahmad was the same Imam Mahdi  and  promised  messiah  whose
         advent was prophesied by the  Holy  Prophet  of  Islam,  peace  and
         blessings of Allah be upon him."

187. This is the fourth of five fundamental tenets, the fifth being this:

         "The Ahmadi person will promise that he will try his best to  abide
         by the ten conditions of bai'at (initiation) as prescribed  by  the
         promised messiah (set out below); that he will give  precedence  to
         his/her faith over all worldly objects; that he will  remain  loyal
         to the institution of Khalifat in  Ahmadiyyat  and  will  obey  the
         Khalifatul Mashi and everything good that he may  require  of  that
         Ahmadi.  Integral to this promise is that the  Ahmadi  will  spread
         his faith to others who are not Ahmadis and engage  in  doing  good
         works."

188. Imam Rashed contrasts  the Ahmadi and non-Ahmadi beliefs as follows:

    i.     The Ahmadis believe that:

         "There is no compulsion in faith.  Jihad now is only meant to be  a
         striving towards righteousness.  A jihad can only be declared by  a
         state under special conditions and cannot be called by  individuals
         or groups."

    ii.    Further:

         "There is no worldly punishment for apostasy."

    iii.   In contrast, non-Ahmadis believe that:

         "Jihad means a holy war and  is  an  essential  article  of  faith.
         Having invited a non-believer to Islam, if he/she does not  believe
         he/she should be killed."

    iv.    and:

         "Anyone  who  converts  from  Islam  to  another  faith   must   be
         decapitated."

189. In response to question 5, Imam  Rashed  states  that  the  purpose  of
    tabligh is to engage in a  meaningful  debate  and  provide  convincing
    arguments, propagate, proselytise and  actively  try  to  convince  the
    other person to convert to one's beliefs and way of life.  Further,  he
    states that Ahmadi should at least commit one  day  a  week  to  summon
    people to God and Ahmadis should try to add at least one  other  person
    into the Ahmadiyya fold each year.  He goes on to observe:

         "All Khalifa (heads of the Ahmadiyya community) have been reminding
         about this obligation to preach.  For this task the entire Jama'at,
         missionaries and the auxiliaries work side by side.  The  resources
         of the community (publications, literature, the 24  hour  satellite
         TV channel, a system of trained missionaries with  the  fresh  pool
         known as waqfeen nau children who are  committed  to  devote  their
         lives for the sake  of  their  God)  are  fully  committed  to  the
         attainment of that objective.

         Nevertheless it must be firmly understood that propagation  is  one
         thing and conversion a completely different issue.  The aim of each
         Ahmadi is to convey the message and it is up to God  to  guide  the
         person to whom the message has been conveyed towards  the  light...
         Thus it is the responsibility of each Ahmadi in each  community  to
         preach.  Each Ahmadi's task is to fulfil his/her responsibility."

    Imam Rashed observes that  Ahmadis  believe  in  open  propagation  and
    engaging in dialogue with all communities of society.   Notwithstanding
    the restrictions against international rights in Pakistan,  Bangladesh,
    Indonesia and the authorities who are in control in the Middle East and
    other Islamic states, Ahmadis are law-abiding  citizens  wherever  they
    live and do not resort to civil disobedience or taking part  in  public
    protests and causing civil unrest.  He goes on to observe:

         "It  should  also  be  remembered  that  whereas  preaching  is   a
         requirement of each Ahmadi, an Ahmadi who does not or is unable  to
         preach because of circumstances beyond his reasonable control  will
         not be excommunicated.  Different Ahmadis practise their  faith  at
         different  spiritual  levels  but  just  because  they   have   not
         manifestly preached does not mean they were less devout and sincere
         in their beliefs."

    And finally on this aspect:

         "Quite obviously an Ahmadi must use wisdom and due  diligence  when
         engaging in preaching as in some countries,  for  instance  in  the
         Middle East, free assembly and debate is prevented.  In such places
         an Ahmadi is required to display a  high  moral  standard  so  that
         others are attracted to that Ahmadi and his way of  life  and  thus
         wish to enquire about his  beliefs.   This  would  be  the  minimum
         standard of discreet indirect preaching by leaving an impression on
         someone about one's chosen way of life expected of an Ahmadi.

         It is only due to the fear of persecution that Ahmadis are  obliged
         to conceal a fundamental obligation of their faith and modify their
         preaching activities by being discreet to  avoid  such  harassment.
         Ahmadis therefore believe that such  forced  concealment  makes  it
         persecutory."

190. The final statement was the subject of questions at the hearing.

191. In response to  question 10 ( the duty to  spread  the  Ahmadi  faith),
    Imam Rashed has this to say:

         "The duty to propagate beliefs is  essential  to  the  missions  of
         prophets.  The prophets have a constant urge to spread the  message
         that they receive from God and rescue as many souls as possible and
         bring such souls closer to the ways of God  rather  than  following
         ways towards darkness and evil.  This work cannot  be  achieved  by
         one person alone.  Following the demise of the prophet,  his  works
         are carried on by his successors.  Ultimately, it is therefore  the
         adherents of that prophet who are the instruments to broadcast that
         message to the people.

         The Arabic word is 'tabligh' and is not  limited  to  the  narrower
         translation  of  how  preaching  is  understood  in  the  UK.    It
         incorporates  preaching,  proselytising  and  propagation  of   the
         faith."

192. In response to question 14 (tolerable methods of  spreading  the  faith
    in the light of restrictions in Pakistan), Imam Rashed  refers  to  the
    general impression created by Ahmadis in public which is one of honesty
    and refers again to the subtle methods of spreading the faith.

193. In reply to questions from Mr Jorro, Imam Rashed said that  if  someone
    chose not to preach, he would be counted as one of those who failed  in
    their duties, because of the firm belief that the message of  Islam  is
    part of the fundamental  duty  of  being  an  Ahmadi.  In  response  to
    questions from Ms Jegarajah, he confirmed that tabligh applied  equally
    to men and women although the latter's ability might  be  qualified  by
    family commitments. Each sex would do it in their own way.

194. Imam Rashed's belief is that Islam provides  for  freedom  of  religion
    which he considered was supported by his  reading  of  the  Quran.   In
    relation to the size of the Ahmadi community in Pakistan including  the
    Lahoris (referred to in his report) he considered it to be  significant
    although figures were not his domain.

195. Mr Malik questioned Imam Rashed about tabligh  with  reference  to  the
    ten bai'at or conditions.  Imam Rashed described  these  conditions  as
    part of the message of Allah and were based  on  the  holy  Quran.   He
    stated that preaching by Ahmadis has been banned in Pakistan and  as  a
    consequence they do not have the freedom of  expression.   Tabligh  was
    however an essential part of being an Ahmadi being both  a  requirement
    and an expectation.  The  reference  to  one  day  a  week  showed  the
    importance of tabligh. He acknowledged that there were situations where
    people could not be so active but for some people it was  a  matter  of
    compulsion and not of desire.  Every Ahmadi is  keen  and  desirous  to
    preach and those who cannot do it feel they  are  unable  to  discharge
    their duties as a Ahmadi. When living under a law  that  prevents  that
    they feel sorry about that.  Ahmadis are expected to respect the law of
    the country, but this does not mean they do  not  have  the  desire  of
    doing tabligh.  A display of high moral standard by Ahmadis which might
    attract others does not really discharge the entirety of the obligation
    of preaching required of all Ahmadis. He  believed  the  population  of
    Ahmadis in Pakistan is increasing although he did not have the figures.
    But this did not mean that preaching had been (particularly)  effective
    as the numbers would have been much higher but for the restrictions.

196. Imam Rashed accepted that Ahmadis were  permitted  to  have  places  of
    worship but reminded us that they unable to refer these as  mosques  or
    have the kalma on the front gate.  He reminded us also that Ahmadis are
    not allowed to call azan.   He  was  not  aware  whether  Ahmadis  were
    permitted to have preaching sessions in their "mosques" as  such.   The
    sermon he had given when visiting an Ahmadi mosque in Pakistan, had not
    been preaching but instead devoted to ways of conducting life  for  the
    community.  If non Ahmadis were invited it could not be for the purpose
    of a tabligh meeting.   He considered that blasphemy with reference  to
    the Quran was not appropriate for punishment  under  Pakistan  law  but
    instead the punishment  is  in  the  hands  of  God.  Asked  about  the
    reference in his report to  women  facing  harassment,  insecurity  and
    problems with  admissions  and  being   denied  secular  education,  he
    accepted that that  this  did  not  mean  that  all  women  had  (such)
    difficulties. He said the Ahmadi leadership did not put restrictions on
    the movement of members where there were no restrictions.  Ladies  used
    to go the mosque.  This should still be done but they can pray at  home
    if it is not safe.  The Ahmadis keep a record in  its  offices  of  all
    actions against its members.  In terms of preaching to Sunnis, there is
    a clear instruction from the prophet that when the  messiah  comes  all
    Muslims should listen to the advice of the messiah and get initiated at
    his hand and join the community.

197. Imam Rashed confirmed that he had been last in Pakistan for three  days
    in 2007 and prior to that for more than a couple of months at  the  end
    of 2004 and the beginning of 2005.  During that earlier period  he  was
    asked by the head of the community in Rabwah to lead the Friday service
    and deliver a sermon.   He  was  concerned  about  the  legislation  in
    Pakistan and sought guidance on what he should say and what  he  should
    not say.  He was given five or six words he was told that he should not
    utter otherwise they would face  prosecution.  By  way  of  example  he
    should not mention that  "we"  (i.e.  the  Ahmadis)  belong  to  Islam.
    Further examples were that he should not refer to the kalma, nor to the
    Urdu term for mosque.  He was just about to mention these words but had
    stopped there.  It  had  given  him  an  unforgettable  experience  how
    miserable the life of his fellow  Ahmadis  was  in  Pakistan.   He  had
    addressed a congregation of some 20,000 to 25,000 people.

198. He also went to Sialkot.  He happened to be there on  Friday.   He  was
    asked by the local head of the community to deliver the sermon.  As  is
    his practice in the United Kingdom, after initial prayers,  called  for
    the person in the front row to announce the call for prayer (azan).  It
    was an emotional experience for him that none of the congregation stood
    up.  People with tears in their eyes mentioned in  Pakistan  we  cannot
    make this call for prayer.  It is illegal.  He realised he  should  not
    have asked them to do so.

199. In response to our questions as to the  hierarchy  of  sources  of  the
    Ahmadi faith he said that the highest is that of  the  Quran  then  the
    practical tradition of the prophet (Sunnah) which is found in the books
    and Hadiz, ie spoken words. Then there is Ijmah, consensus of opinion's
    of great scholars then Ijdeha. The institution of Bait (the ceremony of
    initiation into Islam) comes in Sunnah.  For Ahmadis, the  sayings  and
    books (some 85) of the founder come after  Hadiz.  The  advice  of  the
    Khalifah is subordinate to  the  instruction  of  the  founder  of  the
    community all of which are based on the Quran, Hadiz,  Sunnah  and  the
    explanations of the founder which are found in his books.

200. As to fundamental tenets of the faith, with reference to spreading  the
    faith and whether this is an article of faith or duty, Imam Rashed said
    that spreading the faith is included in the  10  conditions  of  bai'at
    although not in so many words but it is implied in the duty  to  follow
    the traditions of the prophet as revealed in verses from the Quran.  It
    should be equally important to all Muslims to spread the faith  but  it
    is the Ahmadi community which is doing  this  on  a  world  wide  basis
    unlike the non Ahmadi. Summoning people  to  God  as  a  commitment  to
    Ahmadis once a week is from the Quran. As to propagation and conversion
    no one is compelled to become a Muslim. Propagation  goes  beyond  just
    leading a good life.  Going from door to door has attracted dislike  so
    instead Ahmadis try (in the UK) to invite and meet people  for  one  to
    one sessions.  Imam Rashed was not aware of any law comparable to  that
    in Pakistan affecting  Ahmadis  in  Middle  East  countries,  but  some
    restrictions are there and the free assembly and debate is not possible
    and discretion is needed. Hiqmat or wisdom is needed in the context  of
    not violating the law (of the land) and they should not be creating any
    difficult situation for themselves or  the  peace  in  the  country  in
    question.

201. Imam Rashed maintained the assertion in his report that for non  Ahmadi
    Muslims, who have invited a non believer to Islam, such a person should
    be killed if he does not believe as illustrated by the warrior with the
    book in one hand and the  sword  in  the  other  and  as  reflected  in
    "popular opinion".

202. As to tabligh and women, the instruction is  for  both  men  and  women
    depending on the situation and commitments such as taking  children  to
    school and other domestic matters.  Some women are unable to  find  the
    time although others are and so the levels of  tabligh  are  different.
    In Pakistan neither Ahmadi men nor women can be effectively involved in
    tabligh because of the law.  Although Ahmadi women are not able to hold
    open meetings, they can be involved in tabligh  by  providing  help  to
    their  husbands,  with  hospitality  and  looking  after  the  catering
    arrangements. This is  also support and so they play  a  role.   Prayer
    can be offered at home by all. Going to the mosque is not essential for
    women.

203. In reply to questions from Mr Jorro Imam Rashed said  that  as  to  the
    third tenet  of  faith,  bearing  witness,  this  meant  that  whenever
    required one had to verbally announce the faith.  Mr Lemer asked  about
    the relationship between tabligh and bearing witness. His response  was
    that the latter was in essence a declaration of the faith.

DR ANSARI

204. Dr Sarah Ansari is a Reader  in  the  history  of  South  Asia  at  the
    Department of History, Royal Holloway, and University of London.

205.  Her report itself lists a number of questions and her responses  which
    include:

    i.     How does the position of women in Pakistan generally affect  the
         treatment of Ahmadi women as a religious minority?

    ii.    How are Ahmadi women generally perceived by mainstream society?

    iii.   Are Ahmadi women  more  prone  to  discrimination,  gender-based
         persecution because      they are members of a  religious  minority
         and what is the position within society of physically single Ahmadi
         women (i.e. no male member in the  household)  in  terms  of  their
         civil status, access to education and employment  and  safety,  and
         under the circumstances what risk might their children face?

206. Detailed responses are given in the report  followed  by  a  series  of
    conclusions  by  way  of  a  summary  of  Dr  Ansari's  opinions.   She
    identifies Pakistan as an ideological state which is dominated by Sunni
    Muslims and which has become increasingly intolerant both in  terms  of
    its legal structures and public opinion of religious  minorities.   She
    concludes therefore that Ahmadis in such circumstances are at  risk  of
    persecution and  on  occasion  violent  death,  both  individually  and
    collectively.  She  further  describes  Ahmadi  women  as  particularly
    vulnerable members of their community "...thanks to wider social/gender
    norms and the restrictions on women's lives that operate in Pakistan".

207. She goes on to observe that:

         "Life for Ahmadi  women  living  without  the  protection  of  male
         relatives in the context of present day Pakistan would  undoubtedly
         be fraught with difficulties and dangers, and this scenario becomes
         even more problematic were they to be bringing up children of their
         own.   The  challenge  of  operating   successfully   without   the
         involvement of male relatives is intensely difficult for  Pakistani
         women.  Ahmadi  women  without  male  support  would  not  only  be
         personally endangering themselves but also risking their children's
         safety and wellbeing."

DR HAMID

208. Dr Zahida Hamid said she had agreed  to  attend  the  country  guidance
    case on behalf of the Ahmadi Muslim Association UK.  She is  an  Ahmadi
    herself and the daughter  of  Dr  Hameed  Ullah  who  was  abducted  in
    Pakistan on 20 September 2007 and assassinated on 22 September the same
    year.  She remained living in Pakistan and completed her education  and
    qualifications as a medical doctor.  She and her sister arrived in  the
    United Kingdom together with their mother on 1 June  2011  and  claimed
    asylum.  Their claims were not accepted by the respondent, however they
    were successful on their appeals to First tier Tribunal Judge  Eldridge
    who, for reasons given in a determination  promulgated  on  16  October
    2011, concluded that they were refugees.  He found the appellant to  be
    credible and accepted that Dr Ullah had been murdered in 2007.

209. Dr Hamid has responded on paper to  a  number  of  questions  including
    enquiries as to how Ahmadi women are generally perceived by  mainstream
    society, whether they are more prone to discrimination because they are
    members of a religious minority and also questions relating to the duty
    of  members  to  spread  the  Ahmadi  faith.   Issues  as  to  security
    arrangements for women in Pakistan  are  addressed,  including  whether
    Ahmadi women are readily recognisable from  the  manner  in  which  the
    hijab is worn.

210. One of the questions she was asked to answer  in  the  report  was  how
    would  she  describe  the  duty  to  spread  the  Ahmadi  faith;    how
    fundamental this duty was to the practice of the faith and specifically
    to women?  Her answer in brief  was  that  although  preaching  was  an
    integral obligation on an Ahmadi irrespective of gender,  in  practical
    terms, because male members tend to circulate amongst the public, there
    was  a  greater  obligation   on   them   to   engage   in   preaching,
    proselytisation, and to secure a  conversion  if  possible  than  their
    female counterparts.  As to whether Ahmadi women undertake to propagate
    their faith and if so how this is done in practice, she confirmed  that
    Ahmadi women in Pakistan do engage  in  preaching  to  well  known  and
    reliable contacts and at events such as coffee club  meetings  and  are
    known to have obtained conversions through such means.  She describes a
    marked difference between what females can do so far  as  preaching  is
    concerned in Pakistan and their contribution to tabligh in  the  United
    Kingdom.  She believes that the zeal that exists amongst the ladies  of
    the Ahmadi community to spread their faith  would  pay  rich  dividends
    were they unfettered by restrictions that primarily prevent their  free
    expression in Pakistan.

211. Dr Hamid explains that as to security arrangements in  Pakistan,  since
    May 2010 women are now asked to offer their five daily prayers at  home
    instead of in congregation in the mosque as they once did in the past.

212. Another question  she  addressed  was  whether  there  were  particular
    persecutory actions specifically against women including the  unsourced
    statement that it was understood there were cases of  forced  marriages
    in order to convert Ahmadi women into the mainstream Sunni  faith.   In
    her response, which acknowledges that there was no  specific  provision
    in Pakistan law targeting Ahmadi women,  Dr  Hamid  refers  to  several
    girls in  their  final  years  of  a  seven  year  medicine  course  at
    Faisalabad who were expelled en mass from the university in appeasement
    to pressure by the religious fanatics demanding  their  expulsion.   Dr
    Hamid refers to there having been many cases against Ahmadi  women  for
    teaching the recitation of the Holy Quran to  non-Ahmadi  children  and
    that fines have been imposed upon  them  as  posing  as  Muslims.   She
    refers to another ploy used by opponents of the Ahmadi faith being  the
    kidnap of young children knowing that their parents are  likely  to  be
    people of means to pay a ransom.  Without further details,  she  refers
    to specific cases where a lady has accepted the Ahmadi faith and she is
    then ostracised  by  the  rest  of  the  family  and  deprived  of  her
    hereditary rights.

213. Although Dr Hamid refers to the difficulties  faces  by  single  Ahmadi
    women she does however refer to the option available to  them  to  live
    either with a relative in an extended family background (a not  unusual
    circumstance  in  Pakistan)  or  "...seek  marginal  male  support   by
    migrating to the community's headquarters in Rabwah".  Further  in  the
    report, in response to a question asking why there was  a  need  for  a
    separate women's wing, she replies that there is a single  organisation
    looking after the affairs of the ladies of the community known as Lajna
    Imaillah which reports directly to the head  of  the  worldwide  Ahmadi
    community.  There is no age criterion and she goes on to state:

         "...these  auxiliary  organisations  enable   the   Ahmadi   Muslim
         community to ensure that  no  member  is  disenfranchised  and  can
         correlate to a group of likeminded gender, age and interests".

DR AYAZ

214. Dr Iftikhar Ayaz was educated  in  Tanzania,  the  United  Kingdom  and
    United States and has a PhD in Human Development.   He  is  an  eminent
    member of the Ahmadiyya Muslim Association and was  National  President
    of the UK Chapter.  He also represents the community internationally to
    deal with issues relating to Ahmadiyya refugees and asylum seekers.  He
    has served in Tanzania as a Senior Lecturer in the University of Dar Es
    Salaam and as a Deputy Director of Education.  He worked  with  the  UN
    Sponsored Centre on Integrated Rural Development for Africa  and  later
    was awarded a Commonwealth Fellowship and worked for  the  Commonwealth
    Institute.  He served as a Field Expert for the Commonwealth  Fund  for
    Technical Cooperation and later was a Senior Consultant with  UNDP  and
    UNESCO.  He has also served for many years at the UN Council for  Human
    Rights.

215. Dr Ayaz has never lived in Pakistan.  He last visited  the  country  in
    2008 when he was there for some four weeks.  Overall he recalls that he
    has been there on 30 to 35 occasions.   His  evidence  is  set  out  in
    written responses to some 92 questions entitled:

         "Country  guidance  on  the  position  of  Ahmadis   in   Pakistan.
         Questions answered by the Ahmadiyya Muslim Association UK; evidence
         of persecution of the followers of the Ahmadi faith in Pakistan."

216. The questions in the report are said to have  been  formulated  by  the
    Ahmadiyya  Muslim  Association  UK  based  on   their   experience   of
    proceedings on behalf of Ahmadi asylum seekers and by this means  there
    has been indirect lawyer involvement.

217. Key matters that emerge from the questions and  the  responses  at  the
    hearing are as follows:-

    (i)     www.thepersecution.org  is  a  website  maintained  by  the  IT
         Department of the Office of Wakalat Tabshir in the headquarters  of
         the Ahmadiyya in Rabwah.  The same headquarters are responsible for
         monthly and annual news reports.  In most cases the sources of  the
         information for the reports are the Ahmadis themselves  and/or  the
         President of the  local  Ahmadiyya  community  where  the  incident
         occurred.  A few stories are also based on reports of the  national
         press or those issued by human rights organisations.  The media  is
         only a secondary source.  In contrast  with  the  role  of  locally
         published English press in Pakistan which  is  more  positive,  the
         "vernacular press" is  generally  hostile  and  prejudiced  against
         Ahmadis.     A    new    website    was    launched    last    year
         (http://www.persecutionofahmadis.org) which is believed to  have  a
         better design and to be more inclusive and more informative.

    (ii)   There is reference in a question (2(a)) to an attached  schedule
         of incidents of persecution since 2006 from the two  websites.   As
         to whether there are unreported incidents, it  is  considered  that
         the schedule on the website(s) is fairly comprehensive but not  all
         get reported to the headquarters.  As  to  the  circumstances  that
         would give rise to reporting, at the hearing Dr Ayaz  responded  in
         general terms that persecution was constant and persistent  because
         there is harassment and discrimination and social boycott.  He went
         on to  clarify  that  cases  were  reported  where  the  police  or
         judiciary had been involved  and  where  there  had  been  physical
         violence and kidnappings, murders and killings.

    (iii)  The report states that the Lahori group  are  rapidly  dwindling
         and rejoining the main Ahmadiyya group.  They are  thought  not  to
         exceed more than 35,000 persons worldwide.  All incidents relate to
         the Ahmadiyya denomination, of which the Khalifa is  its  spiritual
         head.  In response to a question from Mr Lemer, Dr  Ayaz  explained
         that nearly 70% of Lahoris were in Pakistan.

    (iv)   More than 275,000 Ahmadis were  attracted  to  the  last  annual
         convention in Rabwah in Pakistan in December 1983.  At the  hearing
         Dr Ayaz explained as to the number of Ahmadis residing in Pakistan,
         despite migration of  at  least  100,000,  the  number  (remaining)
         should be sizeable but: "We would not  like  to  hazard  a  guess".
         There is reference in the report to the numbers in  Pakistan  being
         nearer 4 million.  Mr Lemer sought further clarification.  Dr  Ayaz
         described conversion to the Ahmadi in the past years to  have  been
         very rapid and that conversion itself  was  very  simple.   All  an
         applicant would need to do would be to sign a letter of pledge.  He
         went on to explain that every person who wishes to join has to sign
         a letter of allegiance to the head based in London and he  is  then
         accepted.  Such letters are sent to the headquarters in Rabwah  and
         then a list of those letters is prepared and sent to the Khalifa in
         London for his official  acceptance.   The  Khalifa  announces  the
         numbers who convert  annually.   Unless  it  is  reported  that  an
         applicant has moral misbehaviour or  criminal  activity  a  convert
         would be accepted after two  years  when  registration  would  take
         place.  As to the number of Ahmadis in Pakistan, the  reference  in
         the report to others  having  put  the  numbers  there  as  over  4
         million, that was just a guess.  Dr Ayaz explained at  the  hearing
         that it was difficult to give a precise figure.  The  number  there
         was definitely under 1 million.  We asked why Dr Ayaz was unable to
         give a more accurate figure of the number of converts  in  Pakistan
         and the  total  number  of  Ahmadis  there  in  the  light  of  the
         registration and reporting procedure.  He explained that he did not
         have  access  to  the  figures  or  records  which  are  with   the
         headquarters of the community in Pakistan and it was possible  that
         they might not want to declare them in the light of the legislation
         and restrictions on the Ahmadi  community.  As  to  conversions,  a
         number had signed the form of allegiance  but  might  not  want  to
         declare it. Definitely a figure could be obtained of the number  of
         conversions but it was not one he had himself. He referred  by  way
         of explanation to the punishment in Pakistan for apostasy and  this
         being a reason why people had not declared  their  conversion.   He
         believed the figures may have been  passed  on  confidentially  and
         this is why the  number  was  not  openly  available.  The  Khalifa
         announced the number of converts annually but this did not  include
         those who had done so in Pakistan.

         Dr  Ayaz  describes  in  the  report  that  the  Ahmadiyya   Muslim
         Association UK has a rigorous system for verifying that a person is
         an Ahmadi.  If born in this country, a report is obtained from  the
         local President.  As to persons who have migrated here  from  other
         countries, a form is to be completed which is then  attested  by  a
         local UK President  of  the  branch  where  the  person  has  taken
         residence and is submitted to  the  Secretary  of  the  General  or
         Public Affairs Department in the UK and then sent via the  National
         President to the Amir of the country from where  the  migrant  last
         came.  Dr Ayaz clarified at the hearing that if a migrant  had  not
         completed the two years "probation" period they would  be  required
         to do so before they would be registered as an Ahmadi in the United
         Kingdom.  He described in further detail the  vetting  system  that
         was used by the Association in the UK.

    (v)    The practice of preaching or spreading the faith is described in
         some detail in the report.  A theme that emerged in the  course  of
         Dr Ayaz's answers was the importance of this practice  but  in  the
         context of respect for local laws and the avoidance of  unnecessary
         risks.

    (vi)   His report asserts that it is fairly easy to spot an Ahmadi, who
         are said to be characterised by humility, simplicity and a cultured
         manner of speaking.  As to appearance, an Ahmadi man would  have  a
         well-trimmed beard.  For women, the manner in which they wear their
         hijab or burqa and the method in which it  has  been  stitched  are
         giveaway signs.  In examination-in-chief  Dr  Ayaz  asked  for  the
         reference to ID cards to be  deleted  and  for  "passports"  to  be
         substituted where the report refers to Ahmadis  being  required  to
         carry ID cards that  show  their  religion.   In  response  to  our
         questions whether  Ahmadis  were  recognisable  as  such,  Dr  Ayaz
         described the way in which they could be recognised by their manner
         and dress.

    (vii)  The report refers to antipathy towards Ahmadi  emerging  in  the
         United Kingdom including Tooting where there had  been  a  call  to
         sack Ahmadi employees and in Dewsbury and Huddersfield against  the
         community holding Quranic exhibitions.  There have  been  incidents
         of anti-Ahmadi posters in shop windows in Glasgow and Tooting.   In
         addition there have been incidents of anti-Ahmadi propaganda on  TV
         channels and serious hate matters have been reported to OFCOM.   In
         examination-in-chief Dr Ayaz referred  to  the  link  between  this
         behaviour and the Khatme-e-Nabuwat  describing  them  as  having  a
         "very functional strong network throughout the world including  the
         UK."  They have held a conference here in the  UK.   Dr  Ayaz  also
         referred to the potential for Ahmadis who have been active  in  the
         United Kingdom facing difficulties because of  this  once  back  in
         Pakistan.  He gave an example of a student in  the  United  Kingdom
         who had been handed a leaflet by the Khatme-e-Nabuwat  in  Kingston
         in terms that Ahmadis should be killed.  The police  were  involved
         but the matter was not taken to court.

218. These further matters  are  explained  under  a  subsequent  number  of
    headings in the report including:

       . Evidence of persecution of the followers of  the  Ahmadi  faith  in
         Pakistan.

       . Ahmadi community structure and processes.

       . Alleged denial of civil rights.

       . Anti-Ahmadi provisions of Pakistan's legislative code.

       . Propagation of faith.

       . Key events relevant to Ahmadis in Pakistan since 2007.

       . Anti-Ahmadi practices in the UK.

       . Security and protection.

       . Sufficiency of protection.

       . Internal relocation.

219. Mr Malik sought to challenge a number of the assertions in  the  report
    under each of these headings on the basis of inaccuracy, of an  absence
    of sources and a challenge to views expressed which he argued were  not
    sustainable having regard to  the  circumstances  on  which  they  were
    based.  Dr Ayaz answered all the questions with some detail however for
    the reasons given below we have not set out all that we heard  nor  the
    detail of other matters dealt with in the report.

220. In the light of the views expressed throughout cross-examination by  Dr
    Ayaz of the difficulties encountered by Ahmadis in Pakistan,  we  asked
    whether it was his view that all Ahmadis in Pakistan were at  risk  and
    generally in need of protection.  His response was that for Ahmadis who
    were particularly targeted their life was  unbearable.  Their  children
    could not go to school they have no jobs and the only way to  get  them
    into normal life was for them to get out of Pakistan.  The  Association
    does not encourage this but encourages them to face the situation. When
    they leave however they are provided with help.

221. As to those who were not "particularly targeted"  his  answers  was  in
    terms that it related to (the extent of) "exposure".  Some might lead a
    "quiet life". We asked if there was a serious risk of people leading  a
    quiet life coming to the attention of the organisations. He said  there
    was. He considered the point of exposure was when  they  needed  to  do
    something to earn their living. He described the increasing  levels  of
    adverse attention up to being removed from their jobs as well  as  more
    serious things happening. He  described  the  difficulties  in  Ahmadis
    "hiding" themselves even if discreet.  They have been advised that they
    should not expose themselves to threats and dangers but they  are  also
    told not to give away any tenet of their faith. A very small number  of
    Ahmadis would be slack in their observance but even the weakest  Ahmadi
    would turn up every week for Friday services.  We asked whether he  had
    any information about Ahmadis going back to  Pakistan  for  visits.  He
    said that such were fewer  after  the  Khalifa  had  moved  to  London.
    Before then, visits were frequent. Now people with family  would  visit
    on occasion.  Pakistanis visiting generally would be  at  risk  in  the
    light  of  the  security  situation  and  a  risk  of  kidnapping   but
    particularly Ahmadis.

 Dr Lau

222. Dr Martin Lau is a barrister and a Reader in Law at the law  department
    of the School of Oriental and African  Studies,  University  of  London
    where he teaches courses on South Asian law at  both  postgraduate  and
    undergraduate levels.  He visited Pakistan as a  member  of  the  Fact-
    Finding Mission of the Parliamentary Human Rights Group (PHRG) which in
    2010 examined the human rights situation of members  of  the  Ahmadiyya
    community and had previously visited Pakistan in April 2009 as a member
    of a fact-finding mission  of  the  International  Bar  Association  to
    examine the independence of the judiciary.

223. As with a number of the other experts, Dr Lau has set out  his  answers
    to a number of questions.  Key responses are as follows:

      a. In relation to the geographical distribution and number of  Ahmadis
         in Pakistan, he explains he is not an expert and refers to the most
         recent census in Pakistan  published  in  1998  stating  that  they
         represented 0.22% of the population, then 145 million  people.   He
         has heard that there are many more Ahmadis  in  Pakistan  than  the
         figures suggest.  In response to an invitation to  comment  on  the
         extent to which the Ahmadi community organises security for  itself
         and how it does so, he explains that he has no  detailed  knowledge
         of the security arrangements so organised.  During the  mission  of
         the PHRG in 2010  he  noticed  the  inconspicuous  presentation  of
         several buildings used by the community as  community  centres  and
         the like.

      b. Dr Lau provides a brief summary  referring  to  the  constitutional
         amendment in 1974 which he described as largely symbolic as it  did
         not entail any penal sanctions.  This changed  in  the  1980s  when
         amendments to the Pakistan Penal  Code  1860  made  it  a  criminal
         offence for Ahmadis to pose as Muslims.  He refers specifically  to
         new sections 298B and 298C being inserted in the Code in 1984.  The
         former prohibits  Ahmadis  from  using  certain  names  and  titles
         commonly used in Islam.  The offence carries  a  maximum  of  three
         years' imprisonment as well as a fine.  The latter,  section  298C,
         is wider in scope making it a criminal offence  for  an  Ahmadi  to
         pose as a Muslim, to refer to his faith as Islam or  to  preach  or
         propagate his faith or invite others to accept  it  or  "by  words,
         either spoken or written, or by the visible  representation  or  in
         any manner whatsoever outrages the religious feelings of  Muslims".
         An offence again carries a maximum of three years' imprisonment  as
         well as  a  fine.   He  also  refers  to  the  consequences  of  an
         accusation of blasphemy under section 295C of the Code which  makes
         it an offence to defile the sacred name of  the  holy  prophet  for
         which the punishment is death and a fine.

      c. Dr Lau considers it safe to state that the  vast  majority  if  not
         every report compiled by well-respected human rights  organisations
         states that  Ahmadis  suffer  persecution  under  Pakistan's  legal
         system both in respect of laws directed against them as well as the
         law on blasphemy.  He refers also to the COIR paras 19.04 to  19.44
         as well as to the  Ahmadi  community  producing  an  annual  report
         providing a compilation of "persecutions" of Ahmadis  in  Pakistan.
         He explains that the PHRG found testimonies  of  persons,  some  of
         whom the group had met, to be consistent with  those  contained  in
         the report.  He points out that the COIR for 2011 does not refer to
         the most  recent  of  these  reports  "Persecution  of  Ahmadis  in
         Pakistan during the year 2011".  Dr Lau concludes that there is  no
         doubt that  "...a  significant  number  of  Ahmadis  face  criminal
         prosecutions under Pakistan's criminal law..."

      d. Dr Lau quotes in extenso from the PHRG  and  in  addition  examples
         listed in the "Persecution of Ahmadis in Pakistan 2011"  report  of
         instances of discrimination. That report is said to list  a  number
         of instances of discrimination in educational  establishments,  for
         instance the expulsion of Ahmadi pupils and students on the  ground
         of their religion  and  other  educational  establishments  run  by
         Ahmadis being targeted by extremists and forced to close down.  The
         only specific example given is the forced closure of the College of
         Commerce and Sciences in Southern Punjab after a sustained campaign
         by extremists as well as blasphemy  charges  filed  against  Ahmadi
         students.

      e. The next enquiry relates to  the  use  of  anti-Ahmadi  literature,
         posters, advertisements and rallies and the effect  on  the  Ahmadi
         and non-Ahmadi populations.  Dr Lau describes  the  production  and
         distribution of such pamphlets as a  popular  and  frequently  used
         method of extremist groups to incite  like-minded  people  to  take
         actions against the community.  He again refers to the 2011  Report
         of Persecution of Ahmadis in Pakistan and also to  regular  reports
         of rallies  staged  against  Ahmadis,  illustrated  by  an  ongoing
         agitation against the use of a building in Rawalpindi as a place of
         worship which started in January 2012.  He concludes with reference
         to a pessimistic article by the Asian Human Rights Commission of 12
         March 2012 entitled 'Pakistan Government makes no  effort  to  halt
         the persecution and killings of Ahmadis'.

      f. Dr Lau next comments  on  reported  violence  and  attacks  against
         Ahmadis, particularly in the last few years between 2008 and  2012,
         not confined to the mosque attacks.  Dr Lau quotes from  the  Asian
         Human Rights Commission that since January 2011  ten  Ahmadis  have
         been murdered and describes also that almost 100 had been killed in
         two attacks on the mosques in May 2010.  It appears he is referring
         to the same Human Rights Commission as a source for  his  knowledge
         on this.

      g. As to the extent to which violence and attacks are not reported  in
         the media, international country reports, or the  Ahmadi  community
         itself,   Dr Lau explains from his own experience, from  travelling
         and having worked in  Pakistan  for  many  years,  that  not  every
         incident involving the Ahmadis is reported  by  the  press  or  the
         Ahmadi community. He refers to the PHRG having been  told  that  in
         some cases the police for instance refused to register  a  criminal
         complaint made by an Ahmadi  and  that  information  regarding  the
         human rights' position of the Ahmadis differs in detail.  He states
         that differences of data were  pointed  out  by  the  Human  Rights
         Commission of Pakistan in its annual 2010 report.

      h. As to the use of sections 295C and 298B and C of the Pakistan Penal
         Code, Dr Lau refers to his recent publication[12]. He  explains  he
         had examined all reported cases involving offences against religion
         in Pakistan and observes that it is noticeable that,  at  least  in
         the reported decisions, sections 298B and 298C of the Code  feature
         rarely and that the  majority  of  cases  concern  other  sections,
         including 295C ("the blasphemy law").

      i. In the context of 295C carrying a death  penalty  and  a  statement
         that the Pakistan courts have said that only the death penalty  can
         be imposed, the  question  is  asked  how  often  it  is.   Dr  Lau
         responds, observing that according to the  HRCP  Annual  Report  of
         2010, there are currently 8,000 convicts on death row, with  nearly
         6,000 sentenced to death  in  Punjab  alone.   He  understands  the
         government has made promises  to  abolish  the  death  penalty  and
         understands, although he has not been able to locate  any  official
         confirmation, that under the present government there have not been
         executions.  In his opinion, however, the abolition  of  the  death
         penalty is likely to prove difficult since, at least in respect  of
         section 295C of the Code, both the Federal Sharia't Court  and  the
         Sharia't Appellate Bench of the Supreme Court have ruled  that  the
         death penalty for the offence of blasphemy is mandatory.   He  does
         not  provide  a  source  for  this.   In  his  conversations   with
         government officials, he has frequently been told that whilst there
         had been some death sentences under 295C  at  the  level  of  trial
         courts, all get overturned on appeal to the high  courts.   In  his
         review of cases from the past  ten  years,  the  picture  has  been
         largely confirmed, although there were exceptions, one involving an
         85 year old man of the Ahmadi for whom the death penalty  has  been
         confirmed, and he then refers to reported  judgments  dealing  with
         section 295C, referring to the fate of  Bashir  Ahmad.   He  quotes
         from his  research  regarding  reported  judgments  concerned  with
         section 295C including the fate of an  85  year  old  Ahmadi  Hajji
         Bashir Ahmad and Abdul Rehman, decisions which appear to have  been
         reported in 2001 and 2004 respectively.

      j. The next question asks why  the  death  penalty  is  not  routinely
         imposed.  Dr Lau responds  by explaining that it is not correct  to
         say it is not imposed; they are by trial courts but in  many  cases
         they are overturned on appeal. The next question is a specific one:
         "What  would  the  likely  charge/sentence   for   someone   openly
         propagating by standing on a street  corner  issuing  leaflets  and
         proclaiming the Ahmadi faith  as  the  true  religion?"  The  short
         answer by Dr Lau is that it carries  a  maximum  penalty  of  three
         years' imprisonment.

      k. Dr Lau is asked to give an estimate of the number  of  cases  filed
         against Ahmadis under Pakistan Penal Code sections 295 and 298.  He
         states  that it is impossible  to  give  an  estimate.  A  criminal
         prosecution commences with the filing of a First Information Report
         (FIR).  However the statistics record registered  cases  concerning
         all offences against religion and do not  break  down  the  figures
         according to particular sections  of  the  Code.   In  response  to
         further questions he explains that he believes there is no  central
         database recording cases.

      l. As to whether he is able to give a  figure  independent  from  that
         obtained from the Ahmadi community's  own  reports  detailing  some
         3,500 (cases),   Dr Lau explains that he is not  sure  as  to  what
         period that figure relates and cannot answer the question with  any
         precision.  He refers to the Prosecution  2011  report[13]  stating
         that since promulgation of sections 298B and C, tens  of  thousands
         of Ahmadis have been booked under these laws.  He states:

         "The crime statistics from April 1984 to  December  2011,  however,
         list a number of registered  cases  against  Ahmadis  for  offences
         against religion that is far below 'tens of thousands' of cases.  A
         possible  explanation  might  be  that  in  two  cases  the  entire
         population  of  Rabwah  and  Kotli  respectively  were  accused  of
         offences under section 298C and for the repair of  a  mosque  -  if
         these two cases are included  the  figure  is  indeed  in  tens  of
         thousands."

      m. Dr Lau goes on to observe, however, that the paucity  of  centrally
         and officially collected data on  the  number  of  Ahmadis  accused
         should not, in his opinion, "...detract  from  the  fact  that  all
         human rights organisations consistently report a significant number
         of such cases".

      n. In respect of the reliability of the Ahmadi community's own reports
         and figures, he explains that as a member of the PHRG he  was  able
         to interview many of the victims of violence and false prosecutions
         which featured in the 2009 community  report.   Without  exception,
         their accounts accorded with what had been  written  and  had  been
         published.   He describes  the  Ahmadi  community  as  quite  well-
         organised and producing reports that are as accurate  as  possible.
         He is not aware of any suggestion of over or under- reporting.

      o. Dr Lau observes the limited time  available  to  him  in  order  to
         prepare his report meant that he was not able to answer an  enquiry
         about a reference in the  PHRG  report  that  no  Ahmadi  dares  to
         propagate in  the  open.   As  to  reported  incidents  of  Ahmadis
         operating medical camps, his instructions had not referred  him  to
         any incidents of this but he was aware of reports that  during  the
         catastrophic floods of 2010 some 500 internally displaced  families
         were denied humanitarian aid apparently  on  the  ground  of  their
         religion.  He is also aware that the Ahmadi community  itself  runs
         medical camps.

      p. Questions  turn  to  the  availability  of  bail  and  whether  the
         provisions under sections 295 and 298 of the Code are  bailable  by
         the police as opposed to the courts and  if  so  which  ones.   His
         response is that: " offences under sections 295 PPC  are  bailable,
         all others under section 295 are not." He goes on to  explain  that
         an offence under 298B and 298C of the PPC is not bailable.  He  had
         not been able to find any consistent jurisprudence on the grant  of
         bail in relation to offences against religion.

      q. As to the decision of the Tribunal in KA & Others, Dr Lau  observes
         that this was  concerned  with  the  legal  position  of  women  in
         relation to the grant of bail but he did not think  that  the  case
         was relevant to prosecutions of Ahmadis, nor  to  offences  against
         religion in general.  In his opinion, the judgment of KA  does  not
         detract from the findings of the PHRG. As to  whether  it  is  more
         difficult for Ahmadis to get bail as  opposed  to  other  types  of
         detainees, Dr Lau explains that in the absence of any comprehensive
         and thorough research it is difficult to answer this question  with
         a high degree of precision.  Cases presented to the PHRG  suggested
         that there are a number of cases where Ahmadis found  it  difficult
         to obtain bail.

      r. Turning to the matter of FIRs, Dr Lau explains in his  report  that
         there is no comprehensive set of data available that  would  permit
         him to determine whether the settling of scores  is  a  predominant
         motivation behind  these  being  issued  against  Ahmadis  but,  as
         explained by PHRG and his own research, it is  a  frequent  motive.
         He does not think that the motivation is  always  a  personal  one,
         given the use of criminal proceedings  by  extremist  organisations
         such as the Khatme-e-Nabuwat against Ahmadis.   Exceptions  to  his
         view that the filing of FIRs is piecemeal were those filed  against
         the residents of Rabwah and Kotli.  As to the  police  response  to
         the FIRs, Dr Lau refers to KA and its finding that  the  police  do
         not always pursue FIRs.  As to whether the police approach  is  the
         same in Ahmadi cases as that for  domestic  violence,  he  explains
         that  the  legal  position  of  women  is  different  and  has   no
         application to the legal problems encountered by Ahmadis.   KA  had
         referred to many FIRs being  stagnant.   Whether  this  applies  to
         Ahmadi-related cases, in the absence of better research,  he  could
         not say.

      s. Dr Lau believes there is no central register of FIRs and the police
         in one area could not access the records of another police  station
         except by visiting the police station concerned.  He was  not  able
         to say whether the police would pursue an FIR where  an  individual
         has removed from an area and refers again to the role of  extremist
         organisations such as the  Khatme-e-Nabuwat  using  FIRs.   In  the
         absence of a central register, the existence of an FIR would not be
         automatically highlighted  when  a  person  leaves  or  returns  to
         Pakistan.

      t. Reminded that in giving evidence before the Tribunal in KA  he  had
         referred  to  the   police   being   "corrupt,   brutal,   abusive,
         particularly towards women", Dr Lau  was  asked  whether  there  is
         adequate police protection for Ahmadis.  He  considers  the  police
         protection is not adequate in the light  of  the  large  number  of
         murders of Ahmadis as well as  the  suicide  bomb  attacks  against
         Ahmadi  mosques  in  Lahore.  Asked   whether   the   police   were
         particularly abusive to Ahmadis, he explains in his report that  he
         had not seen evidence of this and could not deny or confirm whether
         any abuse was worse for Ahmadi women.   He  was  unable  to  answer
         whether he saw a rise  in  the  incidence  of  Ahmadi  women  being
         targeted.

      u. As to the internal organisation of  the  Khatme-e-Nabuwat,  Dr  Lau
         states  that  although  not  an  organisation  run  or   officially
         sponsored by the state,  there  were  instances  of  its  functions
         receiving official endorsement or featuring government officials as
         participants.  There are  a  number  of  organisations  campaigning
         against Ahmadis.  He explains that he is not an expert in this area
         and could not provide detailed information on groups other than the
         Khatme-e-Nabuwat who are anti-Ahmadi. Dr Lau's  report  deals  with
         how the Khatme-e-Nabuwat propagate their anti-Ahmadi practices.  He
         describes it as an extremist organisation using pamphlets,  fatwas,
         stickers, as well as  rallies  and  conferences  to  propagate  the
         abuse.  There are now a number of private TV channels that  espouse
         very conservative religious views.  He considers it safe  to  state
         that the  government  does  not  prevent  anti-Ahmadi  groups  from
         operating.  He believes that social prominence of an  Ahmadi  is  a
         factor in the vulnerability to attack and refers to evidence of the
         names of prominent Ahmadi businessmen who appear on hit lists.

      v.  As  to  the  source  of  information  that  many  convictions  are
         overturned  on  appeal,  Dr  Lau  states  that  this   comes   from
         conversations with several lawyers representing  Ahmadis.   He  has
         found on the whole that the higher  judiciary  appear  to  be  less
         intimidated by religious  extremists  and  trial  courts  and  they
         attempt  to  evaluate  the  evidence  fairly  although  there   are
         exceptions.  As to whether the judiciary is independent in relation
         to Ahmadis, the number of reported decisions in relation to Ahmadis
         is quite small but Dr Lau considers that they suggest that  at  the
         level of trial courts judges convict on the basis of thin evidence.
          There was no data which would  permit  a  precise  answer  on  the
         likely period a person could expect to spend in detention  awaiting
         trial on remand for blasphemy- related offences  and  he  does  not
         know whether conditions in detention are any worse for Ahmadis than
         the general population.  He believes that as a matter  of  Pakistan
         criminal law it was most unusual for an FIR to be filed against  an
         entire community (Rabwah).

224. In response to questions from Mr Gill, Dr Lau referred  to  his  report
    where it is stated that it is difficult to identify any  factors  which
    would determine with any degree [of] certainty which of the sections of
    Ordinance XX dealing with offences against religion would be used.   He
    explained to Mr Gill that  the  cases  he  had  referred  to  had  been
    published in law reports.  He also explained the process whereby  cases
    would be reported identifying that there was certainly no comprehensive
    system of reporting and hence there was no proper data.  The  only  way
    to find out more data was to spend time in  the  high  courts  in  each
    province and to go through the documentation of thousands of cases.

225. He explained that the Federal Shari'a  Court  did  not  hear  blasphemy
    cases and described the  differing  ways  in  which  the  jurisdictions
    worked.  In essence the Federal Sharia Court determines whether the law
    is in accordance with Islam and in its second jurisdiction, the Federal
    Shari'a Court acts as a Court of  Appeal  arising  out  of  convictions
    under the Hudood Ordinance of which the  most  prominent  is  the  Zina
    Ordinance.

226. Dr Lau referred also to information kept by the police departments  and
    by that he  was  referring  to  FIRs.   Individual  police  departments
    collect data of cases which is published on their websites but as it is
    not broken down into sections of the Penal Code, it is not possible how
    many involved Ahmadis.  As to over or under reporting, he had not found
    an organisation saying that data was completely out of line  with  what
    actually happens in the ground.

227. Sections 298B and C were specifically targeted, according  to  Dr  Lau,
    at the Ahmadi. He considered it was clear that the Ordinance XX  (which
    introduced these provisions) was designed to prevent  the  Ahmadi  from
    calling themselves Muslims and to prevent them from  propagating  their
    faith. He  described  the  reach  of  Section  298C  and  the  risk  of
    conviction that could arise.  He illustrated this by saying  that  just
    leaving a pamphlet somewhere would be  a  visible  representation.   He
    regarded the provision to be all encompassing, as demonstrated  by  its
    language and it would include women who invite people round for tea  to
    discuss the Ahmadi faith. It makes  it  an  offence  to  propagate.  He
    referred to the Supreme Court decision in Zaheeruddin as describing the
    law in terms that if (the provisions of the PPC)  were  not  in  force,
    there would be civil war.

228. Dr Lau explained that the reports available do not  single  out  Ahmadi
    women facing particular problems.  He identified the great difficulties
    they had in the legal system coupled with the "disability" of being  an
    Ahmadi.  As to Ahmadis generally, it was not said in any  reports  that
    Ahmadis were more likely to be roughed up by the police in the  context
    of a statement in his report that he had not seen any evidence that the
    police are particularly abusive to them.  He clarified  his  answer  by
    explaining that even the High Court and Supreme Court would agree  that
    there is certain  amount  of  of  police  brutality  (for  the  general
    population).

229. Referring to the Lahore Mosque attacks in May  2010,  as  a  result  of
    research in asylum  cases  on  which  he  had  been  asked  to  provide
    evidence, Dr Lau was aware that some of the victims who appeared on the
    FIR involved in the attack have been subject to threats.  As  to  other
    difficulties faced by the Ahmadis he confirmed that  according  to  the
    persecution.org report for 2011, 50 had been mentioned as  being  on  a
    hit list following an incident in Faisalabad.  As to whether  there  is
    evidence of state complicity or acquiescence in anti-Ahmadi activities,
    Dr Lau reminded us that the Ordinance XX has stood the  test  of  time.
    This was confirmed by it not having been repealed.

230. In reply to questions from Mr Lemer, Dr Lau said that people who  stand
    up against Islamists face  immediate  threats  and  are  in  very  real
    danger.  He referred to news reports that hundreds of lawyers had lined
    the path outside the courts showering Taseer's convicted assassin  with
    rose petals.  There had been no disciplinary proceedings.

231. As to the numbers of Ahmadis who were reported by their  own  community
    to have faced prosecutions under Pakistan Penal Code (sections 295  and
    298), he had no proper explanation  for  the  discrepancy  between  the
    community's figure of 3,500 and the statement  by  Asma  Jahangir  that
    this was 27,585.  He speculated that the larger figure may include  the
    FIRs issued against whole cities (Rabwah  and  Kotlah).   He  confirmed
    that no website collated the data from various police stations  on  the
    FIRs that had been issued and he had no data on how long it would  take
    to appeal refusal of bail or to proceed by way of  trial  in  a  higher
    court. He thought that bail applications in  general  are  heard  quite
    quickly, the main concern according to  Ahmadi  lawyers  being  to  get
    someone out of jail as quickly as  possible.  From  the  cases  he  had
    referred to none was longer than a year.  There was no real interest in
    pushing for a trial which might result in a conviction. He described  a
    case where there had been no trial for ten years.

232. He did not think that the Khatme-e-Nabuwat had  their  own  TV  channel
    but they did have a publicity organisation which organised  conferences
    and he emphasised that it was not an illegal organisation but otherwise
    he was unable to provide more details.

233. Asked about security arrangements organised by  the  Ahmadi  community,
    Dr Lau  said  that  these  seemed  to  him  to  be  very  much  private
    arrangements but most people with a "household  organisation"  and  the
    upper middle  classes  would  have  private  security  arrangements  in
    Pakistan which included an armed guard at least at night.  Although  he
    could not remember precisely,  he  presumed  that  the  guards  he  saw
    organised by the Ahmadi community would have been armed.

234. As to restrictions on Ahmadis, Dr Lau  confirmed  that  only  a  Muslim
    could be the President of Pakistan and similarly judges of the  Federal
    Shari'at Court had to be Muslims.   This  was  not  a  requirement  for
    judges of the Supreme Court and he was  unsure  about  any  non-secular
    requirements for  the  office  of  Prime  Minister.   He  accepted  the
    legitimacy of the Constitution defining who is a  Muslim  but  did  not
    accept that it would have been difficult to  operate  the  Constitution
    without  this  referring  to  the  situation  prior  to  1974  when  he
    considered self declaration was quite sufficient.  He referred  to  the
    background to the 1974 constitutional change  as  political  (President
    Bhutto was keen to demonstrate that he was a good  Muslim)  and  public
    order related in the light of the incidents arising  including  clashes
    involving the Ahmadis. A two thirds majority was needed  to  amend  the
    constitution but he believed that  the  amendment  was  carried  almost
    unanimously.

235.  When asked about the decision in Zaheeruddin,  Dr  Lau  observed  that
    the court was not neutral in its assessment of Ordinance XX   and  that
    the Pakistan Penal Code prior to 1984 by  contrast  was  based  on  the
    Indian Penal Code of 1860.  This  had  religiously  neutral  provisions
    preventing attacks against mosques. He considered that it would be very
    difficult for an Ahmadi to challenge  the  constitutional  validity  of
    Ordinance XX which could only really be changed by parliament.

236. Dr Lau considered  section  295C  to  be  worded  in  a  wide  fashion.
    Inviting someone to a place of worship could well be interpreted to  be
    a visible representation to propagate the faith but he had not  seen  a
    case concerned with this scenario.  A Muslim who converts to the Ahmadi
    faith is likely to be regarded as an apostate.  He considered  apostasy
    embraced somebody who commits blasphemy and it was not just an  offence
    for an Ahmadi to propagate his faith but for a Muslim who became a non-
    Muslim.

237. Mr Malik asked Dr Lau about the hypothetical circumstances of  a  Sunni
    who converted to the Ahmadi faith and whether he  would  be  committing
    offences under 295C or 298B or C.  Dr Lau  responded  saying  that  the
    basis of his concern was section 295C as one can  not  convert  without
    annoying  the  fundamental  tenets  of  the  religion  which  would  be
    committing blasphemy. It was by this route that apostasy  would  be  an
    offence triable in the secular courts.  He was not aware of  a decision
    involving an offence  of  blasphemy.   An  amendment  to  the  code  in
    2004[14] requires a senior police officer to be involved but he was not
    aware that this had resulted in a reduction in  cases.   The  amendment
    did not apply to sections 298B and C.   As to  prosecutions  under  the
    Pakistan Penal Code (295C, 298B and C) Dr  Lau  observed  he  had  seen
    reference to 56 cases in the Persecution 2011 report.  He had found two
    cases of blasphemy where death sentences had  been  confirmed  although
    there were more reported case involving acquittals.

238. Dr Lau considered getting rid of an FIR to  be  difficult  and  it  was
    necessary to move the High Court to quash one.  When  asked  about  the
    ability  of  the  police  to  sufficiently  protect  non-Ahmadis   from
    extremist elements, Dr Lau agreed that the police on the whole find  it
    difficult to  protect  religious  minorities,  illustrating  this  with
    details of problems suffered by Hindus, Christians and  the  Shi'a.  Dr
    Lau accepted that section 295 of the Penal Code applied to  any  person
    and at this stage of his evidence he referred to the  history  of  this
    part of the legislation.  The 1860 Penal Code only related to  physical
    structures and therefore  any  prosecution  required  physical  damage.
    Section 295A was introduced which made it an offence to make  offensive
    statements against another religion.  The complaint is made by  Ahmadis
    and other religious minorities that their religions are never protected
    by the law.   Dr Lau explained he was not aware of any cases where  the
    state or the police stepped in to  protect  Christian  churches  or  an
    Ahmadi  mosque.

239. Mr Malik sought Dr Lau's views on certain statistics, referring to  the
    86[15] who had been killed in the Lahore Mosque attacks in May 2010  in
    the context of some 12,580 people that year  who  had  been  killed  in
    Pakistan.  Overall, 202 (Ahmadis) had died in the  previous  28  years.
    When asked whether he considered therefore that only a tiny minority of
    those killed were Ahmadis, Dr Lau explained that he was not  an  expert
    in this field. Apart from the FIRs issued against Rabwah and Kotli,  Dr
    Lau had not seen any  other  examples.   He  spoke  however  about  the
    difficulties of such FIRs being challenged in the  High  Court  in  the
    light of the publicity that would be created.

240. Questioning turned to the ability of Ahmadis to get  bail  and  whether
    the police had power to grant bail.  A bailable  offence  entitles  the
    accused and arrested person to  be  bailed  but  non-bailable  offences
    require a special application to the court. Dr Lau's  understanding  is
    that the police have power to grant bail. Because of popular  sentiment
    with demonstrations outside  police  stations  his  impression,  absent
    proper research, is that  very often bail is initially refused if  only
    to protect the suspect but successful in a later application.   Dr  Lau
    also explained his understanding of the Exit Control List which is  run
    federally but otherwise he did not know the basis on which persons  are
    added.

241. Mr Malik asked Dr Lau about the opinion expressed in  his  report  that
    procedural safeguards were not observed in the courts and  that  judges
    were intimidated by religious extremists and as a result  convict  even
    on the basis of thin evidence.  He asked whether matters were  changing
    since the installation of the present Chief Justice.  Dr Lau replied in
    terms that the system is clearly improving but he could not confidently
    say that the system will always pick out every kind of  miscarriage  of
    justice that occurs at trial level.

242. In reply to questions from Mr Gill, Dr Lau referred  to  the  insidious
    nature of the Ordinance XX and its impact on family disputes  including
    divorce. As soon as they drift  into  what  the  law  considers  to  be
    reserved for Muslims, Ahmadis immediately commit a criminal offence.

243. Our questions related to the way in which FIRs worked in Pakistan.   Dr
    Lau explained  that  these  were  completed  by  the  police  based  on
    information provided by the complainant.   If  no  complaint  had  been
    made, the police usually tried to secure witnesses.  Otherwise it might
    that  the  witness  reporting  the  incident  is  the  policeman.   The
    obligation is on the  police  thereafter  to  gather  evidence  and  if
    possible carry out an arrest.  The police were required  to  produce  a
    police report which is referred to as a charge sheet.  Once  completed,
    it is submitted to the court to  frame  the  charge.   If  there  is  a
    failure to investigate, one could go to the  High  Court  for  judicial
    review.  There was no limitation on the life of an FIR.   The  decision
    to refer a matter to the courts was a joint one by the police  and  the
    government prosecutor although the latter had  little  decision  making
    power.  Only the High Court had the power to quash an FIR.  He was  not
    aware of any association of Ahmadi lawyers and clarified that not  only
    Ahmadi lawyers represented Ahmadis.

244. Dr Lau explained he was quite familiar with the work  of  the  Pakistan
    Human Rights Commission and he  considered  it  enjoyed  an  absolutely
    outstanding reputation.  It was very respected both inside and  outside
    Pakistan and he did not  think  that  anyone  in  government  had  ever
    seriously challenged its findings.  He provided  clarification  of  the
    mass Rabwah FIRs and believed there had been two or that the  one  from
    1989 had been renewed in 2008 although this required more research.  He
    questioned the legal soundness of the 2008 FIR when asked about who had
    been implicated.  He considered it would be very difficult to launch  a
    prosecution but also observed that it was extraordinary that  this  FIR
    was still be circulated.  He  believed  that  as  a  matter  of  public
    interest litigation and human rights litigation, a court probably would
    be receptive to a third party bringing  a  public  interest  litigation
    case to quash the FIR and there was nothing to prevent the  High  Court
    suo moto interfering.

245. He confirmed that the term "booked" in the  Ahmadi  community's  report
    of 2011 was a common expression for an FIR having been filed.   He  did
    not believe there was any evidence demonstrating how many FIRs had been
    taken forward to police report stage and subsequent prosecution in  the
    magistrates' court.  It was an area that required further research.  He
    did not believe the (Ahmadi) communities themselves had records of  the
    number  of  FIRs  which  had  resulted  in  active  prosecutions.   The
    Parliamentary Human Rights Commission in discussions with  lawyers  had
    tried to find out the number of cases however  lawyers  themselves  did
    not actually keep proper records.  Of the  3,500  referred  to  in  the
    question in para 33 of his  report,  Dr  Lau  explained  there  was  no
    information on whether they had been granted bail.  It  was  impossible
    to answer how many had resulted eventually in prosecutions.

MS JAHANGIR

246. Ms Asma Jahangir has been tendered as  an  expert  witness.   She  has,
    amongst her many qualifications, a Bachelor of Law degree  from  Punjab
    University and since October 2010 has been  President  of  the  Supreme
    Court Bar Association of Pakistan and  has  been  an  Advocate  in  the
    Supreme Court since 1992.  Additionally, since 1994,  she  has  been  a
    Director of AGHS Legal Aid Cell Lahore which was  set  up  in  1980  to
    provide free legal aid to women.  In  1998  she  was  appointed  United
    Nations  Special  Rapporteur  on  Extrajudicial  Summary  or  Arbitrary
    Execution of the Commission on Human Rights and in 2004  was  appointed
    United Nations Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Religion or  Belief  of
    the Council of Human Rights.

247. Ms Jahangir has been assisted in the preparation of her report  by  her
    daughter, Ms Sulema Jahangir who is qualified as a solicitor in England
    and Wales and is eligible to practise in the higher courts in Pakistan.
    She has a BA from the University of Cambridge awarded in  2003.   Since
    January 2010 she has been working for AGHS Law  Associates  in  Lahore,
    Pakistan as an Associate Lawyer specialising in human rights work.  She
    also has experience from employment in the United Kingdom for some  two
    and a half years prior to December 2009.

248. Ms Jahangir has provided her report on the  letter  head  of  AGHS  Law
    Associates which appears to be a firm based in  Lahore,  Pakistan.   As
    with the expert witnesses, she has been invited to respond  to  certain
    questions:

    i.     Can Ahmadis openly proselytise in Pakistan?  If  not,  why  not?
         Ms Jahangir's evidence is that there is "...absolutely no  space  -
         legal or otherwise - for any Ahmadi to  proselytise  in  Pakistan."
         She refers to the discriminatory legislation we have detailed above
         including the constitutional  changes  in  1974  and  Ordinance  XX
         promulgated in 1984 and now inserted as part of the Pakistan  Penal
         Code 1860, sections 298B and 298C. Ms Jahangir refers to  a  lawyer
         belonging to the Ahmadi faith having unsuccessfully challenged  the
         validity of  Ordinance  XX  as  being  repugnant  to  Islam  and  a
         violation of fundamental rights declared in the constitution.[16]

      She refers also to challenges in a case  in  the  Quetta  High  Court
         after a number of Ahmadis  were  arrested  for  wearing  badges  of
         "Kalma Tayyabba".  The accused are reported to have been  convicted
         and sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment of one year and  pay
         Rs1,000 each or in default of payment serve a further  imprisonment
         of one month.  These proceedings appear to have been instituted  in
         1988.  This was challenged in the Supreme Court  and  a  number  of
         similar cases were heard there in early 1993.  It  appears  in  the
         same  proceedings  (although  not  clear  from  the  report)   that
         Ordinance XX was challenged on this occasion with the outcome  that
         a  five  member  bench  with  one  dissenting  judge  came  to  the
         conclusion that it was a valid and reasonable law  as  it  balanced
         fundamental  rights  and  public  order.    All   convictions   for
         propagation of their faith by the Ahmadis were said to be justified
         and upheld under law.

      Ms Jahangir's report refers to other proceedings before the courts in
         Pakistan for Ahmadis dealing with issues over bail,  the  centenary
         celebration of Ahmadis (which had been banned by the Government  of
         Punjab) and the fact that as a result Ahmadis could not hold  large
         religious gatherings or ceremonies.

      Her conclusion is that it is  very  clear  that  under  the  law  (of
         Pakistan) "Ahmadis cannot proselytise  openly  or  otherwise".   We
         observe at this stage there is no explanation in the report  as  to
         what Ms Jahangir understands by the  word  "proselytise"  which  we
         consider to be  particularly  relevant  in  the  context  of  other
         evidence we have heard which refers to preaching or propagation.

      As with other aspects, Ms Jahangir refers to the 2010 report  of  the
         Human Rights Commission of Pakistan and additionally its report  in
         the following year.

    ii.    "What would the likely charge/sentence  be  for  someone  openly
         propagating for example - standing  on  a  street  corner,  issuing
         leaflets and proclaiming the Ahmadi faith? Ms Jahangir  states  the
         charge would be under section 298C but  if  the  pamphlet  had  any
         mention of the  founder  as  a  prophet  or  the  last  prophet  in
         connection with Islam or some mention of the prophet or other  holy
         personages it could be framed under 295C  or  298A.   She  observes
         there have only been a handful of convictions under 295C and so far
         no sentence has been executed but then observes that a large number
         of those accused under allegations of blasphemy under this  section
         have been killed.

    iii.    What are the special features  of  Ahmadi  women  in  Pakistani
         society?

      Are Ahmadi women at more risk of harm  due  to  their  religion  than
         Ahmadi men?  If so, why?

      Ms Jahangir considers Ahmadi women are equally at risk.   She  refers
         to the prohibition on inter-religious marriages.  She  states  that
         since prejudice against Ahmadis is "acute" an  Ahmadi  mother  will
         stand hardly any chance of gaining custody of her minor children.

    iv.    "What level of religious practice would give rise to a real risk
         of targeting from (a) state and (b) religious extremists?"

      Ms Jahangir gives a number of examples prefaced with these remarks.

             "The state has passed laws that persecute Ahmadis, the  courts
             have sanctified these laws and impunity has been  extended  to
             anyone harassing, discriminating, intimidating or  harming  an
             Ahmadi."

    v.     In relation to the police:

         (a)      Are the police particularly abusive to Ahmadis?

         (b)      Are they particularly abusive to Ahmadi women, if  so,  in
             what manner?

         (c)      Are Ahmadi women at more risk from the Police than  Ahmadi
             men?

         (d)      Would Ahmadi women be at risk of abuse if they  report  an
             incident to the police?

    vi.    How would they be treated if they report an incident or  try  to
         file a FIR?"

      Ms Jahangir's response  is  that  the  police  as  a  whole  "is  not
         particularly abusive to Ahmadis but there are elements  within  the
         police who will be and they are not  discouraged.   In  any  event,
         like the  rest  of  society,  the  police  are  prejudiced  against
         Ahmadis."

    vii.   In response to questions relating to bail, Ms Jahangir  explains
         that as case law shows that bail for Ahmadis is difficult and would
         only be granted exceptionally.  She refers to cases where an Ahmadi
         is  involved  and  ultra-right-wing  groups  are  present  in   the
         courtrooms in a threatening manner.

    viii.  The next three questions relate to the use of FIR.  The  opinion
         of Ms Jahangir is that religious extremists  are  the  most  likely
         people to file an FIR against Ahmadis and she refers to the  police
         being prejudicial and that they also fear violence in  cases  where
         they refuse to file an FIR against Ahmadis.  Ms  Jahangir  explains
         that an FIR against Ahmadis is vigorously pursued.  She  refers  to
         the Khatme-e-Nabuwat ensuring that the FIR is pursued in every case
         against Ahmadis.  In response to further  questions  she  describes
         the extent and reach of the  Khatme-e-Nabuwat  which  she  says  is
         supported by all Islamic religious groups and prayer leaders.

      As to treatment of  such  proceedings  by  the  courts,  Ms  Jahangir
         observes in response to further questions that many convictions are
         overturned and she refers to the  delays  in  these  appeals  being
         heard.  She explains that she cannot give  exact  figures  for  the
         number of appeals that are overturned.  She states  that  the  case
         law presented with her opinion reflects the bias of the  courts  in
         cases of Ahmadis.  As to  the issue whether Ahmadis receive a  fair
         trial, again referring to courts being crowded by  ultra-right-wing
         Islamic  groups,  she  describes  Ahmadi  women  facing  the   same
         prejudices as a male Ahmadi.

    ix.    In response to questions about detention, Ms  Jahangir  explains
         that a person could spend up to  three  years  awaiting  trial  and
         several years for an appeal to be heard.

249. Otherwise Ms Jahangir's report is taken up with  consideration  of  the
    Rabwah FIR and the findings of the Parliamentary Human Rights Group for
    2010 which is dealt with elsewhere in this determination.  Specifically
    she is asked whether there have been any particular  problems  for  the
    victims and families of Lahore mosque attacks following publication  of
    the victims' names.  She explains that she  has  seen  pamphlets  where
    prominent Ahmadi names appeared on hit lists  created  by  anti-Ahmadis
    and observes the state does not act at all  to  protect  Ahmadis.   She
    refers to a large number of madrassa students  being  made  to  believe
    that the killing of Ahmadis is Islamic  and  refers  to  such  students
    being part of the mob or rallies gathered by the Khatme-e-Nabuwat.  She
    observes the significance of the declaration made  by  Liaquat  Hassain
    that Ahmadis were wajibul quatal to be very significant.

250. Finally, Ms Jahangir is asked whether  the incidents  reported  in  the
    US State Report (the year is not provided)  reflect  all  incidents  of
    persecution against Ahmadis.  She observes that the incidents that  any
    report makes cannot be exhaustive because of the paucity of  space  and
    observes a similar shortcoming in  the  UN  reporting  of  the  Special
    Rapporteurs.

251. Her concluding remarks are:

         "I would describe the position of Ahmadi men  and  women  as  being
         under extreme risk.  Violations of human rights against them are  a
         flagrant denial of their religious rights too.  However, in my view
         the situation of Ahmadis is worse than other religious  minorities.
         Their very existence is under  consistent  threat.   Violations  of
         human rights against  Ahmadis  are  systematic  and  of  a  serious
         nature."

252. Just prior to the hearing, an addendum  to  Ms  Jahangir's  report  was
    lodged, posing some further questions.  By way of reply, she  clarifies
    that only  police  can  grant  bail  in  bailable  offences  which  she
    describes as minor offences.  Bail in "cognizable" offences (which  are
    non bailable) is granted by the court after arrest.  Bail can  also  be
    granted before arrest although it is much  more  difficult  to  secure.
    She explains that a police officer has powers to arrest  those  accused
    of a cognizable offence as specified in the  Criminal  Procedure  Code.
    On a private complaint to the court, arrest may also be ordered.  There
    are cases where the police file an FIR but may not arrest  the  accused
    and in such an eventuality, the complainant is able to file a  writ  in
    the court and after a  hearing  the  investigating  officer  can  order
    arrest.  The figure of 67 cases registered against Ahmadis during  2010
    on account of their religious  beliefs,  come  from  the  Human  Rights
    Commission of Pakistan.   Ms  Jahangir  explains  that  the  Commission
    collects data from government sources, press  disclosures  and  carries
    out its own research.  The figure of 67 cases has been provided by  the
    police headquarters at all four  (  main)  provinces  and  the  capital
    although it does not cover other provinces (Ajnk, Gilgit, Baltistan, or
    FATA).  She cannot imagine that  people  are  convicted  without  being
    sentenced.

253. As to timescales for bail, "pre-arrest bail" has a timeframe of one  to
    four months but obtaining bail post-arrest can take up to six to twelve
    months.  Bail following conviction or pre-appeals are  exceptional  and
    can take two to six years.  Access to the provincial FIR registers  can
    be obtained by the Khatme-e-Nabuwat and she explains  "we"  can  access
    the information too.

254.  As  to  whether  Ahmadi  women  face  any  particular  harassment   or
    discrimination and whether they are able  to  go  out  in  public,  she
    explains that she is unable to respond  for  lack  of  data,  observing
    however that Ahmadi women keep a  very  low  profile.   As  to  whether
    houses are a safe alternative to mosque attendance, she  explains  that
    houses of Ahmadis  are  marked  and  are  not  safe  and  every  Ahmadi
    interviewed by her receives pamphlets etc which intimidates them.  Hate
    mail is thrown into their homes.  She clarifies  that  Liaquat  Hassain
    had agreed with a speaker rather than himself declaring Ahmadis wajibul
    quatal.  Finally, as to the number of Ahmadis in Pakistan, she observes
    there is no direct census figure on the actual population.

255. Ms Jahangir gave  her  evidence  before  us  by  video  link.   On  our
    direction, Mr Malik had submitted a number of questions in advance.  Ms
    Jahangir had not had the opportunity of reading them.  Before  she  was
    cross-examined on these questions, she gave this  further  evidence  by
    way of clarification:

    (i)    FIRs are kept in the police stations.  Access to the central FIR
         registry system was not normally available but lawyers are able  to
         get hold of them in restricted circumstances.  After  a  conviction
         occurs, an appeal might take quite a  long  time  to  come  on  for
         hearing.  On appeal, a request would  be  made  for  suspension  of
         sentence, which comes up in two, three, or four years.  In the case
         of blasphemy offences, there has rarely been any case of an  Ahmadi
         where a suspension of sentence has been lifted.  The actual  appeal
         can take any amount of years.  Ms Jahangir has  a  client  who  has
         been accused of blasphemy and has been in a cell for  the  last  40
         years.  Unless the  sentence  has  been  suspended,  the  convicted
         person remains in custody.

    (ii)   As to the position of Ahmadi women, Ms Jahangir referred to  the
         steps taken by the community to protect  them.   In  custody  cases
         where an Ahmadi woman is fighting a non-Ahmadi husband for custody,
         she is less likely to succeed than a non-Ahmadi woman would.

    (iii)  Ms Jahangir has seen several houses of Ahmadis which  have  been
         marked.

256. As to the questions sent in advance:

    (i)    Are people automatically detained after an FIR  is  filed  under
         sections 298B or C  of  the  PPC  or  whether  the  police  have  a
         discretion?

      Ms Jahangir's response is that the police would  arrest  unless  they
         believe the FIR is completely false.  She was aware of three  cases
         (relating it appears to blasphemy) which have been reported whereby
         the courts have instructed the police to go and arrest the accused.
          There is however discretion but it is limited both in law  and  in
         practice because of pressure.

    (ii)   Can you clarify the difference between bailable and non-bailable
         offences?  Is there a right  of  appeal  or  review  if  the  first
         instance court refuses bail?

      Bailable offences are those where the police can grant  bail  without
         the need of going to court.  If one  goes  to  the  court,  refusal
         would be an exception.  However, non-bailable offences are  at  the
         discretion of the court.  A refusal gives a right of appeal to  the
         High Court and from there to the Supreme Court.  The police have no
         power to keep someone in detention beyond 24 hours without approval
         by a magistrate.

    (iii)  At paragraph [9] you have referred to some statistics that  were
         given  by  the  petitioner's  Counsel  to  the  Supreme  Court   in
         Zaheeruddin's case.  Do you know anything about the source of those
         statistics?

      The statistics have been taken from the document itself.

    (iv)   Do you have any statistics as to  how  many  Ahmadis  have  been
         convicted/sentenced under sections 298B, C and 295C of the PPC?

      Personally, Ms Jahangir did not have  such  statistics  but  she  had
         quoted the Human Rights Convention Reports  although  she  did  not
         consider  these  very  comprehensive.   She  was  sure   that   the
         statistics of persons  actually  convicted  and  sentenced  existed
         within the community itself.

    (v)    Do you know how many Ahmadi lawyers are practising in Pakistan?

      Ms Jahangir said that she did not count lawyers by their religion.

    (vi)   You state at paragraph [38] that every province  has  a  central
         register of FIRs.  Do you have any statistics as to how  many  FIRs
         have  been  lodged  against  Ahmadis  since  the  promulgation   of
         Ordinance XX?

      Ms Jahangir stated that between 1984 and 1988  people  did  not  have
         access to FIRs as the country was under a military regime.  [Today]
         the Human Rights Commission researchers are very careful when  they
         are researching blasphemy, particularly on  Ahmadi  issues  because
         they themselves would be putting their lives at risk.

    (vii)  If an FIR is registered against a low profile Ahmadi  in,  let's
         say, Islamabad  and  that  person  moves  quickly  to,  let's  say,
         Karachi, how easy would it be to  track  that  person  by  (a)  the
         police and (b) KN?

      Ms Jahangir replied that both will be able to track that person quite
         easily unless protected by  intelligence  agencies.   However,  the
         latter do not normally protect religious minorities.  The KN has  a
         good network and partnerships with state agents,  their  efficiency
         demonstrated by the marking of houses of Ahmadis.

    (viii) You state at paragraph [42], that 'The names of absconders [are]
         fed into the immigration system.  What is  the  source  (i.e.,  any
         legislation or policy document) of this  assertion?   What  do  you
         mean by the 'immigration system'?

      The exit control list (ECL) is maintained by  the  Interior  Ministry
         and all provinces provide the names of people who the  courts  have
         ordered to be put on ECL for example in child cases.  In  addition,
         this list contains absconders who are declared as such by the court
         and those provided by  agencies  such  as  the  FIA.   Ms  Jahangir
         herself was put on this list during  the  military  government  and
         many of (her colleagues) were not allowed to leave the country.  If
         an  FIR  is  registered  against  someone,  his   name   does   not
         automatically go to the ECL.  An absconder is someone against  whom
         a case has been registered and the police wish to  arrest  but  the
         party is  hiding.   The  court  would  declare  someone  to  be  an
         absconder at the request of the police.  ECL checks take place  for
         persons both leaving and returning  to  Pakistan  and  Ms  Jahangir
         referred to cases where people had endeavoured  to  enter  as  dual
         nationals.

    (ix)   You state at paragraph 43 that 'The government is intimidated by
         [KN]'.  Can you explain how the government is being intimidated?

      There is an absolute refusal (by the government) to  investigate  the
         KN or to arrest anybody from the KN or even go and talk to them.

    (x)    You state at [44], that KN's network 'extends  to  a  number  of
         professional groups like lawyers'.  Is there any evidence  that  KN
         which includes professionals like lawyers, is  involved  either  in
         killings or inciting killings of Ahmadis?

      Her reply was that there is a KN lawyer group  which  operates  quite
         openly and makes statements in  the  press.   This  group  recently
         asked for a soft drink called Shezan to  be  banned  from  the  Bar
         Association because the company belonged to an Ahmadi.  This  group
         makes statements against people, something Ms Jahangir  encountered
         when  she  was  contesting  election  to  the  Supreme  Court   Bar
         Association.  Statements against her included  the  assertion  that
         she supported the Ahmadis and should not be elected. She  clarified
         that this group did not indulge in killings or any such violence.

    (xi)   At [63] you have referred to prominent  Ahmadis.   What  is  the
         difference between prominent  Ahmadis  and  Ahmadis  that  are  not
         prominent?

      Prominent Ahmadis are those who are in public life or in  a  position
         of more visibility such as a known writer, a  television  anchorman
         or a bureaucrat of high stature.

257. In response to further questions from Mr Malik which had not  been  put
    in advance, the following key points emerged:

    (i)    Shia mosques have been attacked in addition to  Ahmadi  mosques.
         However Sunni mosques less so probably less because they are  in  a
         majority.  Attacks on  non-Ahmadi  mosques  are  denounced  by  the
         government in no uncertain terms but  this  was  not  the  case  in
         respect of the attacks on the Ahmadi  mosques  in  May  2010.   The
         threat of those particular attacks had been there for some time and
         Ms Jahangir and the Secretary of the  Human  Rights  Commission  of
         Pakistan met the Chief  Minister  and  warned  him  beforehand  yet
         nothing was done.

    (ii)   Decisions such as those  where  an  Ahmadi  student  was  denied
         access to a college could be challenged in the courts but to do  so
         would result in a risk to life and reputation.

    (iii)  It is correct that no-one has ever been executed  under  section
         295C, the blasphemy provision, but several people have  been  in  a
         cell for many years, running to between 90 and 120.  Three were her
         clients, one being an Ahmadi and two Christian.

    (iv)   Previously,  Ahmadis  intermarried  with  other  Muslims.   Such
         unions were  not  banned  before  1974.   Now  such  marriages  are
         exceptional.

    (v)    In relation to the reference in her  report  to  the  government
         stating that  in  October  2012  they  had  foiled  an  attempt  by
         militants to attack Ahmadis' place of worship  Ms  Jahangir  stated
         that whether this  demonstrated  the  will  of  the  government  to
         protect Ahmadis  from  militants  depended  upon  who  was  in  the
         government.  She knew of no "single" case where Ahmadis  have  gone
         to the court asking for an FIR to  be  registered  against  people.
         They have never dared to go to court.  In contrast with  collective
         FIRs, those against individuals are rigorously implemented  in  the
         large majority of cases.

258. In response to further questions from Mr Gill,  Ms  Jahangir  explained
    that it would be exceptional in cases brought under sections  295C  and
    298C if bail were granted.  Courts  are  restricted  in  granting  bail
    illustrated by a High Court ruling that it would not grant bail  as  it
    would be unfair to  the  accused  as  his  life  would  be  in  danger.
    Decisions on bail are therefore influenced by the activities of  groups
    outside the court.  Pre-conviction bail may take, in a normal case, six
    months to a year to be granted  but in the case of  sections  295C  and
    298C,  Ms Jahangir would be surprised if people got bail at all.  As to
    any dangers in police custody, women's organisations rallied to  change
    the law so that women were not kept in police custody because rape  and
    torture were endemic.  The alternative was  prison.   Such  places  are
    overcrowded by four times their capacity and there have been reports of
    the killings of non-Muslims and Ahmadis whilst in prison.  Ms  Jahangir
    has two clients, both Christians, who were  killed  whilst  in  prison.
    There was no post mortem, nor investigation, nor any enquiry.

259. Clarifying research into FIRs against Ahmadis, from 1988  research  was
    possible but in difficult circumstances.  To actually go  and  ask  for
    details of all blasphemy cases was "suicidal".  When asked whether  the
    Khatme-e-Nabuwat generally engaged in killing, she confirmed there were
    reports that they did so although she was  reluctant  to  develop  this
    answer [with the implication she would be at risk herself].

260. In response to questions from Mr Lemer, Ms Jahangir explained that  the
    courts and the police send details  (of  absconders)  to  the  Interior
    Ministry to go on the Exit Control List.  Mr Lemer sought clarification
    with reference to the Home Office  Country  Report  on  Pakistan  which
    referred to people on the ECL as those  involved  in  mass  corruption,
    economic crime and people involved  in  terrorism  but  did  not  refer
    specifically to people who simply absconded.  Ms Jahangir  referred  to
    reports in newspaper, two days ago of a lawyer being caught because  he
    was an absconder and trying to leave the country.  If an Ahmadi were to
    abscond when they were being accused of a blasphemy offence,  it  would
    be impossible  for  them  to  leave  the  country  because  there  were
    organised groups set up that would ensure such people do not do so.  It
    is very likely the person would end up on an ECL.   The  procedure  for
    someone to be registered as an absconder is  this.   The  police  would
    look for the person and if unsuccessful would file (a suit) in the High
    Court.  Notice would then be given outside  the  absconder's  place  of
    residence sometimes two, sometimes three times, depending on the court,
    and thereafter under criminal procedure (rules) that  person  would  be
    declared an absconder by the court.  If the courts do  not  go  through
    this procedure, someone will not end up on the ECL.

261. As to prominent Ahmadis, in the context of evidence  of  discrimination
    against them, Ms Jahangir confirmed there were  exceptional  people  in
    high places in the government as public servants, but  they  stood  out
    like a "sore thumb".  Everybody would know they are Ahmadi.  Many  were
    there before 1974 but she was not able to say that none had been  there
    post-1974.

262. The visit by Ms Jahangir and the Human Rights  Commission  of  Pakistan
    to the Chief Minister took place two months before the  attack  on  the
    mosques in May 2010.  Their visit had been followed up by two letters.

263. Ms Jahangir explained that English language  newspapers  by  and  large
    would not "persecute" Ahmadis but "vernacular" newspapers  would  never
    write anything about Ahmadis unless it  was  to  threaten  or  demonise
    them.

264. As to whether matters had got better or worse for Ahmadis in  the  last
    three years, Ms Jahangir said that violence has escalated for everyone.

265. In response to our questions for clarification, Ms  Jahangir  explained
    that in the previous five years she has not acted for  Ahmadis  as  she
    practises mostly in the Supreme Court and most of  the  (Ahmadi)  cases
    appear at trial  and  High  Court  level.   A  lot  of  Ahmadi  lawyers
    undertake Ahmadi cases.   On  the  matter  of  FIRs,  these  should  be
    prepared at the police station.  Thereafter, if the accusation  is  one
    of a very serious nature (a cognisable offence) the police will go  and
    arrest an accused.  If it is a minor offence, the police grant bail  to
    the person.  Because of the volume of cases, if  it  is  a  very  minor
    offence, the police will take some time to (contact) the accused.   The
    decision to refer the matter to the trial court is taken by the  police
    and they are required to do so within 24 hours of arrest.  The role  of
    the prosecutor is reflected in a new system put in place.  It has  been
    operational  for  only  a  couple  of  years.   Such  prosecutors  will
    accompany the police and they will be the persons who present the  case
    to the court.  However the police will come with a file.  As to whether
    the prosecutor makes the decision whether the case should  be  referred
    to the trial court, this has started in some provinces but it is a  new
    system and still in its infancy.

266. Ms Jahangir confirmed that  the  FIR  against  Rabwah  has  never  been
    cancelled.  From what she had been told, Ms  Jahangir  understood  that
    this "blind FIR" is used against members of the Ahmadi  community.   It
    was being misused in this way until a year ago.

267. As to the number  of  Ahmadis  who  are  awaiting  trial,  Ms  Jahangir
    confirmed that her quotation was from that quoted  in  the  Zaheeruddin
    case.  She did not have a countrywide figure.

268. Ms Jahangir's impression was that she believed, as  did  other  members
    of the Human  Rights  Commission,  that  the  Ahmadi  Association  were
    keeping good figures and monitoring events affecting their  members  in
    Pakistan.  She clarified a reference in her report to a large number of
    Ahmadi youth being kidnapped by Taliban on the assumption  that  ransom
    taken from non-Muslims was not forbidden in Islam.  She understood  the
    number involved to be in the "tens".

SCHEDULE II

THE SUBMISSIONS

269. The Secretary of State's case is set out in a skeleton  argument  dated
    16 May which Mr Malik supplemented with argument at  the  hearing.   He
    made the following key points:

    (i)    There has been no material change since the decision in  MJ  and
          Mr Malik  adopted  the  Secretary  of  State's  position  in  that
          decision.  The problem identified by the Tribunal in MJ  over  the
          extent of evidence of the number of blasphemy cases  remained  the
          same.  The Tribunal then said that it was very difficult to assess
          real risk in a population of  millions  of  Ahmadis  based  on  an
          unspecified  proportion  of  an  unspecified  level  of  blasphemy
          charges out of about 50 cases a year.

    (ii)   Mr Malik noted that the appellants were relying  on  these  four
          key  points:  the  application  of  anti-Ahmadi  laws  amounts  to
          persecution; the existence of such laws  amounts  to  persecution;
          the risk from non-state actors and the state's failure to  provide
          protection  and  internal  relocation  not  being  a   viable   or
          reasonable option.

    (iii)  He argued that the proper inference that can be drawn  from  the
          lack of evidence is that either the  number  of  prosecutions  and
          convictions is so insignificant that no-one has ever documented it
          or the author  of  the  report  prepared  by  the  association  as
          evidence of the number of incidents against Ahmadis wants  to  put
          forward one side of the picture.

    (iv)   The statistics relied on by the Ahmadi Association in  its  2011
          Persecution Report covered a 20 year period between 1984 and 2011.
           Even if one were to accept that  the  figures  referred  to  many
          cases actually being registered against Ahmadis,  the  number  was
          still very insignificant.  The  registration  of  a  case  against
          someone meant nothing.  It is the police and prosecution who  make
          the decision whether to arrest or charge a person.   There  is  no
          reliable evidence that a mere general application  of  anti-Ahmadi
          laws amounts to persecution.

    (v)    As to the proposition that the mere existence of the anti-Ahmadi
          legislation amounted to persecution, leaders of the  Ahmadi  faith
          were given the opportunity to address the law  makers  before  the
          Constitution was amended (in 1974) and it had been accepted by  Dr
          W that the legislation was rational.

    (vi)   The decision of  the  Supreme  Court  in  Zaheeruddin,  although
          argued by Dr Lau to be biased, this was not  the  position  of  Ms
          Jahangir.

    (vii)  There was no evidence that a well-known Ahmadi who had  appeared
          on national TV as quoted in  the  Ahmadi  Times  to  have  made  a
          mockery of anti-Ahmadi Ordinance was either arrested  or  charged.
          According to the article,  someone  had  gone  to  the  court  for
          registration  of  the  FIR  but  that   petition   was   dismissed
          straightaway.  This demonstrates the state has little interest  in
          prosecuting those who breach the anti-Ahmadi laws.

    (viii) As to the risk from non-state actors, around  207  Ahmadis  were
          killed in the 28 year period between 1984 and 2011 which  includes
          86 who were killed on  28  May  2010.   The  number  of  attempted
          murders is quoted as 234.  As confirmed in his skeleton  argument,
          overall in Pakistan 12,580 people were murdered in 2010 and  there
          were 14,431 attempted murders.  There were  eight  mosque  attacks
          (as evidenced in a report from South Asian  Terrorism  Portal)  in
          2010.  In 2009 there were 17 and in 2008  12.   Such  attacks  are
          widespread.  The attacks on  28  May  2010  were  the  only  major
          terrorist attacks on Ahmadi  mosques.   This  demonstrated  either
          that the militants or the non-state actors were not keen to attack
          Ahmadi mosques or that the mosques are adequately and sufficiently
          protected.   Despite  the  evidence  that  no-one  in   mainstream
          politics expressed any sympathy in  2010,  federal  ministers  did
          visit injured people in hospital and the attacks were condemned by
          everyone in Pakistan.  The attacks were carried out by the Taliban
          and within weeks after the attacks the suspects were arrested  and
          weapons discovered.  Mr Malik could not  see  what  else  a  state
          could conceivably do.

    (ix)   The killers of Governor  Salman  Taseer  and  the  Minister  for
          Minorities, Shahbaz Bhatti, were subsequently arrested.

    (x)    It cannot be said that the media  on  the  whole  is  biased  or
          hostile towards the Ahmadi.  The evidence by witnesses relating to
          what it had been asserted by the former Minister Aamar Hussain was
          exaggerated.  He had been expelled from his  party  and  this  was
          evidence that anti-Ahmadi views were not  welcomed  in  mainstream
          Pakistani politics.

    (xi)   There is  no  evidence  that  the  Khatme-e-Nabuwat  incites  or
          participates in the persecution of Ahmadis in Pakistan.

    (xii)  Dr Lau had given evidence that it would simply be impossible  to
          enforce the FIR against the City of Rabwah.  Despite the  evidence
          of Ms Jahangir, she acknowledged in her  report  that  no-one  had
          been arrested pursuant to that FIR.  There was nothing to back the
          oral assertion she had made.

    (xiii) As stated in his skeleton argument, it is accepted that  liberal
          values are much less respected in Pakistan  and  Ahmadis  do  face
          discrimination in certain circumstances.  Mr Malik relied  on  the
          observations in Shah v Islam [1999] UKHL 20  as well as in Sepet v
          SSHD [2003] UKHL 15 and Amare v SSHD [2005]  EWCA  Civ  1600.   In
          particular risk to the latter Laws LJ said:

             "The  Convention  is  not  there  to  safeguard   or   protect
             potentially affected persons from having to  live  in  regimes
             where pluralist values are  less  respected,  even  much  less
             respected than they are here."

    (xiv)  The TV station of the  Ahmadiyya  Muslim  Association,  MTA,  is
          readily available throughout Pakistan and they have  a  number  of
          publications which are both published and circulated in Pakistan.

    (xv)   Ahmadis are generally safe in Pakistan but  where  exceptionally
          it is found one cannot return to one's home area, the existence of
          the internal flight option will always be a question of fact.

    (xvi)  As to the applicability of HJ (Iran) UKSC 31, the court was  not
          setting a rigid  principle  but  a  flexible  one  to  be  applied
          according to the context of the claim made.  There is no  reliable
          evidence that those Ahmadis who live openly in Pakistan are  being
          persecuted.  They are free to go to their places of worship up and
          down the country.  As to preaching, individual Ahmadis take  their
          duty more or less seriously according to their own views  and  the
          strength of their devotion.  It should not be assumed on the basis
          of the evidence of Imam Rashed that every single Ahmadi has a very
          deep conviction to preach his faith.  Quoting from  his  skeleton,
          "the Secretary of  State  accepts  that  if  an  Ahmadi  applicant
          demonstrates that if he returns to Pakistan and lives openly as an
          Ahmadi, he will face real and continuing prospect of  persecution,
          he will be a refuge, even if, because of dangers of living openly,
          he will actually live discreetly."  Mr  Malik  clarified  this  by
          affirming in response to our enquiry "only then after as an Ahmadi
          he will face a real and continuing prospect of persecution".

    (xvii) It is one thing to say that an Ahmadi  should  be  permitted  to
          live openly as an Ahmadi but it is quite another to  say  that  he
          should be able to do all the things he is able to do in the United
          Kingdom or  to  preach  his  faith  in  a  particular  way.   With
          reference to his skeleton argument, there was no evidence that  an
          Ahmadi is at risk merely because he is  an  Ahmadi.   The  matters
          that are prohibited under section 298B of Pakistan's Penal Code do
          not form part of their core religious  doctrine  and  are  at  the
          margin of the protected interest.  This  provision  does  not  bar
          Ahmadis from practising the core of  their  faith.   Section  298C
          restricts the ability of Ahmadis  to  preach  or  propagate  their
          faith in a particular way  but  does  not  prohibit  preaching  or
          propagation altogether, such as by conduct or attitude or inviting
          someone to attend their place to worship.  Ahmadis  therefore  can
          effectively preach and propagate their faith by  remaining  within
          the four corners of the law.  There was no evidence  that  Ahmadis
          were being denied their fundamental right to  be  what  they  are.
          There was no suggestion an Ahmadi should be forced to  lie  or  be
          discreet about their faith in order to avoid persecution.

    (xviii)      The approach of the Advocate General in Germany v Y & T is
          slightly different from what was said by John Dyson in  HJ  (Iran)
          but no matter what approach is adopted,  the  answer  remains  the
          same.  The act in question must be particularly severe  such  that
          the person  concerned  can  legitimately  no  longer  live  in  or
          tolerate living in  his  country  of  origin.   According  to  the
          Advocate  General,  it  is  for  the  authority  responsible   for
          reviewing  the  application  for  asylum  to  verify  whether  the
          legislation is actually implemented by the  Pakistani  authorities
          on the basis of regular  reports  issued  by  the  states  and  by
          organisations.  By way of conclusion of his analysis of the  A-G's
          opinion, Mr Malik argued the way in which  a  person  is  able  to
          conduct himself in the United Kingdom was not a proper  criterion;
          he should not expect the same level of tolerance in his country of
          origin.

    (xix)  As to risks faced by Ahmadi women, Dr  Ansari  had  acknowledged
          that she was not an expert  specifically  on  Ahmadi  issues.   Dr
          Hamid is not an expert with experience in law or  social  sciences
          but just a layperson expressing her view.  Dr Lau had not answered
          questions about women in his report  and  Ms  Jahangir  positively
          rejected the notion that women are more vulnerable than men.

    (xx)   The situation of Ahmadis in Pakistan generally is not such  that
          would bring them within the possible parameters of a  flagrant  or
          fundamental breach of Article 9 such as to amount to a denial or a
          complete nullification of rights.

270.  Mr  Malik  then  dealt  specifically  with  the  claims  by  all  five
    appellants in his oral submissions as follows:

    (i)    NM - The appellant is inviting the Tribunal  to  go  beyond  the
         ambit of the hearing.  The evidence adduced had  been  rejected  by
         the First-tier Tribunal and those findings have been  preserved  in
         the decision of UTJ Dawson on 10 May 2011.  The Upper Tribunal  had
         very properly stopped him (Mr Malik)  from  cross-examining  NM  on
         those matters and it would be wrong in principle to go beyond  that
         ambit.  He accepted that  NM  has  been  preaching  in  the  United
         Kingdom since arrival, but he did not accept that he is a prominent
         or very exceptional Ahmadi and were he to  return  to  Pakistan  he
         would be able to live freely.  Mr Malik did not accept there was  a
         general risk to the community as a whole and if there is no general
         risk, the further questions of HJ (Iran) do not apply.

    (ii)   NH - The First-tier Tribunal rejected all the evidence  she  had
         given and gave cogent reasons for  doing  so.   She  did  not  give
         evidence before the Upper Tribunal as to what she is doing  in  the
         United Kingdom and what it would be she would do  on  return.   Her
         claim was bound to fail.

    (iii)  SB- Her account put  forward  was  rejected  by  the  First-tier
         Tribunal.  SB  had  adduced  no  reliable  evidence  that  she  was
         actually preaching in the United Kingdom and had failed to  provide
         corroborative evidence from the  friends  and  associates  she  had
         claimed to preach to.

    (iv)   NH - Here the First-tier Tribunal had rejected her account.   In
         explaining why she wished to stay in the United Kingdom  there  was
         no reference to any fear of persecution.  We were directed  to  her
         answers from the transcript that was available  "...because  it  is
         freedom over here, it is a good environment  and  one  has  freedom
         about religion...the imam the khalifa lives in this  country...that
         is all."  It is submitted that her claim is bound to fail also.

    (v)    HQ - the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  made  very  clear  findings
         rejecting his account.   Unlike  NM  he  has  adduced  no  reliable
         evidence that he has been preaching in this country since  arrival.
         Again Mr Malik relied on the lack of corroborative evidence.

271. In response to our questions  for  clarification,  Mr  Malik  explained
    that there needed to be a fact-sensitive exercise to decide whether  or
    not a particular Ahmadi is an exceptional Ahmadi and by that  he  meant
    to establish how an Ahmadi  would  conduct  himself  in  Pakistan.   An
    Ahmadi is exceptional in the sense of being at risk of arrest or  being
    charged under, for example, the blasphemy provision.  Being a prominent
    businessman in itself is not exceptional.  His submission is  that  the
    state does take additional care in respect of Ahmadis,  illustrated  by
    there being only one major attack on Ahmadi mosques in the previous ten
    years, from which the proper inference was that such  places  are  well
    protected.

272. Mr Malik further clarified that the question as to whether an  activity
    (for instance propagating or preaching faith) was marginal or  core  is
    not dependent on any religious doctrine as such but on  the  individual
    person.  There were a number of ways  to  preach  and  propagate  one's
    faith.  On either a  human  rights  analysis,  in  terms  of  core  and
    peripheral elements of a right, or  the  approach  of  looking  at  the
    severity of the interference, Mr Malik submitted that the  outcome  was
    the same.

Submissions by Mr Gill QC and Mr D Lemer (for MN, SB and HQ)

273. A joint skeleton argument  was  adopted,  supplemented  by  submissions
    from both Mr Gill and Mr Lemer.  Key points in the skeleton of  general
    application are these:

    (i)     The focus is on the test in Art 1A(2) of the Refugee  Convention
         for which the Qualification Directive provides a full and inclusive
         application setting out  minimum  tests  for  persecution  and  the
         reasons for persecution in Articles 9 and 10.

    (ii)    There  is  no  room  for  limiting  the  protected  area  of  an
         individual's conduct to those actions which could be said  to  form
         the central core of his protected  characteristic,  reliance  being
         placed on Germany v Y & Z  and  HJ  (Iran).   All  aspects  of  the
         expression of the protected individual identity  are  in  principle
         protected and the attempt to restrict the  protected  area  to  the
         core activities arises from  the  misplaced  attempt  to  introduce
         objectivity to what is a fundamentally subjective assessment of  an
         individual's  faith;  and   for   the   Tribunal   to   apply   the
         core/peripheral test the Tribunal in fact would divert from the key
         question of assessing what  the  appellant  would  wish  to  do  on
         return;  and,  furthermore,  it  suggests  erroneously   that   the
         Pakistani state has a margin of appreciation that  allows  for  the
         restriction of an Ahmadi's allegedly "peripheral" religious rights.

    (iii)   There is no room for a consideration of what  degree  of  feared
         interference  with  the  full   expression   of   one's   protected
         characteristics may be reasonably tolerable.  The search is not for
         what or may not  be  tolerable;  it  is  to  identify  whether  the
         situation into which the applicant risks being faced (and  ignoring
         the fact that harm may be avoided by a  self-induced  restraint  or
         concealment of his protected characteristic due to a fear of  harm)
         amounts to a severe violation of his basic human rights or freedoms
         and thus to persecution.

    (iv)    The question which is likely to require greater scrutiny is  not
         whether  the  applicant's  desired   activity   is   protected   by
         international human rights norms: the full  breadth  of  it  almost
         certainly will be, so long as he does not engage in  that  activity
         in a way which amounts to a disproportionate interference with  the
         internationally recognised  basic  human  rights  and  freedoms  of
         others.  The question which  is  likely  to  require  the  greatest
         attention  is   whether   the   feared   interferences   with   the
         manifestation  or   expression   of   the   applicant's   protected
         characteristic amount, by reason of their nature or  repetitive  or
         cumulative effect, to persecution.

    (v)     The correct analysis involves a consideration of:

        (a) what religious activities would an applicant wish to  engage  in
             upon return; and

        (b) whether, if he were to engage in those activities, he  would  be
             exposed to a real risk of persecution.

    (vi)    The general submission is made that  the  evidence  demonstrates
         that at the very least Ahmadis are at risk in  Pakistan  when  they
         openly express their faith (in contravention of the Pakistan  Penal
         Code)  resulting  in  a  real  risk  of  prosecution  amounting  to
         persecution and/or when they become known to  non-state  agents  as
         Ahmadis resulting in ill-treatment against which the state will  be
         unwilling or unable  to  protect  them.   Additional  risk  factors
         included activities for the Ahmadi community in the United Kingdom.

    (vii)   The risk of persecution of Ahmadis in Pakistan has to be  viewed
         in the context of Pakistan's legislative measures, the actions  and
         policies of state  organisations,  law  enforcement  agencies,  the
         media and other leading institutions.

    (viii)  A prosecution will amount to persecution where  (with  reference
         to Article 9(2)(c) of the Qualification Directive) the  prosecution
         or  the  punishment  arising  from  it  is  discriminatory   and/or
         disproportionate as well as the  impact  of  the  criminal  justice
         process considered as a whole.

    (ix)    It may be open to the state to  provide  for  restrictions  upon
         religious  practices  supported   where   necessary   by   criminal
         punishment,  provided  that  those  restrictions  are   both   non-
         discriminatory and proportionate to the legitimate aim of promoting
         religious pluralism and ensuring peaceful coexistence of  religious
         groups, reliance  being  placed  for  this  contention  on  Federal
         Republic of Germany v. Y & Z.

    (x)     It is contended that the introduction of the provisions  in  the
         Pakistan Penal Code were motivated by increased religious extremism
         in Pakistan rather than the need to secure public order and  if  it
         was the latter it meant the state had  capitulated  and  sacrificed
         the rights of a minority  group  in  view  of  the  demands  of  an
         oppressive majority.  Thus, far from being a rational system it  is
         contrary to all norms of human rights, as indicated by  Lord  Dyson
         in HJ (Iran) in his  reference  to  African  countries  needing  to
         reflect in state practice strongly and genuinely anti-gay views.

    (xi)    It is argued that it is not realistically  open  to  Ahmadis  to
         achieve an amendment of the  provisions  and  as  an  indicator  of
         persecutory treatment  reliance  is  placed  on  the  targeting  of
         Ahmadis under the relevant provisions of the Pakistan  Penal  Code,
         the length of pre-trial detention and the inability of  Ahmadis  to
         secure release on bail, as well as a lack of fair trial procedures.
          Account is to be taken also of the length of post-trial  detention
         pending appeal and the treatment of Ahmadis in detention.

    (xii)   It is further contended that persecution can be  established  in
         other ways and for the Ahmadi there are restrictions in relation to
         voting, marriage, education,  employment,  freedom  of  expression,
         freedom of assembly and access to humanitarian relief.

    (xiii)  It is necessary for adherents of the  Ahmadi  faith  to  curtail
         their  expression  of  religion  by  avoiding  the   use   of   the
         nomenclature set out in  section  298B,  abstaining  from  reciting
         azan, not defining or referring to themselves as Muslims, not being
         able to undertake the haj (one of the five pillars  of  Islam)  and
         not disseminating their faith.

    (xiv)   As to Convention reason, the  protected  religious  activity  is
         relied on coupled with actual or imputed  political  opinion  which
         can cover any action perceived to  be  a  challenge  to  government
         authority.

    (xv)    Non-state actors including the Khatme-e-Nabuwat are  central  to
         the risk of persecution of Ahmadis arising from  their  instigation
         of prosecutions under the Pakistan Penal Code and the fact that the
         Pakistani state is either unwilling and/or  is  unable  to  provide
         adequate protection in the face  of  ill-treatment  from  non-state
         actors.

    (xvi)   Internal relocation is not available because an open  expression
         of faith will lead to real risk of prosecution and/or ill-treatment
         from a non-state agent throughout Pakistan.

    (xvii)  Ahmadis are the most targeted minority in Pakistan and there has
         been an increase in incidents  of  violence  over  the  past  three
         years.  Although in absolute terms  the  statistics  regarding  the
         number of prosecutions and deaths do not demonstrate a vast number,
         this is explained by under-reporting, inadequacies  of  the  system
         for recording, statistics  and  the  great  extent  to  which  most
         Ahmadis exercise extreme discretion in the exercise of their  faith
         in the light of the high risk of targeting by state  and  non-state
         agents.

    (xviii) In so far as  Article  9  of  the  Human  Rights  Convention  is
         engaged, it is accepted it will be necessary  to  show  a  flagrant
         denial of the Convention right: see R (Ullah) v Special Adjudicator
         (DO v AIT) [2004] UKHL 26 and EM (Lebanon) v SSHD [2008]  UKHL  64.
         To the extent that any of the acts or anticipated  acts  relied  on
         are not deemed to  amount  to  persecution  in  themselves,  it  is
         contended that they form part of the relevant flagrant denial which
         has resulted  in  a  virtual  nullification  of  their  ability  to
         practise their faith.  It is contended that those  Ahmadis  who  do
         not satisfy the HJ (Iran) test on the  basis  that  they  have  not
         acted discreetly for fear of  ill-treatment  are  able  to  succeed
         under Article 9 ECHR.

274. In his oral  submissions,  Mr  Gill  developed  these  arguments.   The
    following key points emerge in addition:

    (i)    There is a fundamental flaw in the way in which the Secretary of
         State has put the case because on the one hand it is accepted  that
         concealment, discretion, restraint, is not to  be  expected  of  an
         individual and that a real risk of persecution would be made out if
         a person behaves as an  Ahmadi  openly  and  if  he  faces  certain
         consequences which arise to an inappropriate level, it is  accepted
         by the Secretary of State that will amount to persecution.  However
         the Secretary of State has submitted that it is only her definition
         of openness that the Tribunal can adopt.  The Secretary of  State's
         idea of openness denies an Ahmadi even the most  basic  aspects  of
         his identity which is to pray openly in public or in private in the
         community of others and denies them the essence of  their  religion
         which would include their right to preach or to propagate.

    (ii)   There is no basis in any  form  of  international  case  law  or
         domestic case law which would  support  the  proposition  that  the
         Pakistani law affecting Ahmadis is rational.

    (iii)  The individual is  entitled  to  the  fullest  expression  of  a
         religious identity which is one of the most important and  personal
         things to an individual which the lexicon of human rights seeks  to
         protect.  It is degrading to  an  individual  to  have  to  conceal
         something as fundamental as a  religious  identity.   To  deny  the
         right to do that on a discriminatory basis is degrading treatment.

    (iv)   For the Ahmadi there is an atmosphere of constant insecurity and
         fear of arbitrary violation of Article 3 rights, Article 5  rights,
         Article 9 and 14 rights.  The fact that the risk  of  detention  is
         constantly there, the effect that one can assume  will  have  on  a
         person's state of mind and the chilling effect that there  will  be
         on such individuals to therefore hide their identity, all that is a
         condition of being rendered invisible, effectively as the Jews  had
         to be during the course of 1930s Nazi Germany.

    (v)    In contrast with the appeals before us, the  previous  case  law
         did not analyse the Pakistani laws or the application  in  the  way
         which has now been possible and things have  changed  significantly
         since MJ.  There is a growing trend of Islamisation in Pakistan  so
         that any group or individual who is perceived  as  being  anti  the
         mainstream Islam is a legitimate target.

    (vi)   With reference to the opinion of Advocate General Bot:

             "It is for the  authority  responsible,  the  asylum  granting
             authority for reviewing the application of someone  to  verify
             whether  the  legislation  is  actually  implemented  by   the
             Pakistani authority ... on the basis of regular reports issued
             by states and by organisations for  the  protection  of  human
             rights.  If it is it can reach the level of persecution."

      Mr Gill accepted that despite these remarks, it is a shared duty.

    (vii)  The category of individuals therefore who are at risk  is  going
         to be far, far broader than was thought to be the case in  MJ.   It
         is going to encompass anybody who genuinely says:

             "The following activities are important to me in  the  way  in
             which I express my faith.  If I indulge in those activities  I
             will come to the attention of groups like KN,  and  that  will
             give rise to an atmosphere of insecure daily living,  which  I
             should not be expected to put up with and if an FIR is issued,
             even more so."

      The case was not being kept that  narrow  and  (based  on  Mr  Gill's
         earlier submissions),   to  deny  people  the  ability  to  express
         aspects  of  their  faith,  amounts  in   itself   to   persecution
         irrespective of whether they attract the interest of the  Khatme-e-
         Nabuwat.

    (viii) The evidence of Ms Jahangir is important  as  she  accepts  that
         women  face  additional  hurdles  and   problems   and   additional
         discrimination and risks within Pakistani society and so  therefore
         are more easily targeted.  They become visible partly from the  way
         they dress.  Although women tend to get bail more easily, one could
         see why, bearing in mind the criticism there has been of Pakistan's
         treatment of women in the legal system.

    (ix)   As to Article 9 of  the  Human  Rights  Convention  the  law  on
         proportionality  needed  to  be  applied  but  when  there   is   a
         manifestation of such a fundamental right as the right of religion,
         a high set of circumstances would be required which  could  justify
         interference.   Even  though  Mr  Gill  did  not  accept  the  core
         periphery  analysis,  he  submitted  that  the   manifestation   of
         religious identity of the  Ahmadis  is  being  interfered  with  in
         Pakistan in a  very  core  way,  amounting  to  a  denial  of  core
         identity.

    (x)    It is not just a case of the law which on its  face  is  neutral
         being applied in a discriminatory and persecutory manner, the  case
         being put is that the law itself is stated to  be  anti-Ahmadi  and
         targeting a particular community group.

    (xi)   All Ahmadis are potentially at risk but that does  not  mean  to
         say that there will not be cases that fail. By the phrase  "genuine
         Ahmadi", it was meant  somebody  who  was  actually  interested  in
         expressing a religious identity.  One may have a genuine Ahmadi who
         may say, "well I am a  genuine  Ahmadi  but  I  don't  actually  do
         anything about it, I don't manifest  my  "Ahmadiness"  in  any  way
         because it is not important to  me".   That  is  not  the  sort  of
         person, Mr Gill argued, needs protection.  Mr Gill illustrated this
         with reference to someone who was born an Ahmadi  but  did  nothing
         about it in practice or in terms of openness in the  way  in  which
         life was lived.

    (xii)  In principle, the perception of others that a lapsed  Ahmadi  is
         still an Ahmadi could in  theory  give  rise  to  an  argument  for
         protection but evidence would need to be produced in such cases.

275. Mr Lemer added these additional points:

    (i)    It is right to recognise that there is an apparent contradiction
         between the information available that the numbers of Ahmadis being
         prosecuted or encountering ill-treatment looks quite  low  and  the
         evidence of significant problems for Ahmadis in Pakistan.  The vast
         majority of Ahmadis however will take  significant  precautions  in
         manifestation of their religious beliefs and so  the  incidents  of
         violations are less.  There are reasons why individuals  would  not
         want to involve the community for support as they may wish  to  use
         other means to solve the  dispute  by  perhaps  giving  in  to  the
         business rival and it may not be in the particular interests of  an
         Ahmadi to raise the profile of their complaint by reporting  it  to
         the community.

    (ii)   The annual community report for  2011  records  the  outcome  of
         cases  where  FIRs  had  been  issued,  indicating  there  is  some
         analysis.  Analysis of outcomes of FIRs on a systematic basis  will
         require a very considerable amount of organisation to track through
         what has happened to each person who ends up within  the  Pakistani
         criminal justice system.

    (iii)  It is not right to say that there  have  only  been  two  mosque
         attacks in 2010.  These have been the only ones in the recent  past
         as illustrated by page 114 of the Persecution Report 2011[17].

    (iv)   The authorities have not undertaken any investigation  into  the
         shortcomings exposed by the May 2010 mosque attacks.  No action has
         been taken against the six people who have been  arrested  and  so,
         although they may languish in jail, nothing further has happened in
         relation to them.

    (v)    Dr W had given evidence that the reason for the changes  to  the
         Pakistan Penal Code was  not  public  disorder  but  pressure  from
         religious minorities.  There  is  objective  evidence  showing  the
         involvement of the Khatme-e-Nabuwat in the Rawalpindi  incident  as
         illustrated by the Amnesty International news report of 2  February
         2012 and a report by www.ucanews.com dated 14 June  2011  recording
         Ahmadis  seeking  government  protection   after   Khatme-e-Nabuwat
         distributed pamphlets including a hit list containing the names  of
         32 businessmen, teachers, and doctors, along with  their  addresses
         in Punjab province.  Their involvement is further  demonstrated  by
         the records (at Annex D).

    (vi)   MTA TV is based in the United Kingdom and it would be  requiring
         a lot of the Pakistan state to block the satellite transmission.

    (vii)  If an FIR had  been  issued  against  someone  historically  the
         longer they are in the United Kingdom in general terms  the  higher
         the likelihood of absconder status with consequent risk  on  return
         because of the ECL.

      ix) Pre-arrest bail covered situations where someone against whom  an
          FIR has been issued goes straight to court to obtain bail.   This
          would arise where someone had found out about the  FIR  prior  to
          the police arresting them.




SUBMISSIONS BY MS JEGARAJAH AND MR YEO (ZN AND NH)

276. A joint skeleton argument was been provided.  Although we do  not  wish
    to do any injustice to the  quality  of  the  skeleton  and  subsequent
    submissions we heard, our focus is on points not already  canvassed  by
    Mr Gill and Mr Lemer.  In particular we note this additional material:

    (i)    Article 18 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights of  1948
         became a norm of international law in 1966 with  the  International
         Covenant on Civil and Political  Rights  which  made  concrete  the
         basic freedoms of religion and conscience articulated in  the  UDHR
         and made its signatories bound by it.  In addition  to  prohibiting
         state coercion that would impair a person's freedom to practise  or
         adopt a  religion  or  belief  of  their  choice,  the  ICCPR  also
         prohibits states from denying religious minorities  the  right,  in
         community with other group members, to  enjoy  their  own  culture,
         profess or  practise  their  own  religion  or  to  use  their  own
         language.  Such rights are non-derogable except where the interests
         of public safety, order,  health  or  morals,  or  the  fundamental
         rights and freedoms of others as prescribed by law, justifies their
         limitation.

    (ii)   There is a consistent theme within  international  jurisprudence
         that restrictions on public and other  expressions  of  faith  will
         amount  to  persecution  under  the   Convention:   Bastanipour   v
         Immigration & Naturalisation Service 980 Fm 2nd 1129 (7th  Circuit,
         7 December 1992), Kazemzadeh v Attorney General  (11th  Circuit,  6
         August 2009) (US):, Appellant S395/2002 [2003] HCA 71  (Australia),
         NABD v  Minister  for  Immigration  &  Multicultural  &  Indigenous
         Affairs [2005] HCA 29 (Australia) Wen v Minister for Immigration  &
         Multicultural Affairs [2000] FCA 1599 (Australia),  Fosu  v  Canada
         (Minister of Employment & Immigration) [1994] 90 FTR 182,  FCJ  No.
         1813 (Canada), Husseini v Minister  of  Citizenship  &  Immigration
         [2002] FCT 177, Irripugge  v  Canada  (Minister  of  Citizenship  &
         Immigration  [2000]  182  FTR  47  (Canada),  Golesorkhi  v  Canada
         (Citizenship & Immigration) [2008] FC  511  (Canada),  and  Zhou  v
         Minister of Citizenship & Immigration [2009] FC 1210.

    (iii)  HJ (Iran) is born out of these authorities.

    (iv)   Attempting to divide Ahmadis into  categories  of  ordinary  and
         exceptional or proselytising and quiet  misses  the  point  and  is
         legally flawed.  The Tribunal should be cautious of questioning the
         importance to Ahmadis of calling themselves Muslim or calling their
         mosques 'mosques',  using  the  azan  and  similar.   There  is  no
         authority or support  for  the  Secretary  of  State's  distinction
         between core and peripheral aspects of a  religious  faith  or  the
         practice of a religion and the Tribunal should reject this proposed
         approach: see RT (Zimbabwe) & Others v SSHD [2010]  EWCA  Civ  1285
         and the Federal Republic of Germany v Y & Z.

    (v)    In 1985 the  United  Nations  Sub-Commission  on  Prevention  of
         Discrimination and Protection of Minorities  adopted  a  resolution
         stating that Ordinance XX violated prima facie the right to liberty
         and security of person, the right to freedom from arbitrary  arrest
         and detention...the rights of religious minorities to  profess  and
         practise their own religion and their right to an  effective  legal
         remedy.

    (vi)   The UNHCR Eligibility Guidelines for assessing the international
         protection needs of members of religious minorities  from  Pakistan
         is relied on.

    (vii)  Pakistani law provides ineffective  citizenship  or  effectively
         denies effective citizenship to Ahmadis as a class.  They may  only
         enjoy citizenship if they deny their faith.  Pakistan is  the  only
         state to have declared Ahmadis to be non-Muslims by law.

    (viii) Ahmadi women constitute a  PSG,  with  faith  and  gender  being
         clearly  immutable  characteristics  comprising  a  group.    Self-
         protection is the only limited protection available to male members
         of the community and is not available to women who  are  impossible
         to protect with lack of resources and the effect of  non-attendance
         by them at their place of worship is profound.  Ahmadi women cannot
         obtain protection as with other women in general or particularly as
         Ahmadi women.

277. Key points from Ms Jegarajah's  oral submissions were these:

    (i)    It is important to look at faith and belief in  a  holistic  way
         but the starting  point  is  whether  Ahmadis  consider  themselves
         Muslim to which the answer is a definite yes and as  a  consequence
         should be able to stand in a market and say "I am a Muslim".

    (ii)   There is nothing disguised about the Ordinance XX and the  anti-
         blasphemy laws; you do not have to work on the basis of any  subtle
         inference, it is persecutory as it  declares  Ahmadis  to  be  non-
         Muslims and they are not permitted to express themselves as such.

    (iii)  It is very difficult to divorce the question of being an  Ahmadi
         from a political issue as it is one that strikes at the very  heart
         of the integrity of the Pakistani state and that is the reason  why
         Ahmadis - as opposed to all other minorities - pose much more of  a
         threat than any of the other minorities as is clear from history.

    (iv)   The Pakistani state uses the law as a persecutory  tool  against
         Ahmadis and the anti Ahmadi legislation itself is persecutory as it
         breaches core principles of human rights law.

    (v)    An Ahmadi is somebody who declares himself to be an  Ahmadi  not
         somebody who has committed various degrees of  propagation  of  the
         faith.

    (vi)   Ahmadis have had  to  perform  self-repression  and  self-denial
         since the anti-blasphemy laws came about.

    (vii)  For 22 years, Ahmadi women have actually never  been  considered
         by the Tribunal.  The role of women within the Ahmadi community  is
         quite core.  They are educators, they are nurturers and they retain
         the honour of the community.  They are in a particularly vulnerable
         situation.  They are unable to take their children  to  the  mosque
         and they cannot meet other women in communality of worship which is
         the highest form of worship with other women in the  mosque.   They
         experience  persecution  as  Ahmadis  through  a  different  prism.
         Women's organisations within the  Ahmadi  community  are  extremely
         visible.  The way in which the community is protecting Ahmadi women
         is to require them to stay at home and this is one of the worst and
         most profound aspects of persecution in Pakistan.  Ahmadis  neither
         enjoy the full rights  nor  the  basic  rights  of  citizenship  in
         Pakistan evidenced by the situation over passports.

    (viii) The anti-blasphemy laws negate the essence of being  an  Ahmadi.
         The issue is not whether an  Ahmadi  being  returned  is  going  to
         propagate but rather the issue is the right of an Ahmadi to declare
         himself a Muslim in any way, shape or form.

    (ix)   Among the many cases relied on by Ms Jegarajah,  the  concluding
         one was a New Zealand case[18] from which she quotes: "by requiring
         the refugee applicant to abandon a core right, a  refugee  decision
         maker is requiring the refugee claimant, the  same  submissive  and
         compliant behaviour, the same denial of a fundamental  human  right
         which the agent of persecution in a  country  of  origin  seeks  to
         achieve by persecutory conduct".  Although the New Zealand Tribunal
         was dealing with a case by an Iranian  homosexual,  she  considered
         this analogous to the Ahmadi cases.

    (x)    The reason why there is an absence of evidence (of  the  outcome
         of FIRs and their number) is not because of some deficiency in  the
         data collection process but because people  do  not  stick  around.
         They go into hiding.  They claim asylum.

278. Mr Yeo's submissions included the following points:

    (i)    Gay marriage and the right to organise a parade are rights which
         are protected by international law in the same way that  the  right
         to freedom of religion is.

    (ii)   Despite the submission of the Secretary of  State  that  Ahmadis
         are not being forced to lie, it is his contention that they are  in
         order to obtain a passport or to vote which are core civil rights.

    (iii)  "Living openly" (the phrase in HJ (Iran))  is  about  sexuality.
         However what is in issue in the appeal is freedom of expression  of
         religion and this would be a better way of putting it  rather  than
         living openly.

    (iv)   It was an incorrect approach to divide a  religious  group  into
         quiet and loud adherence and its previous approach  to  exceptional
         and unexceptional or proselytising and  quiet  Ahmadis  relying  on
         NABI  v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs  &  Anor
         [2005] HCA39.

     (v)    A  further  authority  NAEB  v  Minister  for  Immigration  and
         Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs [2004] FCAFC 79 indicated  the
         correct approach where somebody had only a loose  commitment  which
         if so might not create a Convention reason at all.

    (vi)   In assessing risk it  is  not  only  the  way  in  which  people
         themselves self-identify but also the perception of  others  around
         them.  If someone is seen as an Ahmadi they would be  at  risk  and
         this would apply even if someone were not going to the mosque on  a
         regular basis.

    (vii)  Mr Yeo urged caution on the Tribunal as to its  expectations  of
         the evidence that might  be  available  for  Ahmadis.   The  Ahmadi
         Association does not exist for the purpose of collecting statistics
         and they do their best to collect data.  It is correct  that  there
         is an absence of information on the follow-up  to  Ahmadis  against
         whom FIRs have been filed.  It is not that they have got  the  data
         and are hiding it, it is simply that they did not see  that  it  is
         particularly important and those affected would not always want  or
         be able to inform them.

    (viii) It is important not to hold the experts out  as  something  they
         are not.  The Ahmadis are the best people to give evidence on  what
         it is like to be an Ahmadi and on  the  experience  of  Ahmadis  in
         Pakistan.  It is true that they are not independent  and  it  would
         also be right to say that they are not objective but that does  not
         mean that they are not reliable.  Dr  Hamid's  evidence  should  be
         seen in this light.

MN, SB, and HQ

279.  The  joint  skeleton  argument  by  Mr  Gill  and  Mr  Lemer  provides
    additional submissions on each of the above appellants.  Starting  with
    MN, it is argued:

    (i)    The appellant  has  advanced  significant  evidence  as  to  his
         religious activities in the United Kingdom.

    (ii)   It is recognised that the Tribunal has expressly chosen to limit
         its further consideration of his case to his  proposed  conduct  on
         return.  It is submitted that he would be at risk on return in  the
         light of the evidence advanced during the  course  of  the  hearing
         before the Upper Tribunal as  a  result  of  his  presence  on  the
         published list of Ahmadis who were injured during the 28  May  2010
         mosque attacks and his consequential position as a prominent Ahmadi
         upon return.

    (iii)  The evidence clearly indicates that  those  who  would  wish  to
         openly proselytise are at  risk  of  ill-treatment  from  non-state
         agents and prosecution by the Pakistan  state  under  the  Pakistan
         Penal Code on the basis that any prosecution under that code  would
         amount to persecution and in the event it did not it amounted to  a
         breach of Article 9 of the Human Rights Convention.

    (iv)   It is not open to the appellant to temporarily  relocate  as  no
         evidence suggested an openly proselytising Ahmadi could live safely
         elsewhere, taking account of the nationwide structure and reach  of
         the Khatme-e-Nabuwat.

    (v)    A further risk factor is the profile of the appellant within the
         Ahmadi community in the United Kingdom and the evidence  suggesting
         that  the  Khatme-e-Nabuwat  have  the  ability  to  identify  such
         individuals to their colleagues in Pakistan.

    (vi)   For the appellant, open preaching forms an  important/core  part
         of his religious identity  but  he  does  not  accept  that  it  is
         necessary to demonstrate that preaching  forms  part  of  the  core
         identity, merely  that  he  would  genuinely  wish  to  preach  and
         manifest that aspect of his faith.

280. The additional submissions on SB argue:

    (i)    None of the matters asserted by SB (in support of her claim) are
         actually rejected by the First-tier Tribunal save for the complaint
         made against her in December 2010.   The  core  of  her  claim  was
         accepted and  on  the  further  evidence  she  gave  to  the  Upper
         Tribunal:

         (a)      she is an Ahmadi woman who has had to restrain or  conceal
             her religious activities including preaching due to a fear  of
             serious harm;

         (b)       she  has  been  restricted  in  numerous  ways  from  the
             expression of her faith which  strike  at  the  heart  of  her
             religious identity;

         (c)      she had occupied a preaching role for about  twelve  years
             but contrary to her reasonable desires this had to be  limited
             to select audiences;

         (d)      SB occupies a position more prominent or visible than  the
             average Ahmadi who does not speak out or  does  not  take  the
             lead preaching role.  The First-tier Tribunal had not rejected
             the account that she  suffered  the  attentions  of  Khatme-e-
             Nabuwat for many years.

    (ii)   Had the FT addressed the issue of restraint  due  to  fear,  her
         appeal would have been allowed.

281. Additional submissions on HQ:

    (i)    It is noted that the  Upper  Tribunal's  consideration  of  HQ's
         claim is limited by virtue of the various unchallenged findings  of
         the First-tier Tribunal, namely:

         (a)      the account of events in Pakistan has been rejected;

         (b)      however the appellant's account of active involvement with
             the Ahmadi community in the  UK  and  his  wish  to  be  fully
             involved in the practice  of  his  religion  including  openly
             preaching   is   unchallenged,   such    practice    including
             distributing leaflets,  explaining  the  brief  ideas  of  her
             faith, referring people to the community website,  undertaking
             various posts  in  the  United  Kingdom,  and  attendance  and
             participation on preaching stalls.

    (ii)   Were HQ to openly proselytise she  would  face  prosecution  and
         that prosecution would amount  to  persecution.  If  not  it  would
         amount to a flagrant breach  of  Article  9  of  the  Human  Rights
         Convention.

    (iii)  The option of internal relocation is not available as there  was
         no evidence to suggest that an openly  proselytising  Ahmadi  could
         live  safely  anywhere  in  Pakistan  and  having  regard  to   the
         nationwide structure of the Khatme-e-Nabuwat.

          iv) It is argued that the appellant's risk is heightened  by  the
              high profile he has had with  the  Ahmadi  community  in  the
              United Kingdom and the evidence suggesting that the Khatme-e-
              Nabuwat have the ability to identify such individuals.

282. Both Mr Gill and Mr Lemer supplemented  their  skeleton  argument  with
    oral submissions directly on the circumstances of all three  appellants
    from which the following key points emerge:

    (i)    As to NM, there was unchallenged evidence  as  to  his  acts  of
         preaching in the United Kingdom.  It was of somebody who had really
         exhibited his intention to openly preach in the UK and that has  to
         be contrasted with the findings in relation to what had happened to
         him in Pakistan.  NM is a person who would wish on his  account  to
         openly preach and exhibit his faith upon return to Pakistan.

    (ii)   Internal relocation was not raised in SB's case  in  the  First-
         tier Tribunal and no Rule 24 response has been raised  in  relation
         to it.  The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had  only  mentioned  four
         reasons for concluding that he could not accept the account as true
         of her activities and experiences in  Pakistan.   In  essence,  the
         judge had accepted that she had taught for about twelve  years  and
         had taught to non-Ahmadis but had taken great care to  ensure  that
         it was not to people she did not know something about.

    (iv)   The same questions are applicable to HQ.  Mr  Malik  had  argued
         that HQ had not submitted any evidence to demonstrate he  had  been
         preaching.  This is not accepted.  Findings were actually  made  by
         the First-tier Tribunal that he had been distributing  leaflets  to
         homes and shops in the United Kingdom and referring people  to  the
         community website in explaining  the  brief  ideas  of  the  Ahmadi
         faith, all of which had been accepted.  A letter  from  the  Ahmadi
         Muslim Association of 13 March 2012 corroborated his activities.

283. In respect of NH, we heard the following key  points  in  supplementary
    submissions from Mr Yeo that this  appellant  is  clearly  a  committed
    Ahmadi and has been involved in proselytising and seemed to  have  done
    so discreetly in the sense  that  it  did  not  lead  to  difficulties.
    Reference is made to her evidence whether if asked  in  Pakistan  about
    her religion she would respond that she is an Ahmadi.

284. Mr Yeo also made specific submission on  ZN.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge had found that she and her husband  had  never  been  open  about
    their faith in public and that they do  not  carry  the  obligation  to
    propagate to any degree.  The judge did not reject her claim  that  she
    had had problems from  time  to  time.   The  incidents  on  which  the
    appellant relies are the sort of incidents that it  is  argued  Ahmadis
    suffer on a day-to-day basis and it could not possibly be the case that
    the appellants NH and ZN could have given  their  accounts  around  the
    submissions that have emerged and evolved through  the  course  of  the
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal.



SCHEDULE III

SUPPLEMENTARY Submissions

285. The Secretary  of  State's  response  to  our  invitation  for  further
    submissions on the relevance and effect of RT  (Zimbabwe)  &  Others  v
    SSHD [2012] UKSC 38, the United States International Religious  Freedom
    Report 2012 and the decision in Federal Republic of  Germany  v  Y  (C-
    71/11), & Z (C-99/11) are in summary:

    RT (Zimbabwe)

    (i)    The appeals before  us  are  fundamentally  different  from  the
         circumstances in RT (Zimbabwe).  There is no  suggestion  that  any
         Ahmadi should lie and feign loyalty to the majority faith in  order
         to avoid the persecutory ill-treatment to which he would  otherwise
         be subjected.  There  is  no  suggestion  that  any  Ahmadi  should
         conceal his faith in order to avoid persecution that  would  follow
         if he did not do so.

    (ii)   The Secretary of State's  primary  position  is  that  there  is
         simply no reliable evidence that Ahmadis who live openly  or  those
         who do not demonstrate positive support to Sunni majority faith are
         generally at risk of persecution in Pakistan.

    (iii)  The restrictions on Ahmadis propagating their faith or the  fact
         that they do not  have  the  same  rights  as  non-Ahmadis  may  be
         discriminatory  but  fall  short  of  the  required  threshold   to
         establish persecution for the purposes of the  Refugee  Convention.
         The distinction as to what is at the core of  the  protected  right
         and what is at its margin is valuable here  because,  adopting  the
         words of Lord Dyson "It focuses attention  on  the  important  part
         that persecution is more than a breach of human rights".

    International Religious Freedom Report

    (iv)   This report does not take  the  evidence  heard  at  the  appeal
         hearing much further.

    (v)    The report acknowledges that a 2005 law requires a senior police
         officer to investigate any blasphemy charge before a  complaint  is
         filed which demonstrates there  is  now  an  additional  hurdle  in
         registering a complaint under the blasphemy provisions and  thus  a
         procedural safeguard.

    (vi)   There is no restriction on Ahmadis (in relation  to  citizenship
         rights including the right  to  vote)  who  declare  themselves  as
         Ahmadis.

    (vii)  The report acknowledges the provisions in the  Constitution  for
         freedom to manage religious institutions.

    (viii) The report notes  the  efforts  of  the  government  to  promote
         interfaith harmony and its efforts to  regulate  religious  schools
         (maddrassahs).

    (ix)   The statistics of the data provided by the  National  Commission
         for Justice and Peace during the  year  of  a  total  of  49  cases
         registered under the blasphemy laws of  which  eight  were  against
         Christians, and  two  against  Ahmadis,  with  39  against  Muslims
         undermines  the  appellants'  contentions  that  Ahmadis  are   the
         specific target of the blasphemy laws.

    (x)    The report  highlights  key  improvements  and  developments  in
         respect for religious freedom.

    Federal Republic of Germany v Y & Z (C-71/11 and C-99/11)

    (xi)   It is submitted that the restrictions on the  followers  of  the
         Ahmadi faith in Pakistan may amount to an interference  with  their
         right of religious freedom, however the interference is no way near
         to "severe violation" of the protected right.  There is no reliable
         evidence that any interference is of  such  gravity  so  as  to  be
         categorised as persecution.

    (xii)  In relation to the distinction between core and marginal  rights
         there is an apparent tension between the approach of the  Court  of
         Justice (at paragraphs 62 to 66) and some of  the  observations  by
         Lord Dyson in RT (Zimbabwe) at paragraph 50:  "A  determination  of
         whether the applicant's proposed or intended action lay at the core
         of the right or at its margins [is] useful in deciding  whether  or
         not the prohibition of it amounts to persecution."  It is submitted
         that whether the approach in Y & Z or in RT (Zimbabwe) is  adopted,
         the result remains the same.  Whether the matter is  considered  by
         reference to "the severity of the measures and  sanctions  adopted"
         or by using "a human rights framework in  order  to  determine  the
         limits of what an individual is entitled to do  and  not  do",  the
         treatment of Ahmadis falls  short  of  the  required  threshold  to
         establish persecution for the purposes of the Refugee Convention.

    (xiii) There is no reliable evidence  that  Ahmadis  generally  run  "a
         genuine risk of being prosecuted or subject to inhuman or degrading
         treatment or punishment" by exercising the freedom to  live  openly
         as Ahmadis in Pakistan (with reference to the observations  of  the
         CJEU at paragraphs 68 to 70.  The question  as  to  how  an  Ahmadi
         looked at individually will conduct himself if returned to Pakistan
         and how others will react to what  he  does  will  always  be  fact
         sensitive.  The concluding observation of the Court of  Justice  at
         paragraph  [79]  is  consistent  with  the  Secretary  of   State's
         submissions.  It is argued there is no suggestion that  any  Ahmadi
         should conceal his identity, lie about his faith  or  abstain  from
         key religious practices in order  to  avoid  the  persecutory  ill-
         treatment which would follow if he did not do so.

286. Mr Gill  for  SB  and  Mr  Lemer  for  MN  and  HQ  have  made  further
    submissions on RT (Zimbabwe), the  US  Department  of  State  Religious
    Freedom Report 2011 and Germany v Y & Z.  Ms Jegarajah and Mr Yeo  have
    also on behalf of ZN & NH.  In summary, Mr Lemer made these points:

    RT (Zimbabwe)

    (i)    This case is relevant as it addresses the  core/marginal  belief
         discourse.

    (ii)   As Lord Dyson recognised [paragraph 42], the SSHD's  attempt  to
         shift the debate towards a reliance on a core/marginal  distinction
         "bears  a  striking  resemblance  to  the  Secretary   of   State's
         contention in HJ (Iran) that the individuals  in  that  case  would
         only have a well-founded fear of persecution if the concealment  of
         their sexual orientation would not  be  'reasonably  tolerable'  to
         them".  Reference is made to para [47] of RT (Zimbabwe) where  Lord
         Dyson says that the Secretary of  State's  suggested  core/marginal
         distinction misunderstands HJ (Iran).

    (iii)  It follows from RT (Zimbabwe) that an analysis of the nature  of
         the proposed/actual activity needs to be undertaken.

    (iv)   Both Germany v Y & Z and RT (Zimbabwe) are  entirely  consistent
         with the appellants' submissions that the Pakistani  state  is  not
         entitled to prescribe limitations to the right to religious  belief
         in the way that it has done.  The conduct which the appellants wish
         to be able to carry  out  (the  various  forms  of  expression  and
         manifestations of their religious belief in which they consider are
         restricted) cannot be described as being part of the margins of the
         protected right.

    (v)    In the context of Ahmadis in Pakistan the appellants submit that
         any  manifestation  of  belief  that  would   lead   to   potential
         prosecution within the  PPC,  or  ill-treatment  at  the  hands  of
         extremists, is by  definition  sufficiently  core  to  attract  the
         protection of the Refugee Convention.  There is no reason to  treat
         being at the  margins  of  any  type  of  expression  of  religious
         identity  (which  go  far  beyond  just  religious  preaching   and
         propagation of belief) which the appellants wish to  carry  out  in
         these cases.

    (vi)   The rejection in RT  (Zimbabwe)  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
         reliance on  the  core/marginal  distinction  was  in  firm  terms.
         Protection will extend for example to an Ahmadi businessman who may
         not be religious in many ways but it was treated by others as being
         an Ahmadi and who by reason of that fact, faces persecution.  There
         is nothing marginal about the right of an Ahmadi  not  to  practise
         his religious identity and yet be free of the risk  of  persecution
         at the hands of  those  who  would  label  him  as  an  Ahmadi  and
         persecute him on that ground.

    (vii)  The question is not how important is the right  in  question  to
         the individual.  The question is  whether  the  right  in  question
         falls from the area of protected activity and whether the right (or
         perceived or imputed possession or expression of it) gives rise  to
         a risk of persecution.  As the appellants have  been  at  pains  to
         point out, the present case is  not  simply  about  preaching.   It
         involves the expression of all aspects of "Ahmadiness" in Pakistani
         society.

    (viii) The importance of the right in question can however be  relevant
         in intensifying the sense of persecution so that acts which may not
         otherwise  be  persecutory  become  persecutory  because   of   the
         importance to the individual of fully protected right.

    International Religious Freedom Report 2012

    (ix)   It is submitted that this report is consistent with the  country
         information previously advanced and specific passages are  referred
         to including the increase  in  societal  intolerance  and  violence
         against  minorities.   Of  the  statistics  concerning  murders  of
         Ahmadis it is noted that five were murdered in  the  year  and  two
         blasphemy cases were registered against Ahmadis, such figures being
         consistent with the persecution of Ahmadis in Pakistan  during  the
         year 2011 report.

    Federal Republic of Germany Y & Z C-71/11, and C-99/11

    (x)    The CJEU makes it clear that it is not necessary to  distinguish
         between core  and  non-core  areas  of  an  individual's  religious
         manifestation.  The definition of religion encompasses all  of  its
         aspects, be they public or private, collective or individual.

    (xi)   The CJEU has clarified that acts which may constitute a  "severe
         violation"  within  the  meaning  of   Article   9(1)(a)   of   the
         Qualification Directive includes serious acts which interfere  with
         the applicant's freedom not only to practise his faith  in  private
         circles but also to live that faith publicly.  All kinds of acts of
         interference with the right to practise one's religious belief  may
         amount to persecution depending on whether by reason of its  nature
         or repetition, it amounts  to  a  severe  violation.   Reliance  is
         placed on the appellants having already demonstrated  the  evidence
         of this.

    (xii)  The CJEU has held that acts which on account of their  intrinsic
         severity as well as the severity  of  their  consequences  for  the
         person concerned may be regarded as  constituting  persecution  and
         that such acts  must  be  identified,  not  on  the  basis  of  the
         particular aspect of religious freedom  that  is  being  interfered
         with but on the basis of the nature of the repression inflicted  on
         the individual and its consequences as  observed  by  the  Advocate
         General at point 52 of his Opinion.  It is argued that there can be
         acts which are so restrictive of the practice of religion that  the
         intrinsic severity of the restriction itself is enough to amount to
         persecution irrespective of the consequences.  The mere  fact  that
         communal worship is so rigidly controlled by  the  state,  so  that
         even the collective saying of prayers in  the  manner  required  by
         Ahmadi  religious  belief  is  prohibited,  in  itself  amounts  to
         persecution.

    (xiii) An assessment of the severity  of  the  measures  and  sanctions
         adopted (or likely to be adopted) determines whether the  violation
         constitutes persecution.  It is contended that at paragraph 69  the
         CJEU made it clear that persecution  for  participation  in  formal
         worship, either alone or within a community,  may  well  amount  to
         persecution.  The court  further  held  that  it  was  relevant  in
         determining whether there is a  risk  of  persecution  to  make  an
         objective assessment as to what an individual would wish to do.

    (xiv)   It  is  submitted  that  the  CJEU  continues  to  reject   the
         core/peripheral dichotomy proposed by the respondent.   Whilst  the
         Secretary of State had suggested that the Supreme Court's  judgment
         in RT (Zimbabwe) should be confined to its political opinion  based
         context, it is now clear that such a distinction is redundant.

    (xv)   As to  the  respondent's  submission  that  it  is  material  to
         determine whether the religious manifestation is core or peripheral
         to the protected right, the Court  of  Justice  judgment  expressly
         undermines the contention  that  a  focus  on  the  nature  of  the
         religious manifestation is relevant.

    (xvi)  The need to consider the  subjective  circumstances  requires  a
         consideration of what the individual appellant would wish to do  on
         return to Pakistan in the practice  of  their  Ahmadi  faith.   The
         court's judgment is a clear  and  unequivocal  endorsement  of  the
         position adopted by the appellants:

             "The application of the tests set out by the CJEU are  to  the
             sort of conduct which the appellants would wish to  carry  out
             in Pakistan and as the appellants have made clear, we are  not
             simply talking about preaching  but  about  manifestations  of
             their religion and the practice of what  is  required  by  the
             religion in all aspects of life means that each of the appeals
             must now succeed."

287. Turning finally to the further submissions on behalf of ZH  and  NH  by
    Ms Jegarajah and Mr Yeo,  specifically  as  to  RT  (Zimbabwe),  it  is
    submitted:

    (i)    The appellants' case is that the Ahmadis are persecuted by being
         prevented from practising their faith at pain  of  persecution  and
         are actively targeted for persecution and are denied protection and
         their  civil  rights  which  either  constitutes   persecution   or
         contributes to it.

    (ii)   Some of the terminology of RT (Zimbabwe) may require  adjustment
         for the concepts to be applied accurately in the different  context
         of religion as opposed to sexuality or political opinion.   'Living
         openly' is not quite the right test in the context of religion  for
         example.  A  better  analogy  would  be  'free  to  practise  one's
         religion'.

    (iii)   In  RT  (Zimbabwe)  Lord  Dyson  comprehensively  rejects   the
         Secretary  of  State's  proposed  distinction  between   core   and
         peripheral aspects of rights or gradations of  Convention  reasons.
         At a practical and basic level, what is  considered  peripheral  to
         one person may be considered  core  to  another  but  this  may  be
         irrelevant because the perception of the  persecutor  may  be  more
         important.  The use of the false core/peripheral dichotomy risks in
         the context of Ahmadis  in  Pakistan  and  other  groups  who  have
         suffered longstanding  persecution  embedding  and  retrospectively
         justifying the very persecution complained of.

    (iv)   All that matters is whether the person genuinely self-identifies
         as Ahmadi or in the alternative would be perceived as being  Ahmadi
         by actors of persecution.

    (v)     The  anti-Ahmadi  laws,  the  discriminatory   application   of
         blasphemy laws and the increasingly militant  public  discourse  in
         Pakistan engender an atmosphere of 'if you are not with us you  are
         against us'.  Ahmadis  are  perceived  as  being  disloyal  to  the
         Prophet Mohammed, to Islam and to the Pakistani state.

    (vi)   The submissions reiterate the  appellants'  case  regarding  the
         difficulties encountered by Ahmadis in Pakistan with  the  argument
         that Ahmadis have to pretend not to be Muslim and not  to  consider
         themselves  Muslim  in  order  to  avoid  being  persecuted.   They
         consider this a lie and they have to  live  that  lie  everyday  in
         Pakistan.

    Religious Freedom Report 2011

    (vii)  It  is  observed  that  the  report  repeatedly  indicates  that
         religious  freedom  generally  is  deteriorating  in  Pakistan  not
         improving  identifying  that  legal  and  policy  restrictions   on
         religious freedom are generally enforced against Ahmadis.

288. Submissions by Ms Jegarajah and Mr Yeo on Federal Republic  of  Germany
    v Y & Z argue:

    (i)    The requirement  to  self-repress  is  a  requirement  in  place
         throughout the life of an Ahmadi.  The restrictions on civil rights
         are  part  of  the  accumulation  of  various  measures   including
         violation of human rights.

    (ii)   There is no distinction between peripheral  and  core  areas  of
         practice.  Ahmadis cannot engage in formal worship without profound
         restriction and  women  cannot  engage  in  formal  restriction  in
         community with others, at all.

    (iii)  It is not reasonable that Ahmadis deny that they are Muslims and
         assert the finality of the prophet in order to avoid persecution.
                                 APPENDIX A

                Glossary of words as provided by the parties

|No  |Word          |Literal Translation |Ahmadi context Translation        |
|    |              |                    |                                  |
|1   |Ahl-e-Bait    |Term to describe the|The Ahmadi community also use this|
|    |              |people of the House |phrase to describe the household  |
|    |              |of Prophet Mohammed |and family of Mirza Ghulam Ahmad  |
|    |              |and his family      |                                  |
|2   |Al-Fazal      |Grace               |The official Ahmadi community     |
|    |Newspaper     |                    |newspaper, established in 1913    |
|3   |Al-Hadees     |Muslim Sect         |Muslim Sect                       |
|4   |Al Misbah     |A source of light   |Official Women's magazine/journal |
|    |Magazine      |                    |                                  |
|5   |Anjuman       |Association         |Central organisation that         |
|    |              |                    |administer the day to day affairs |
|    |              |                    |of the Ahmadi community           |
|6   |Anssaar Ullah |Helper in the cause |Organisation of the Ahmadi        |
|    |              |of Allah            |community for 40 plus males       |
|7   |Aslam-o-Alikam|Peace Be upon you,  |The members of the Ahmadi faith   |
|    |              |Islamic greeing:    |are banned from using this phrase |
|    |              |Hello               |                                  |
|8   |Azan          |Islamic call to     |Islamic call to Prayer            |
|    |              |Prayer              |                                  |
|9   |Baad Bakht    |Wretched individual |Derogatory term used against      |
|    |              |                    |Ahmadis                           |
|10  |Bai'at        |Pledge              |Oath of allegiance to the Ahmadi  |
|    |              |                    |faith                             |
|11  |Bait-ul-Nur   |House of light      |Ahmadi Mosque in Model Town,      |
|    |              |                    |Lahore Pakistan                   |
|12  |Burqa         |Islamic             |The Ahmadi women will distinguish |
|    |              |veil/covering for   |her burqa by additionally covering|
|    |              |women               |her face and loosely draping it   |
|    |              |                    |around her head                   |
|13  |Dai lillah    |Caller towards Allah|Preacher, to seek conversion      |
|14  |Darood        |Prayer recited by   |Ahmadis are prohibited from saying|
|    |              |Muslims to send     |any such prayer which             |
|    |              |peace and blessings |identifies/characterises them as  |
|    |              |upon Prophet        |Muslims                           |
|    |              |Mohammed and Abraham|                                  |
|15  |Darul Zikr    |House of remembrance|Ahmadi mosque in Gari Shauw,      |
|    |              |                    |Lahore, Pakistan                  |
|16  |Dawa          |Claim               |Claim                             |
|17  |Deobandis     |Muslim Sect         |Muslim Sect                       |
|18  |Ewan-E-Tauheed|                    |Largest Ahmadi place of worship in|
|    |              |                    |Rawalpindi, Pakistan              |
|19  |Fatwa         |Decree              |Decree                            |
|20  |Firqa         |Sect                |Sect                              |
|21  |Hadood        |Islamic Penal       |Islamic Penal Injunctions         |
|    |Ordinance     |Injunctions         |                                  |
|22  |Hijab         |Head covering of    |Head covering of Muslim women     |
|    |              |Muslim women        |                                  |
|23  |Hiqmat        |Wisdom              |The prudence provided by Ahmadi   |
|    |              |                    |leadership on particular issues   |
|    |              |                    |relating to community affairs     |
|24  |Hoor, Hoors   |Woman of Paradise   |Derogatory phrase used against    |
|    |              |                    |Ahmadi women to objectify them    |
|25  |Inshallah     |Islamic phrase: God |Islamic phrase: God willing       |
|    |              |willing             |                                  |
|26  |Izzat         |Honour/prestige     |Honour/prestige                   |
|27  |Jalsa Salana  |Annual gathering    |The annual convention of the      |
|    |              |                    |Ahmadi community, held around the |
|    |              |                    |world                             |
|28  |Jamaat        |Community           |The phrase most commonly used to  |
|    |              |                    |describe the Ahmadi community     |
|29  |Jihad         |Holy war            |Ahmadis are targeted by           |
|    |              |                    |extremists, who consider killing  |
|    |              |                    |an Ahmadi as part of their duty to|
|    |              |                    |conduct holy war                  |
|30  |Jizya         |Levy/Tax            |The tax levied on non-Muslims in a|
|    |              |                    |Muslim state                      |
|31  |Kafir         |Infidel             |Derogatory term used against      |
|    |              |                    |Ahmadi, who state themselves to be|
|    |              |                    |Muslims                           |
|32  |Kalma         |Proclamation of     |Proclamation of faith             |
|    |              |faith               |                                  |
|33  |Kalma         |Formula of faith    |Formula of faith                  |
|    |Tayyaba/Qalma |                    |                                  |
|    |Tayyaba       |                    |                                  |
|34  |Khalifa       |Successor           |Supreme Head of Ahmadiyya         |
|    |              |                    |Community                         |
|35  |Khatme-e-Nabuw|Finality of the     |An organisation in Pakistan with  |
|    |at            |Prophethood         |an anti Ahmadi agenda             |
|36  |Khilafat      |Institution of      |The institution of the Supreme    |
|    |              |succession          |Head of Ahmadiyya Community       |
|37  |Khilafat      |Centenary of the    |100 year anniversary of the       |
|    |Jubilee       |succession          |Supreme Head of Ahmadiyya         |
|    |              |                    |Community                         |
|38  |Khulafa-e-Rash|4 leaders (Khalifs) |4 leaders (Khalifs) who succeeded |
|    |ideen         |who succeeded the   |the Prophet Mohammed              |
|    |              |Prophet Mohammed    |                                  |
|39  |Lahori Group  |Sub sect of the     |A branch of the Ahmadiyya         |
|    |              |Ahmadi community    |community, established in 1914    |
|40  |Madrassa      |School              |School where Islamic subjects are |
|    |              |                    |taught                            |
|41  |Mahram        |Male relations of a |As is the mainstream Muslim belief|
|    |              |Muslim female whom  |these male relations include:     |
|    |              |she does not require|husband, father, father-in-law,   |
|    |              |to observe purdah   |brother, paternal uncles and      |
|    |              |(veil) in front of  |maternal uncles                   |
|42  |Majlis-i-ahrar|Liberal party of    |A political party formed by       |
|    |-e-islam      |Islam               |Islamic clerics in 1929.  Their   |
|    |              |                    |manifesto was to eliminate the    |
|    |              |                    |Ahmadiyya community               |
|43  |Majlis-i-Amala|Executive committee |Executive committee               |
|44  |Majlis-i-Shura|Consultation        |Elected assembly of Ahmadi        |
|    |              |committee           |community members who provide     |
|    |              |                    |advice and consider the affairs of|
|    |              |                    |the Ahmadiyya community.  The     |
|    |              |                    |assembly is held once a year      |
|45  |Masjid        |Mosque, place of    |Ahmadis are prohibited to call    |
|    |              |worship             |their place of worship a "Masjid" |
|    |              |                    |and therefore have to name them   |
|    |              |                    |"Bait" - meaning house            |
|46  |Mirzai,       |Names given to      |Derogatory term used to describe  |
|    |Mirzais       |Ahmadis             |members of the Ahmadi community   |
|47  |Mujahideen    |Soldier/warriors    |Soldier/warriors                  |
|48  |Mullah        |Islamic Cleric      |Islamic Cleric                    |
|49  |Munazra       |Debate              |Debate                            |
|50  |Nabi          |Prophet             |Prophet                           |
|51  |Naib Amir     |Deputy Head         |Vice President                    |
|52  |Nikah         |Islamic marriage    |Islamic marriage                  |
|53  |Nubwwat       |Prophethood         |Prophethood                       |
|54  |Purdah        |Islamic covering for|Islamic covering for women - veil |
|    |              |women - veil        |                                  |
|55  |Qadiani       |Member of Ahmadi    |The founding branch of the Ahmadi |
|    |              |group               |community and used as a derogatory|
|    |              |                    |term                              |
|56  |Qadiyan       |City of India       |The city where the Ahmadi         |
|    |              |                    |community was founded in 1889     |
|57  |Qadiyaniat    |Ideology of Ahmadi  |Derogatory term used to describe  |
|    |              |community           |the doctrine of the Ahmadiyya     |
|    |              |                    |community                         |
|58  |Risalat       |Carrying the message|Carrying the message of God       |
|    |              |of Allah            |                                  |
|59  |Sahaaba       |The companions of   |The Ahmadi community include the  |
|    |              |the Prophet Mohammed|companions of the Mirza Ghulam    |
|    |              |                    |Ahmad as Sahaaba                  |
|60  |Sawab         |To earn merit       |To earn merit                     |
|61  |Sharam        |Modesty/prestige    |Modesty/prestige                  |
|62  |Sharia't      |Islamic             |Islamic rules/norms/law           |
|    |              |rules/norms/law     |                                  |
|63  |Sunni         |Muslim Party/sect   |Muslim Party/sect                 |
|    |Tehreek/Sunni |                    |                                  |
|64  |Tabligh       |Preaching           |Preaching, propagation to non     |
|    |              |                    |Ahmadis                           |
|65  |Tablighi      |Religious preaching |Religious preaching party         |
|    |Jamaat        |party               |                                  |
|66  |Tahaffuz      |Protection of honour|A movement/organisation           |
|    |Namoos-E-Risal|of Prophet Mohammed |                                  |
|    |at            |                    |                                  |
|67  |Tajneed       |Record of membership|Record of membership              |
|68  |Tashez-ul-Azah|Increase            |Children's magazine/journal issued|
|    |an            |intelligence        |by the Ahmadi community           |
|69  |Tauhin-e-Rasal|Blasphemy           |Blasphemy                         |
|    |at            |                    |                                  |
|70  |Ulema         |Religious scholars  |Religious scholars                |
|71  |Umm-ul-Mummine|Mother of the       |The term used to describe for the |
|    |en            |believers           |wives of the Prophet Mohammed and |
|    |              |                    |Mirza Ghulam Ahmad                |
|72  |Wajib-ul-Qatl |Liable to be killed |Liable to be killed               |
|73  |Waqfeen Nau   |New devotee         |New devotee                       |
|74  |Zakat         |Religious tax/tythe |Religious tax/tythe               |
|75  |Zina          |Fornication         |Fornication                       |
|76  |Zindique      |Heretic             |Heretic                           |
|77  |Lajna         |Maids of God        |Organisation of the Ahmadi        |
|    |Amanullah     |                    |community for women 15+           |
|78  |Atfaal        |Children            |Male children up to age of 15     |
|79  |Khaddum       |Servant             |Male 15-40 years old              |
|80  |Nasrat        |Helper              |Girls up to 15 years old          |



                                 APPENDIX B
                        (as provided by the parties)

                  Copy of Ordinance No. XX Of 1984 and 1986


          Amendment to the section 295c of the Pakistan Penal Code

                                EXTRAORDINARY
                           PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY
                     ISLAMABAD, THURSDAY, APRIL 26, 1984

PART 1
Acts, Ordinances, President's Orders and Regulations including  Martial  law
Orders and
Regulations of the Government of Pakistan

MINISTRY OF LAW AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (LAW DIVISION)
Islamabad, the 26th April 1984 No. F.17 (1) 84-Pub.

The following Ordinance made  by  the  President  is  hereby  published  for
general information.

ORDINANCE NO. XX OF 1984

AN ORDINANCE
to amend the law to prohibit the Quadiani group, Lahori  group  and  Ahmadis
from indulging in anti-Islamic activities:

WHEREAS it is expedient to amend the law to  prohibit  the  Quadiani  group,
Lahori group and Ahmadis from indulging in anti-Islamic activities:

AND WHEREAS the  President  is  satisfied  that  circumstances  exist  which
render it necessary to take immediate action:

NOW, THEREFORE, in pursuance of the Proclamation of the fifth day  of  July,
1977, and in exercise of  all  powers  enabling  him  in  that  behalf,  the
President is pleased to make and promulgate the following Ordinance:

PART I - PRELIMINARY
1. Short title and commencement.
(1) This  Ordinance  may  be  called  the  Anti-Islamic  Activities  of  the
Quadiani Group,  Lahori  Group  and  Ahmadis  (Prohibition  and  Punishment)
Ordinance, 1984.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
2. Ordinance to override orders or decisions of courts.
The provisions of this  Ordinance  shall  have  effect  notwithstanding  any
order or decision of any court.

PART II - AMENDMENT OF THE PAKISTAN PENAL CODE (ACT XLV OF 1860)

3. Addition of new sections 298B and 298C, Act XLV of 1860.
In the Pakistan Penal Code (Act XLV of 1860), in Chapter XV,  after  section
298A, the following new
sections shall be added, namely:

"298B. Misuse of epithets,  descriptions  and  titles,  etc.,  reserved  for
certain holy personages or places.

(1) Any person  of  the  Quadiani  group  or  the  Lahori  group  (who  call
themselves 'Ahmadis' or by any other name) who by words,  either  spoken  or
written, or by visible representation;
    (a)    refers to, or addresses, any person,  other  than  a  Caliph  or
    companion of the Holy Prophet
    Muhammad (peace  be  upon  him),as  'Ameerul  Mumineen',  'Khalifa-tui-
    Mumineen', 'Khalifatul-
    Muslimeen', 'Sahaabi' or 'Razi Allah Anho'
    (b)    refers to, or addresses, any person, other than a  wife  of  the
    Holy Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him) as 'Ummul-Mumineen'
    (c)    refers to, or addresses, any person, other than a member of  the
    family (Ahl-e-bait) of the Holy Prophet Muhammad (peace be  upon  him),
    as 'Ahl-e-Bait'; or
    (d)    refers to, or names, or calls, his place of worship as 'Masjid';
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a  term  which
may extend to three years and shall also be liable to fine.
(2) Any person of the Quadiani group or Lahori group  (who  call  themselves
Ahmadis or by any other name) who by words, either spoken or written, or  by
visible representation, refers to the  mode  or  form  of  call  to  prayers
followed by his faith as 'Azan' or recites Azan  as  used  by  the  Muslims,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a  term  which
may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine.

298C. Person of Quadiani group etc., calling himself a Muslim  or  preaching
or propagating his faith.
Any person of the Quadiani group or the Lahori group  (who  call  themselves
'Ahmadis' or by any other name), who, directly or indirectly, poses  himself
as Muslim, or calls, or refers to,  his  faith  as  Islam,  or  preaches  or
propagates his faith, or invites others  to  accept  his  faith,  by  words,
either spoken or written, or by visible representations, or  in  any  manner
whatsoever outrages the religious feelings of  Muslims,  shall  be  punished
with imprisonment of either description for  a  term  which  may  extend  to
three years and shall also be liable to fine."


ACT III OF 1986

CRIMINAL LAW (AMENDMENT) ACT, 198
An Act further to amend the Pakistan Penal Code and  the  Code  of  Criminal
Procedure, 1898
(Gazette of Pakistan, Extraordinary, part 1, 12th October 1986)

The following Act of Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament)  received  the  assent  of
the President on the 5th October, 1986 and is hereby published  for  general
information:

WHEREAS it is expedient further to amend the Pakistan Penal  Code  (Act  XLV
of 1860) and the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Act V of 1893),  for  the
purposes hereinafter appearing:
It is hereby enacted as follows:

SECTION 295C PAKISTAN CRIMINAL CODE

1. Short title and commencement
(1) This Act may be called the Criminal Law (Amendment) Act 1986.
(2) It shall come into force at once.

2. Insertion of new section 295-C, Act XLV of 1860. In  the  Pakistan  Penal
Code (Act XLV of 1860), after  section  295-B,  the  following  new  section
shall be inserted, namely:

"295-C. Use of derogatory remarks, etc. in respect of the Holy Prophet.
Whoever by words, either spoken or written, or  by  visible  representation,
or by any imputation, innuendo,  or  insinuation,  directly  or  indirectly,
defiles the sacred name of the Holy Prophet Muhammad  (peace  be  upon  him)
shall be punished with death, or imprisonment for life, and  shall  also  be
liable to fine."
                                 APPENDIX C

                     DOCUMENTS BEFORE THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
|     |Document                                           |Date                |
|Item |                                                   |                    |
|     |                                                   |                    |
|1    |Aysha Haroon, International: The News, 'While the  |23 May 2012         |
|     |State Looks Away'                                  |                    |
|2    |Rana Tanveer, The Express Tribune, 'Ahmadi place of|21 May 2012         |
|     |worship: Clerics press for demolition of dome'     |                    |
|3    |UNHCR, Eligibility guidelines for assessing the    |14 May 2012         |
|     |international protection needs of members of       |                    |
|     |religious minorities from Pakistan'                |                    |
|4    |Persecution of Ahmadis in Pakistan: News Report    |April 2012          |
|    5|Dawn.com, 'No looking back for us'                 |7 April 2012        |
|6    |Asian Human Rights Commission,  'PAKISTAN:         |12 March 2012       |
|     |Government makes no effort to halt the 12 March    |                    |
|     |2012 Persecution and killings of Ahmadis'          |                    |
|7    |John Cheetham, www.canberratimes.com.au, "A good   |11 March 2012       |
|     |Muslim's better life cut short by Extremists'      |                    |
|8    |March 5-11: Extremism Watch, Jinnah-institute      |5-11 March 2012     |
|9    |Ahmadiyya Muslim Jamaat International Press        |7 March 2012        |
|     |Release, 'Another Ahmadi Martyred in Pakistan'     |                    |
|10   |Azam Khan, The Express Tribune, 'Police bar Ahmadis|2 March 2012        |
|     |from entering worship centre'                      |                    |
|11   |Rahab Fizah & Anna Thorning, Asian Human Rights    |2 March 2012        |
|     |Commission, 'PAKISTAN: More Muslim than the        |                    |
|     |Muslims'                                           |                    |
|12   |Z Ali, The Express Tribune, 'Targeted Attack:      |1 March 2012        |
|     |Ahmadi Killed, grandson injured in Shaheed         |                    |
|     |Benazirabad'                                       |                    |
|13   |Abdul Alim, The Muslim Times, 'Pakistan: Punjab    |21 March 2012       |
|     |govt orders Ahmadiyya women Magazine 'Misbah'      |                    |
|     |banned, threatens Daily Al-Fazal'                  |                    |
|14   |The Express Tribune, 'Minority Issue: Cameras      |25 February 2012    |
|     |forced off Ahmadi worship Centre'                  |                    |
|15   |Pakistan Today, 'Shahbaz Bhatti's alleged killer   |14 February 2012    |
|     |remanded for 7 days'                               |                    |
|16   |Rana Yusuf, The Express Tribune, 'Barred: Lawyers  |11 February 2012    |
|     |ban drink on court complex'                        |                    |
|17   |Asian Human Rights Commission, 'Ahmadiyya community|4 February 2012     |
|     |targeted by terrorist organisations'               |                    |
|18   |Amnesty International News, 'Pakistan should       |2 February 2012     |
|     |protect Ahmaddiya community against threat of      |                    |
|     |violence'                                          |                    |
|19   |Imran Jattala Ahmadiyya Times, 'Rawalpindi'        |30 January 2012     |
|20   |Mudassir Raja, The Express Tribune, 'Protest       |29 January 2012     |
|     |against 'unconstitutional' practices becomes Ahmadi|                    |
|     |rally'                                             |                    |
|21   |Human Rights Watch World Report 2012               |2012                |
|22   |Asian Human Rights Commission, 'Pakistan: the State|2011                |
|     |of Human Rights in 2011'                           |                    |
|23   |Persecution of Ahmadis in Pakistan during the Year |31 December 2011    |
|     |2011: A Summary                                    |                    |
|24   |Rana Tanveer, Express Tribune, 'Harassment: Three  |24 December 2011    |
|     |Ahmedis [sic] accused under Blasphemy laws'        |                    |
|25   |Atif M Malik, Health & Human Rights Journal,       |2011                |
|     |'Denial of flood aid to the Ahmadiyya Muslim       |                    |
|     |community In Pakistan'                             |                    |
|26   |Amnesty International Report 2011 (Pakistan)       |2011                |
|27   |Jinnah Institute, 'A Question of Faith: A Report on|2011                |
|     |the Status of Religious Minorities in Pakistan'    |                    |
|28   |Abdul Manan, The Express Tribune, 'For minorities  |4 December 2011     |
|     |in Pakistan, persecution never ends'               |                    |
|29   |Rana Tanveer, The Express Tribune 'Blasphemy       |1 December 2011     |
|     |allegations: Ahmadi family under threat from       |                    |
|     |Clerics'                                           |                    |
|30   |Syed Danish Hussain www.nation.com.pk  'Banner     |20 November 2011    |
|     |against Ahmadis not removed despite passing 10     |                    |
|     |Days'                                              |                    |
|31   |Muhammad Sadaqat, The Express Tribune 'Hint of     |1 November 2011     |
|     |Ahmadi ties gets hakkem 'banished' '               |                    |
|32   |BBC News Asia, 'Pakistan judge Pervez Ali Shah     |25 October 2011     |
|     |'flees death threats'                              |                    |
|33   |Rana Tanveer, The Express Tribune, 'Qadri          |10 October 2011     |
|     |supporters rail against US, Ahmadis'               |                    |
|34   |Zeenews.com, 'Ahmadi students, teacher expelled    |8 October 2011      |
|     |from Pak schools                                   |                    |
|35   |Declan Walsh, the Guardian, 'Pakistan's blasphemy  |3 October 2011      |
|     |laws have left even judges in fear of their lives' |                    |
|36   |BBC News Asia, 'Salman Taseer murder: Mumtaz Qadri |1 October 2011      |
|     |sentenced to death'                                |                    |
|37   |Home Office UK Border Agency, Country of Origin    |29 September 2011   |
|     |Report: Pakistan                                   |                    |
|38   |Asian Human Rights Commission, 'PAKISTAN: Ahmadi   |28 September 2011   |
|     |students are under threat from the Extremist       |                    |
|     |religious groups - government turns a blind eye    |                    |
|     |Again'                                             |                    |
|39   |Asian Human Rights Commission, 'PAKISTAN: The      |5 September 2011    |
|     |federal government must intervene To stop the      |                    |
|     |killings of Ahmadis'                               |                    |
|40   |Omar Oakes, This is Local London, 'Morden man fears|5 August 2011       |
|     |for brother named on Ahmadiyya Muslim murder list  |                    |
|     |in Pakistan'                                       |                    |
|41   |Home Office UK Border Agency, Operational Guidance |August 2011         |
|     |Note, Pakistan                                     |                    |
|42   |Daily Times, 'Ahmedi community slams govt over     |13 July 2011        |
|     |killing of minority Member'                        |                    |
|43   |Saba Imtiaz, The Express Tribune, 'Ahmadis in      |19 June 2011        |
|     |Karachi: Pulpit pounding, barricades, prayers But  |                    |
|     |no peace'                                          |                    |
|44   |'Ahmadis panic over hit list' www.ucanews.com      |14 June 2011        |
|45   |Afnan Khan, Daily Times,  www.dailytimes.com.pk    |14 June 2011        |
|     |'Terrorists chalk out plan to target Ahmedis' [sic]|                    |
|46   |Shamsul Islam, The Express Tribune, 'Textile City: |13 June 2011        |
|     |Politicians turn blind eye to hate pamplets'       |                    |
|47   |Asian Human Rights Commission, 'PAKISTAN:          |11 June 2011        |
|     |Extremists openly plan to kill hundreds of         |                    |
|     |Ahmadis-government turns a blind eye'              |                    |
|48   |Umer Nangiana, The Express Tribune 'Ahmadis fair   |10 June 2011        |
|     |game for TTP Kidnappers'                           |                    |
|49   |Shamsul Islam, The Express Tribune, 'Targeting     |9 June 2011         |
|     |minorities: No friend to Ahmadis in Faisalabad'    |                    |
|     |(Copy of Pamphlet mentioned in article with        |                    |
|     |translation from Persecution.org)                  |                    |
|   50|Asian Human Rights Commission, 'PAKISTAN: A year on|30 May 2011         |
|     |from the Lahore attacks but Ahmedis Still          |                    |
|     |suffering' [sic]                                   |                    |
|   51|PAKISTAN: Observatory for the Protection of Human  |2011                |
|     |Rights Defenders Annual Report 2011                |                    |
|   52|BBC News South Asia, 'Pakistan Minorities Minister |2 March 2011        |
|     |Shahbaz Bhatti shot dead'                          |                    |
|   53|The Independent, 'Pakistan: Boy arrested for exam  |2 February 2011     |
|     |blasphemy'                                         |                    |
|   54|Julie McCarthy www.npr.org/2011/01/24, 'Extremist  |24 January 2011     |
|     |Intimidation calls Pakistan secular society'       |                    |
|   55|Home Office UK Border Agency, Country of Origin    |17 January 2011     |
|     |Information Report: Pakistan [Extract]             |                    |
|   56|BBC News South Asia, 'Punjab Governor Salman Taseer|4 January 2011      |
|     |assassinated in Islamabad'                         |                    |
|   57|Human Rights Watch World Report 2011: Pakistan     |2011                |
|   58|Persecution of Ahmadis in Pakistan during the Year |2010                |
|     |2010: A Summary                                    |                    |
|   59|BBC South Asia, 'Pakistani Christian Asia Bibi 'has|7 December 2010     |
|     |price on her head''                                |                    |
|   60|Human Rights Watch, 'Pakistan: Repeal Blasphemy    |23 November 2010    |
|     |Law'                                               |                    |
|   61|US Department of State: Pakistan International     |17 November 2011    |
|     |Religious Freedom Report                           |                    |
|   62|US Department of State, International Religious    |July-December 2010  |
|     |Freedom Report [extract]                           |                    |
|   63|Dawn.com, 'Firing at Ahmedi worship place in       |19 November 2010    |
|     |Lahore; no casualties'                             |                    |
|   64|Immigration & Refugee Board of Canada,  Response to|4 November 2010     |
|     |Information Request 'RIRs'                         |                    |
|   65|BBC News South Asia, 'Pakistan Ahmadi man forcibly |2 November 2010     |
|     |exhumed in Lahore'                                 |                    |
|   66|Immigration & Refugee Board of Canada, Response to |28 October 2010     |
|     |Information Request 'RIRs': 'Arrest Warrants'      |                    |
|   67|Pak Tribune.com, 'Ahmadi leader killed in Mardan   |4 September 2010    |
|     |suicide attack'                                    |                    |
|   68|David O'Reilly, The Philadelphia Inquirer, 'US     |25 August 2010      |
|     |citizen slain over his religion in his native      |                    |
|     |Pakistan'                                          |                    |
|   69|Ahmadiyya Times, 'Pakistan: Plea against Mubashir  |16 August 2010      |
|     |Luqman dismissed'                                  |                    |
|   70|Afnan Khan, Daily Times, 'Inquiry into attacks on  |6 July 2010         |
|     |Ahmedis pulls off vanishing act' [sic]             |                    |
|   71|Los Angeles Times, 'Pakistan sect endures          |6 July 2010         |
|     |persecution' Alex Rodriguez                        |                    |
|   72|Aljazeera News, 'Lahore most assault suspects held'|5 July 2010         |
|   73|Mohsin Hamid, Dawn.com, 'Fear and Silence - Why are|27 June 2010        |
|     |Ahmadis persecuted so ferociously in Pakistan?'    |                    |
|   74|Rana Tanveer, Express Tribune, 'Shezan factory     |14 June 2010        |
|     |attacked in Lahore'                                |                    |
|   75|Duncan Walsh, The Guardian, 'Ahmadi massacre       |7 June 2010         |
|     |silence is dispiriting'                            |                    |
|   76|Fayed Pervez/PPI Photographs of KN protest,        |7 June 2010         |
|     |Pashawar, Pakistan                                 |                    |
|   77|The Economist, 'Into the heartland; The Punjabi    |5 June 2010         |
|     |Taliban'                                           |                    |
|   78|Human Rights Watch, 'Pakistan: Massacre of Minority|1 June 2010         |
|     |Ahmadis'                                           |                    |
|   79|Abdul Manan, Express Tribune, 'Ahmadi man murdered |1 June 2010         |
|     |in Narowal'                                        |                    |
|   80|BBC News, 'Gunman attack Pakistani hospital'       |1 June 2010         |
|   81|Reuters & Khaleej Times, 'Pakistani law fuels      |31 May 2010         |
|     |hatred of Ahmadis: UN experts'                     |                    |
|   82|BBC News South Asia, 'Pakistan mosque attacks in   |29 May 2010         |
|     |Lahore kill scores'                                |                    |
|   83|Jane Perlez, New York Times, 'Pakistani Taliban    |29 May 2010         |
|     |carried out attack on Lahore Mosques, Police say'  |                    |
|   84|Ahmadiyya Muslim Jamaat International Press        |26 May 2010         |
|     |Release, 'Ahmadi Muslim Killed in Karachi'         |                    |
|   85|'Police Organisations in Pakistan', Extract of 2.7 |May 2010            |
|     |Women in the Police                                |                    |
|     |HRCP/CHRI 2010                                     |                    |
|   86|Farhad Jerral, 'Culperable role of PML-N in        |May 2010            |
|     |Lahore's Ahmadi massacre' with English translation |                    |
|   87|Dawn.com, 'A community harried by threats'         |14 April 2010       |
|   88|Ahmadiyya Muslim Jamaat International Press        |4 April 2010        |
|     |Release, '3 Ahmadi Muslims Killed in Pakistan in   |                    |
|     |Barbaric Attack'                                   |                    |
|   89|US Department of State, 2009 Human Rights Report:  |11 March 2010       |
|     |Pakistan                                           |                    |
|   90|Human Rights Commission In Pakistan, 'State of     |February 2010       |
|     |Human Rights in 2009' [extract]                    |                    |
|   91|Parliamentary Human Rights Group Report of the fact|13-22 February 2010 |
|     |Finding mission to Pakistan to examine the human   |                    |
|     |rights Situation of the Ahmadiyya community        |                    |
|   92|Ahmadiyya Muslim Jamaat International Press        |5 January 2010      |
|     |Release, 'Retired Ahmadi Professor Murdered in     |                    |
|     |Lahore'                                            |                    |
|   93|Ahmadiyya Muslim Jamaat International Press        |30 November 2009    |
|     |Release, 'An Ahmadi Teacher Killed in Pakistan'    |                    |
|   94|Human Rights Watch, World Report 2010: Pakistan    |undated             |
|     |'Events of 2009' [extract]                         |                    |
|   95|Persecution.org, Persecution of Ahmadis in Pakistan|undated             |
|     |during the Year 2009: A Summary                    |                    |
|   96|Ahmadiyya Muslim Jamaat International Press        |5 October 2009      |
|     |Release, 'Murder of Another Ahmadi Muslim in       |                    |
|     |Pakistan'                                          |                    |
|   97|UN High Commissioner for Refugees 'Pakistan: The   |May 2009            |
|     |situation of religious minorities' [extract]       |                    |
|   98|Ahmadiyya Foreign Missions Office Press Release,   |18 March 2009       |
|     |'Brutal Murder of Two Ahmadi Doctors in Multan'    |                    |
|   99|International Crisis Group, 'Reforming the         |16 October 2008     |
|     |Judiciary in Pakistan, Asia Report 160'            |                    |
|  100|Human Rights Watch, World Report 2010: Pakistan    |undated             |
|     |'Events of 2008'                                   |                    |
|  101|Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada, Response  |26 November 2007    |
|     |to Information Request (AMA UK procedure)          |                    |
|  102|Persecution of Ahmadis in Pakistan during the Year |undated             |
|     |2008: A Summary                                    |                    |
|  103|Home Office UK Border Agency, Country of Origin    |30 April 2007       |
|     |Information Report Pakistan [extract]              |                    |
|  104|Parliamentary Human Rights Group, 'Rabwah: A Place |January 2007        |
|     |for Martyrs?'                                      |                    |
|  105|The Constitution of Pakistan, Part 2, Chapter 1:   |undated             |
|     |Fundamental Rights and Principles of Policy        |                    |
|  106|Judgment of Supreme Court of Pakistan Criminal     |1992, 1989, 1988    |
|     |Appeals No 31-K to 35-K of 1988; Civil Appeals No  |                    |
|     |149 and 150 of 1989 and Civil Appeal No 412 of 1992|                    |
|  107|Pakistan Penal Code                                |6 October 1860      |


                                 APPENDIX D

   Extract from "Persecution of Ahmadis in Pakistan during the Year 2011"

    Annex I
        Particulars of Police Cases Registered on Religious grounds against
                             Ahmadis during 2011

|No |Number|Names of Accused|Police |FIR No.|Date   |Penal  |Remarks        |
|   |      |                |Station|       |       |Code   |               |
|1  |1-9   |Malik Mohammad  |Chenab |26     |20/01/1|379    |Baseless       |
|   |      |Rafiq           |Nagar  |       |1      |       |allegation of  |
|   |      |Muhammad faazal |(Rabwah|       |       |       |theft, on      |
|   |      |Butt            |)      |       |       |       |communal       |
|   |      |Naeem Ullah     |       |       |       |       |grounds        |
|   |      |Mehboob Ahmad   |       |       |       |       |               |
|   |      |Muhammad Arshad |       |       |       |       |               |
|   |      |Junaid Ahmad    |       |       |       |       |               |
|   |      |Jahangir Khan   |       |       |       |       |               |
|   |      |Gohar Butt      |       |       |       |       |               |
|   |      |Tariq Ahmad     |       |       |       |       |               |
|   |      |(Residents of   |       |       |       |       |               |
|   |      |Ahmad Nagar)    |       |       |       |       |               |
|2  |10-12 |Irfan Ahmad     |Satelli|75     |29/04/1|279,   |Car accident   |
|   |      |Amir Ahmad      |te     |       |1      |337    |case, pushed by|
|   |      |Shafiq Ahmad    |Town,  |       |       |       |mullas         |
|   |      |Residents of Mir|Mir Pur|       |       |       |               |
|   |      |Pur Sindh       |Sindh  |       |       |       |               |
|3  |13-28 |Amin            |Anti-Te|Complai|06/08/1|302,   |Murder         |
|   |      |Naseer          |rrorism|nt case|1      |324,   |allegation     |
|   |      |Shahid          |Court  |       |       |148,   |               |
|   |      |Ameer Ahmad     |Sargodh|       |       |149,   |(Chak 194 R.B.,|
|   |      |Zafer Iqbal     |a Camp |       |       |109,   |Lathianwala    |
|   |      |Tahir Ahmad     |at     |       |       |7ATA   |Faisalabad)    |
|   |      |Tufiq Ahmad     |Faisala|       |       |       |               |
|   |      |Mohammad Imran  |bad    |       |       |       |               |
|   |      |Habib Ahmad     |       |       |       |       |               |
|   |      |Hamid Javed     |       |       |       |       |               |
|   |      |Saeed Ahmad     |       |       |       |       |               |
|   |      |5 unknown       |       |       |       |       |               |
|   |      |persons         |       |       |       |       |               |
|4  |29-32 |Shamshad Ahmad  |Kunjah,|665    |20/10/1|302,   |False murder   |
|   |      |Tariq Mehmood   |Gujrat |       |1      |324,   |allegation;    |
|   |      |Maqsood Ahmad   |       |       |       |148,   |Nusrat Ahmad   |
|   |      |Nusrat Ahmad    |       |       |       |149    |arrested       |
|5  |33    |Rana Sajeel     |Khushab|352    |15/12/1|295-C  |Fabricated     |
|   |      |Ahmad           |       |       |1      |       |blasphemy case |
|6  |34    |Rana Hakim      |Khushab|349    |14/12/1|298-C  |               |
|   |      |Jameel          |       |       |1      |       |               |
|7  |35    |Asfandyar s/o   |Khushab|       |-      |16 MPO |Arrested       |
|   |      |Rana Hakim      |       |       |       |       |               |
|   |      |Jameel          |       |       |       |       |               |
|8  |36    |Basharat Ahmad  |Kunjah,|765    |17/12/1|295-B  |Arrested       |
|   |      |                |Gujrat |       |1      |       |               |

Penalties: PPCs 295-C, 302 - death; 295-B - imprisonment  for  life;  324  -
seven years'  imprisonment;  298-C,  379,  337,  148,  149  -  three  years'
imprisonment; 279 - imprisonment for two years; 109 - as for the offence; 7-
ATA -; 16 MPO - detention up to three months; 7-ATA  -  trial  in  an  anti-
terrorism court.



-----------------------
[1] There are two variants of the Ahmadi, the Quadiani and the Lahori. The
appellants in these appeals are all Qadiani which has a significantly
larger following.
[2] Article 260(3) of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan
(as amended up to 31 July 2004), 10 April 1973,
http://www.unhcr.org/refworld/docid/47558c422.html, identifies Christians,
Hindus, Sikhs, Buddhists, Parsis, Baha'is and Ahmadis
(whether of the Quadiani or Lahori group) as "non-Muslims". Eligibility for
presidency is restricted to Muslims (Article 41(2)). Some
seats in the National and Provincial Assemblies are reserved for women and
non-Muslims (Articles 51 and 106).
[3] For the provisions of the PCC see Appendix B.
[4] ibid
[5] The full version including the formal text which we have been provided
with is at Appendix B
[6] According to the report "Persecution of Ahmadis in Pakistan during the
year 2011", in summary,   eight "police cases" were registered on religious
grounds against Ahmadis during 2011. Between April 1984 and 31 December
2011, among the figures given 764 Ahmadis were "booked" for displaying
kalma, 435 for posing as Muslims and 724 for preaching. 299 Ahmadis were
charged under the Blasphemy laws and there were 1008 other various cases
against Ahmadis on religious grounds. The same report refers to 207 Ahmadis
having been killed in the same period and 234 attempted murders.
[7] These figures are according to the 1998 census. There is no
identification of the make-up the remaining small percentage.
[8]  Hudood Ordinances impose punishments according to orthodox
interpretations of Islamic law.
[9] Kalma is referred to in the report as Kalima
[10] See 6 supra.
[11] The term Islamisation was used in evidence to describe the role of
Islam in society in Pakistan and we use it on the same basis.
[12] (Offences against religion in Pakistan: Appellant Review", Dr Martin
Lau, LAW and (IN) EQUALITIES, Contemporary Perspectives, Eastern Book
Company
[13] The report entitled "Persecution of Ahmadis in Pakistan during the
year 2011"
[14] The 2011 Persecution Report states this was in 2005
[15] We heard varying evidence on the number killed.
[16] PLD 1985 FSC8 Majeebur Rehman v The Federal of Pakistan.
[17] 12 Ahmadi  Mosques set on fire, 16 forcibly occupied  and 23
demolished.
[18] Refugee Status Appeals Authority New Zealand Appeal No 74665/03

