
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

  MA and SM (Zambrano: EU children outside EU) Iran [2013] UKUT 00380 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 25 June 2013                               |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

                                     MA
     (Anonymity direction made)                                    Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ISTANBUL
                                                                  Respondent


                                   Between

                                     SM
                           (Anonymity direction made)
                              Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - BANGKOK
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant in the first appeal:       Mr Chukwudolue of Moorehouse
Solicitors
For the Appellant in the second appeal: The Sponsor, M
For the Respondents:                    Mr P Deller, Senior Presenting
Officer

   1) In EU law terms there is no reason why the decision in Zambrano  could
      not in principle be relied upon by the parent, or other primary carer,
      of a minor EU national living outside the EU as  long  as  it  is  the
      intention of the  parent,  or  primary  carer,  to  accompany  the  EU
      national child to his/her  country  of  nationality,  in  the  instant
      appeals that being the United Kingdom.  To  conclude  otherwise  would
      deny access, without justification, to a whole class of EU citizens to
      rights they are entitled to by virtue of their citizenship.

   2) The above conclusion is fortified by  the  terms  of  The  Immigration
      (European Economic  Area)  (Amendment)  (No.2)  Regulations  2012  (SI
      2012/2560), brought into force on 8 November 2012. Paragraphs 2 and  3
      of the Schedule to the Regulations give effect to the CJEU's  decision
      in Zambrano by amending regulations 11  and  15A  of  the  Immigration
      (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 in order to confer rights of
      entry and residence on the primary carer of a British citizen  who  is
      joining the British citizen in, or accompanying the British citizen to
      [regulations 11(5)(e) and 15A(4A)], the United Kingdom and  where  the
      denial of such a right of residence would prevent the British  citizen
      from being able to reside in the United Kingdom or in an EEA State.




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
INTRODUCTION

 1. We make an anonymity direction  in  both  appeals.  They  each  include
    consideration of the interests of a minor and, in the first appeal, the
    sponsor, who although now a British citizen, has been accepted to be  a
    Refugee and is currently a vulnerable person.  Such directions  are  to
    remain in place unless or until this Tribunal, or any other appropriate
    Court, directs otherwise. As such, no report of these proceedings shall
    directly, or indirectly, identify the  appellants  or  any  members  of
    their family. Failure to comply with this direction could amount  to  a
    contempt of court.

 2. With the consent of the parties, this conjoined determination sets  out
    our reasons and decisions in the appeals in the Upper  Tribunal.   They
    are conjoined because of certain issues which are common  to  them,  as
    follows:

      i) the reach of the Zambrano v Office national de  l'emploi  (Case  C-
         34/09) principles to minor European citizens who have never entered
         the Union; and

     ii) the correct approach under Article  8  in  such  situations  taking
         account  of  the  respondent's  concession  reiterated  in   Izuazu
         (Article 8 - new rules) [2013] UKUT 00045 (IAC) which  is  referred
         to below.

 3. The first named appellant, an Iranian national, lives in Turkey with AP
    her British citizen child, who was born in 2009.  She had  applied  for
    entry clearance to join her husband and  father  of  AP,  P,  whom  she
    married in Turkey on 20 June 2007.  P was  naturalised  in  2008  as  a
    British citizen after being granted indefinite leave to remain  in  the
    United Kingdom as a  refugee  from  Iran  in  2004.   This  appellant's
    application for entry clearance  was  refused  by  an  Entry  Clearance
    Officer on 13 February 2012 on the grounds that (i)  her  marriage  was
    not subsisting, (ii) the parties to the marriage did not intend to live
    permanently together and also on (iii) maintenance and

    (iv) accommodation grounds.   Her appeal was  dismissed  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge R. G. Walters  for  reasons  given  in  a  determination
    promulgated  on  15  November  2012.  The  judge  accepted   that   the
    appellant's marriage was subsisting and the parties  intended  to  live
    together, but concluded that she did not  meet  the  accommodation  and
    maintenance requirements of the Rules.  The judge  also  concluded  the
    Entry Clearance Officer's decision would not lead to a  breach  of  the
    appellant's Article 8 ECHR rights.

 4. Permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  granted  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Coker on 10 April 2013.  The appeal  first  came  before
    Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor on 3 May 2013, who, by way of a  decision
    dated 9 May 2013, set aside the  First-tier  Tribunal's  determination,
    having concluded that an error on a point of law  in  relation  to  its
    consideration of Article 8 ECHR had been made. The  reasons  given  for
    this conclusion are attached hereto as Appendix I.

 5. The appellant in the second appeal is a national of Thailand where  she
    was born in 1973.  She married M (the sponsor) in Thailand on 24  April
    2007.  He is a British citizen by birth born in 1975.  The couple  have
    two British citizen children, JM born in 2004 and FM born in 2007.   JM
    lives with the sponsor in the United  Kingdom.   FM  remains  with  his
    mother in Thailand. The application by  the  appellant  in  the  second
    appeal was refused on maintenance and accommodation grounds on  7  June
    2012.

 6. First-tier Tribunal Judge Grimshaw  determined  the  appeal  without  a
    hearing (as requested by the appellant) which she dismissed  under  the
    Immigration Rules and on Article 8  grounds.  The  appeal  came  before
    Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor on 3 June 2013, who, by way of a decision
    of the same date, set aside the  First-tier  Tribunal's  determination,
    having concluded that an error on a point of law  in  relation  to  its
    consideration of Article 8 ECHR had been made.  The  reasons  given  by
    Judge O'Connor for this conclusion are attached hereto at Appendix  II.



 7. In both appeals, Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor gave directions  to  the
    parties requiring skeleton arguments, in particular  on  the  issue  of
    whether it is unlawful and therefore unreasonable to expect  a  British
    citizen child (and therefore European  citizen  child)  who  has  never
    lived within the European Union to remain outside  of  the  Union.  The
    submissions  were  also  to  address  (i)  the  Secretary  of   State's
    concession in the decision of Izuazu, and (ii) the decisions in  Dereci
    & Others [2012] EUECJ C-256/11 and Zambrano.

 8. Unfortunately neither Mr Chukwudolue nor Mr Deller complied  with  that
    direction within the time limited by Judge O'Connor, but both  provided
    skeleton arguments on the day of the hearing before the Upper Tribunal.
     Mrs SM's appeal had been listed  for  2  o'clock.   The  sponsor  was,
    however, able to attend the  hearing  earlier  and  participated  fully
    after Mr Chukwudolue had made his submissions.

FINDINGS OF FACT RELATING TO THE FIRST APPEAL

 9. We remind ourselves that as the decision under appeal is  one  refusing
    entry clearance,  pursuant  to  s.85  and  s.85A  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 we are constrained to  considering  the
    circumstances as they appertained as of the  date  of  the  refusal  of
    Entry Clearance i.e. 13 February 2012.

10. The following facts in the first appeal are not in dispute.

11. The appellant is an Iranian national and has been  residing  in  Turkey
    since  2007.  She  was  granted  a  residence  permit  by  the  Turkish
    authorities on 30 September 2008. She and P married in  Ankara,  Turkey
    on 20 June 2007. She initially made an application for entry  clearance
    to join her husband in the United Kingdom in 2007, however the  Embassy
    refused to accept such application, indicating that the  appellant  was
    required to lodge it with the embassy in her homeland.

12. The appellant works in Turkey as a translator, and has been  awarded  a
    Bachelors of Religious Studies from the Nations University,  Louisiana,
    U.S.A. She can speak and write English fluently.

13. AP has lived with the appellant since birth, save for  a  short  period
    spent in the United Kingdom with his father, a  time  we  make  further
    reference to below.

14. As we have noted already, P is from Iran. He entered the United Kingdom
    in January 2003, was granted Indefinite Leave to Remain, as a  refugee,
    on 7 April 2004 and was naturalised as a  British  citizen  on  the  21
    February 2008. His asylum claim was based on the fact that he had, on 4
    occasions, been imprisoned and subjected to ill treatment in Iran;  the
    first occasion, for 6 months, being brought about by his refusal during
    his military service to kill persons suspected of  being  in  the  drug
    industry, and the subsequent occasions, for 2 months, 1 � years  and  2
    weeks, being as a consequence of his involvement in political protests.



15. He visits the appellant in Turkey on an annual basis, although  he  did
    so twice in 2011; his last visit prior to  the  decision  under  appeal
    being in December 2011. He and the appellant speak regularly,  both  on
    the telephone and Skype. He lives in a  1  bedroom  flat,  but  Croydon
    Council have indicated to him that, upon the arrival of  the  appellant
    and his son, he would be provided with larger accommodation. He is  not
    in employment, and receives Employment Support Allowance.

16. Dr Mohamed Abdelghani, a Consultant Psychiatrist with the South  London
    and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust, wrote on the  21  December  2011  in
    relation to P's mental health, confirming that he  has  been  diagnosed
    with Post Traumatic Stress Disorder for which he takes  Olanzapine  and
    Mirtazapine on a daily basis.  The  letter  further  observes  that  he
    suffers from poor concentration and low energy levels, hears the  voice
    of one of the prison guards from his time in  detention  in  Iran,  has
    flashbacks relating to his traumatic experiences in  Iran  on  2  to  3
    occasions a day, and that  he  complains  of  vomiting  when  he  eats.
    Investigations are underway regarding  the  latter  complaint.  When  P
    found out that the appellant's application for entry clearance had been
    refused he self harmed by superficially cutting his arms.

17. This letter is in similar terms to a letter  authored  by  a  Dr  Frank
    Holloway, Consultant Psychiatrist, on 24  February  2010.  Dr  Holloway
    also observes in his letter that, "In January 2010 he [P]  returned  to
    the United Kingdom with his son and is now struggling to cope with  his
    new role as a single parent". This is consistent with oral  evidence  P
    gave to the Upper Tribunal, in which he stated that he had brought  his
    son to the United Kingdom on Christmas day 2009 and had taken him  back
    to Turkey in April 2010. He continued his oral  evidence  by  asserting
    that he had been unable to look after his son, his son had  become  ill
    on several occasions, and that a Doctor at Mayday hospital  in  Croydon
    had recommended that he take his son back to Turkey  where  his  mother
    could provide better care. Mr Deller did  not  cross  examine  on  this
    evidence,  and  neither  did  he  submit,  during  the  course  of  his
    submissions, that such evidence should be disbelieved.

18. We observe at this point that we were also provided with a letter dated
    6 March 2013 from Dr Teuta-Rexhepi-Johansson, relating  to  P's  mental
    health, in much the same terms as those detailed above.

FINDINGS OF FACT RELATING TO THE SECOND APPEAL

19. The core facts in the second appeal are the subject of dispute.  We may
    only consider  the  circumstances  appertaining  at  the  time  of  the
    decision (7 June 2012), as we explained to M.

20. We have above, in the introduction to this determination, set  out  the
    key events which require some fleshing out.

21. According to the appellant's application for entry clearance:

      i) She did not intend to work in  the  United  Kingdom  and  that  her
         sponsoring husband was unemployed.

     ii) They planned to live at an address  in  [redacted]  which  had  two
         bedrooms plus a further room which was rented from H Homes.

    iii) The  parties  had  first  met  in  2002  in  Koh  Samui  and  their
         relationship began a year later.  They last saw each  other  on  10
         June 2010 (the application is dated 10 April 2012).

     iv) The appellant had taken the English language test.

      v) The appellant had travelled to the United Kingdom in 2006  together
         with her sponsoring  husband  and  the  eldest  child.   The  first
         application for entry clearance for that visit had been refused but
         the second was successful.

     vi) The appellant is unemployed and in receipt of �500 per month  which
         was sent on living costs from her husband.

22. The application was accompanied by a letter from the sponsor, which  is
    referred to in the Entry Clearance Officer's  decision.   The  decision
    notes:

      i) That the letter  provided  by  the  sponsor  dated  31  March  2012
         indicated a monthly income of �849.32 made up of child tax  credit,
         jobseeker's allowance and child benefit with rent and  council  tax
         being paid for by Hounslow Council.

     ii) The respondent considered these were the only sources of income and
         he was not satisfied that  there  were  sufficient  funds  for  the
         appellant's maintenance.

    iii) The elder son JM had been attending primary school since  September
         2010.  The sponsor had explained that he could not work  until  the
         appellant was in the United Kingdom.  Given that JM  was  in  full-
         time education the respondent did not accept he could not take  any
         employment.  The application and letter did not  disclose  evidence
         of enquiries for work or previous experience as an  electrician  or
         the presence of relevant qualifications to undertake such work.

     iv) The money transfers the sponsor had referred to did not  correspond
         with the transactions in his account.

      v) A letter of support from  the  sponsor's  mother  did  not  contain
         evidence of her personal or financial circumstances.

23. The Entry Clearance Officer explained he was not satisfied the  parties
    could maintain themselves or that there would be adequate accommodation
    without recourse to public funds with reference to paragraph 281(v) and
    (iv).

24. Pausing there for the moment,  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  gave  no
    reasons why he did not consider the accommodation to be  adequate,  nor
    did the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  But since it is clear the appellant
    did not meet the mandatory requirement of maintenance under the  Rules,
    any error flowing from consideration of the  accommodation  aspect  was
    not material.

25. The Entry Clearance Officer also considered the Article 8  aspect.   He
    observed  that  the  sponsor  had  been  visiting  Thailand   regularly
    throughout  the  years  to  maintain  the  relationship  and  that  the
    appellant therefore  had  the  option  to  continue  to  maintain  that
    relationship through his visits.  He concluded:

         "While I accept that you  may  now  wish  to  settle  as  a  family
         together in one place, you have failed to  provide  a  satisfactory
         explanation as to why your sponsor cannot reside with you and  your
         children in Thailand.  I am satisfied that there has been no breach
         of those Articles  given  the  reasons  already  stated  above.   I
         consider  that  refusing  this   application   is   justified   and
         proportionate in the exercise of immigration control.  I note  that
         refusing this application will not interfere with family  life  for
         the purpose of Article 8(1) which you enjoy in Thailand."

26. By way of response to this decision, M explained the following relevant
    matters in a letter addressed to the entry clearance post as follows:

      i) JM starts school at 8.55am and finishes at 3.30pm.   The  hours  of
         work the sponsor could offer any future employer is  10am  to  2.30
         Monday to Friday.  These limited hours he could offer was something
         that were hard to come by.  Were his wife in the United Kingdom the
         hours of work he could offer would be considerably more.  Reference
         is made to  the  sponsor's  qualifications  and  experience  as  an
         electrician  and  also  his  qualifications  and  experience  as  a
         football coach.

     ii) Should his wife's application be refused, he would be travelling to
         Thailand by himself and bring his younger son back  to  the  United
         Kingdom so that he could start school in September.  He  could  not
         apply for a school place until the younger son was  in  the  United
         Kingdom.

    iii) As to why the family could not live in Thailand,  the  sponsor  and
         his wife had agreed that their sons  would  have  a  better  future
         receiving an English education.

     iv) As to family life being continued the way it is, he  had  not  seen
         his wife between June 2010 and April 2012  and  had  not  seen  his
         younger son.  Likewise JM  had  not  seen  his  mother  or  younger
         brother.  The four of them did reunite in Bangkok on 3 April  2012.
         It was only for  a  twenty  day  period.   The  sponsor  questioned
         whether this sounded like a healthy, stable family life.

      v) He referred to the children's champion  stating  that  every  child
         matters and that long visa applications should not  interfere  with
         children's lives.  A young child was missing his mother and brother
         and another child missing his father and brother.  When the  father
         and two sons were living in the United Kingdom his sons would  miss
         their mother and the sponsor his wife.

27. An Entry Clearance Manager carried out a review on 1 November  2012  in
    which the points were made that:

      i) It is a common fact that many lone parents manage to work full time
         and care for their children.  The sponsor had the option  of  part-
         time employment and had not chosen to do so.

     ii) The whole family, both those residing in  the  United  Kingdom  and
         those in Thailand, were wholly dependent on British public funds.

    iii) There was an absence of evidence that  the  sponsor  had  made  any
         effort to find employment or  that  he  was  able  to  work  as  an
         electrician.

     iv) There was no evidence to show that  the  quality  of  education  in
         Thailand is below that of the United Kingdom.

      v) It was the sponsor's choice to take his elder son back with him  to
         the United Kingdom in order to get a free education and the  family
         unit as a whole  had  not  resided  together  for  any  significant
         periods.

     vi) The sponsor had failed to address the fact  that  he  was  claiming
         benefits for a child who had never resided in the United Kingdom.

28. The Entry Clearance Officer and Manager had before them a  letter  from
    [school], with reference to JM, confirming that:

      i) He had been attending since 23 July 2010.

     ii) He had been identified as having special educational needs  as  his
         achievements were considerably lower than national expectations.

    iii) Despite intensive intervention he had not  made  adequate  progress
         and it was believed there could be an emotional element to this.

     iv) At the beginning of the academic year JM was referred to a  council
         support team as there were concerns around his living  arrangements
         and the impact this was having on his emotional wellbeing.   It  is
         noted that since then JM  and  his  father  have  moved  into  more
         suitable accommodation.

29. The letter from the deputy head concludes:

         "J visited his mother and sibling in Thailand in April  this  year,
         since returning  J  has  become  very  confused  about  his  family
         situation and will often cry for 'mummy'.  The school has  concerns
         around J meeting his behavioural and emotional milestones  as  well
         as his basic needs being met in the current situation, therefore we
         have made  a  referral  to  Children's  Services  under  the  Child
         Protection framework."

30. This appears to have been the extent of the evidence before the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge who noted the request had been made for the  appeal
    to be decided on the papers.  An analysis of the Judge's  determination
    is in the error of law decision by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  O'Connor  at
    Appendix II.

31. In response to a request from Judge O'Connor, M provided a letter dated
    15 June 2013.  He sets out again the history of his relationship to the
    appellant and the difficulties encountered.  He contrasts his  position
    with that of an EEA national exercising free  movement  rights  in  the
    United Kingdom and their ability for their family  to  join  them.   He
    refers also to the UN Convention on the Rights of  the  Child,  arguing
    that Articles 3 to 10 have been totally ignored by UKBA.

32. At the hearing, on our invitation M repeated the number  of  points  of
    concern.  Whilst in no way diminishing  the  intense  feelings  he  has
    about his situation, nothing new of a material nature emerged.

33. Although in some respects the sponsor's evidence is short on detail, we
    are satisfied that he is an honest witness and we accept  his  evidence
    of the family's fervent desire to be together, the difficulties he  has
    with bringing up JM alone and his explanation for the  difficulties  he
    has  encountered  in  obtaining  employment,  having  regard   to   his
    commitments to JM.  M referred again at the hearing before us to  those
    difficulties which  Mr  Deller  did  not  seek  to  challenge  to  such
    evidence.

THE LAW RELATING TO EUROPEAN CITIZENSHIP - BOTH APPEALS

34. EC Directive 2004/38/EC ("the Citizens Directive") grants rights to  EU
    citizens, and to any "family member" of such  citizens  [defined  as  a
    spouse or partner of the EU citizen, or direct minor  and/or  dependent
    descendant or direct dependent ascendant relative of the EU citizen  or
    his/her  spouse  or  partner  -  but  not  a  non-dependent   ascendant
    relative]. As a matter of domestic law, the Citizens Directive is given
    effect by the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (SI
    2006 No 1003) ("the EEA Regulations").

35. Article 20 of the Treaty on  the  Functioning  of  the  European  Union
    ("TFEU") provides that every national of a  Member  State  shall  be  a
    citizen of the EU, and shall have the right to move and  reside  freely
    within the territory of the member states.

36. Article 20 of the TFEU is in the following terms:

         "1.      Citizenship of the Union  is  hereby  established.  Every
             person holding the nationality of a Member State  shall  be  a
             citizen of the  Union.  Citizenship  of  the  Union  shall  be
             additional to and not replace national citizenship.
          2.  Citizens of the Union shall enjoy the rights and be subject to
             the duties provided for in  the  Treaties.  They  shall  have,
             inter alia:


               a) the right to move and reside freely within the  territory
                  of the Member States;
          b) ...
          c) ...
          d) ...


             These  rights  shall  be  exercised  in  accordance  with   the
             conditions and limits  defined  by  the  Treaties  and  by  the
             measures adopted thereunder."

37. In Ruiz Zambrano v Office National de l'Emploi  (ONEm)  [2011]  All  ER
    (EC) 491, the CJEU confirmed that Article 20 of the TFEU conferred  the
    status of citizen of the Union on every person holding the  nationality
    of a Member State.

38. The decision in Zambrano concerned Colombian national parents living in
    Belgium, whose children were nationals of Belgium. Mr Zambrano lost his
    employment, which he had been undertaking  without  the  required  work
    permit. He was refused unemployment benefits.  Mr  Zambrano  sought  to
    argue before the Belgium courts that articles 20 and 21  TFEU  required
    Belgium as a member state to grant him, as an ascendant  relative  upon
    whom minor children who were EU citizens depended,  an  exemption  from
    the obligation to hold a work permit.

39. The Grand Chamber of the  European  Court,  on  a  reference  from  the
    Tribunal du travail de Bruxelles, concluded as follows:

        "41. As the Court has stated  several  times,  citizenship  of  the
        European  Union  is  intended  to  be  the  fundamental  status  of
        nationals of member states...


        42. In those circumstances,  article  20  TFEU  precludes  national
        measures which have the effect of depriving citizens of  the  Union
        of the genuine enjoyment of the substance of their rights conferred
        by virtue of their status as citizens of the Union...


        43. A refusal to grant a right of  residence  to  a  third  country
        national with dependent minor children in the  member  state  where
        those children are nationals and reside,  and  also  a  refusal  to
        grant such a person a work permit, has such an effect.


        44. It must be  assumed  that  such  a  refusal  would  lead  to  a
        situation where those children, citizens of the Union,  would  have
        to leave the territory of the Union in  order  to  accompany  their
        parents. Similarly, if a work permit were not  granted  to  such  a
        person, he would risk not having sufficient  resources  to  provide
        for himself and his family, which would  result  in  the  children,
        citizens of the Union, having to leave the territory of the  Union.
        In those circumstances, those citizens of the  Union  would,  as  a
        result, be unable to exercise the substance of the rights conferred
        on them by virtue of their status as citizens of the Union.


        45. Accordingly, the answer to the question referred is that art 20
        TREU is to be interpreted as meaning that  it  precludes  a  member
        state from refusing a third country national upon  which  is  minor
        children, who are European Union citizens, are dependent,  a  right
        of residence in the member state of residence  and  nationality  of
        those children, and from refusing to grant a work  permit  to  that
        third country national, in so far as such decisions  deprive  those
        children of the genuine enjoyment of the substance  of  the  rights
        attaching to the status of European Union citizen."

40. The CJEU's decision in Zambrano has subsequently been considered  in  a
    number of other decisions of the CJEU: McCarthy v  Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2011] All ER  (EC)  729;  Dereci  &  Others  v
    Bundesministerum fur  Inners  [2012]  All  ER  (EC)  373;  O  and  S  v
    Maahanmuuttovirasto [2012] EUECJ C-356/11 and  C-356/12  and  Yoshikazu
    Iida v Stadt Ulm [2012] EUECJ C-40/11: and by the Court  of  Appeal  in
    Harrison (Jamaica) & AB (Morocco) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2012] EWCA Civ 1736.

41. Hickinbottom J recently had occasion  to  consider  the  abovementioned
    authorities in his decision in Jamil Sanneh v (1)  Secretary  of  State
    for Work and Pensions and  (2)  The  Commissioners  for  Her  Majesty's
    Revenue and Customs [2013] EWHC 793 (Admin); summarising  the  learning
    to be derived from them, which we respectfully agree with and adopt, in
    the following terms:

        i) All nationals of all member states are EU citizens.  It  is  for
        each member state to determine how nationality of that state may be
        acquired,  but,  once  it  is  acquired  by  an  individual,   that
        individual has the right to enjoy the substance of the rights  that
        attach to the status of EU citizen, including the right  to  reside
        in the territory  of  the  EU.  That  applies  equally  to  minors,
        irrespective of the nationality of their parents, and  irrespective
        of whether one or both parents have EU citizenship.


        ii) An EU citizen must have the  freedom  to  enjoy  the  right  to
        reside in the EU, genuinely and in  practice.  For  a  minor,  that
        freedom may be jeopardised if, although legally entitled to  reside
        in the EU, he  is  compelled  to  leave  EU  territory  because  an
        ascendant relative upon whom he is dependent is compelled to leave.
        That relative may be compelled to leave by  dint  of  direct  state
        action (e.g. he is the subject of  an  order  for  removal)  or  by
        virtue of being driven to leave and reside in a non-EU  country  by
        force of economic necessity (e.g. by having insufficient  resources
        to provide for his EU child(ren) because the state  refuses  him  a
        work permit). The rights of an EU child will not be infringed if he
        is not compelled to leave. Therefore, even where a non-EU ascendant
        relative is compelled to leave EU territory, the article 20  rights
        of an EU child will not be infringed if there is another  ascendant
        relative who has the right of residence in the EU, and who can  and
        will in practice care for the child.


        iii) It is for the national courts to determine, as a  question  of
        fact on the evidence before it, whether  an  EU  citizen  would  be
        compelled to leave the EU to follow a non-EU national upon whom  he
        is dependent.


        iv) Nothing less than such compulsion will engage articles  20  and
        21 of the TFEU. In particular, EU law will not be engaged where the
        EU citizen is not compelled to leave the EU, even if the quality or
        standard of life of the EU citizen is diminished as a result of the
        non-EU national upon whom he is dependent is (for example)  removed
        or prevented from working; although (a) diminution in  the  quality
        of life might engage EU law if (and only if) it  is  sufficient  in
        practice to compel the a relevant ascendant relative, and hence the
        EU dependent citizen, to leave, and (b) such actions as removal  or
        prevention of work may result in an interference  with  some  other
        right, such as the right to respect for family life under article 8
        of the European Convention on Human Rights.


        v) Although such article 8 rights are similar in scope  to  the  EU
        rights conferred by article 7 of the Charter of Fundamental  Rights
        of the European Union, the provisions of the Charter are  addressed
        to member states only when they are implementing EU law. If EU  law
        is not engaged, then the domestic  courts  have  to  undertake  the
        examination of the right to family life under article 8;  but  that
        is an entirely distinct area of protection.


        vi) The overriding of the general national right to refuse a non-EU
        national a right  of  residence,  by  reference  to  the  effective
        enjoyment of the right to reside of  a  dependent  EU  citizen,  is
        described in both Dereci (paragraph 67) and Harrison (paragraph 66)
        as "exceptional", meaning  (as  explained  in  the  latter),  as  a
        principle, it will not be regularly engaged.

42.  In Campbell (exclusion; Zambrano) [2013] UKUT  00147  (IAC)  the  Upper
    Tribunal (Upper Tribunal Judges Storey and Jordan) considered an appeal
    against the decision of an entry  clearance  officer  to  refuse  entry
    clearance for the purposes of settlement as the  spouse  of  a  British
    citizen, where the claimant also had a British citizen child living  in
    the United Kingdom. It concluded, in relation to the application of the
    'Zambrano principles' that:

        "30.  We  see  no  reason  why  Zambrano  principles  cannot   have
        application in entry clearance cases: in both in country and out of
        country cases the Member State must ensure that any  'refusal  does
        not lead, for the Union citizens concerned, to the  denial  of  the
        genuine enjoyment of the  substance  of  the  rights  conferred  by
        virtue of his status as a citizen of the Union":  Dereci  &  Others
        [European Citizenship) [2011] EUECJ  C-256-11,  15  November  2-11,
        para 74. Indeed the ruling of the Grand Chamber  of  the  Court  of
        Justice in this case  encompassed  not  just  the  cases  of  those
        applicants who  were  already  living  in  the  host  Member  State
        (Austria) but Mrs Stevic who resided in Serbia: see paras  26,  35,
        74."

43.  None  of  the  decisions  thus  far  referred  to  has  considered  the
    applicability of the Zambrano principles to the scenario  of  the  type
    that presents itself in the instant appeals; i.e. where a  EU  national
    child, from whom the non  EU  national  parent  is  seeking  to  derive
    rights, is not living within the EU at the relevant date and has  never
    lived within the EU.

44. In EU law terms, there is no reason why the decision in Zambrano  could
    not in principle be relied upon by the parent, or other primary  carer,
    of a minor EU national living outside the EU  as  long  as  it  is  the
    intention of the parent, or primary carer, to accompany the EU national
    child to his/her country of nationality, in the  instant  appeals  that
    being the United Kingdom. To  conclude  otherwise  would  deny  access,
    without justification, to a whole class of EU citizens to  rights  they
    are entitled to by virtue of their citizenship. Mr Deller did not  seek
    to argue to the contrary.

45. The above conclusion is fortified  by  the  terms  of  The  Immigration
    (European  Economic  Area)  (Amendment)  (No.2)  Regulations  2012  (SI
    2012/2560), brought in to force on 8 November 2012. Paragraphs 2 and  3
    of the Schedule to the Regulations give effect to the  CJEU's  decision
    in Zambrano by amending regulations  11  and  15A  of  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 in order to confer rights  of
    entry and residence on the primary carer of a British  citizen  who  is
    joining the British citizen in, or accompanying the British citizen  to
    [regulations 11(5)(e) and 15A(4A)], the United Kingdom  and  where  the
    denial of such a right of residence would prevent the  British  citizen
    from being able to reside in the United Kingdom or in an EEA State.

46. We were not required by the parties to consider whether the  appellants
    could benefit directly from the  2012  Regulations  supra,  as  it  was
    agreed between them that such Regulations were not  of  application  in
    the instant appeals.

THE EU LAW PRINCIPLES APPLIED TO THE FIRST APPEAL

47. The appellant's son, AP, is a British, and therefore a  European  Union
    citizen. It  is  intended  that  the  appellant  in  the  first  appeal
    accompany her son to the United Kingdom. AP has the right to reside  in
    the EU.

48. Neither AP, nor the British citizen sponsor in the first appeal,  have,
    or  intend  to,  move  within  the  territory  of  the  member  states.
    Consequently the appellant  can  place  no  reliance  on  EC  Directive
    2004/38/EC.

49. Turning to the application of the  Zambrano  principles  to  the  first
    appeal, it is of some significance that  the  sponsor  has  the  mental
    health issues we have identified above. We find, having considered  all
    of the evidence before us, that as of the date of the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer's decision P, as a consequence of his mental health issues, did
    not have the capability of looking after AP, without there  being  more
    than an insignificant risk to AP's essential well being.

50. There was no evidence before us, and Mr Deller did not seek to  assert,
    that AP had other relatives in the United Kingdom who could  take  care
    of him and it is no answer to the appellant's claim under the  Zambrano
    principles that AP could exercise his right of residence in the  EU  by
    being adopted or otherwise  placed  in  the  care  of  Social  Services
    [Harrison at paragraph 19].

51. On the exceptional facts of this case we find that a refusal  to  admit
    the appellant to the United Kingdom would deprive  AP  of  the  genuine
    enjoyment of the substance of the rights associated with his status  as
    an EU citizen.  Consequently, denying the appellant in the first appeal
    a right of entry and residence to the United Kingdom would  lead  to  a
    breach of Article 20 of the Treaty on the Functioning of  the  European
    Union.

52. The first appeal is therefore allowed on the basis that the decision of
    the Entry Clearance Officer  of  the  13  February  2012  breaches  the
    appellant's derived rights under the Community Treaties in  respect  of
    entry to and residence in the United Kingdom.  That being so  there  is
    no purpose in journeying into Art 8 ECHR but were we to do so we  would
    find, having regard to the factors that have led us to allow the appeal
    under EU law, that:

        a. The appellant has a family  life  with  her  son,  AP,  and  her
           husband, P (as accepted by Mr Deller).

        b. The decision of the ECO interferes with the  appellant's  family
           life with her husband.

        c. Such interference would be  of  sufficient  severity  so  as  to
           engage Art 8.

        d. Such interference is not in accordance with the law.

        e. The legitimate aim relied on by the ECO is (as submitted  by  Mr
           Deller) an economic one.

        f. The interference caused by the refusal of entry clearance is, in
           all  the  circumstances  including  the  interests  of  AP,  not
           proportionate to that aim.

THE EU LAW PRINCIPLES APPLIED TO THE SECOND APPEAL

53. The appellant's two  sons,  JM  and  FM,  are  British,  and  therefore
    European Union, citizens. JM is already residing in the United  Kingdom
    and has done so with his British citizen father,  the  sponsor,  for  a
    number of years. It  was,  as  of  the  date  of  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer's decision, intended that FM accompany  the  appellant  in  the
    second appeal to the United Kingdom.  Although  not  relevant  for  the
    purposes of this appeal, we observe that the current intention is  that
    FM will travel to and reside in the United Kingdom even if  his  mother
    is not granted leave to do so.

54. Neither JM or FM, nor the British citizen sponsor in the second appeal,
    has moved, or intend to  move,  within  the  territory  of  the  member
    states. Consequently the appellant in the second appeal  can  place  no
    reliance on EC Directive 2004/38/EC.

55. Turning to the application of the Zambrano  principles  to  the  second
    appeal, whilst we accept that if JM and FM were both to reside  in  the
    United Kingdom without their mother, life would be  difficult  for  the
    sponsor, and indeed the children, we do not accept that  a  refusal  to
    admit the appellant to the United Kingdom would deprive either JM or FM
    of the genuine enjoyment of the substance of the rights associated with
    their status as EU citizens.

56. There is no suggestion that the sponsor is not capable of looking after
    JM and FM. He has tailored his working hours thus far  to  ensure  that
    they fit in with the need to care for JM, and we have no doubt he would
    also ensure that FM was similarly cared for. There mere fact  that  the
    sponsor cannot be as economically active as he would wish,  because  of
    his care responsibilities to JM and FM, is not sufficient to support  a
    conclusion that JM and FM would be  denied  the  genuine  enjoyment  of
    their EU citizenship rights, nor would this be the  case  even  if  the
    sponsor  were  required  to  stop  working  altogether.  The  right  of
    residence is a right to reside in the territory of the EU. It is not  a
    right to any particular quality of life or to any  particular  standard
    of living (see Dereci at paragraph 68, and Harrison at paragraph 67).

57. Looking at the circumstances in the second appeal as a whole we do  not
    accept that denial of a right of entry and residence to  the  appellant
    would lead to a breach of Article 20 of the Treaty on  the  Functioning
    of the European Union

CONCLUSIONS ON ARTICLE 8 IN THE SECOND APPEAL

57. We are required to examine the best interests of JM as he is living  in
    the United Kingdom. The Entry Clearance Officer undertook  no  analysis
    of those interests.

58. FM is outside the United Kingdom and therefore  s.55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 does not apply.  Nevertheless,  as
    was made clear by the Tribunal in Mundeba  (s.55  and  para  297(i)(f))
    [2013] UKUT 00088 (IAC):

       "i) The exercise of the duty  by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  to
          assess an  application under the Immigration Rules as  to  whether
          there are  family  or  other  considerations  making  the  child's
          exclusion undesirable inevitably involves an  assessment  of  what
          the child's welfare and best interests require.

       ii)  Where an immigration decision engages  Article  8  rights,  due
          regard must be had to the UN  Convention  on  the  Rights  of  the
          Child. An entry clearance decision for the admission  of  a  child
          under  18   is   "an   action   concerning   children...undertaken
          by...administrative authorities" and so by  Article  3  "the  best
          interests of the child shall be a primary consideration".

       iii) Although the statutory duty under s.55 UK Borders Act 2009 only
          applies to children within the  UK,  the  broader  duty  doubtless
          explains why the Secretary of State's IDI invites Entry  Clearance
          Officers to consider the statutory guidance issued under s.55.

       iv) Family considerations  require  an  evaluation  of  the  child's
          welfare including emotional needs.  'Other considerations' come in
          to play where there are other aspects of a child's life  that  are
          serious and compelling for example where an applicant is living in
          an unacceptable social and economic environment.  The focus  needs
          to be on the circumstances of the child in the light of his or her
          age, social backgrounds and developmental history and will involve
          inquiry as to whether:-

             a.   there is evidence of neglect or abuse;

             b.   there are unmet needs that should be catered for;

             c.   there are stable arrangements for  the  child's  physical
         care.

         The assessment involves consideration as to whether the combination
         of circumstances is sufficiently serious and compelling to  require
         admission."

  59. We are satisfied that the Entry Clearance Officer's  decision  was  an
      action concerning children undertaken by an administrative  authority,
      and accordingly Article 3 of the UN Convention on the  Rights  of  the
      Child comes into play.

  60. As a starting point, the best interests of a child  are  usually  best
      served by  being  with  both  parents.   Continuity  of  residence  is
      another; change in place of residence where a child has grown after  a
      number of years when socially aware is important, [see also SG  (child
      of polygamous marriage) Nepal [2012] UKUT  265  (IAC)  [2012]  Imm  AR
      939].

  61. Mr Deller refers in his skeleton argument to the  recent  decision  of
      the Court of Appeal in SS (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013]  EWCA  Civ  550,  in
      particular the comments by Mann J at [62] that  any  "best  interests"
      consideration should be identified by the appellants.

  62. Laws LJ gave the lead judgment in SS (Nigeria).  At [44]  he  provides
      analysis of what is understood by the interests of a child or children
      being a primary consideration, and at [44]:

         "...  with  great  respect  they  are  capable  if  not   carefully
         understood, of investing child  cases  with  a  uniform  prevailing
         force which yields no or little space to the context in  hand.   As
         for the first characteristic,  the  key  phrase  is  of  course  'a
         primary consideration'.  It appears from ZH and  subsequently,  but
         is taken from Article 3(1) of the UNCRC, so the choice of words may
         be regarded as having particular significance.  What sense is to be
         given to the  adjective  'primary'?   We  know  it  does  not  mean
         'paramount' - other considerations may ultimately prevail.  And the
         child's interests are not 'the' but only 'a' primary  consideration
         -  indicating  that  there  may  be  other  considerations   which,
         presumably, may count for as much.  Thus the term  'primary'  seems
         problematic.  In the course of argument Mr Auburn accepted that  'a
         primary consideration' should be taken to mean a  consideration  of
         substantial importance.  I think that is right."

  63. Mr Deller did  not  seek  to  persuade  us  otherwise  that  the  best
      interests  of  the  two  children  affected  by  the  Entry  Clearance
      Officer's decision were to be together with both parents in  a  united
      family.

  64. He accepted that family  life  existed  in  this  case  and  that  the
      decision entailed consequences of such gravity so as to engage Article
      8.  We consider that he was correct to state that the  decisions  were
      lawful, but only insofar as they do not affect any  derived  residence
      rights of carers of British citizen children.  We have  already  found
      that the EU citizen rights of FM and of JM are not undermined  to  the
      extent that either child (or  the  children  together)   is  (or  are)
      unable to exercise those  citizenship  rights  in  the  light  of  the
      ability of the sponsor to care for both of them in the United Kingdom.

  65. Continuing the familiar journey  through  the  Razgar  principles,  Mr
      Deller argued that the decisions are pursuant to the legitimate aim of
      consistent immigration control in the economic interests of the UK and
      that they were proportionate.

  66. Our focus therefore is on the issue of proportionality.

  67. In his oral submissions Mr Deller emphasised that the  legitimate  aim
      relied upon by the ECO was purely an economic one.  He  was  alive  to
      the difference of approach that may be taken where the best  interests
      of young children are  concerned  in  contrast  with  those  of  later
      teenage years, and with characteristic candour he accepted that he had
      not come across such a case as this before where  there  were  British
      citizen children living apart in the circumstances in the case  before
      us.

  68. In Izuazu  the  Secretary  of  State  made  the  following  concession
      (recorded in Appendix A to the determination)



        "The Secretary of State continues to accept that where the  primary
        carer of a British citizen is denied a Zambrano right of  residence
        on the basis that his or her removal or deportation would not force
        the British citizen to leave the  EU,  it  will  not  logically  be
        possible when considering any Article 8 claim made by such a person
        to determine their claim on the basis that  the  family  (including
        the British citizen) can relocate together to a place  outside  the
        EU. However, the Secretary of State does not accept that it follows
        that there will be no circumstances in which a  decision  taken  in
        respect of the primary carer of a British citizen can require  that
        British citizen to leave the UK. The Secretary of  State  does  not
        consider that the UK Border Agency letter sent to the  Tribunal  in
        Sanade suggested that she did accept that it is never reasonable to
        expect a British citizen party to genuine family life in the UK  to
        relocate permanently abroad but apologises for any lack of  clarity
        in the correspondence which may have caused the Tribunal  to  reach
        this conclusion"



  69. Mr Deller accepted that this concession can be extrapolated so  as  to
      be  of  application  to  entry   clearance   applications   and   that
      consequently it would not logically be possible  when  considering  an
      Article 8 claim in such a context to determine the claim on the  basis
      that the British citizen  child  would  relocate,  or  remain  living,
      outside the EU.  The consequent effect of such  extrapolation  in  the
      instant case is that, (i) although FM is  currently  residing  outside
      the EU, the appellants Article 8 claim must be determined on the basis
      that he is living in the EU and (ii) it is not reasonable to expect JM
      to relocate to Thailand.


  70. In such circumstances a refusal to grant the appellant entry clearance
      would lead to a  permanent  breakdown  in  the  physical  relationship
      between the appellant and her child FM (and indeed JM), save  for  the
      possibility of contact during visits.

  71. The best interests of the children in this case acquire  a  particular
      force on the facts, taking account of the developmental and  emotional
      difficulties encountered by JM.  Although we  do  not  have  the  same
      insight into any difficulties encountered by FM, inevitably there will
      have been a negative impact on him in coming to terms with his  father
      and older brother being in the United Kingdom and their contact  being
      largely  only  via  Skype,  with  only  the  most   limited   physical
      interaction.

  72. The Secretary of State is undoubtedly entitled  to  rely  on  economic
      considerations as justification for  the  accepted  interference.   We
      have found M credible and we  consider  that  we  have  been  given  a
      plausible explanation why he had not previously been  able  to  obtain
      employment given the limited  number  of  free  hours  he  would  have
      available.

  73. It does not follow,  however,  that  where  a  family  which  includes
      British citizen children are being kept  apart  for  economic  reasons
      that the existence of children should result, using  the  language  of
      Laws J, in "...a uniform prevailing force which yields  no  or  little
      space to the context in hand".  The context here is  one  of  economic
      considerations in the United Kingdom where  there  are  real  economic
      pressures on an overstretched welfare system. The focus therefore must
      be on the particular circumstances of the case and to evaluate whether
      the factors in favour of the appellant joining  her  children  in  the
      United Kingdom are sufficiently compelling to  outweigh  the  economic
      considerations.

  74. The position is a plain one. If the scales tip in favour of  the  ECO,
      it will have the effect of separating a mother from her  two  children
      one of whom for which she has been the principal carer and  the  other
      who has suffered as the result of their separation. Mr Deller accepted
      that our approach should be on the basis that FM is here in the  light
      of his constitutional right to be. This is in the context  of  a  well
      meaning father who has found it difficult to  care  for  the  son  who
      lives him and who we believe will find the presence of  two  to  be  a
      real struggle without the presence of the mother.

  75. Unlike so many appeals that we are  required  to  consider  this  case
      involves no misconduct at any level by the  parties.  As  observed  by
      Richards LJ in JO (Uganda)[2010] EWCA Civ 10 at [29]:

         "There is, however, one material difference between the  two  types
         of case, in that they generally involve the  pursuit  of  different
         legitimate aims: in deportation  cases  it  is  the  prevention  of
         disorder or crime, in ordinary removal cases it is the  maintenance
         of  effective  immigration  control.  The  difference  in  aim   is
         potentially important because the factors in  favour  of  expulsion
         are in my view capable of carrying greater weight in a  deportation
         case than in  a  case  of  ordinary  removal.  The  maintenance  of
         effective immigration control  is  an  important  matter,  but  the
         protection of society against serious crime is even more  important
         and can properly be given correspondingly  greater  weight  in  the
         balancing exercise. Thus I think it perfectly possible in principle
         for a given set of considerations of  family  life  and/or  private
         life   to   be   sufficiently   weighty   to    render    expulsion
         disproportionate in an ordinary removal case, yet  insufficient  to
         render expulsion disproportionate in a deportation case because  of
         the additional weight to be given  to  the  criminal  offending  on
         which the deportation decision was based. I stress "in  principle",
         because the actual weight to be placed on  the  criminal  offending
         must of course depend on the seriousness of the  offences  and  the
         other circumstances of the case."

  76. The absence of any misconduct by the parties  does  not  diminish  the
      weight we must give to the economic well-being of the UK but its place
      in the measure of proportionality needs to be carefully  evaluated  in
      the face of the impact of continued separation of this family.  We put
      our sympathies on one side. But what we are left with is a  compelling
      need for this family to be reunited  in  the  best  interests  of  the
      children. The harm that would  flow  from  their  continued  split  is
      sufficient to tip the scales in favour of the appellant coming to  the
      UK due weight having been given to the competing  economic  factor  of
      limiting the demands made on the public purse.

  77. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  in
      the assessment of Article 8  grounds.   We  re-make  the  decision  on
      appeal by allowing it on Article 8 grounds.

Decisions
First appeal

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside. We  re-make
the decision on appeal allowing it on the basis that  the  decision  of  the
Entry Clearance Officer of the 13 February  2012  breaches  the  appellant's
derived rights under the Community Treaties.

Second appeal

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside. We re-make
the decision by allowing it on Article 8 grounds.

We have both contributed to this determination.

Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor

Date July 2013


Appendix I

       "[1] The appellant is a citizen of Iran living  in  Turkey.   On  13
        February 2012 an Entry Clearance Officer in  Istanbul  refused  her
        entry clearance to join her husband in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
        appellant's husband, Mr P, is a former refugee here and  is  now  a
        British citizen.  The appellant and her husband married  in  Turkey
        on 20 June 2007 and they have a child of  their  union  born  on  8
        April 2009.  Their child, A, is a  British  citizen  and  currently
        lives with the appellant in Turkey.

        [2]  The  Entry  Clearance  Officer  refused  the  appellant  entry
        clearance for three reasons  (i)  it  was  not  accepted  that  the
        appellant and her husband had a subsisting marriage and  that  they
        intended to permanently live together, (ii)  it  was  not  accepted
        that there would be adequate accommodation for the parties and  any
        dependants without recourse to public funds (iii) and  it  was  not
        accepted that the parties would  be  able  to  maintain  themselves
        adequately without recourse to public funds.

        [3] The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge R. G.  Walters
        on 30 October 2012 and was dismissed on all grounds  by  way  of  a
        determination promulgated on 15 November 2012.

        [4] In its determination the First-tier Tribunal accepted that  the
        appellant and the sponsor were in a subsisting  marriage  and  that
        they intended to live permanently with each  other  in  the  United
        Kingdom, but concluded  that  the  appellant  could  not  meet  the
        accommodation and  maintenance  requirements  of  the  Rules.   The
        tribunal also considered  whether  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer's
        decision would lead to a breach of the appellant's Article  8  ECHR
        rights, and concluded that it would not.

        [5] Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted by Upper
        Tribunal Judge Coker in a decision of  10  April  2013.   Thus  the
        appeal came before me.

        [6] The grounds of challenge are numerous but in broad  terms  seek
        to assert that  (i)  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  wrong  in  its
        conclusion that the appellant failed to meet  the  maintenance  and
        accommodation  requirements  of  the  Rule,  (ii)  the   First-tier
        Tribunal erred by failing to consider whether the appellant met the
        requirements of paragraph 325A of the Immigration Rules and finally
        (iii) the First-tier Tribunal's consideration  of  Article  8  ECHR
        grounds was inadequate and unlawful.

        [7] I shall deal with these grounds in turn.

        [8] In seeking to challenge the conclusion that the appellant could
        not meet the maintenance requirement of the  Rule,  Mr  Chukwudolue
        observed  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  accepted  that  the
        appellant has qualifications as an interpreter and  translator  and
        in particular qualifications in interpreting and  translating  into
        the English language. It was submitted that in  such  circumstances
        the tribunal's decision on the maintenance issue was unsustainable.



        [9] In its consideration of this aspect of the  appeal  the  First-
        tier Tribunal  drew  attention  to  a  letter  from  the  vicar  of
        [church], which indicates  that  the  appellant's  language  skills
        would help her reach out to the local community in the  parish.  It
        correctly observed, however, that nowhere in  this  letter  did  it
        state that the appellant would receive payment for performing  such
        a role.  There was no other evidence before the First-tier Tribunal
        relating to (i) the general availability  of  employment  or  self-
        employment in the United Kingdom as a  translator  or  interpreter,
        (ii) the likely level  of  the  pay  of  any  employment  or  self-
        employment that may be obtained by the appellant in this regard  or
        (iii) the  likely  regularity  of  any  such  employment  or  self-
        employment.

        [10] It was for the appellant to  demonstrate  on  the  balance  of
        probabilities that she would be able to  obtain  sufficient  income
        from employment or self-employment in the United Kingdom so  as  to
        meet the Immigration Rules. Given the paucity of evidence  relating
        to the possibility of her obtaining income from  her  own  sources,
        and given that the sponsor was a recipient of public funds,  in  my
        conclusion, far from  being  perverse,  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
        conclusion on the maintenance issue  was  inevitable.  In  all  the
        circumstances I do not accept that the First-tier Tribunal erred in
        concluding that  the  appellant  failed  to  meet  the  maintenance
        requirement of the Immigration Rule.

        [11] As to the issue  of  accommodation,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        noted that the sponsor had given evidence that  he  had  approached
        [the council] in relation to the possible arrival of his  wife  and
        child in the United Kingdom and that the council  had  stated  that
        once they had arrived larger accommodation would be provided to the
        family.  The First-tier Tribunal found that this  would  amount  to
        additional recourse to public funds.  I, also  find  that  this  is
        plainly the case, as can  be  seen  from  the  Tribunal's  reported
        decision of KA & Others (public funds: housing) Iraq  [2007]  UKAIT
        00081.

        [12]  The  grounds  seek  to  do  no  more  than  assert  that  the
        appellant's current accommodation satisfies the Immigration  Rules,
        however, as indicated above, the local authority has indicated that
        they would move  the  sponsor  to  larger  accommodation  upon  the
        appellant's arrival and, consequently, the tribunal  was  right  to
        conclude as it did on the issue of accommodation.

        [13] For the reasons given above I therefore find that  the  First-
        tier Tribunal did not err in its conclusions made  in  relation  to
        paragraph 281 of the Immigration Rules.

        [14] The second tranche of grounds relied  upon  by  the  appellant
        generally assert that the First-tier Tribunal erred in (i)  failing
        to consider paragraph  352A  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  (ii)
        failing to properly consider and address the decision of the  Upper
        Tribunal in FH (post-flight spouse) Iran [2010] UKUT 275.

        [15] These are manifestly hopeless grounds.  The former  was  quite
        properly withdrawn by Mr  Chukwudolue  during  the  course  of  his
        submissions.  For the sake of clarity I observe that paragraph 352A
        of the Immigration Rules relates  to  marriages  which  took  place
        prior to the flight of the refugee and, in any event, relates  only
        to those persons whom are in the United Kingdom and currently  have
        refugee  status.   The  appellant  falls  into  neither  of   these
        categories. The sponsor fled Iran prior to marrying  the  appellant
        and, in any event, the sponsor was no longer a refugee  as  of  the
        date  of  the  ECO's  decision;  he  having  been  granted  British
        citizenship (see paragraph 339BA of the Immigration Rules).

        [16] As to the relevance of the decision in FH Iran, this  decision
        considers an applicant who engaged in a post-flight marriage  to  a
        person who was a refugee with 5  years  leave  to  remain,  in  the
        United Kingdom. Consequently, such  person  could  neither  satisfy
        paragraph 352A of the Rules nor paragraph 281  of  the  Rules,  the
        latter being as a consequence of the fact that the  United  Kingdom
        based sponsor did not have settled status.  As indicated above, the
        sponsor in the instant appeal  does  have  settled  status  in  the
        United Kingdom.  Consequently, the rationale  which  underpins  the
        decision in FH plainly does not apply to the instant appeal.

        [17] I now turn to my consideration of the Article 8 ECHR ground.

        [18] In my conclusion the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  in  this
        regard contains an error of law such that it ought to be set aside.

        [19] In paragraphs 32 and 33 of its  determination  the  First-tier
        Tribunal stated as follows:

           "[32]The sponsor was asked  at  the  hearing  why  he  could  not
           relocate to Turkey to continue his family life  there  with  the
           appellant and his son.  He replied  that  he  would  receive  no
           state benefits in Turkey and also that he would have to pay  for
           his son's education.

           [33] I did not find that either of these factors would cause the
           interference to be disproportionate.  If it were to be so  held,
           it would mean that the appellant would essentially  be  able  to
           bypass the requirements of the Immigration  Rules  that  she  be
           adequately maintained and accommodated.   It  appears  that  the
           only reason the sponsor gives  for  not  moving  to  Turkey  and
           exercising his family life rights there is financial.   He  does
           not suggest, for example, that Turkey's  immigration  law  would
           prohibit him from settling there as the appellant's husband."

        [20] These two paragraphs contain a series of errors. It  is  plain
        that the First-tier Tribunal erred by failing to direct  itself  as
        to the appropriate consideration when assessing whether the sponsor
        should be required to live in Turkey.  The tribunal ought  to  have
        asked itself whether it was reasonable for the sponsor to  move  to
        Turkey not whether it was proportionate for him to do so. Secondly,
        contrary  to  that  which  is  stated  in  paragraph  33   of   the
        determination, both  the  appellant's  witness  statement  and  the
        skeleton argument drawn on his behalf list a whole host of  reasons
        why it was asserted to be unreasonable to  expect  the  sponsor  to
        move to Turkey, including the  fact  that  he  has  serious  health
        problems for which he receives support in the United Kingdom.   The
        First-tier Tribunal erred in failing  to  take  such  matters  into
        account  when  coming  to  its   conclusion   on   the   issue   of
        proportionality. Thirdly, and of most significance, is the  failure
        of the First-tier Tribunal to recognise that the appellant's  child
        is a British citizen and thereby has certain EU law rights.

        [21] I do not accept Ms Horsley's submission that  the  consequence
        of  the  appellant  being  unable  to  meet  the  new   Article   8
        requirements, as set out in the  Immigration  Rules  after  9  July
        2012, is that his appeal is not capable of succeeding on Article  8
        ECHR grounds. Firstly, those Rules post  date  the  decision  under
        appeal and do not act retrospectively and, further, the tribunal is
        also required to consider whether the ECO's decision would lead  to
        a breach of the appellant's Article 8 ECHR rights as  protected  by
        section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

        [22] For all these reasons, I set aside the  First-tier  Tribunal's
        determination insofar as it relates to the Article  8  ECHR  ground
        and direct that the decision on  appeal  be  remade  by  the  Upper
        Tribunal.  The findings made in relation to the  Immigration  Rules
        are to remain standing"



Appendix II

        "[1] The appellant is a citizen of Thailand, born  10  March  1973.
        On 7 June 2012 an Entry Clearance Officer in  Bangkok  refused  her
        entry clearance to join her husband in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
        appellant's husband is a British Citizen.  The  appellant  and  her
        husband married in Thailand on 24 April 2007 and have 2 children of
        their union, both children  being  born  in  Thailand.  The  eldest
        child, JM, was born on 23 December 2004 and  lives  in  the  United
        Kingdom. He has been attending school here  since  September  2010.
        The youngest child, FM, was  born  on  14  December  2007  and  has
        remained living in Thailand since birth. The children are both dual
        Thai and British nationals.

        [2]  The  Entry  Clearance  Officer  refused  the  appellant  entry
        clearance for three reasons (i) it  was  not  accepted  that  there
        would be adequate accommodation for the parties and any  dependants
        without recourse to public funds (ii) it was not accepted that  the
        parties would be able to  maintain  themselves  adequately  without
        recourse to public funds (iii) refusing entry clearance  would  not
        lead to a breach of Article 8 ECHR.

        [3] The appellant appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the
        appeal  cane  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grimshaw  on  28
        February  2012.  It  dismissed  on  all  grounds  by   way   of   a
        determination promulgated on 7 March 2013.

        [4] In its determination the First-tier Tribunal concluded that the
        appellant  could  not  meet  the  accommodation   and   maintenance
        requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules.    The   tribunal   also
        considered whether the Entry  Clearance  Officer's  decision  would
        lead to a breach of the appellant's  Article  8  ECHR  rights,  and
        concluded that, although Article 8 was engaged [25],  refusing  the
        appellant entry  clearance  was  proportionate.  In  doing  so  the
        tribunal gave the following reasons:

           [26]  However,  I  am  required  to  weigh  the  rights  of  the
           individual and the rights of society as a whole. I have kept  in
           mind the balancing exercise that must be carried out in order to
           strike a fair balance between the  competing  interests  of  the
           individual and the community. I  have  taken  into  account  the
           Respondent's legitimate aim of protecting  this  country's  well
           being by maintaining proper immigration  control,  and,  on  the
           other hand the effect of separation on  the  appellant  and  the
           sponsor. As far as that is concerned I am aware that the  couple
           also have two young children, one of whom remains  in  Thailand.
           The other child who lives with the sponsor in the United Kingdom
           is  displaying  behavioural   problems   and   the   school   is
           sufficiently concerned about his  welfare  to  make  a  referral
           under the child protection framework.

           [27] It is not entirely clear to me why the sponsor is prevented
           from enjoying family life with the appellant and his children in
           Thailand. The letter that he has submitted simply refers to  the
           prospect of their children having a better future  by  receiving
           an English education in the United Kingdom. However, that factor
           alone does not persuade me that  it  would  be  unreasonable  to
           expect the sponsor to make a home with the appellant  and  their
           children in Thailand. It is  the  sponsor's  own  evidence  that
           since 2002 he has lived and travelled  extensively  in  Thailand
           with the appellant and has met her family and friends.

           [28] I remind myself that the  sponsor  is  not  prevented  from
           visiting the appellant abroad and  using  modern  technology  to
           keep their marriage and family alive  during  their  periods  of
           separation. It is evident that the family already have access to
           modern means of  communication,  including  Skype.  Furthermore,
           there is nothing to the prevent the  appellant  making  a  fresh
           application for entry clearance to the  United  Kingdom  in  the
           future that addresses the issues raised in this determination. I
           bear in mind that respect for the right to family life does  not
           and cannot prevent the State from establishing conditions  which
           conflict  with  family  life  if  such  conditions  maintain  an
           appropriate  balance  between  private  life  and   the   public
           interest. Respect for family life does not necessarily mean that
           members of one family can establish themselves in the country of
           their choice.

           [29] Accordingly, I am satisfied that  the  decision  to  refuse
           entry clearance in this case is one that can be justified by the
           Respondent as proportionate and a fair balance between competing
           considerations."

        [5] I granted the appellant  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
        Tribunal, in a decision of the 24 April  2013,  for  the  following
        reasons:


           "It is arguable, however, that the First-tier Tribunal erred  in
           its consideration of Article 8 ECHR by (i) failing  to  lawfully
           consider the best interests of the British Citizen/dual national
           children and (ii) by failing to consider and apply the  relevant
           principles of EU law set out in the Upper Tribunal's decision in
           Sanade and others (British children - Zambrano - Dereci)  [2012]
           UKUT 00048, [such principles being more recently  considered  by
           the Upper Tribunal in its decision in Izuazu (Article  8  -  new
           rules) [2013] UKUT 00045 (IAC)]."

        [6] At  the  hearing  Ms  Horsley  submitted  that  the  First-tier
        Tribunal had not materially erred in law.  She  accepted  that  the
        tribunal  had  made  no  mention  of  the  best  interests  of  the
        appellant's children but submitted that it could be  inferred  from
        the decision that (i) the tribunal had been aware that the children
        are British, (ii) that it had considered the best interests of  the
        children and (iii) that having done so it had  concluded  that  the
        ECO's decision was nevertheless proportionate.

        [7] Upon being invited by the Upper Tribunal to identify  what  the
        First-tier Tribunal had found the best interests of the children to
        be, Ms Horsley submitted that given  that  the  children  are  dual
        nationals  it  could  not  necessarily  be  said  that  there  best
        interests lie in being in the  United  Kingdom  and  that,  in  any
        event, even if the best interests of the children did lie in  being
        in the United Kingdom this would not, on the facts of  the  instant
        case, outweigh the public interest in  refusing entry clearance. Ms
        Horsley then sought to persuade  the  tribunal  that  the  relevant
        public interest is that which is reflected in the Immigration Rules
        as they  currently  stand,  when  taken  in  conjunction  with  the
        Immigration Directorate Instructions dated May 2013.

        [8] I reject the above submissions and conclude that the First-tier
        Tribunal's failure to consider the best interests of the  children,
        or at the very least the United Kingdom based child, amounts to  an
        error on a point of law capable of affecting  the  outcome  of  the
        appeal.

        [9] Contrary to Ms Horsley's submission I do not accept it  can  be
        inferred from the First-tier Tribunal's determination that it  took
        into account the  best  interests  of  the  children.  No  specific
        mention is made in the determination of section 55 or of  the  best
        interests of the children. No attempt  is  made  to  identify  what
        those best  interests  are,  and  no  reasons  are  given  for  any
        conclusions that may have been made on this issue. Further, if  the
        tribunal did make a finding  as  to  what  would  be  in  the  best
        interests of the children, it did  not  direct  itself  that  those
        interests must be treated as a primary consideration, nor  does  it
        obviously apply such direction even if not explicitly stated.

        [10] In short the First-tier Tribunal's determination is devoid  of
        any recognition of its role in assessing where the  best  interests
        of the children lie.

        [11] As to whether such error is capable of affecting  the  outcome
        of the appeal, I find that it  plainly  is.  In  my  conclusion  it
        cannot be said that there is only  one  possible  outcome  to  this
        appeal.

        [12] As to Ms Horsley's submission that the  Secretary  of  State's
        view of where the public interests lies is that  reflected  in  the
        current Immigration Rules and the May  2013  IDI's,  I  leave  this
        point open for further argument in the re-making of  the  decision;
        however,  my  preliminary  view  is  that  such  a  submission   is
        misguided, given the  terms  of  Sections  85  and  85A(2)  of  the
        Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and  the  opinions  of
        their Lordships House in AS Somalia [2009] UKHL 32,  i.e.  that  on
        appeal against a decision to  refuse  entry  clearance  it  is  the
        circumstances appertaining as of the date  of  the  ECO's  decision
        that are relevant. The ECO's decision in the  instant  matter  pre-
        dates the changes to  the  Immigration  Rules  relied  upon  by  Ms
        Horsley.

        [13] I consequently  find  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal contained an error of law capable of affecting the outcome
        of the appeal and for this reason I set it aside. The scope of that
        hearing is to be restricted to a consideration of Article  8  ECHR,
        there  being  no  material  error  in  the  First-tier   Tribunal's
        consideration of the ground relating to the Immigration Rules."








